n, that it isn’t
love but mistrust that keeps you in torment.  I might have said jealousy,
but I didn’t like to use that word.  A parrot would have added that I had
given him no right to be jealous.  But I am no parrot.  I recognized the
rights of his passion which I could very well see.  He is jealous.  He is
not jealous of my past or of the future; but he is jealously mistrustful
of me, of what I am, of my very soul.  He believes in a soul in the same
way Therese does, as something that can be touched with grace or go to
perdition; and he doesn’t want to be damned with me before his own
judgment seat.  He is a most noble and loyal gentleman, but I have my own
Basque peasant soul and don’t want to think that every time he goes away
from my feet—yes, _mon cher_, on this carpet, look for the marks of
scorching—that he goes away feeling tempted to brush the dust off his
moral sleeve.  That!  Never!”

With brusque movements she took a cigarette out of the box, held it in
her fingers for a moment, then dropped it unconsciously.

“And then, I don’t love him,” she uttered slowly as if speaking to
herself and at the same time watching the very quality of that thought.
“I never did.  At first he fascinated me with his fatal aspect and his
cold society smiles.  But I have looked into those eyes too often.  There
are too many disdains in this aristocratic republican without a home.
His fate may be cruel, but it will always be commonplace.  While he sat
there trying in a worldly tone to explain to me the problems, the
scruples, of his suffering honour, I could see right into his heart and I
was sorry for him.  I was sorry enough for him to feel that if he had
suddenly taken me by the throat and strangled me slowly, _avec délices_,
I could forgive him while I choked.  How correct he was!  But bitterness
against me peeped out of every second phrase.  At last I raised my hand
and said to him, ‘Enough.’  I believe he was shocked by my plebeian
abruptness but he was too polite to show it.  His conventions will always
stand in the way of his nature.  I told him that everything that had been
said and done during the last seven or eight months was inexplicable
unless on the assumption that he was in love with me,—and yet in
everything there was an implication that he couldn’t forgive me my very
existence.  I did ask him whether he didn’t think that it was absurd on
his part . . . ”

“Didn’t you say that it was exquisitely absurd?” I asked.

“Exquisitely! . . . ” Doña Rita was surprised at my question.  “No.  Why
should I say that?”

“It would have reconciled him to your abruptness.  It’s their family
expression.  It would have come with a familiar sound and would have been
less offensive.”

“Offensive,” Doña Rita repeated earnestly.  “I don’t think he was
offended; he suffered in another way, but I didn’t care for that.  It was
I that had become offended in the end, without spite, you understand, but
past bearing.  I didn’t spare him.  I told him plainly that to want a
woman formed in mind and body, mistress of herself, free in her choice,
independent in her thoughts; to love her apparently for what she is and
at the same time to demand from her the candour and the innocence that
could be only a shocking pretence; to know her such as life had made her
and at the same time to despise her secretly for every touch with which
her life had fashioned her—that was neither generous nor high minded; it
was positively frantic.  He got up and went away to lean against the
mantelpiece, there, on his elbow and with his head in his hand.  You have
no idea of the charm and the distinction of his pose.  I couldn’t help
admiring him: the expression, the grace, the fatal suggestion of his
immobility.  Oh, yes, I am sensible to aesthetic impressions, I have been
educated to believe that there is a soul in them.”

With that enigmatic, under the eyebrows glance fixed on me she laughed
her deep contralto laugh without mirth but also without irony, and
profoundly moving by the mere purity of the sound.

“I suspect he was never so disgusted and appalled in his life.  His
self-command is the most admirable worldly thing I have ever seen.  What
made it beautiful was that one could feel in it a tragic suggestion as in
a great work of art.”

She paused with an inscrutable smile that a great painter might have put
on the face of some symbolic figure for the speculation and wonder of
many generations.  I said:

“I always thought that love for you could work great wonders.  And now I
am certain.”

“Are you trying to be ironic?” she said sadly and very much as a child
might have spoken.

“I don’t know,” I answered in a tone of the same simplicity.  “I find it
very difficult to be generous.”

“I, too,” she said with a sort of funny eagerness.  “I didn’t treat him
very generously.  Only I didn’t say much more.  I found I didn’t care
what I said—and it would have been like throwing insults at a beautiful
composition.  He was well inspired not to move.  It has spared him some
disagreeable truths and perhaps I would even have said more than the
truth.  I am not fair.  I am no more fair than other people.  I would
have been harsh.  My very admiration was making me more angry.  It’s
ridiculous to say of a man got up in correct tailor clothes, but there
was a funereal grace in his attitude so that he might have been
reproduced in marble on a monument to some woman in one of those
atrocious Campo Santos: the bourgeois conception of an aristocratic
mourning lover.  When I came to that conclusion I became glad that I was
angry or else I would have laughed right out before him.”

“I have heard a woman say once, a woman of the people—do you hear me,
Doña Rita?—therefore deserving your attention, that one should never
laugh at love.”

“My dear,” she said gently, “I have been taught to laugh at most things
by a man who never laughed himself; but it’s true that he never spoke of
love to me, love as a subject that is.  So perhaps . . . But why?”

“Because (but maybe that old woman was crazy), because, she said, there
was death in the mockery of love.”

Doña Rita moved slightly her beautiful shoulders and went on:

“I am glad, then, I didn’t laugh.  And I am also glad I said nothing
more.  I was feeling so little generous that if I had known something
then of his mother’s allusion to ‘white geese’ I would have advised him
to get one of them and lead it away on a beautiful blue ribbon.  Mrs.
Blunt was wrong, you know, to be so scornful.  A white goose is exactly
what her son wants.  But look how badly the world is arranged.  Such
white birds cannot be got for nothing and he has not enough money even to
buy a ribbon.  Who knows!  Maybe it was this which gave that tragic
quality to his pose by the mantelpiece over there.  Yes, that was it.
Though no doubt I didn’t see it then.  As he didn’t offer to move after I
had done speaking I became quite unaffectedly sorry and advised him very
gently to dismiss me from his mind definitely.  He moved forward then and
said to me in his usual voice and with his usual smile that it would have
been excellent advice but unfortunately I was one of those women who
can’t be dismissed at will.  And as I shook my head he insisted rather
darkly: ‘Oh, yes, Doña Rita, it is so.  Cherish no illusions about that
fact.’  It sounded so threatening that in my surprise I didn’t even
acknowledge his parting bow.  He went out of that false situation like a
wounded man retreating after a fight.  No, I have nothing to reproach
myself with.  I did nothing.  I led him into nothing.  Whatever illusions
have passed through my head I kept my distance, and he was so loyal to
what he seemed to think the redeeming proprieties of the situation that
he has gone from me for good without so much as kissing the tips of my
fingers.  He must have felt like a man who had betrayed himself for
nothing.  It’s horrible.  It’s the fault of that enormous fortune of
mine, and I wish with all my heart that I could give it to him; for he
couldn’t help his hatred of the thing that is: and as to his love, which
is just as real, well—could I have rushed away from him to shut myself up
in a convent?  Could I?  After all I have a right to my share of
daylight.”



CHAPTER V


I took my eyes from her face and became aware that dusk was beginning to
steal into the room.  How strange it seemed.  Except for the glazed
rotunda part its long walls, divided into narrow panels separated by an
order of flat pilasters, presented, depicted on a black background and in
vivid colours, slender women with butterfly wings and lean youths with
narrow birds’ wings.  The effect was supposed to be Pompeiian and Rita
and I had often laughed at the delirious fancy of some enriched
shopkeeper.  But still it was a display of fancy, a sign of grace; but at
that moment these figures appeared to me weird and intrusive and
strangely alive in their attenuated grace of unearthly beings concealing
a power to see and hear.

Without words, without gestures, Doña Rita was heard again.  “It may have
been as near coming to pass as this.”  She showed me the breadth of her
little finger nail.  “Yes, as near as that.  Why?  How?  Just like that,
for nothing.  Because it had come up.  Because a wild notion had entered
a practical old woman’s head.  Yes.  And the best of it is that I have
nothing to complain of.  Had I surrendered I would have been perfectly
safe with these two.  It is they or rather he who couldn’t trust me, or
rather that something which I express, which I stand for.  Mills would
never tell me what it was.  Perhaps he didn’t know exactly himself.  He
said it was something like genius.  My genius!  Oh, I am not conscious of
it, believe me, I am not conscious of it.  But if I were I wouldn’t pluck
it out and cast it away.  I am ashamed of nothing, of nothing!  Don’t be
stupid enough to think that I have the slightest regret.  There is no
regret.  First of all because I am I—and then because . . . My dear,
believe me, I have had a horrible time of it myself lately.”

This seemed to be the last word.  Outwardly quiet, all the time, it was
only then that she became composed enough to light an enormous cigarette
of the same pattern as those made specially for the king—_por el Rey_!
After a time, tipping the ash into the bowl on her left hand, she asked
me in a friendly, almost tender, tone:

“What are you thinking of, _amigo_?”

“I was thinking of your immense generosity.  You want to give a crown to
one man, a fortune to another.  That is very fine.  But I suppose there
is a limit to your generosity somewhere.”

“I don’t see why there should be any limit—to fine intentions!  Yes, one
would like to pay ransom and be done with it all.”

“That’s the feeling of a captive; and yet somehow I can’t think of you as
ever having been anybody’s captive.”

“You do display some wonderful insight sometimes.  My dear, I begin to
suspect that men are rather conceited about their powers.  They think
they dominate us.  Even exceptional men will think that; men too great
for mere vanity, men like Henry Allègre for instance, who by his
consistent and serene detachment was certainly fit to dominate all sorts
of people.  Yet for the most part they can only do it because women
choose more or less consciously to let them do so.  Henry Allègre, if any
man, might have been certain of his own power; and yet, look: I was a
chit of a girl, I was sitting with a book where I had no business to be,
in his own garden, when he suddenly came upon me, an ignorant girl of
seventeen, a most uninviting creature with a tousled head, in an old
black frock and shabby boots.  I could have run away.  I was perfectly
capable of it.  But I stayed looking up at him and—in the end it was HE
who went away and it was I who stayed.”

“Consciously?” I murmured.

“Consciously?  You may just as well ask my shadow that lay so still by me
on the young grass in that morning sunshine.  I never knew before how
still I could keep.  It wasn’t the stillness of terror.  I remained,
knowing perfectly well that if I ran he was not the man to run after me.
I remember perfectly his deep-toned, politely indifferent ‘_Restez
donc_.’  He was mistaken.  Already then I hadn’t the slightest intention
to move.  And if you ask me again how far conscious all this was the
nearest answer I can make you is this: that I remained on purpose, but I
didn’t know for what purpose I remained.  Really, that couldn’t be
expected. . . . Why do you sigh like this?  Would you have preferred me
to be idiotically innocent or abominably wise?”

“These are not the questions that trouble me,” I said.  “If I sighed it
is because I am weary.”

“And getting stiff, too, I should say, in this Pompeiian armchair.  You
had better get out of it and sit on this couch as you always used to do.
That, at any rate, is not Pompeiian.  You have been growing of late
extremely formal, I don’t know why.  If it is a pose then for goodness’
sake drop it.  Are you going to model yourself on Captain Blunt?  You
couldn’t, you know.  You are too young.”

“I don’t want to model myself on anybody,” I said.  “And anyway Blunt is
too romantic; and, moreover, he has been and is yet in love with you—a
thing that requires some style, an attitude, something of which I am
altogether incapable.”

“You know it isn’t so stupid, this what you have just said.  Yes, there
is something in this.”

“I am not stupid,” I protested, without much heat.

“Oh, yes, you are.  You don’t know the world enough to judge.  You don’t
know how wise men can be.  Owls are nothing to them.  Why do you try to
look like an owl?  There are thousands and thousands of them waiting for
me outside the door: the staring, hissing beasts.  You don’t know what a
relief of mental ease and intimacy you have been to me in the frankness
of gestures and speeches and thoughts, sane or insane, that we have been
throwing at each other.  I have known nothing of this in my life but with
you.  There had always been some fear, some constraint, lurking in the
background behind everybody, everybody—except you, my friend.”

“An unmannerly, Arcadian state of affairs.  I am glad you like it.
Perhaps it’s because you were intelligent enough to perceive that I was
not in love with you in any sort of style.”

“No, you were always your own self, unwise and reckless and with
something in it kindred to mine, if I may say so without offence.”

“You may say anything without offence.  But has it never occurred to your
sagacity that I just, simply, loved you?”

“Just—simply,” she repeated in a wistful tone.

“You didn’t want to trouble your head about it, is that it?”

“My poor head.  From your tone one might think you yearned to cut it off.
No, my dear, I have made up my mind not to lose my head.”

“You would be astonished to know how little I care for your mind.”

“Would I?  Come and sit on the couch all the same,” she said after a
moment of hesitation.  Then, as I did not move at once, she added with
indifference: “You may sit as far away as you like, it’s big enough,
goodness knows.”

The light was ebbing slowly out of the rotunda and to my bodily eyes she
was beginning to grow shadowy.  I sat down on the couch and for a long
time no word passed between us.  We made no movement.  We did not even
turn towards each other.  All I was conscious of was the softness of the
seat which seemed somehow to cause a relaxation of my stern mood, I won’t
say against my will but without any will on my part.  Another thing I was
conscious of, strangely enough, was the enormous brass bowl for cigarette
ends.  Quietly, with the least possible action, Doña Rita moved it to the
other side of her motionless person.  Slowly, the fantastic women with
butterflies’ wings and the slender-limbed youths with the gorgeous
pinions on their shoulders were vanishing into their black backgrounds
with an effect of silent discretion, leaving us to ourselves.

I felt suddenly extremely exhausted, absolutely overcome with fatigue
since I had moved; as if to sit on that Pompeiian chair had been a task
almost beyond human strength, a sort of labour that must end in collapse.
I fought against it for a moment and then my resistance gave way.  Not
all at once but as if yielding to an irresistible pressure (for I was not
conscious of any irresistible attraction) I found myself with my head
resting, with a weight I felt must be crushing, on Doña Rita’s shoulder
which yet did not give way, did not flinch at all.  A faint scent of
violets filled the tragic emptiness of my head and it seemed impossible
to me that I should not cry from sheer weakness.  But I remained
dry-eyed.  I only felt myself slipping lower and lower and I caught her
round the waist clinging to her not from any intention but purely by
instinct.  All that time she hadn’t stirred.  There was only the slight
movement of her breathing that showed her to be alive; and with closed
eyes I imagined her to be lost in thought, removed by an incredible
meditation while I clung to her, to an immense distance from the earth.
The distance must have been immense because the silence was so perfect,
the feeling as if of eternal stillness.  I had a distinct impression of
being in contact with an infinity that had the slightest possible rise
and fall, was pervaded by a warm, delicate scent of violets and through
which came a hand from somewhere to rest lightly on my head.  Presently
my ear caught the faint and regular pulsation of her heart, firm and
quick, infinitely touching in its persistent mystery, disclosing itself
into my very ear—and my felicity became complete.

It was a dreamlike state combined with a dreamlike sense of insecurity.
Then in that warm and scented infinity, or eternity, in which I rested
lost in bliss but ready for any catastrophe, I heard the distant, hardly
audible, and fit to strike terror into the heart, ringing of a bell.  At
this sound the greatness of spaces departed.  I felt the world close
about me; the world of darkened walls, of very deep grey dusk against the
panes, and I asked in a pained voice:

“Why did you ring, Rita?”

There was a bell rope within reach of her hand.  I had not felt her move,
but she said very low:

“I rang for the lights.”

“You didn’t want the lights.”

“It was time,” she whispered secretly.

Somewhere within the house a door slammed.  I got away from her feeling
small and weak as if the best part of me had been torn away and
irretrievably lost.  Rose must have been somewhere near the door.

“It’s abominable,” I murmured to the still, idol-like shadow on the
couch.

The answer was a hurried, nervous whisper: “I tell you it was time.  I
rang because I had no strength to push you away.”

I suffered a moment of giddiness before the door opened, light streamed
in, and Rose entered, preceding a man in a green baize apron whom I had
never seen, carrying on an enormous tray three Argand lamps fitted into
vases of Pompeiian form.  Rose distributed them over the room.  In the
flood of soft light the winged youths and the butterfly women reappeared
on the panels, affected, gorgeous, callously unconscious of anything
having happened during their absence.  Rose attended to the lamp on the
nearest mantelpiece, then turned about and asked in a confident
undertone.

“_Monsieur dîne_?”

I had lost myself with my elbows on my knees and my head in my hands, but
I heard the words distinctly.  I heard also the silence which ensued.  I
sat up and took the responsibility of the answer on myself.

“Impossible.  I am going to sea this evening.”

This was perfectly true only I had totally forgotten it till then.  For
the last two days my being was no longer composed of memories but
exclusively of sensations of the most absorbing, disturbing, exhausting
nature.  I was like a man who has been buffeted by the sea or by a mob
till he loses all hold on the world in the misery of his helplessness.
But now I was recovering.  And naturally the first thing I remembered was
the fact that I was going to sea.

“You have heard, Rose,” Doña Rita said at last with some impatience.

The girl waited a moment longer before she said:

“Oh, yes!  There is a man waiting for Monsieur in the hall.  A seaman.”

It could be no one but Dominic.  It dawned upon me that since the evening
of our return I had not been near him or the ship, which was completely
unusual, unheard of, and well calculated to startle Dominic.

“I have seen him before,” continued Rose, “and as he told me he has been
pursuing Monsieur all the afternoon and didn’t like to go away without
seeing Monsieur for a moment, I proposed to him to wait in the hall till
Monsieur was at liberty.”

I said: “Very well,” and with a sudden resumption of her extremely busy,
not-a-moment-to-lose manner Rose departed from the room.  I lingered in
an imaginary world full of tender light, of unheard-of colours, with a
mad riot of flowers and an inconceivable happiness under the sky arched
above its yawning precipices, while a feeling of awe enveloped me like
its own proper atmosphere.  But everything vanished at the sound of Doña
Rita’s loud whisper full of boundless dismay, such as to make one’s hair
stir on one’s head.

“_Mon Dieu_!  And what is going to happen now?”

She got down from the couch and walked to a window.  When the lights had
been brought into the room all the panes had turned inky black; for the
night had come and the garden was full of tall bushes and trees screening
off the gas lamps of the main alley of the Prado.  Whatever the question
meant she was not likely to see an answer to it outside.  But her whisper
had offended me, had hurt something infinitely deep, infinitely subtle
and infinitely clear-eyed in my nature.  I said after her from the couch
on which I had remained, “Don’t lose your composure.  You will always
have some sort of bell at hand.”

I saw her shrug her uncovered shoulders impatiently.  Her forehead was
against the very blackness of the panes; pulled upward from the
beautiful, strong nape of her neck, the twisted mass of her tawny hair
was held high upon her head by the arrow of gold.

“You set up for being unforgiving,” she said without anger.

I sprang to my feet while she turned about and came towards me bravely,
with a wistful smile on her bold, adolescent face.

“It seems to me,” she went on in a voice like a wave of love itself,
“that one should try to understand before one sets up for being
unforgiving.  Forgiveness is a very fine word.  It is a fine invocation.”

“There are other fine words in the language such as fascination,
fidelity, also frivolity; and as for invocations there are plenty of
them, too; for instance: alas, heaven help me.”

We stood very close together, her narrow eyes were as enigmatic as ever,
but that face, which, like some ideal conception of art, was incapable of
anything like untruth and grimace, expressed by some mysterious means
such a depth of infinite patience that I felt profoundly ashamed of
myself.

“This thing is beyond words altogether,” I said.  “Beyond forgiveness,
beyond forgetting, beyond anger or jealousy. . . . There is nothing
between us two that could make us act together.”

“Then we must fall back perhaps on something within us, that—you admit
it?—we have in common.”

“Don’t be childish,” I said.  “You give one with a perpetual and intense
freshness feelings and sensations that are as old as the world itself,
and you imagine that your enchantment can be broken off anywhere, at any
time!  But it can’t be broken.  And forgetfulness, like everything else,
can only come from you.  It’s an impossible situation to stand up
against.”

She listened with slightly parted lips as if to catch some further
resonances.

“There is a sort of generous ardour about you,” she said, “which I don’t
really understand.  No, I don’t know it.  Believe me, it is not of myself
I am thinking.  And you—you are going out to-night to make another
landing.”

“Yes, it is a fact that before many hours I will be sailing away from you
to try my luck once more.”

“Your wonderful luck,” she breathed out.

“Oh, yes, I am wonderfully lucky.  Unless the luck really is yours—in
having found somebody like me, who cares at the same time so much and so
little for what you have at heart.”

“What time will you be leaving the harbour?” she asked.

“Some time between midnight and daybreak.  Our men may be a little late
in joining, but certainly we will be gone before the first streak of
light.”

“What freedom!” she murmured enviously.  “It’s something I shall never
know. . . .”

“Freedom!” I protested.  “I am a slave to my word.  There will be a
siring of carts and mules on a certain part of the coast, and a most
ruffianly lot of men, men you understand, men with wives and children and
sweethearts, who from the very moment they start on a trip risk a bullet
in the head at any moment, but who have a perfect conviction that I will
never fail them.  That’s my freedom.  I wonder what they would think if
they knew of your existence.”

“I don’t exist,” she said.

“That’s easy to say.  But I will go as if you didn’t exist—yet only
because you do exist.  You exist in me.  I don’t know where I end and you
begin.  You have got into my heart and into my veins and into my brain.”

“Take this fancy out and trample it down in the dust,” she said in a tone
of timid entreaty.

“Heroically,” I suggested with the sarcasm of despair.

“Well, yes, heroically,” she said; and there passed between us dim
smiles, I have no doubt of the most touching imbecility on earth.  We
were standing by then in the middle of the room with its vivid colours on
a black background, with its multitude of winged figures with pale limbs,
with hair like halos or flames, all strangely tense in their strained,
decorative attitudes.  Doña Rita made a step towards me, and as I
attempted to seize her hand she flung her arms round my neck.  I felt
their strength drawing me towards her and by a sort of blind and
desperate effort I resisted.  And all the time she was repeating with
nervous insistence:

“But it is true that you will go.  You will surely.  Not because of those
people but because of me.  You will go away because you feel you must.”

With every word urging me to get away, her clasp tightened, she hugged my
head closer to her breast.  I submitted, knowing well that I could free
myself by one more effort which it was in my power to make.  But before I
made it, in a sort of desperation, I pressed a long kiss into the hollow
of her throat.  And lo—there was no need for any effort.  With a stifled
cry of surprise her arms fell off me as if she had been shot.  I must
have been giddy, and perhaps we both were giddy, but the next thing I
knew there was a good foot of space between us in the peaceful glow of
the ground-glass globes, in the everlasting stillness of the winged
figures.  Something in the quality of her exclamation, something utterly
unexpected, something I had never heard before, and also the way she was
looking at me with a sort of incredulous, concentrated attention,
disconcerted me exceedingly.  I knew perfectly well what I had done and
yet I felt that I didn’t understand what had happened.  I became suddenly
abashed and I muttered that I had better go and dismiss that poor
Dominic.  She made no answer, gave no sign.  She stood there lost in a
vision—or was it a sensation?—of the most absorbing kind.  I hurried out
into the hall, shamefaced, as if I were making my escape while she wasn’t
looking.  And yet I felt her looking fixedly at me, with a sort of
stupefaction on her features—in her whole attitude—as though she had
never even heard of such a thing as a kiss in her life.

A dim lamp (of Pompeiian form) hanging on a long chain left the hall
practically dark.  Dominic, advancing towards me from a distant corner,
was but a little more opaque shadow than the others.  He had expected me
on board every moment till about three o’clock, but as I didn’t turn up
and gave no sign of life in any other way he started on his hunt.  He
sought news of me from the _garçons_ at the various cafés, from the
_cochers de fiacre_ in front of the Exchange, from the tobacconist lady
at the counter of the fashionable _Débit de Tabac_, from the old man who
sold papers outside the _cercle_, and from the flower-girl at the door of
the fashionable restaurant where I had my table.  That young woman, whose
business name was Irma, had come on duty about mid-day.  She said to
Dominic: “I think I’ve seen all his friends this morning but I haven’t
seen him for a week.  What has become of him?”

“That’s exactly what I want to know,” Dominic replied in a fury and then
went back to the harbour on the chance that I might have called either on
board or at Madame Léonore’s café.

I expressed to him my surprise that he should fuss about me like an old
hen over a chick.  It wasn’t like him at all.  And he said that “_en
effet_” it was Madame Léonore who wouldn’t give him any peace.  He hoped
I wouldn’t mind, it was best to humour women in little things; and so he
started off again, made straight for the street of the Consuls, was told
there that I wasn’t at home but the woman of the house looked so funny
that he didn’t know what to make of it.  Therefore, after some
hesitation, he took the liberty to inquire at this house, too, and being
told that I couldn’t be disturbed, had made up his mind not to go on
board without actually setting his eyes on me and hearing from my own
lips that nothing was changed as to sailing orders.

“There is nothing changed, Dominic,” I said.

“No change of any sort?” he insisted, looking very sombre and speaking
gloomily from under his black moustaches in the dim glow of the alabaster
lamp hanging above his head.  He peered at me in an extraordinary manner
as if he wanted to make sure that I had all my limbs about me.  I asked
him to call for my bag at the other house, on his way to the harbour, and
he departed reassured, not, however, without remarking ironically that
ever since she saw that American cavalier Madame Léonore was not easy in
her mind about me.

As I stood alone in the hall, without a sound of any sort, Rose appeared
before me.

“Monsieur will dine after all,” she whispered calmly.

“My good girl, I am going to sea to-night.”

“What am I going to do with Madame?” she murmured to herself.  “She will
insist on returning to Paris.”

“Oh, have you heard of it?”

“I never get more than two hours’ notice,” she said.  “But I know how it
will be,” her voice lost its calmness.  “I can look after Madame up to a
certain point but I cannot be altogether responsible.  There is a
dangerous person who is everlastingly trying to see Madame alone.  I have
managed to keep him off several times but there is a beastly old
journalist who is encouraging him in his attempts, and I daren’t even
speak to Madame about it.”

“What sort of person do you mean?”

“Why, a man,” she said scornfully.

I snatched up my coat and hat.

“Aren’t there dozens of them?”

“Oh!  But this one is dangerous.  Madame must have given him a hold on
her in some way.  I ought not to talk like this about Madame and I
wouldn’t to anybody but Monsieur.  I am always on the watch, but what is
a poor girl to do? . . . Isn’t Monsieur going back to Madame?”

“No, I am not going back.  Not this time.”  A mist seemed to fall before
my eyes.  I could hardly see the girl standing by the closed door of the
Pempeiian room with extended hand, as if turned to stone.  But my voice
was firm enough.  “Not this time,” I repeated, and became aware of the
great noise of the wind amongst the trees, with the lashing of a rain
squall against the door.

“Perhaps some other time,” I added.

I heard her say twice to herself: “_Mon Dieu_!  _Mon_, _Dieu_!” and then
a dismayed: “What can Monsieur expect me to do?”  But I had to appear
insensible to her distress and that not altogether because, in fact, I
had no option but to go away.  I remember also a distinct wilfulness in
my attitude and something half-contemptuous in my words as I laid my hand
on the knob of the front door.

“You will tell Madame that I am gone.  It will please her.  Tell her that
I am gone—heroically.”

Rose had come up close to me.  She met my words by a despairing outward
movement of her hands as though she were giving everything up.

“I see it clearly now that Madame has no friends,” she declared with such
a force of restrained bitterness that it nearly made me pause.  But the
very obscurity of actuating motives drove me on and I stepped out through
the doorway muttering: “Everything is as Madame wishes it.”

She shot at me a swift: “You should resist,” of an extraordinary
intensity, but I strode on down the path.  Then Rose’s schooled temper
gave way at last and I heard her angry voice screaming after me furiously
through the wind and rain: “No!  Madame has no friends.  Not one!”




PART FIVE


CHAPTER I


That night I didn’t get on board till just before midnight and Dominic
could not conceal his relief at having me safely there.  Why he should
have been so uneasy it was impossible to say but at the time I had a sort
of impression that my inner destruction (it was nothing less) had
affected my appearance, that my doom was as it were written on my face.
I was a mere receptacle for dust and ashes, a living testimony to the
vanity of all things.  My very thoughts were like a ghostly rustle of
dead leaves.  But we had an extremely successful trip, and for most of
the time Dominic displayed an unwonted jocularity of a dry and biting
kind with which, he maintained, he had been infected by no other person
than myself.  As, with all his force of character, he was very responsive
to the moods of those he liked I have no doubt he spoke the truth.  But I
know nothing about it.  The observer, more or less alert, whom each of us
carries in his own consciousness, failed me altogether, had turned away
his face in sheer horror, or else had fainted from the strain.  And thus
I had to live alone, unobserved even by myself.

But the trip had been successful.  We re-entered the harbour very quietly
as usual and when our craft had been moored unostentatiously amongst the
plebeian stone-carriers, Dominic, whose grim joviality had subsided in
the last twenty-four hours of our homeward run, abandoned me to myself as
though indeed I had been a doomed man.  He only stuck his head for a
moment into our little cuddy where I was changing my clothes and being
told in answer to his question that I had no special orders to give went
ashore without waiting for me.

Generally we used to step on the quay together and I never failed to
enter for a moment Madame Léonore’s café.  But this time when I got on
the quay Dominic was nowhere to be seen.  What was it?
Abandonment—discretion—or had he quarrelled with his Léonore before
leaving on the trip?

My way led me past the café and through the glass panes I saw that he was
already there.  On the other side of the little marble table Madame
Léonore, leaning with mature grace on her elbow, was listening to him
absorbed.  Then I passed on and—what would you have!—I ended by making my
way into the street of the Consuls.  I had nowhere else to go.  There
were my things in the apartment on the first floor.  I couldn’t bear the
thought of meeting anybody I knew.

The feeble gas flame in the hall was still there, on duty, as though it
had never been turned off since I last crossed the hall at half-past
eleven in the evening to go to the harbour.  The small flame had watched
me letting myself out; and now, exactly of the same size, the poor little
tongue of light (there was something wrong with that burner) watched me
letting myself in, as indeed it had done many times before.  Generally
the impression was that of entering an untenanted house, but this time
before I could reach the foot of the stairs Therese glided out of the
passage leading into the studio.  After the usual exclamations she
assured me that everything was ready for me upstairs, had been for days,
and offered to get me something to eat at once.  I accepted and said I
would be down in the studio in half an hour.  I found her there by the
side of the laid table ready for conversation.  She began by telling
me—the dear, poor young Monsieur—in a sort of plaintive chant, that there
were no letters for me, no letters of any kind, no letters from anybody.
Glances of absolutely terrifying tenderness mingled with flashes of
cunning swept over me from head to foot while I tried to eat.

“Are you giving me Captain Blunt’s wine to drink?” I asked, noting the
straw-coloured liquid in my glass.

She screwed up her mouth as if she had a twinge of toothache and assured
me that the wine belonged to the house.  I would have to pay her for it.
As far as personal feelings go, Blunt, who addressed her always with
polite seriousness, was not a favourite with her.  The “charming, brave
Monsieur” was now fighting for the King and religion against the impious
Liberals.  He went away the very morning after I had left and, oh! she
remembered, he had asked her before going away whether I was still in the
house.  Wanted probably to say good-bye to me, shake my hand, the dear,
polite Monsieur.

I let her run on in dread expectation of what she would say next but she
stuck to the subject of Blunt for some time longer.  He had written to
her once about some of his things which he wanted her to send to Paris to
his mother’s address; but she was going to do nothing of the kind.  She
announced this with a pious smile; and in answer to my questions I
discovered that it was a stratagem to make Captain Blunt return to the
house.

“You will get yourself into trouble with the police, Mademoiselle
Therese, if you go on like that,” I said.  But she was as obstinate as a
mule and assured me with the utmost confidence that many people would be
ready to defend a poor honest girl.  There was something behind this
attitude which I could not fathom.  Suddenly she fetched a deep sigh.

“Our Rita, too, will end by coming to her sister.”

The name for which I had been waiting deprived me of speech for the
moment.  The poor mad sinner had rushed off to some of her wickednesses
in Paris.  Did I know?  No?  How could she tell whether I did know or
not?  Well!  I had hardly left the house, so to speak, when Rita was down
with her maid behaving as if the house did really still belong to
her. . .

“What time was it?” I managed to ask.  And with the words my life itself
was being forced out through my lips.  But Therese, not noticing anything
strange about me, said it was something like half-past seven in the
morning.  The “poor sinner” was all in black as if she were going to
church (except for her expression, which was enough to shock any honest
person), and after ordering her with frightful menaces not to let anybody
know she was in the house she rushed upstairs and locked herself up in my
bedroom, while “that French creature” (whom she seemed to love more than
her own sister) went into my salon and hid herself behind the window
curtain.

I had recovered sufficiently to ask in a quiet natural voice whether Doña
Rita and Captain Blunt had seen each other.  Apparently they had not seen
each other.  The polite captain had looked so stern while packing up his
kit that Therese dared not speak to him at all.  And he was in a hurry,
too.  He had to see his dear mother off to Paris before his own
departure.  Very stern.  But he shook her hand with a very nice bow.

Therese elevated her right hand for me to see.  It was broad and short
with blunt fingers, as usual.  The pressure of Captain Blunt’s handshake
had not altered its unlovely shape.

“What was the good of telling him that our Rita was here?” went on
Therese.  “I would have been ashamed of her coming here and behaving as
if the house belonged to her!  I had already said some prayers at his
intention at the half-past six mass, the brave gentleman.  That maid of
my sister Rita was upstairs watching him drive away with her evil eyes,
but I made a sign of the cross after the fiacre, and then I went upstairs
and banged at your door, my dear kind young Monsieur, and shouted to Rita
that she had no right to lock herself in any of my _locataires_’ rooms.
At last she opened it—and what do you think?  All her hair was loose over
her shoulders.  I suppose it all came down when she flung her hat on your
bed.  I noticed when she arrived that her hair wasn’t done properly.  She
used your brushes to do it up again in front of your glass.”

“Wait a moment,” I said, and jumped up, upsetting my wine to run upstairs
as fast as I could.  I lighted the gas, all the three jets in the middle
of the room, the jet by the bedside and two others flanking the
dressing-table.  I had been struck by the wild hope of finding a trace of
Rita’s passage, a sign or something.  I pulled out all the drawers
violently, thinking that perhaps she had hidden there a scrap of paper, a
note.  It was perfectly mad.  Of course there was no chance of that.
Therese would have seen to it.  I picked up one after another all the
various objects on the dressing-table.  On laying my hands on the brushes
I had a profound emotion, and with misty eyes I examined them
meticulously with the new hope of finding one of Rita’s tawny hairs
entangled amongst the bristles by a miraculous chance.  But Therese would
have done away with that chance, too.  There was nothing to be seen,
though I held them up to the light with a beating heart.  It was written
that not even that trace of her passage on the earth should remain with
me; not to help but, as it were, to soothe the memory.  Then I lighted a
cigarette and came downstairs slowly.  My unhappiness became dulled, as
the grief of those who mourn for the dead gets dulled in the overwhelming
sensation that everything is over, that a part of themselves is lost
beyond recall taking with it all the savour of life.

I discovered Therese still on the very same spot of the floor, her hands
folded over each other and facing my empty chair before which the spilled
wine had soaked a large portion of the table-cloth.  She hadn’t moved at
all.  She hadn’t even picked up the overturned glass.  But directly I
appeared she began to speak in an ingratiating voice.

“If you have missed anything of yours upstairs, my dear young Monsieur,
you mustn’t say it’s me.  You don’t know what our Rita is.”

“I wish to goodness,” I said, “that she had taken something.”

And again I became inordinately agitated as though it were my absolute
fate to be everlastingly dying and reviving to the tormenting fact of her
existence.  Perhaps she had taken something?  Anything.  Some small
object.  I thought suddenly of a Rhenish-stone match-box.  Perhaps it was
that.  I didn’t remember having seen it when upstairs.  I wanted to make
sure at once.  At once.  But I commanded myself to sit still.

“And she so wealthy,” Therese went on.  “Even you with your dear generous
little heart can do nothing for our Rita.  No man can do anything for
her—except perhaps one, but she is so evilly disposed towards him that
she wouldn’t even see him, if in the goodness of his forgiving heart he
were to offer his hand to her.  It’s her bad conscience that frightens
her.  He loves her more than his life, the dear, charitable man.”

“You mean some rascal in Paris that I believe persecutes Doña Rita.
Listen, Mademoiselle Therese, if you know where he hangs out you had
better let him have word to be careful.  I believe he, too, is mixed up
in the Carlist intrigue.  Don’t you know that your sister can get him
shut up any day or get him expelled by the police?”

Therese sighed deeply and put on a look of pained virtue.

“Oh, the hardness of her heart.  She tried to be tender with me.  She is
awful.  I said to her, ‘Rita, have you sold your soul to the Devil?’ and
she shouted like a fiend: ‘For happiness!  Ha, ha, ha!’  She threw
herself backwards on that couch in your room and laughed and laughed and
laughed as if I had been tickling her, and she drummed on the floor with
the heels of her shoes.  She is possessed.  Oh, my dear innocent young
Monsieur, you have never seen anything like that.  That wicked girl who
serves her rushed in with a tiny glass bottle and put it to her nose; but
I had a mind to run out and fetch the priest from the church where I go
to early mass.  Such a nice, stout, severe man.  But that false, cheating
creature (I am sure she is robbing our Rita from morning to night), she
talked to our Rita very low and quieted her down.  I am sure I don’t know
what she said.  She must be leagued with the devil.  And then she asked
me if I would go down and make a cup of chocolate for her Madame.
Madame—that’s our Rita.  Madame!  It seems they were going off directly
to Paris and her Madame had had nothing to eat since the morning of the
day before.  Fancy me being ordered to make chocolate for our Rita!
However, the poor thing looked so exhausted and white-faced that I went.
Ah! the devil can give you an awful shake up if he likes.”

Therese fetched another deep sigh and raising her eyes looked at me with
great attention.  I preserved an inscrutable expression, for I wanted to
hear all she had to tell me of Rita.  I watched her with the greatest
anxiety composing her face into a cheerful expression.

“So Doña Rita is gone to Paris?” I asked negligently.

“Yes, my dear Monsieur.  I believe she went straight to the railway
station from here.  When she first got up from the couch she could hardly
stand.  But before, while she was drinking the chocolate which I made for
her, I tried to get her to sign a paper giving over the house to me, but
she only closed her eyes and begged me to try and be a good sister and
leave her alone for half an hour.  And she lying there looking as if she
wouldn’t live a day.  But she always hated me.”

I said bitterly, “You needn’t have worried her like this.  If she had not
lived for another day you would have had this house and everything else
besides; a bigger bit than even your wolfish throat can swallow,
Mademoiselle Therese.”

I then said a few more things indicative of my disgust with her rapacity,
but they were quite inadequate, as I wasn’t able to find words strong
enough to express my real mind.  But it didn’t matter really because I
don’t think Therese heard me at all.  She seemed lost in rapt amazement.

“What do you say, my dear Monsieur?  What!  All for me without any sort
of paper?”

She appeared distracted by my curt: “Yes.”  Therese believed in my
truthfulness.  She believed me implicitly, except when I was telling her
the truth about herself, mincing no words, when she used to stand
smilingly bashful as if I were overwhelming her with compliments.  I
expected her to continue the horrible tale but apparently she had found
something to think about which checked the flow.  She fetched another
sigh and muttered:

“Then the law can be just, if it does not require any paper.  After all,
I am her sister.”

“It’s very difficult to believe that—at sight,” I said roughly.

“Ah, but that I could prove.  There are papers for that.”

After this declaration she began to clear the table, preserving a
thoughtful silence.

I was not very surprised at the news of Doña Rita’s departure for Paris.
It was not necessary to ask myself why she had gone.  I didn’t even ask
myself whether she had left the leased Villa on the Prado for ever.
Later talking again with Therese, I learned that her sister had given it
up for the use of the Carlist cause and that some sort of unofficial
Consul, a Carlist agent of some sort, either was going to live there or
had already taken possession.  This, Rita herself had told her before her
departure on that agitated morning spent in the house—in my rooms.  A
close investigation demonstrated to me that there was nothing missing
from them.  Even the wretched match-box which I really hoped was gone
turned up in a drawer after I had, delightedly, given it up.  It was a
great blow.  She might have taken that at least!  She knew I used to
carry it about with me constantly while ashore.  She might have taken it!
Apparently she meant that there should be no bond left even of that kind;
and yet it was a long time before I gave up visiting and revisiting all
the corners of all possible receptacles for something that she might have
left behind on purpose.  It was like the mania of those disordered minds
who spend their days hunting for a treasure.  I hoped for a forgotten
hairpin, for some tiny piece of ribbon.  Sometimes at night I reflected
that such hopes were altogether insensate; but I remember once getting up
at two in the morning to search for a little cardboard box in the
bathroom, into which, I remembered, I had not looked before.  Of course
it was empty; and, anyway, Rita could not possibly have known of its
existence.  I got back to bed shivering violently, though the night was
warm, and with a distinct impression that this thing would end by making
me mad.  It was no longer a question of “this sort of thing” killing me.
The moral atmosphere of this torture was different.  It would make me
mad.  And at that thought great shudders ran down my prone body, because,
once, I had visited a famous lunatic asylum where they had shown me a
poor wretch who was mad, apparently, because he thought he had been
abominably fooled by a woman.  They told me that his grievance was quite
imaginary.  He was a young man with a thin fair beard, huddled up on the
edge of his bed, hugging himself forlornly; and his incessant and
lamentable wailing filled the long bare corridor, striking a chill into
one’s heart long before one came to the door of his cell.

And there was no one from whom I could hear, to whom I could speak, with
whom I could evoke the image of Rita.  Of course I could utter that word
of four letters to Therese; but Therese for some reason took it into her
head to avoid all topics connected with her sister.  I felt as if I could
pull out great handfuls of her hair hidden modestly under the black
handkerchief of which the ends were sometimes tied under her chin.  But,
really, I could not have given her any intelligible excuse for that
outrage.  Moreover, she was very busy from the very top to the very
bottom of the house, which she persisted in running alone because she
couldn’t make up her mind to part with a few francs every month to a
servant.  It seemed to me that I was no longer such a favourite with her
as I used to be.  That, strange to say, was exasperating, too.  It was as
if some idea, some fruitful notion had killed in her all the softer and
more humane emotions.  She went about with brooms and dusters wearing an
air of sanctimonious thoughtfulness.

The man who to a certain extent took my place in Therese’s favour was the
old father of the dancing girls inhabiting the ground floor.  In a tall
hat and a well-to-do dark blue overcoat he allowed himself to be
button-holed in the hall by Therese who would talk to him interminably
with downcast eyes.  He smiled gravely down at her, and meanwhile tried
to edge towards the front door.  I imagine he didn’t put a great value on
Therese’s favour.  Our stay in harbour was prolonged this time and I kept
indoors like an invalid.  One evening I asked that old man to come in and
drink and smoke with me in the studio.  He made no difficulties to
accept, brought his wooden pipe with him, and was very entertaining in a
pleasant voice.  One couldn’t tell whether he was an uncommon person or
simply a ruffian, but in any case with his white beard he looked quite
venerable.  Naturally he couldn’t give me much of his company as he had
to look closely after his girls and their admirers; not that the girls
were unduly frivolous, but of course being very young they had no
experience.  They were friendly creatures with pleasant, merry voices and
he was very much devoted to them.  He was a muscular man with a high
colour and silvery locks curling round his bald pate and over his ears,
like a _barocco_ apostle.  I had an idea that he had had a lurid past and
had seen some fighting in his youth.  The admirers of the two girls stood
in great awe of him, from instinct no doubt, because his behaviour to
them was friendly and even somewhat obsequious, yet always with a certain
truculent glint in his eye that made them pause in everything but their
generosity—which was encouraged.  I sometimes wondered whether those two
careless, merry hard-working creatures understood the secret moral beauty
of the situation.

My real company was the dummy in the studio and I can’t say it was
exactly satisfying.  After taking possession of the studio I had raised
it tenderly, dusted its mangled limbs and insensible, hard-wood bosom,
and then had propped it up in a corner where it seemed to take on, of
itself, a shy attitude.  I knew its history.  It was not an ordinary
dummy.  One day, talking with Doña Rita about her sister, I had told her
that I thought Therese used to knock it down on purpose with a broom, and
Doña Rita had laughed very much.  This, she had said, was an instance of
dislike from mere instinct.  That dummy had been made to measure years
before.  It had to wear for days and days the Imperial Byzantine robes in
which Doña Rita sat only once or twice herself; but of course the folds
and bends of the stuff had to be preserved as in the first sketch.  Doña
Rita described amusingly how she had to stand in the middle of her room
while Rose walked around her with a tape measure noting the figures down
on a small piece of paper which was then sent to the maker, who presently
returned it with an angry letter stating that those proportions were
altogether impossible in any woman.  Apparently Rose had muddled them all
up; and it was a long time before the figure was finished and sent to the
Pavilion in a long basket to take on itself the robes and the hieratic
pose of the Empress.  Later, it wore with the same patience the
marvellous hat of the “Girl in the Hat.”  But Doña Rita couldn’t
understand how the poor thing ever found its way to Marseilles minus its
turnip head.  Probably it came down with the robes and a quantity of
precious brocades which she herself had sent down from Paris.  The
knowledge of its origin, the contempt of Captain Blunt’s references to
it, with Therese’s shocked dislike of the dummy, invested that summary
reproduction with a sort of charm, gave me a faint and miserable illusion
of the original, less artificial than a photograph, less precise, too.
. . . But it can’t be explained.  I felt positively friendly to it as if it
had been Rita’s trusted personal attendant.  I even went so far as to
discover that it had a sort of grace of its own.  But I never went so far
as to address set speeches to it where it lurked shyly in its corner, or
drag it out from there for contemplation.  I left it in peace.  I wasn’t
mad.  I was only convinced that I soon would be.



CHAPTER II


Notwithstanding my misanthropy I had to see a few people on account of
all these Royalist affairs which I couldn’t very well drop, and in truth
did not wish to drop.  They were my excuse for remaining in Europe, which
somehow I had not the strength of mind to leave for the West Indies, or
elsewhere.  On the other hand, my adventurous pursuit kept me in contact
with the sea where I found occupation, protection, consolation, the
mental relief of grappling with concrete problems, the sanity one
acquires from close contact with simple mankind, a little self-confidence
born from the dealings with the elemental powers of nature.  I couldn’t
give all that up.  And besides all this was related to Doña Rita.  I had,
as it were, received it all from her own hand, from that hand the clasp
of which was as frank as a man’s and yet conveyed a unique sensation.
The very memory of it would go through me like a wave of heat.  It was
over that hand that we first got into the habit of quarrelling, with the
irritability of sufferers from some obscure pain and yet half unconscious
of their disease.  Rita’s own spirit hovered over the troubled waters of
Legitimity.  But as to the sound of the four magic letters of her name I
was not very likely to hear it fall sweetly on my ear.  For instance, the
distinguished personality in the world of finance with whom I had to
confer several times, alluded to the irresistible seduction of the power
which reigned over my heart and my mind; which had a mysterious and
unforgettable face, the brilliance of sunshine together with the
unfathomable splendour of the night as—Madame de Lastaola.  That’s how
that steel-grey man called the greatest mystery of the universe.  When
uttering that assumed name he would make for himself a guardedly solemn
and reserved face as though he were afraid lest I should presume to
smile, lest he himself should venture to smile, and the sacred formality
of our relations should be outraged beyond mending.

He would refer in a studiously grave tone to Madame de Lastaola’s wishes,
plans, activities, instructions, movements; or picking up a letter from
the usual litter of paper found on such men’s desks, glance at it to
refresh his memory; and, while the very sight of the handwriting would
make my lips go dry, would ask me in a bloodless voice whether perchance
I had “a direct communication from—er—Paris lately.”  And there would be
other maddening circumstances connected with those visits.  He would
treat me as a serious person having a clear view of certain
eventualities, while at the very moment my vision could see nothing but
streaming across the wall at his back, abundant and misty, unearthly and
adorable, a mass of tawny hair that seemed to have hot sparks tangled in
it.  Another nuisance was the atmosphere of Royalism, of Legitimacy, that
pervaded the room, thin as air, intangible, as though no Legitimist of
flesh and blood had ever existed to the man’s mind except perhaps myself.
He, of course, was just simply a banker, a very distinguished, a very
influential, and a very impeccable banker.  He persisted also in
deferring to my judgment and sense with an over-emphasis called out by
his perpetual surprise at my youth.  Though he had seen me many times (I
even knew his wife) he could never get over my immature age.  He himself
was born about fifty years old, all complete, with his iron-grey whiskers
and his bilious eyes, which he had the habit of frequently closing during
a conversation.  On one occasion he said to me.  “By the by, the Marquis
of Villarel is here for a time.  He inquired after you the last time he
called on me.  May I let him know that you are in town?”

I didn’t say anything to that.  The Marquis of Villarel was the Don
Rafael of Rita’s own story.  What had I to do with Spanish grandees?  And
for that matter what had she, the woman of all time, to do with all the
villainous or splendid disguises human dust takes upon itself?  All this
was in the past, and I was acutely aware that for me there was no
present, no future, nothing but a hollow pain, a vain passion of such
magnitude that being locked up within my breast it gave me an illusion of
lonely greatness with my miserable head uplifted amongst the stars.  But
when I made up my mind (which I did quickly, to be done with it) to call
on the banker’s wife, almost the first thing she said to me was that the
Marquis de Villarel was “amongst us.”  She said it joyously.  If in her
husband’s room at the bank legitimism was a mere unpopulated principle,
in her salon Legitimacy was nothing but persons.  “_Il m’a causé beaucoup
de vous_,” she said as if there had been a joke in it of which I ought to
be proud.  I slunk away from her.  I couldn’t believe that the grandee
had talked to her about me.  I had never felt myself part of the great
Royalist enterprise.  I confess that I was so indifferent to everything,
so profoundly demoralized, that having once got into that drawing-room I
hadn’t the strength to get away; though I could see perfectly well my
volatile hostess going from one to another of her acquaintances in order
to tell them with a little gesture, “Look!  Over there—in that corner.
That’s the notorious Monsieur George.”  At last she herself drove me out
by coming to sit by me vivaciously and going into ecstasies over “_ce
cher_ Monsieur Mills” and that magnificent Lord X; and ultimately, with a
perfectly odious snap in the eyes and drop in the voice, dragging in the
name of Madame de Lastaola and asking me whether I was really so much in
the confidence of that astonishing person.  “_Vous devez bien regretter
son départ pour Paris_,” she cooed, looking with affected bashfulness at
her fan. . . . How I got out of the room I really don’t know.  There was
also a staircase.  I did not fall down it head first—that much I am
certain of; and I also remember that I wandered for a long time about the
seashore and went home very late, by the way of the Prado, giving in
passing a fearful glance at the Villa.  It showed not a gleam of light
through the thin foliage of its trees.

I spent the next day with Dominic on board the little craft watching the
shipwrights at work on her deck.  From the way they went about their
business those men must have been perfectly sane; and I felt greatly
refreshed by my company during the day.  Dominic, too, devoted himself to
his business, but his taciturnity was sardonic.  Then I dropped in at the
café and Madame Léonore’s loud “Eh, Signorino, here you are at last!”
pleased me by its resonant friendliness.  But I found the sparkle of her
black eyes as she sat down for a moment opposite me while I was having my
drink rather difficult to bear.  That man and that woman seemed to know
something.  What did they know?  At parting she pressed my hand
significantly.  What did she mean?  But I didn’t feel offended by these
manifestations.  The souls within these people’s breasts were not
volatile in the manner of slightly scented and inflated bladders.
Neither had they the impervious skins which seem the rule in the fine
world that wants only to get on.  Somehow they had sensed that there was
something wrong; and whatever impression they might have formed for
themselves I had the certitude that it would not be for them a matter of
grins at my expense.

That day on returning home I found Therese looking out for me, a very
unusual occurrence of late.  She handed me a card bearing the name of the
Marquis de Villarel.

“How did you come by this?” I asked.  She turned on at once the tap of
her volubility and I was not surprised to learn that the grandee had not
done such an extraordinary thing as to call upon me in person.  A young
gentleman had brought it.  Such a nice young gentleman, she interjected
with her piously ghoulish expression.  He was not very tall.  He had a
very smooth complexion (that woman was incorrigible) and a nice, tiny
black moustache.  Therese was sure that he must have been an officer _en
las filas legitimas_.  With that notion in her head she had asked him
about the welfare of that other model of charm and elegance, Captain
Blunt.  To her extreme surprise the charming young gentleman with
beautiful eyes had apparently never heard of Blunt.  But he seemed very
much interested in his surroundings, looked all round the hall, noted the
costly wood of the door panels, paid some attention to the silver
statuette holding up the defective gas burner at the foot of the stairs,
and, finally, asked whether this was in very truth the house of the most
excellent Señora Doña Rita de Lastaola.  The question staggered Therese,
but with great presence of mind she answered the young gentleman that she
didn’t know what excellence there was about it, but that the house was
her property, having been given to her by her own sister.  At this the
young gentleman looked both puzzled and angry, turned on his heel, and
got back into his fiacre.  Why should people be angry with a poor girl
who had never done a single reprehensible thing in her whole life?

“I suppose our Rita does tell people awful lies about her poor sister.”
She sighed deeply (she had several kinds of sighs and this was the
hopeless kind) and added reflectively, “Sin on sin, wickedness on
wickedness!  And the longer she lives the worse it will be.  It would be
better for our Rita to be dead.”

I told “Mademoiselle Therese” that it was really impossible to tell
whether she was more stupid or atrocious; but I wasn’t really very much
shocked.  These outbursts did not signify anything in Therese.  One got
used to them.  They were merely the expression of her rapacity and her
righteousness; so that our conversation ended by my asking her whether
she had any dinner ready for me that evening.

“What’s the good of getting you anything to eat, my dear young Monsieur,”
she quizzed me tenderly.  “You just only peck like a little bird.  Much
better let me save the money for you.”  It will show the
super-terrestrial nature of my misery when I say that I was quite
surprised at Therese’s view of my appetite.  Perhaps she was right.  I
certainly did not know.  I stared hard at her and in the end she admitted
that the dinner was in fact ready that very moment.

The new young gentleman within Therese’s horizon didn’t surprise me very
much.  Villarel would travel with some sort of suite, a couple of
secretaries at least.  I had heard enough of Carlist headquarters to know
that the man had been (very likely was still) Captain General of the
Royal Bodyguard and was a person of great political (and domestic)
influence at Court.  The card was, under its social form, a mere command
to present myself before the grandee.  No Royalist devoted by conviction,
as I must have appeared to him, could have mistaken the meaning.  I put
the card in my pocket and after dining or not dining—I really don’t
remember—spent the evening smoking in the studio, pursuing thoughts of
tenderness and grief, visions exalting and cruel.  From time to time I
looked at the dummy.  I even got up once from the couch on which I had
been writhing like a worm and walked towards it as if to touch it, but
refrained, not from sudden shame but from sheer despair.  By and by
Therese drifted in.  It was then late and, I imagine, she was on her way
to bed.  She looked the picture of cheerful, rustic innocence and started
propounding to me a conundrum which began with the words:

“If our Rita were to die before long . . .”

She didn’t get any further because I had jumped up and frightened her by
shouting: “Is she ill?  What has happened?  Have you had a letter?”

She had had a letter.  I didn’t ask her to show it to me, though I
daresay she would have done so.  I had an idea that there was no meaning
in anything, at least no meaning that mattered.  But the interruption had
made Therese apparently forget her sinister conundrum.  She observed me
with her shrewd, unintelligent eyes for a bit, and then with the fatuous
remark about the Law being just she left me to the horrors of the studio.
I believe I went to sleep there from sheer exhaustion.  Some time during
the night I woke up chilled to the bone and in the dark.  These were
horrors and no mistake.  I dragged myself upstairs to bed past the
indefatigable statuette holding up the ever-miserable light.  The
black-and-white hall was like an ice-house.

The main consideration which induced me to call on the Marquis of
Villarel was the fact that after all I was a discovery of Doña Rita’s,
her own recruit.  My fidelity and steadfastness had been guaranteed by
her and no one else.  I couldn’t bear the idea of her being criticized by
every empty-headed chatterer belonging to the Cause.  And as, apart from
that, nothing mattered much, why, then—I would get this over.

But it appeared that I had not reflected sufficiently on all the
consequences of that step.  First of all the sight of the Villa looking
shabbily cheerful in the sunshine (but not containing her any longer) was
so perturbing that I very nearly went away from the gate.  Then when I
got in after much hesitation—being admitted by the man in the green baize
apron who recognized me—the thought of entering that room, out of which
she was gone as completely as if she had been dead, gave me such an
emotion that I had to steady myself against the table till the faintness
was past.  Yet I was irritated as at a treason when the man in the baize
apron instead of letting me into the Pompeiian dining-room crossed the
hall to another door not at all in the Pompeiian style (more Louis XV
rather—that Villa was like a _Salade Russe_ of styles) and introduced me
into a big, light room full of very modern furniture.  The portrait _en
pied_ of an officer in a sky-blue uniform hung on the end wall.  The
officer had a small head, a black beard cut square, a robust body, and
leaned with gauntleted hands on the simple hilt of a straight sword.
That striking picture dominated a massive mahogany desk, and, in front of
this desk, a very roomy, tall-backed armchair of dark green velvet.  I
thought I had been announced into an empty room till glancing along the
extremely loud carpet I detected a pair of feet under the armchair.

I advanced towards it and discovered a little man, who had made no sound
or movement till I came into his view, sunk deep in the green velvet.  He
altered his position slowly and rested his hollow, black, quietly burning
eyes on my face in prolonged scrutiny.  I detected something comminatory
in his yellow, emaciated countenance, but I believe now he was simply
startled by my youth.  I bowed profoundly.  He extended a meagre little
hand.

“Take a chair, Don Jorge.”

He was very small, frail, and thin, but his voice was not languid, though
he spoke hardly above his breath.  Such was the envelope and the voice of
the fanatical soul belonging to the Grand-master of Ceremonies and
Captain General of the Bodyguard at the Headquarters of the Legitimist
Court, now detached on a special mission.  He was all fidelity,
inflexibility, and sombre conviction, but like some great saints he had
very little body to keep all these merits in.

“You are very young,” he remarked, to begin with.  “The matters on which
I desired to converse with you are very grave.”

“I was under the impression that your Excellency wished to see me at
once.  But if your Excellency prefers it I will return in, say, seven
years’ time when I may perhaps be old enough to talk about grave
matters.”

He didn’t stir hand or foot and not even the quiver of an eyelid proved
that he had heard my shockingly unbecoming retort.

“You have been recommended to us by a noble and loyal lady, in whom His
Majesty—whom God preserve—reposes an entire confidence.  God will reward
her as she deserves and you, too, Señor, according to the disposition you
bring to this great work which has the blessing (here he crossed himself)
of our Holy Mother the Church.”

“I suppose your Excellency understands that in all this I am not looking
for reward of any kind.”

At this he made a faint, almost ethereal grimace.

“I was speaking of the spiritual blessing which rewards the service of
religion and will be of benefit to your soul,” he explained with a slight
touch of acidity.  “The other is perfectly understood and your fidelity
is taken for granted.  His Majesty—whom God preserve—has been already
pleased to signify his satisfaction with your services to the most noble
and loyal Doña Rita by a letter in his own hand.”

Perhaps he expected me to acknowledge this announcement in some way,
speech, or bow, or something, because before my immobility he made a
slight movement in his chair which smacked of impatience.  “I am afraid,
Señor, that you are affected by the spirit of scoffing and irreverence
which pervades this unhappy country of France in which both you and I are
strangers, I believe.  Are you a young man of that sort?”

“I am a very good gun-runner, your Excellency,” I answered quietly.

He bowed his head gravely.  “We are aware.  But I was looking for the
motives which ought to have their pure source in religion.”

“I must confess frankly that I have not reflected on my motives,” I said.
“It is enough for me to know that they are not dishonourable and that
anybody can see they are not the motives of an adventurer seeking some
sordid advantage.”

He had listened patiently and when he saw that there was nothing more to
come he ended the discussion.

“Señor, we should reflect upon our motives.  It is salutary for our
conscience and is recommended (he crossed himself) by our Holy Mother the
Church.  I have here certain letters from Paris on which I would consult
your young sagacity which is accredited to us by the most loyal Doña
Rita.”

The sound of that name on his lips was simply odious.  I was convinced
that this man of forms and ceremonies and fanatical royalism was
perfectly heartless.  Perhaps he reflected on his motives; but it seemed
to me that his conscience could be nothing else but a monstrous thing
which very few actions could disturb appreciably.  Yet for the credit of
Doña Rita I did not withhold from him my young sagacity.  What he thought
of it I don’t know. The matters we discussed were not of course of high
policy, though from the point of view of the war in the south they were
important enough.  We agreed on certain things to be done, and finally,
always out of regard for Doña Rita’s credit, I put myself generally at
his disposition or of any Carlist agent he would appoint in his place;
for I did not suppose that he would remain very long in Marseilles.  He
got out of the chair laboriously, like a sick child might have done.  The
audience was over but he noticed my eyes wandering to the portrait and he
said in his measured, breathed-out tones:

“I owe the pleasure of having this admirable work here to the gracious
attention of Madame de Lastaola, who, knowing my attachment to the royal
person of my Master, has sent it down from Paris to greet me in this
house which has been given up for my occupation also through her
generosity to the Royal Cause.  Unfortunately she, too, is touched by the
infection of this irreverent and unfaithful age.  But she is young yet.
She is young.”

These last words were pronounced in a strange tone of menace as though he
were supernaturally aware of some suspended disasters.  With his burning
eyes he was the image of an Inquisitor with an unconquerable soul in that
frail body.  But suddenly he dropped his eyelids and the conversation
finished as characteristically as it had begun: with a slow, dismissing
inclination of the head and an “Adios, Señor—may God guard you from sin.”



CHAPTER III


I must say that for the next three months I threw myself into my unlawful
trade with a sort of desperation, dogged and hopeless, like a fairly
decent fellow who takes deliberately to drink.  The business was getting
dangerous.  The bands in the South were not very well organized, worked
with no very definite plan, and now were beginning to be pretty closely
hunted.  The arrangements for the transport of supplies were going to
pieces; our friends ashore were getting scared; and it was no joke to
find after a day of skilful dodging that there was no one at the landing
place and have to go out again with our compromising cargo, to slink and
lurk about the coast for another week or so, unable to trust anybody and
looking at every vessel we met with suspicion.  Once we were ambushed by
a lot of “rascally Carabineers,” as Dominic called them, who hid
themselves among the rocks after disposing a train of mules well in view
on the seashore.  Luckily, on evidence which I could never understand,
Dominic detected something suspicious.  Perhaps it was by virtue of some
sixth sense that men born for unlawful occupations may be gifted with.
“There is a smell of treachery about this,” he remarked suddenly, turning
at his oar.  (He and I were pulling alone in a little boat to
reconnoitre.)  I couldn’t detect any smell and I regard to this day our
escape on that occasion as, properly speaking, miraculous.  Surely some
supernatural power must have struck upwards the barrels of the
Carabineers’ rifles, for they missed us by yards.  And as the Carabineers
have the reputation of shooting straight, Dominic, after swearing most
horribly, ascribed our escape to the particular guardian angel that looks
after crazy young gentlemen.  Dominic believed in angels in a
conventional way, but laid no claim to having one of his own.  Soon
afterwards, while sailing quietly at night, we found ourselves suddenly
near a small coasting vessel, also without lights, which all at once
treated us to a volley of rifle fire.  Dominic’s mighty and inspired
yell: “_A plat ventre_!” and also an unexpected roll to windward saved
all our lives.  Nobody got a scratch.  We were past in a moment and in a
breeze then blowing we had the heels of anything likely to give us chase.
But an hour afterwards, as we stood side by side peering into the
darkness, Dominic was heard to mutter through his teeth: “_Le métier se
gâte_.”  I, too, had the feeling that the trade, if not altogether
spoiled, had seen its best days.  But I did not care.  In fact, for my
purpose it was rather better, a more potent influence; like the stronger
intoxication of raw spirit.  A volley in the dark after all was not such
a bad thing.  Only a moment before we had received it, there, in that
calm night of the sea full of freshness and soft whispers, I had been
looking at an enchanting turn of a head in a faint light of its own, the
tawny hair with snared red sparks brushed up from the nape of a white
neck and held up on high by an arrow of gold feathered with brilliants
and with ruby gleams all along its shaft.  That jewelled ornament, which
I remember often telling Rita was of a very Philistinish conception (it
was in some way connected with a tortoiseshell comb) occupied an undue
place in my memory, tried to come into some sort of significance even in
my sleep.  Often I dreamed of her with white limbs shimmering in the
gloom like a nymph haunting a riot of foliage, and raising a perfect
round arm to take an arrow of gold out of her hair to throw it at me by
hand, like a dart.  It came on, a whizzing trail of light, but I always
woke up before it struck.  Always.  Invariably.  It never had a chance.
A volley of small arms was much more likely to do the business some
day—or night.

                                * * * * *

At last came the day when everything slipped out of my grasp.  The little
vessel, broken and gone like the only toy of a lonely child, the sea
itself, which had swallowed it, throwing me on shore after a shipwreck
that instead of a fair fight left in me the memory of a suicide.  It took
away all that there was in me of independent life, but just failed to
take me out of the world, which looked then indeed like Another World fit
for no one else but unrepentant sinners.  Even Dominic failed me, his
moral entity destroyed by what to him was a most tragic ending of our
common enterprise.  The lurid swiftness of it all was like a stunning
thunder-clap—and, one evening, I found myself weary, heartsore, my brain
still dazed and with awe in my heart entering Marseilles by way of the
railway station, after many adventures, one more disagreeable than
another, involving privations, great exertions, a lot of difficulties
with all sorts of people who looked upon me evidently more as a
discreditable vagabond deserving the attentions of gendarmes than a
respectable (if crazy) young gentleman attended by a guardian angel of
his own.  I must confess that I slunk out of the railway station shunning
its many lights as if, invariably, failure made an outcast of a man.  I
hadn’t any money in my pocket.  I hadn’t even the bundle and the stick of
a destitute wayfarer.  I was unshaven and unwashed, and my heart was
faint within me.  My attire was such that I daren’t approach the rank of
fiacres, where indeed I could perceive only two pairs of lamps, of which
one suddenly drove away while I looked.  The other I gave up to the
fortunate of this earth.  I didn’t believe in my power of persuasion.  I
had no powers.  I slunk on and on, shivering with cold, through the
uproarious streets.  Bedlam was loose in them.  It was the time of
Carnival.

Small objects of no value have the secret of sticking to a man in an
astonishing way.  I had nearly lost my liberty and even my life, I had
lost my ship, a money-belt full of gold, I had lost my companions, had
parted from my friend; my occupation, my only link with life, my touch
with the sea, my cap and jacket were gone—but a small penknife and a
latchkey had never parted company with me.  With the latchkey I opened
the door of refuge.  The hall wore its deaf-and-dumb air, its
black-and-white stillness.

The sickly gas-jet still struggled bravely with adversity at the end of
the raised silver arm of the statuette which had kept to a hair’s breadth
its graceful pose on the toes of its left foot; and the staircase lost
itself in the shadows above.  Therese was parsimonious with the lights.
To see all this was surprising.  It seemed to me that all the things I
had known ought to have come down with a crash at the moment of the final
catastrophe on the Spanish coast.  And there was Therese herself
descending the stairs, frightened but plucky.  Perhaps she thought that
she would be murdered this time for certain.  She had a strange,
unemotional conviction that the house was particularly convenient for a
crime.  One could never get to the bottom of her wild notions which she
held with the stolidity of a peasant allied to the outward serenity of a
nun.  She quaked all over as she came down to her doom, but when she
recognized me she got such a shock that she sat down suddenly on the
lowest step.  She did not expect me for another week at least, and,
besides, she explained, the state I was in made her blood take “one
turn.”

Indeed my plight seemed either to have called out or else repressed her
true nature.  But who had ever fathomed her nature!  There was none of
her treacly volubility.  There were none of her “dear young gentlemans”
and “poor little hearts” and references to sin.  In breathless silence
she ran about the house getting my room ready, lighting fires and
gas-jets and even hauling at me to help me up the stairs.  Yes, she did
lay hands on me for that charitable purpose.  They trembled.  Her pale
eyes hardly left my face.  “What brought you here like this?” she
whispered once.

“If I were to tell you, Mademoiselle Therese, you would see there the
hand of God.”

She dropped the extra pillow she was carrying and then nearly fell over
it.  “Oh, dear heart,” she murmured, and ran off to the kitchen.

I sank into bed as into a cloud and Therese reappeared very misty and
offering me something in a cup.  I believe it was hot milk, and after I
drank it she took the cup and stood looking at me fixedly.  I managed to
say with difficulty: “Go away,” whereupon she vanished as if by magic
before the words were fairly out of my mouth.  Immediately afterwards the
sunlight forced through the slats of the jalousies its diffused glow, and
Therese was there again as if by magic, saying in a distant voice: “It’s
midday”. . . Youth will have its rights.  I had slept like a stone for
seventeen hours.

I suppose an honourable bankrupt would know such an awakening: the sense
of catastrophe, the shrinking from the necessity of beginning life again,
the faint feeling that there are misfortunes which must be paid for by a
hanging.  In the course of the morning Therese informed me that the
apartment usually occupied by Mr. Blunt was vacant and added mysteriously
that she intended to keep it vacant for a time, because she had been
instructed to do so.  I couldn’t imagine why Blunt should wish to return
to Marseilles.  She told me also that the house was empty except for
myself and the two dancing girls with their father.  Those people had
been away for some time as the girls had engagements in some Italian
summer theatres, but apparently they had secured a re-engagement for the
winter and were now back.  I let Therese talk because it kept my
imagination from going to work on subjects which, I had made up my mind,
were no concern of mine.  But I went out early to perform an unpleasant
task.  It was only proper that I should let the Carlist agent ensconced
in the Prado Villa know of the sudden ending of my activities.  It would
be grave enough news for him, and I did not like to be its bearer for
reasons which were mainly personal.  I resembled Dominic in so far that
I, too, disliked failure.

The Marquis of Villarel had of course gone long before.  The man who was
there was another type of Carlist altogether, and his temperament was
that of a trader.  He was the chief purveyor of the Legitimist armies, an
honest broker of stores, and enjoyed a great reputation for cleverness.
His important task kept him, of course, in France, but his young wife,
whose beauty and devotion to her King were well known, represented him
worthily at Headquarters, where his own appearances were extremely rare.
The dissimilar but united loyalties of those two people had been rewarded
by the title of baron and the ribbon of some order or other.  The gossip
of the Legitimist circles appreciated those favours with smiling
indulgence.  He was the man who had been so distressed and frightened by
Doña Rita’s first visit to Tolosa.  He had an extreme regard for his
wife.  And in that sphere of clashing arms and unceasing intrigue nobody
would have smiled then at his agitation if the man himself hadn’t been
somewhat grotesque.

He must have been startled when I sent in my name, for he didn’t of
course expect to see me yet—nobody expected me.  He advanced soft-footed
down the room.  With his jutting nose, flat-topped skull and sable
garments he recalled an obese raven, and when he heard of the disaster he
manifested his astonishment and concern in a most plebeian manner by a
low and expressive whistle.  I, of course, could not share his
consternation.  My feelings in that connection were of a different order;
but I was annoyed at his unintelligent stare.

“I suppose,” I said, “you will take it on yourself to advise Doña Rita,
who is greatly interested in this affair.”

“Yes, but I was given to understand that Madame de Lastaola was to leave
Paris either yesterday or this morning.”

It was my turn to stare dumbly before I could manage to ask: “For
Tolosa?” in a very knowing tone.

Whether it was the droop of his head, play of light, or some other subtle
cause, his nose seemed to have grown perceptibly longer.

“That, Señor, is the place where the news has got to be conveyed without
undue delay,” he said in an agitated wheeze.  “I could, of course,
telegraph to our agent in Bayonne who would find a messenger.  But I
don’t like, I don’t like!  The Alphonsists have agents, too, who hang
about the telegraph offices.  It’s no use letting the enemy get that
news.”

He was obviously very confused, unhappy, and trying to think of two
different things at once.

“Sit down, Don George, sit down.”  He absolutely forced a cigar on me.
“I am extremely distressed.  That—I mean Doña Rita is undoubtedly on her
way to Tolosa.  This is very frightful.”

I must say, however, that there was in the man some sense of duty.  He
mastered his private fears.  After some cogitation he murmured: “There is
another way of getting the news to Headquarters.  Suppose you write me a
formal letter just stating the facts, the unfortunate facts, which I will
be able to forward.  There is an agent of ours, a fellow I have been
employing for purchasing supplies, a perfectly honest man.  He is coming
here from the north by the ten o’clock train with some papers for me of a
confidential nature.  I was rather embarrassed about it.  It wouldn’t do
for him to get into any sort of trouble.  He is not very intelligent.  I
wonder, Don George, whether you would consent to meet him at the station
and take care of him generally till to-morrow.  I don’t like the idea of
him going about alone.  Then, to-morrow night, we would send him on to
Tolosa by the west coast route, with the news; and then he can also call
on Doña Rita who will no doubt be already there. . . .”  He became again
distracted all in a moment and actually went so far as to wring his fat
hands.  “Oh, yes, she will be there!” he exclaimed in most pathetic
accents.

I was not in the humour to smile at anything, and he must have been
satisfied with the gravity with which I beheld his extraordinary antics.
My mind was very far away.  I thought: Why not?  Why shouldn’t I also
write a letter to Doña Rita, telling her that now nothing stood in the
way of my leaving Europe, because, really, the enterprise couldn’t be
begun again; that things that come to an end can never be begun again.
The idea—never again—had complete possession of my mind.  I could think
of nothing else.  Yes, I would write.  The worthy Commissary General of
the Carlist forces was under the impression that I was looking at him;
but what I had in my eye was a jumble of butterfly women and winged
youths and the soft sheen of Argand lamps gleaming on an arrow of gold in
the hair of a head that seemed to evade my outstretched hand.

“Oh, yes,” I said, “I have nothing to do and even nothing to think of
just now, I will meet your man as he gets off the train at ten o’clock
to-night.  What’s he like?”

“Oh, he has a black moustache and whiskers, and his chin is shaved,” said
the newly-fledged baron cordially.  “A very honest fellow.  I always
found him very useful.  His name is José Ortega.”

He was perfectly self-possessed now, and walking soft-footed accompanied
me to the door of the room.  He shook hands with a melancholy smile.
“This is a very frightful situation.  My poor wife will be quite
distracted.  She is such a patriot.  Many thanks, Don George.  You
relieve me greatly.  The fellow is rather stupid and rather bad-tempered.
Queer creature, but very honest!  Oh, very honest!”



CHAPTER IV


It was the last evening of Carnival.  The same masks, the same yells, the
same mad rushes, the same bedlam of disguised humanity blowing about the
streets in the great gusts of mistral that seemed to make them dance like
dead leaves on an earth where all joy is watched by death.

It was exactly twelve months since that other carnival evening when I had
felt a little weary and a little lonely but at peace with all mankind.
It must have been—to a day or two.  But on this evening it wasn’t merely
loneliness that I felt.  I felt bereaved with a sense of a complete and
universal loss in which there was perhaps more resentment than mourning;
as if the world had not been taken away from me by an august decree but
filched from my innocence by an underhand fate at the very moment when it
had disclosed to my passion its warm and generous beauty.  This
consciousness of universal loss had this advantage that it induced
something resembling a state of philosophic indifference.  I walked up to
the railway station caring as little for the cold blasts of wind as
though I had been going to the scaffold.  The delay of the train did not
irritate me in the least.  I had finally made up my mind to write a
letter to Doña Rita; and this “honest fellow” for whom I was waiting
would take it to her.  He would have no difficulty in Tolosa in finding
Madame de Lastaola.  The General Headquarters, which was also a Court,
would be buzzing with comments on her presence.  Most likely that “honest
fellow” was already known to Doña Rita.  For all I knew he might have
been her discovery just as I was.  Probably I, too, was regarded as an
“honest fellow” enough; but stupid—since it was clear that my luck was
not inexhaustible.  I hoped that while carrying my letter the man would
not let himself be caught by some Alphonsist guerilla who would, of
course, shoot him.  But why should he?  I, for instance, had escaped with
my life from a much more dangerous enterprise than merely passing through
the frontier line in charge of some trustworthy guide.  I pictured the
fellow to myself trudging over the stony slopes and scrambling down wild
ravines with my letter to Doña Rita in his pocket.  It would be such a
letter of farewell as no lover had ever written, no woman in the world
had ever read, since the beginning of love on earth.  It would be worthy
of the woman.  No experience, no memories, no dead traditions of passion
or language would inspire it.  She herself would be its sole inspiration.
She would see her own image in it as in a mirror; and perhaps then she
would understand what it was I was saying farewell to on the very
threshold of my life.  A breath of vanity passed through my brain.  A
letter as moving as her mere existence was moving would be something
unique.  I regretted I was not a poet.

I woke up to a great noise of feet, a sudden influx of people through the
doors of the platform.  I made out my man’s whiskers at once—not that
they were enormous, but because I had been warned beforehand of their
existence by the excellent Commissary General.  At first I saw nothing of
him but his whiskers: they were black and cut somewhat in the shape of a
shark’s fin and so very fine that the least breath of air animated them
into a sort of playful restlessness.  The man’s shoulders were hunched up
and when he had made his way clear of the throng of passengers I
perceived him as an unhappy and shivery being.  Obviously he didn’t
expect to be met, because when I murmured an enquiring, “Señor Ortega?”
into his ear he swerved away from me and nearly dropped a little handbag
he was carrying.  His complexion was uniformly pale, his mouth was red,
but not engaging.  His social status was not very definite.  He was
wearing a dark blue overcoat of no particular cut, his aspect had no
relief; yet those restless side-whiskers flanking his red mouth and the
suspicious expression of his black eyes made him noticeable.  This I
regretted the more because I caught sight of two skulking fellows,
looking very much like policemen in plain clothes, watching us from a
corner of the great hall.  I hurried my man into a fiacre.  He had been
travelling from early morning on cross-country lines and after we got on
terms a little confessed to being very hungry and cold.  His red lips
trembled and I noted an underhand, cynical curiosity when he had occasion
to raise his eyes to my face.  I was in some doubt how to dispose of him
but as we rolled on at a jog trot I came to the conclusion that the best
thing to do would be to organize for him a shake-down in the studio.
Obscure lodging houses are precisely the places most looked after by the
police, and even the best hotels are bound to keep a register of
arrivals.  I was very anxious that nothing should stop his projected
mission of courier to headquarters.  As we passed various street corners
where the mistral blast struck at us fiercely I could feel him shivering
by my side.  However, Therese would have lighted the iron stove in the
studio before retiring for the night, and, anyway, I would have to turn
her out to make up a bed on the couch.  Service of the King!  I must say
that she was amiable and didn’t seem to mind anything one asked her to
do.  Thus while the fellow slumbered on the divan I would sit upstairs in
my room setting down on paper those great words of passion and sorrow
that seethed in my brain and even must have forced themselves in murmurs
on to my lips, because the man by my side suddenly asked me: “What did
you say?”—“Nothing,” I answered, very much surprised.  In the shifting
light of the street lamps he looked the picture of bodily misery with his
chattering teeth and his whiskers blown back flat over his ears.  But
somehow he didn’t arouse my compassion.  He was swearing to himself, in
French and Spanish, and I tried to soothe him by the assurance that we
had not much farther to go.  “I am starving,” he remarked acidly, and I
felt a little compunction.  Clearly, the first thing to do was to feed
him.  We were then entering the Cannebière and as I didn’t care to show
myself with him in the fashionable restaurant where a new face (and such
a face, too) would be remarked, I pulled up the fiacre at the door of the
Maison Dorée.  That was more of a place of general resort where, in the
multitude of casual patrons, he would pass unnoticed.

For this last night of carnival the big house had decorated all its
balconies with rows of coloured paper lanterns right up to the roof.  I
led the way to the grand salon, for as to private rooms they had been all
retained days before.  There was a great crowd of people in costume, but
by a piece of good luck we managed to secure a little table in a corner.
The revellers, intent on their pleasure, paid no attention to us.  Señor
Ortega trod on my heels and after sitting down opposite me threw an
ill-natured glance at the festive scene.  It might have been about
half-past ten, then.

Two glasses of wine he drank one after another did not improve his
temper.  He only ceased to shiver.  After he had eaten something it must
have occurred to him that he had no reason to bear me a grudge and he
tried to assume a civil and even friendly manner.  His mouth, however,
betrayed an abiding bitterness.  I mean when he smiled.  In repose it was
a very expressionless mouth, only it was too red to be altogether
ordinary.  The whole of him was like that: the whiskers too black, the
hair too shiny, the forehead too white, the eyes too mobile; and he lent
you his attention with an air of eagerness which made you uncomfortable.
He seemed to expect you to give yourself away by some unconsidered word
that he would snap up with delight.  It was that peculiarity that somehow
put me on my guard.  I had no idea who I was facing across the table and
as a matter of fact I did not care.  All my impressions were blurred; and
even the promptings of my instinct were the haziest thing imaginable.
Now and then I had acute hallucinations of a woman with an arrow of gold
in her hair.  This caused alternate moments of exaltation and depression
from which I tried to take refuge in conversation; but Señor Ortega was
not stimulating.  He was preoccupied with personal matters.  When
suddenly he asked me whether I knew why he had been called away from his
work (he had been buying supplies from peasants somewhere in Central
France), I answered that I didn’t know what the reason was originally,
but I had an idea that the present intention was to make of him a
courier, bearing certain messages from Baron H. to the Quartel Real in
Tolosa.

He glared at me like a basilisk.  “And why have I been met like this?” he
enquired with an air of being prepared to hear a lie.

I explained that it was the Baron’s wish, as a matter of prudence and to
avoid any possible trouble which might arise from enquiries by the
police.

He took it badly.  “What nonsense.”  He was—he said—an employé (for
several years) of Hernandez Brothers in Paris, an importing firm, and he
was travelling on their business—as he could prove.  He dived into his
side pocket and produced a handful of folded papers of all sorts which he
plunged back again instantly.

And even then I didn’t know whom I had there, opposite me, busy now
devouring a slice of pâté de foie gras.  Not in the least.  It never
entered my head.  How could it?  The Rita that haunted me had no history;
she was but the principle of life charged with fatality.  Her form was
only a mirage of desire decoying one step by step into despair.

Señor Ortega gulped down some more wine and suggested I should tell him
who I was.  “It’s only right I should know,” he added.

This could not be gainsaid; and to a man connected with the Carlist
organization the shortest way was to introduce myself as that “Monsieur
George” of whom he had probably heard.

He leaned far over the table, till his very breast-bone was over the
edge, as though his eyes had been stilettos and he wanted to drive them
home into my brain.  It was only much later that I understood how near
death I had been at that moment.  But the knives on the tablecloth were
the usual restaurant knives with rounded ends and about as deadly as
pieces of hoop-iron.  Perhaps in the very gust of his fury he remembered
what a French restaurant knife is like and something sane within him made
him give up the sudden project of cutting my heart out where I sat.  For
it could have been nothing but a sudden impulse.  His settled purpose was
quite other.  It was not my heart that he was after.  His fingers indeed
were groping amongst the knife handles by the side of his plate but what
captivated my attention for a moment were his red lips which were formed
into an odd, sly, insinuating smile.  Heard!  To be sure he had heard!
The chief of the great arms smuggling organization!

“Oh!” I said, “that’s giving me too much importance.”  The person
responsible and whom I looked upon as chief of all the business was, as
he might have heard, too, a certain noble and loyal lady.

“I am as noble as she is,” he snapped peevishly, and I put him down at
once as a very offensive beast.  “And as to being loyal, what is that?
It is being truthful!  It is being faithful!  I know all about her.”

I managed to preserve an air of perfect unconcern.  He wasn’t a fellow to
whom one could talk of Doña Rita.

“You are a Basque,” I said.

He admitted rather contemptuously that he was a Basque and even then the
truth did not dawn upon me.  I suppose that with the hidden egoism of a
lover I was thinking of myself, of myself alone in relation to Doña Rita,
not of Doña Rita herself.  He, too, obviously.  He said: “I am an
educated man, but I know her people, all peasants.  There is a sister, an
uncle, a priest, a peasant, too, and perfectly unenlightened.  One can’t
expect much from a priest (I am a free-thinker of course), but he is
really too bad, more like a brute beast.  As to all her people, mostly
dead now, they never were of any account.  There was a little land, but
they were always working on other people’s farms, a barefooted gang, a
starved lot.  I ought to know because we are distant relations.
Twentieth cousins or something of the sort.  Yes, I am related to that
most loyal lady.  And what is she, after all, but a Parisian woman with
innumerable lovers, as I have been told.”

“I don’t think your information is very correct,” I said, affecting to
yawn slightly.  “This is mere gossip of the gutter and I am surprised at
you, who really know nothing about it—”

But the disgusting animal had fallen into a brown study.  The hair of his
very whiskers was perfectly still.  I had now given up all idea of the
letter to Rita.  Suddenly he spoke again:

“Women are the origin of all evil.  One should never trust them.  They
have no honour.  No honour!” he repeated, striking his breast with his
closed fist on which the knuckles stood out very white.  “I left my
village many years ago and of course I am perfectly satisfied with my
position and I don’t know why I should trouble my head about this loyal
lady.  I suppose that’s the way women get on in the world.”

I felt convinced that he was no proper person to be a messenger to
headquarters.  He struck me as altogether untrustworthy and perhaps not
quite sane.  This was confirmed by him saying suddenly with no visible
connection and as if it had been forced from him by some agonizing
process: “I was a boy once,” and then stopping dead short with a smile.
He had a smile that frightened one by its association of malice and
anguish.

“Will you have anything more to eat?” I asked.

He declined dully.  He had had enough.  But he drained the last of a
bottle into his glass and accepted a cigar which I offered him.  While he
was lighting it I had a sort of confused impression that he wasn’t such a
stranger to me as I had assumed he was; and yet, on the other hand, I was
perfectly certain I had never seen him before.  Next moment I felt that I
could have knocked him down if he hadn’t looked so amazingly unhappy,
while he came out with the astounding question: “Señor, have you ever
been a lover in your young days?”

“What do you mean?” I asked.  “How old do you think I am?”

“That’s true,” he said, gazing at me in a way in which the damned gaze
out of their cauldrons of boiling pitch at some soul walking scot free in
the place of torment.  “It’s true, you don’t seem to have anything on
your mind.”  He assumed an air of ease, throwing an arm over the back of
his chair and blowing the smoke through the gash of his twisted red
mouth.  “Tell me,” he said, “between men, you know, has this—wonderful
celebrity—what does she call herself?  How long has she been your
mistress?”

I reflected rapidly that if I knocked him over, chair and all, by a
sudden blow from the shoulder it would bring about infinite complications
beginning with a visit to the Commissaire de Police on night-duty, and
ending in God knows what scandal and disclosures of political kind;
because there was no telling what, or how much, this outrageous brute
might choose to say and how many people he might not involve in a most
undesirable publicity.  He was smoking his cigar with a poignantly
mocking air and not even looking at me.  One can’t hit like that a man
who isn’t even looking at one; and then, just as I was looking at him
swinging his leg with a caustic smile and stony eyes, I felt sorry for
the creature.  It was only his body that was there in that chair.  It was
manifest to me that his soul was absent in some hell of its own.  At that
moment I attained the knowledge of who it was I had before me.  This was
the man of whom both Doña Rita and Rose were so much afraid.  It remained
then for me to look after him for the night and then arrange with Baron
H. that he should be sent away the very next day—and anywhere but to
Tolosa.  Yes, evidently, I mustn’t lose sight of him.  I proposed in the
calmest tone that we should go on where he could get his much-needed
rest.  He rose with alacrity, picked up his little hand-bag, and, walking
out before me, no doubt looked a very ordinary person to all eyes but
mine.  It was then past eleven, not much, because we had not been in that
restaurant quite an hour, but the routine of the town’s night-life being
upset during the Carnival the usual row of fiacres outside the Maison
Dorée was not there; in fact, there were very few carriages about.
Perhaps the coachmen had assumed Pierrot costumes and were rushing about
the streets on foot yelling with the rest of the population.  “We will
have to walk,” I said after a while.—“Oh, yes, let us walk,” assented
Señor Ortega, “or I will be frozen here.”  It was like a plaint of
unutterable wretchedness.  I had a fancy that all his natural heat had
abandoned his limbs and gone to his brain.  It was otherwise with me; my
head was cool but I didn’t find the night really so very cold.  We
stepped out briskly side by side.  My lucid thinking was, as it were,
enveloped by the wide shouting of the consecrated Carnival gaiety.  I
have heard many noises since, but nothing that gave me such an intimate
impression of the savage instincts hidden in the breast of mankind; these
yells of festivity suggested agonizing fear, rage of murder, ferocity of
lust, and the irremediable joylessness of human condition: yet they were
emitted by people who were convinced that they were amusing themselves
supremely, traditionally, with the sanction of ages, with the approval of
their conscience—and no mistake about it whatever!  Our appearance, the
soberness of our gait made us conspicuous.  Once or twice, by common
inspiration, masks rushed forward and forming a circle danced round us
uttering discordant shouts of derision; for we were an outrage to the
peculiar proprieties of the hour, and besides we were obviously lonely
and defenceless.  On those occasions there was nothing for it but to
stand still till the flurry was over.  My companion, however, would stamp
his feet with rage, and I must admit that I myself regretted not having
provided for our wearing a couple of false noses, which would have been
enough to placate the just resentment of those people.  We might have
also joined in the dance, but for some reason or other it didn’t occur to
us; and I heard once a high, clear woman’s voice stigmatizing us for a
“species of swelled heads” (_espèce d’enflés_).  We proceeded sedately,
my companion muttered with rage, and I was able to resume my thinking.
It was based on the deep persuasion that the man at my side was insane
with quite another than Carnivalesque lunacy which comes on at one stated
time of the year.  He was fundamentally mad, though not perhaps
completely; which of course made him all the greater, I won’t say danger
but, nuisance.

I remember once a young doctor expounding the theory that most
catastrophes in family circles, surprising episodes in public affairs and
disasters in private life, had their origin in the fact that the world
was full of half-mad people.  He asserted that they were the real
majority.  When asked whether he considered himself as belonging to the
majority, he said frankly that he didn’t think so; unless the folly of
voicing this view in a company, so utterly unable to appreciate all its
horror, could be regarded as the first symptom of his own fate.  We
shouted down him and his theory, but there is no doubt that it had thrown
a chill on the gaiety of our gathering.

We had now entered a quieter quarter of the town and Señor Ortega had
ceased his muttering.  For myself I had not the slightest doubt of my own
sanity.  It was proved to me by the way I could apply my intelligence to
the problem of what was to be done with Señor Ortega.  Generally, he was
unfit to be trusted with any mission whatever.  The unstability of his
temper was sure to get him into a scrape.  Of course carrying a letter to
Headquarters was not a very complicated matter; and as to that I would
have trusted willingly a properly trained dog.  My private letter to Doña
Rita, the wonderful, the unique letter of farewell, I had given up for
the present.  Naturally I thought of the Ortega problem mainly in the
terms of Doña Rita’s safety.  Her image presided at every council, at
every conflict of my mind, and dominated every faculty of my senses.  It
floated before my eyes, it touched my elbow, it guarded my right side and
my left side; my ears seemed to catch the sound of her footsteps behind
me, she enveloped me with passing whiffs of warmth and perfume, with
filmy touches of the hair on my face.  She penetrated me, my head was
full of her . . . And his head, too, I thought suddenly with a side
glance at my companion.  He walked quietly with hunched-up shoulders
carrying his little hand-bag and he looked the most commonplace figure
imaginable.

Yes.  There was between us a most horrible fellowship; the association of
his crazy torture with the sublime suffering of my passion.  We hadn’t
been a quarter of an hour together when that woman had surged up fatally
between us; between this miserable wretch and myself.  We were haunted by
the same image.  But I was sane!  I was sane!  Not because I was certain
that the fellow must not be allowed to go to Tolosa, but because I was
perfectly alive to the difficulty of stopping him from going there, since
the decision was absolutely in the hands of Baron H.

If I were to go early in the morning and tell that fat, bilious man:
“Look here, your Ortega’s mad,” he would certainly think at once that I
was, get very frightened, and . . . one couldn’t tell what course he
would take.  He would eliminate me somehow out of the affair.  And yet I
could not let the fellow proceed to where Doña Rita was, because,
obviously, he had been molesting her, had filled her with uneasiness and
even alarm, was an unhappy element and a disturbing influence in her
life—incredible as the thing appeared!  I couldn’t let him go on to make
himself a worry and a nuisance, drive her out from a town in which she
wished to be (for whatever reason) and perhaps start some explosive
scandal.  And that girl Rose seemed to fear something graver even than a
scandal.  But if I were to explain the matter fully to H. he would simply
rejoice in his heart.  Nothing would please him more than to have Doña
Rita driven out of Tolosa.  What a relief from his anxieties (and his
wife’s, too); and if I were to go further, if I even went so far as to
hint at the fears which Rose had not been able to conceal from me, why
then—I went on thinking coldly with a stoical rejection of the most
elementary faith in mankind’s rectitude—why then, that accommodating
husband would simply let the ominous messenger have his chance.  He would
see there only his natural anxieties being laid to rest for ever.
Horrible?  Yes.  But I could not take the risk.  In a twelvemonth I had
travelled a long way in my mistrust of mankind.

We paced on steadily.  I thought: “How on earth am I going to stop you?”
Had this arisen only a month before, when I had the means at hand and
Dominic to confide in, I would have simply kidnapped the fellow.  A
little trip to sea would not have done Señor Ortega any harm; though no
doubt it would have been abhorrent to his feelings.  But now I had not
the means.  I couldn’t even tell where my poor Dominic was hiding his
diminished head.

Again I glanced at him sideways.  I was the taller of the two and as it
happened I met in the light of the street lamp his own stealthy glance
directed up at me with an agonized expression, an expression that made me
fancy I could see the man’s very soul writhing in his body like an
impaled worm.  In spite of my utter inexperience I had some notion of the
images that rushed into his mind at the sight of any man who had
approached Doña Rita.  It was enough to awaken in any human being a
movement of horrified compassion; but my pity went out not to him but to
Doña Rita.  It was for her that I felt sorry; I pitied her for having
that damned soul on her track.  I pitied her with tenderness and
indignation, as if this had been both a danger and a dishonour.

I don’t mean to say that those thoughts passed through my head
consciously.  I had only the resultant, settled feeling.  I had, however,
a thought, too.  It came on me suddenly, and I asked myself with rage and
astonishment: “Must I then kill that brute?”  There didn’t seem to be any
alternative.  Between him and Doña Rita I couldn’t hesitate.  I believe I
gave a slight laugh of desperation.  The suddenness of this sinister
conclusion had in it something comic and unbelievable.  It loosened my
grip on my mental processes.  A Latin tag came into my head about the
facile descent into the abyss.  I marvelled at its aptness, and also that
it should have come to me so pat.  But I believe now that it was
suggested simply by the actual declivity of the street of the Consuls
which lies on a gentle slope.  We had just turned the corner.  All the
houses were dark and in a perspective of complete solitude our two
shadows dodged and wheeled about our feet.

“Here we are,” I said.

He was an extraordinarily chilly devil.  When we stopped I could hear his
teeth chattering again.  I don’t know what came over me, I had a sort of
nervous fit, was incapable of finding my pockets, let alone the latchkey.
I had the illusion of a narrow streak of light on the wall of the house
as if it had been cracked.  “I hope we will be able to get in,” I
murmured.

Señor Ortega stood waiting patiently with his handbag, like a rescued
wayfarer.  “But you live in this house, don’t you?” he observed.

“No,” I said, without hesitation.  I didn’t know how that man would
behave if he were aware that I was staying under the same roof.  He was
half mad.  He might want to talk all night, try crazily to invade my
privacy.  How could I tell?  Moreover, I wasn’t so sure that I would
remain in the house.  I had some notion of going out again and walking up
and down the street of the Consuls till daylight.  “No, an absent friend
lets me use . . . I had that latchkey this morning . . . Ah! here it is.”

I let him go in first.  The sickly gas flame was there on duty,
undaunted, waiting for the end of the world to come and put it out.  I
think that the black-and-white hall surprised Ortega.  I had closed the
front door without noise and stood for a moment listening, while he
glanced about furtively.  There were only two other doors in the hall,
right and left.  Their panels of ebony were decorated with bronze
applications in the centre.  The one on the left was of course Blunt’s
door.  As the passage leading beyond it was dark at the further end I
took Señor Ortega by the hand and led him along, unresisting, like a
child.  For some reason or other I moved on tip-toe and he followed my
example.  The light and the warmth of the studio impressed him
favourably; he laid down his little bag, rubbed his hands together, and
produced a smile of satisfaction; but it was such a smile as a totally
ruined man would perhaps force on his lips, or a man condemned to a short
shrift by his doctor.  I begged him to make himself at home and said that
I would go at once and hunt up the woman of the house who would make him
up a bed on the big couch there.  He hardly listened to what I said.
What were all those things to him!  He knew that his destiny was to sleep
on a bed of thorns, to feed on adders.  But he tried to show a sort of
polite interest.  He asked: “What is this place?”

“It used to belong to a painter,”  I mumbled.

“Ah, your absent friend,” he said, making a wry mouth.  “I detest all
those artists, and all those writers, and all politicos who are thieves;
and I would go even farther and higher, laying a curse on all idle lovers
of women.  You think perhaps I am a Royalist?  No.  If there was anybody
in heaven or hell to pray to I would pray for a revolution—a red
revolution everywhere.”

“You astonish me,” I said, just to say something.

“No!  But there are half a dozen people in the world with whom I would
like to settle accounts.  One could shoot them like partridges and no
questions asked.  That’s what revolution would mean to me.”

“It’s a beautifully simple view,” I said.  “I imagine you are not the
only one who holds it; but I really must look after your comforts.  You
mustn’t forget that we have to see Baron H. early to-morrow morning.”
And I went out quietly into the passage wondering in what part of the
house Therese had elected to sleep that night.  But, lo and behold, when
I got to the foot of the stairs there was Therese coming down from the
upper regions in her nightgown, like a sleep-walker.  However, it wasn’t
that, because, before I could exclaim, she vanished off the first floor
landing like a streak of white mist and without the slightest sound.  Her
attire made it perfectly clear that she could not have heard us coming
in.  In fact, she must have been certain that the house was empty,
because she was as well aware as myself that the Italian girls after
their work at the opera were going to a masked ball to dance for their
own amusement, attended of course by their conscientious father.  But
what thought, need, or sudden impulse had driven Therese out of bed like
this was something I couldn’t conceive.

I didn’t call out after her.  I felt sure that she would return.  I went
up slowly to the first floor and met her coming down again, this time
carrying a lighted candle.  She had managed to make herself presentable
in an extraordinarily short time.

“Oh, my dear young Monsieur, you have given me a fright.”

“Yes.  And I nearly fainted, too,” I said.  “You looked perfectly awful.
What’s the matter with you?  Are you ill?”

She had lighted by then the gas on the landing and I must say that I had
never seen exactly that manner of face on her before.  She wriggled,
confused and shifty-eyed, before me; but I ascribed this behaviour to her
shocked modesty and without troubling myself any more about her feelings
I informed her that there was a Carlist downstairs who must be put up for
the night.  Most unexpectedly she betrayed a ridiculous consternation,
but only for a moment.  Then she assumed at once that I would give him
hospitality upstairs where there was a camp-bedstead in my dressing-room.
I said:

“No.  Give him a shake-down in the studio, where he is now.  It’s warm in
there.  And remember! I charge you strictly not to let him know that I
sleep in this house.  In fact, I don’t know myself that I will; I have
certain matters to attend to this very night.  You will also have to
serve him his coffee in the morning.  I will take him away before ten
o’clock.”

All this seemed to impress her more than I had expected.  As usual when
she felt curious, or in some other way excited, she assumed a saintly,
detached expression, and asked:

“The dear gentleman is your friend, I suppose?”

“I only know he is a Spaniard and a Carlist,” I said: “and that ought to
be enough for you.”

Instead of the usual effusive exclamations she murmured: “Dear me, dear
me,” and departed upstairs with the candle to get together a few blankets
and pillows, I suppose.  As for me I walked quietly downstairs on my way
to the studio.  I had a curious sensation that I was acting in a
preordained manner, that life was not at all what I had thought it to be,
or else that I had been altogether changed sometime during the day, and
that I was a different person from the man whom I remembered getting out
of my bed in the morning.

Also feelings had altered all their values.  The words, too, had become
strange.  It was only the inanimate surroundings that remained what they
had always been.  For instance the studio. . . .

During my absence Señor Ortega had taken off his coat and I found him as
it were in the air, sitting in his shirt sleeves on a chair which he had
taken pains to place in the very middle of the floor.  I repressed an
absurd impulse to walk round him as though he had been some sort of
exhibit.  His hands were spread over his knees and he looked perfectly
insensible.  I don’t mean strange, or ghastly, or wooden, but just
insensible—like an exhibit.  And that effect persisted even after he
raised his black suspicious eyes to my face.  He lowered them almost at
once.  It was very mechanical.  I gave him up and became rather concerned
about myself.  My thought was that I had better get out of that before
any more queer notions came into my head.  So I only remained long enough
to tell him that the woman of the house was bringing down some bedding
and that I hoped that he would have a good night’s rest.  And directly I
spoke it struck me that this was the most extraordinary speech that ever
was addressed to a figure of that sort.  He, however, did not seem
startled by it or moved in any way.  He simply said:

“Thank you.”

In the darkest part of the long passage outside I met Therese with her
arms full of pillows and blankets.



CHAPTER V


Coming out of the bright light of the studio I didn’t make out Therese
very distinctly.  She, however, having groped in dark cupboards, must
have had her pupils sufficiently dilated to have seen that I had my hat
on my head.  This has its importance because after what I had said to her
upstairs it must have convinced her that I was going out on some midnight
business.  I passed her without a word and heard behind me the door of
the studio close with an unexpected crash.  It strikes me now that under
the circumstances I might have without shame gone back to listen at the
keyhole.  But truth to say the association of events was not so clear in
my mind as it may be to the reader of this story.  Neither were the exact
connections of persons present to my mind.  And, besides, one doesn’t
listen at a keyhole but in pursuance of some plan; unless one is
afflicted by a vulgar and fatuous curiosity.  But that vice is not in my
character.  As to plan, I had none.  I moved along the passage between
the dead wall and the black-and-white marble elevation of the staircase
with hushed footsteps, as though there had been a mortally sick person
somewhere in the house.  And the only person that could have answered to
that description was Señor Ortega.  I moved on, stealthy, absorbed,
undecided; asking myself earnestly: “What on earth am I going to do with
him?”  That exclusive preoccupation of my mind was as dangerous to Señor
Ortega as typhoid fever would have been.  It strikes me that this
comparison is very exact.  People recover from typhoid fever, but
generally the chance is considered poor.  This was precisely his case.
His chance was poor; though I had no more animosity towards him than a
virulent disease has against the victim it lays low.  He really would
have nothing to reproach me with; he had run up against me, unwittingly,
as a man enters an infected place, and now he was very ill, very ill
indeed.  No, I had no plans against him.  I had only the feeling that he
was in mortal danger.

I believe that men of the most daring character (and I make no claim to
it) often do shrink from the logical processes of thought.  It is only
the devil, they say, that loves logic.  But I was not a devil.  I was not
even a victim of the devil.  It was only that I had given up the
direction of my intelligence before the problem; or rather that the
problem had dispossessed my intelligence and reigned in its stead side by
side with a superstitious awe.  A dreadful order seemed to lurk in the
darkest shadows of life.  The madness of that Carlist with the soul of a
Jacobin, the vile fears of Baron H., that excellent organizer of
supplies, the contact of their two ferocious stupidities, and last, by a
remote disaster at sea, my love brought into direct contact with the
situation: all that was enough to make one shudder—not at the chance, but
at the design.

For it was my love that was called upon to act here, and nothing else.
And love which elevates us above all safeguards, above restraining
principles, above all littlenesses of self-possession, yet keeps its feet
always firmly on earth, remains marvellously practical in its
suggestions.

I discovered that however much I had imagined I had given up Rita, that
whatever agonies I had gone through, my hope of her had never been lost.
Plucked out, stamped down, torn to shreds, it had remained with me
secret, intact, invincible.  Before the danger of the situation it
sprang, full of life, up in arms—the undying child of immortal love.
What incited me was independent of honour and compassion; it was the
prompting of a love supreme, practical, remorseless in its aim; it was
the practical thought that no woman need be counted as lost for ever,
unless she be dead!

This excluded for the moment all considerations of ways and means and
risks and difficulties.  Its tremendous intensity robbed it of all
direction and left me adrift in the big black-and-white hall as on a
silent sea.  It was not, properly speaking, irresolution.  It was merely
hesitation as to the next immediate step, and that step even of no great
importance: hesitation merely as to the best way I could spend the rest
of the night.  I didn’t think further forward for many reasons, more or
less optimistic, but mainly because I have no homicidal vein in my
composition.  The disposition to gloat over homicide was in that
miserable creature in the studio, the potential Jacobin; in that
confounded buyer of agricultural produce, the punctual employé of
Hernandez Brothers, the jealous wretch with an obscene tongue and an
imagination of the same kind to drive him mad.  I thought of him without
pity but also without contempt.  I reflected that there were no means of
sending a warning to Doña Rita in Tolosa; for of course no postal
communication existed with the Headquarters.  And moreover what would a
warning be worth in this particular case, supposing it would reach her,
that she would believe it, and that she would know what to do?  How could
I communicate to another that certitude which was in my mind, the more
absolute because without proofs that one could produce?

The last expression of Rose’s distress rang again in my ears: “Madame has
no friends.  Not one!” and I saw Doña Rita’s complete loneliness beset by
all sorts of insincerities, surrounded by pitfalls; her greatest dangers
within herself, in her generosity, in her fears, in her courage, too.
What I had to do first of all was to stop that wretch at all costs.  I
became aware of a great mistrust of Therese.  I didn’t want her to find
me in the hall, but I was reluctant to go upstairs to my rooms from an
unreasonable feeling that there I would be too much out of the way; not
sufficiently on the spot.  There was the alternative of a live-long night
of watching outside, before the dark front of the house.  It was a most
distasteful prospect.  And then it occurred to me that Blunt’s former
room would be an extremely good place to keep a watch from.  I knew that
room.  When Henry Allègre gave the house to Rita in the early days (long
before he made his will) he had planned a complete renovation and this
room had been meant for the drawing-room.  Furniture had been made for it
specially, upholstered in beautiful ribbed stuff, made to order, of dull
gold colour with a pale blue tracery of arabesques and oval medallions
enclosing Rita’s monogram, repeated on the backs of chairs and sofas, and
on the heavy curtains reaching from ceiling to floor.  To the same time
belonged the ebony and bronze doors, the silver statuette at the foot of
the stairs, the forged iron balustrade reproducing right up the marble
staircase Rita’s decorative monogram in its complicated design.
Afterwards the work was stopped and the house had fallen into disrepair.
When Rita devoted it to the Carlist cause a bed was put into that
drawing-room, just simply the bed.  The room next to that yellow salon
had been in Allègre’s young days fitted as a fencing-room containing also
a bath, and a complicated system of all sorts of shower and jet
arrangements, then quite up to date.  That room was very large, lighted
from the top, and one wall of it was covered by trophies of arms of all
sorts, a choice collection of cold steel disposed on a background of
Indian mats and rugs: Blunt used it as a dressing-room.  It communicated
by a small door with the studio.

I had only to extend my hand and make one step to reach the magnificent
bronze handle of the ebony door, and if I didn’t want to be caught by
Therese there was no time to lose.  I made the step and extended the
hand, thinking that it would be just like my luck to find the door
locked.  But the door came open to my push.  In contrast to the dark hall
the room was most unexpectedly dazzling to my eyes, as if illuminated _a
giorno_ for a reception.  No voice came from it, but nothing could have
stopped me now.  As I turned round to shut the door behind me noiselessly
I caught sight of a woman’s dress on a chair, of other articles of
apparel scattered about.  The mahogany bed with a piece of light silk
which Therese found somewhere and used for a counterpane was a
magnificent combination of white and crimson between the gleaming
surfaces of dark wood; and the whole room had an air of splendour with
marble consoles, gilt carvings, long mirrors and a sumptuous Venetian
lustre depending from the ceiling: a darkling mass of icy pendants
catching a spark here and there from the candles of an eight-branched
candelabra standing on a little table near the head of a sofa which had
been dragged round to face the fireplace.  The faintest possible whiff of
a familiar perfume made my head swim with its suggestion.

I grabbed the back of the nearest piece of furniture and the splendour of
marbles and mirrors, of cut crystals and carvings, swung before my eyes
in the golden mist of walls and draperies round an extremely conspicuous
pair of black stockings thrown over a music stool which remained
motionless.  The silence was profound.  It was like being in an enchanted
place.  Suddenly a voice began to speak, clear, detached, infinitely
touching in its calm weariness.

“Haven’t you tormented me enough to-day?” it said. . . . My head was
steady now but my heart began to beat violently.  I listened to the end
without moving, “Can’t you make up your mind to leave me alone for
to-night?”  It pleaded with an accent of charitable scorn.

The penetrating quality of these tones which I had not heard for so many,
many days made my eyes run full of tears.  I guessed easily that the
appeal was addressed to the atrocious Therese.  The speaker was concealed
from me by the high back of the sofa, but her apprehension was perfectly
justified.  For was it not I who had turned back Therese the pious, the
insatiable, coming downstairs in her nightgown to torment her sister some
more?  Mere surprise at Doña Rita’s presence in the house was enough to
paralyze me; but I was also overcome by an enormous sense of relief, by
the assurance of security for her and for myself.  I didn’t even ask
myself how she came there.  It was enough for me that she was not in
Tolosa.  I could have smiled at the thought that all I had to do now was
to hasten the departure of that abominable lunatic—for Tolosa: an easy
task, almost no task at all.  Yes, I would have smiled, had not I felt
outraged by the presence of Señor Ortega under the same roof with Doña
Rita.  The mere fact was repugnant to me, morally revolting; so that I
should have liked to rush at him and throw him out into the street.  But
that was not to be done for various reasons.  One of them was pity.  I
was suddenly at peace with all mankind, with all nature.  I felt as if I
couldn’t hurt a fly.  The intensity of my emotion sealed my lips.  With a
fearful joy tugging at my heart I moved round the head of the couch
without a word.

In the wide fireplace on a pile of white ashes the logs had a deep
crimson glow; and turned towards them Doña Rita reclined on her side
enveloped in the skins of wild beasts like a charming and savage young
chieftain before a camp fire.  She never even raised her eyes, giving me
the opportunity to contemplate mutely that adolescent, delicately
masculine head, so mysteriously feminine in the power of instant
seduction, so infinitely suave in its firm design, almost childlike in
the freshness of detail: altogether ravishing in the inspired strength of
the modelling.  That precious head reposed in the palm of her hand; the
face was slightly flushed (with anger perhaps).  She kept her eyes
obstinately fixed on the pages of a book which she was holding with her
other hand.  I had the time to lay my infinite adoration at her feet
whose white insteps gleamed below the dark edge of the fur out of quilted
blue silk bedroom slippers, embroidered with small pearls.  I had never
seen them before; I mean the slippers.  The gleam of the insteps, too,
for that matter.  I lost myself in a feeling of deep content, something
like a foretaste of a time of felicity which must be quiet or it couldn’t
be eternal.  I had never tasted such perfect quietness before.  It was
not of this earth.  I had gone far beyond.  It was as if I had reached
the ultimate wisdom beyond all dreams and all passions.  She was That
which is to be contemplated to all Infinity.

The perfect stillness and silence made her raise her eyes at last,
reluctantly, with a hard, defensive expression which I had never seen in
them before.  And no wonder!  The glance was meant for Therese and
assumed in self-defence.  For some time its character did not change and
when it did it turned into a perfectly stony stare of a kind which I also
had never seen before.  She had never wished so much to be left in peace.
She had never been so astonished in her life.  She had arrived by the
evening express only two hours before Señor Ortega, had driven to the
house, and after having something to eat had become for the rest of the
evening the helpless prey of her sister who had fawned and scolded and
wheedled and threatened in a way that outraged all Rita’s feelings.
Seizing this unexpected occasion Therese had displayed a distracting
versatility of sentiment: rapacity, virtue, piety, spite, and false
tenderness—while, characteristically enough, she unpacked the
dressing-bag, helped the sinner to get ready for bed, brushed her hair,
and finally, as a climax, kissed her hands, partly by surprise and partly
by violence.  After that she had retired from the field of battle slowly,
undefeated, still defiant, firing as a last shot the impudent question:
“Tell me only, have you made your will, Rita?”  To this poor Doña Rita
with the spirit of opposition strung to the highest pitch answered: “No,
and I don’t mean to”—being under the impression that this was what her
sister wanted her to do.  There can be no doubt, however, that all
Therese wanted was the information.

Rita, much too agitated to expect anything but a sleepless night, had not
the courage to get into bed.  She thought she would remain on the sofa
before the fire and try to compose herself with a book.  As she had no
dressing-gown with her she put on her long fur coat over her night-gown,
threw some logs on the fire, and lay down.  She didn’t hear the slightest
noise of any sort till she heard me shut the door gently.  Quietness of
movement was one of Therese’s accomplishments, and the harassed heiress
of the Allègre millions naturally thought it was her sister coming again
to renew the scene.  Her heart sank within her.  In the end she became a
little frightened at the long silence, and raised her eyes.  She didn’t
believe them for a long time.  She concluded that I was a vision.  In
fact, the first word which I heard her utter was a low, awed “No,” which,
though I understood its meaning, chilled my blood like an evil omen.

It was then that I spoke.  “Yes,” I said, “it’s me that you see,” and
made a step forward.  She didn’t start; only her other hand flew to the
edges of the fur coat, gripping them together over her breast.  Observing
this gesture I sat down in the nearest chair.  The book she had been
reading slipped with a thump on the floor.

“How is it possible that you should be here?” she said, still in a
doubting voice.

“I am really here,” I said.  “Would you like to touch my hand?”

She didn’t move at all; her fingers still clutched the fur coat.

“What has happened?”

“It’s a long story, but you may take it from me that all is over.  The
tie between us is broken.  I don’t know that it was ever very close.  It
was an external thing.  The true misfortune is that I have ever seen
you.”

This last phrase was provoked by an exclamation of sympathy on her part.
She raised herself on her elbow and looked at me intently.  “All over,”
she murmured.

“Yes, we had to wreck the little vessel.  It was awful.  I feel like a
murderer.  But she had to be killed.”

“Why?”

“Because I loved her too much.  Don’t you know that love and death go
very close together?”

“I could feel almost happy that it is all over, if you hadn’t had to lose
your love.  Oh, _amigo_ George, it was a safe love for you.”

“Yes,” I said.  “It was a faithful little vessel.  She would have saved
us all from any plain danger.  But this was a betrayal.  It was—never
mind.  All that’s past.  The question is what will the next one be.”

“Why should it be that?”

“I don’t know.  Life seems but a series of betrayals.  There are so many
kinds of them.  This was a betrayed plan, but one can betray confidence,
and hope and—desire, and the most sacred . . .”

“But what are you doing here?” she interrupted.

“Oh, yes!  The eternal why.  Till a few hours ago I didn’t know what I
was here for.  And what are you here for?” I asked point blank and with a
bitterness she disregarded.  She even answered my question quite readily
with many words out of which I could make very little.  I only learned
that for at least five mixed reasons, none of which impressed me
profoundly, Doña Rita had started at a moment’s notice from Paris with
nothing but a dressing-bag, and permitting Rose to go and visit her aged
parents for two days, and then follow her mistress.  That girl of late
had looked so perturbed and worried that the sensitive Rita, fearing that
she was tired of her place, proposed to settle a sum of money on her
which would have enabled her to devote herself entirely to her aged
parents.  And did I know what that extraordinary girl said?  She had
said: “Don’t let Madame think that I would be too proud to accept
anything whatever from her; but I can’t even dream of leaving Madame.  I
believe Madame has no friends.  Not one.”  So instead of a large sum of
money Doña Rita gave the girl a kiss and as she had been worried by
several people who wanted her to go to Tolosa she bolted down this way
just to get clear of all those busybodies.  “Hide from them,” she went on
with ardour.  “Yes, I came here to hide,” she repeated twice as if
delighted at last to have hit on that reason among so many others.  “How
could I tell that you would be here?”  Then with sudden fire which only
added to the delight with which I had been watching the play of her
physiognomy she added: “Why did you come into this room?”

She enchanted me.  The ardent modulations of the sound, the slight play
of the beautiful lips, the still, deep sapphire gleam in those long eyes
inherited from the dawn of ages and that seemed always to watch
unimaginable things, that underlying faint ripple of gaiety that played
under all her moods as though it had been a gift from the high gods moved
to pity for this lonely mortal, all this within the four walls and
displayed for me alone gave me the sense of almost intolerable joy.  The
words didn’t matter.  They had to be answered, of course.

“I came in for several reasons.  One of them is that I didn’t know you
were here.”

“Therese didn’t tell you?”

“No.”

“Never talked to you about me?”

I hesitated only for a moment.  “Never,” I said.  Then I asked in my
turn, “Did she tell you I was here?”

“No,” she said.

“It’s very clear she did not mean us to come together again.”

“Neither did I, my dear.”

“What do you mean by speaking like this, in this tone, in these words?
You seem to use them as if they were a sort of formula.  Am I a dear to
you?  Or is anybody? . . . or everybody? . . .”

She had been for some time raised on her elbow, but then as if something
had happened to her vitality she sank down till her head rested again on
the sofa cushion.

“Why do you try to hurt my feelings?” she asked.

“For the same reason for which you call me dear at the end of a sentence
like that: for want of something more amusing to do.  You don’t pretend
to make me believe that you do it for any sort of reason that a decent
person would confess to.”

The colour had gone from her face; but a fit of wickedness was on me and
I pursued, “What are the motives of your speeches?  What prompts your
actions?  On your own showing your life seems to be a continuous running
away.  You have just run away from Paris.  Where will you run to-morrow?
What are you everlastingly running from—or is it that you are running
after something?  What is it?  A man, a phantom—or some sensation that
you don’t like to own to?”

Truth to say, I was abashed by the silence which was her only answer to
this sally.  I said to myself that I would not let my natural anger, my
just fury be disarmed by any assumption of pathos or dignity.  I suppose
I was really out of my mind and what in the middle ages would have been
called “possessed” by an evil spirit.  I went on enjoying my own
villainy.

“Why aren’t you in Tolosa?  You ought to be in Tolosa.  Isn’t Tolosa the
proper field for your abilities, for your sympathies, for your
profusions, for your generosities—the king without a crown, the man
without a fortune!  But here there is nothing worthy of your talents.
No, there is no longer anything worth any sort of trouble here.  There
isn’t even that ridiculous Monsieur George.  I understand that the talk
of the coast from here to Cette is that Monsieur George is drowned.  Upon
my word I believe he is.  And serve him right, too.  There’s Therese, but
I don’t suppose that your love for your sister . . .”

“For goodness’ sake don’t let her come in and find you here.”

Those words recalled me to myself, exorcised the evil spirit by the mere
enchanting power of the voice.  They were also impressive by their
suggestion of something practical, utilitarian, and remote from
sentiment.  The evil spirit left me and I remained taken aback slightly.

“Well,” I said, “if you mean that you want me to leave the room I will
confess to you that I can’t very well do it yet.  But I could lock both
doors if you don’t mind that.”

“Do what you like as long as you keep her out.  You two together would be
too much for me to-night.  Why don’t you go and lock those doors?  I have
a feeling she is on the prowl.”

I got up at once saying, “I imagine she has gone to bed by this time.”  I
felt absolutely calm and responsible.  I turned the keys one after
another so gently that I couldn’t hear the click of the locks myself.
This done I recrossed the room with measured steps, with downcast eyes,
and approaching the couch without raising them from the carpet I sank
down on my knees and leaned my forehead on its edge.  That penitential
attitude had but little remorse in it.  I detected no movement and heard
no sound from her.  In one place a bit of the fur coat touched my cheek
softly, but no forgiving hand came to rest on my bowed head.  I only
breathed deeply the faint scent of violets, her own particular fragrance
enveloping my body, penetrating my very heart with an inconceivable
intimacy, bringing me closer to her than the closest embrace, and yet so
subtle that I sensed her existence in me only as a great, glowing,
indeterminate tenderness, something like the evening light disclosing
after the white passion of the day infinite depths in the colours of the
sky and an unsuspected soul of peace in the protean forms of life.  I had
not known such quietness for months; and I detected in myself an immense
fatigue, a longing to remain where I was without changing my position to
the end of time.  Indeed to remain seemed to me a complete solution for
all the problems that life presents—even as to the very death itself.

Only the unwelcome reflection that this was impossible made me get up at
last with a sigh of deep grief at the end of the dream.  But I got up
without despair.  She didn’t murmur, she didn’t stir.  There was
something august in the stillness of the room.  It was a strange peace
which she shared with me in this unexpected shelter full of disorder in
its neglected splendour.  What troubled me was the sudden, as it were
material, consciousness of time passing as water flows.  It seemed to me
that it was only the tenacity of my sentiment that held that woman’s
body, extended and tranquil above the flood.  But when I ventured at last
to look at her face I saw her flushed, her teeth clenched—it was
visible—her nostrils dilated, and in her narrow, level-glancing eyes a
look of inward and frightened ecstasy.  The edges of the fur coat had
fallen open and I was moved to turn away.  I had the same impression as
on the evening we parted that something had happened which I did not
understand; only this time I had not touched her at all.  I really didn’t
understand.  At the slightest whisper I would now have gone out without a
murmur, as though that emotion had given her the right to be obeyed.  But
there was no whisper; and for a long time I stood leaning on my arm,
looking into the fire and feeling distinctly between the four walls of
that locked room the unchecked time flow past our two stranded
personalities.

And suddenly she spoke.  She spoke in that voice that was so profoundly
moving without ever being sad, a little wistful perhaps and always the
supreme expression of her grace.  She asked as if nothing had happened:

“What are you thinking of, _amigo_?”

I turned about.  She was lying on her side, tranquil above the smooth
flow of time, again closely wrapped up in her fur, her head resting on
the old-gold sofa cushion bearing like everything else in that room the
decoratively enlaced letters of her monogram; her face a little pale now,
with the crimson lobe of her ear under the tawny mist of her loose hair,
the lips a little parted, and her glance of melted sapphire level and
motionless, darkened by fatigue.

“Can I think of anything but you?” I murmured, taking a seat near the
foot of the couch.  “Or rather it isn’t thinking, it is more like the
consciousness of you always being present in me, complete to the last
hair, to the faintest shade of expression, and that not only when we are
apart but when we are together, alone, as close as this.  I see you now
lying on this couch but that is only the insensible phantom of the real
you that is in me.  And it is the easier for me to feel this because that
image which others see and call by your name—how am I to know that it is
anything else but an enchanting mist?  You have always eluded me except
in one or two moments which seem still more dream-like than the rest.
Since I came into this room you have done nothing to destroy my
conviction of your unreality apart from myself.  You haven’t offered me
your hand to touch.  Is it because you suspect that apart from me you are
but a mere phantom, and that you fear to put it to the test?”

One of her hands was under the fur and the other under her cheek.  She
made no sound.  She didn’t offer to stir.  She didn’t move her eyes, not
even after I had added after waiting for a while,

“Just what I expected.  You are a cold illusion.”

She smiled mysteriously, right away from me, straight at the fire, and
that was all.



CHAPTER VI


I had a momentary suspicion that I had said something stupid.  Her smile
amongst many other things seemed to have meant that, too.  And I answered
it with a certain resignation:

“Well, I don’t know that you are so much mist.  I remember once hanging
on to you like a drowning man . . . But perhaps I had better not speak of
this.  It wasn’t so very long ago, and you may . . . ”

“I don’t mind.  Well . . .”

“Well, I have kept an impression of great solidity.  I’ll admit that.  A
woman of granite.”

“A doctor once told me that I was made to last for ever,” she said.

“But essentially it’s the same thing,” I went on.  “Granite, too, is
insensible.”

I watched her profile against the pillow and there came on her face an
expression I knew well when with an indignation full of suppressed
laughter she used to throw at me the word “Imbecile.”  I expected it to
come, but it didn’t come.  I must say, though, that I was swimmy in my
head and now and then had a noise as of the sea in my ears, so I might
not have heard it.  The woman of granite, built to last for ever,
continued to look at the glowing logs which made a sort of fiery ruin on
the white pile of ashes.  “I will tell you how it is,” I said.  “When I
have you before my eyes there is such a projection of my whole being
towards you that I fail to see you distinctly.  It was like that from the
beginning.  I may say that I never saw you distinctly till after we had
parted and I thought you had gone from my sight for ever.  It was then
that you took body in my imagination and that my mind seized on a
definite form of you for all its adorations—for its profanations, too.
Don’t imagine me grovelling in spiritual abasement before a mere image.
I got a grip on you that nothing can shake now.”

“Don’t speak like this,” she said.  “It’s too much for me.  And there is
a whole long night before us.”

“You don’t think that I dealt with you sentimentally enough perhaps?  But
the sentiment was there; as clear a flame as ever burned on earth from
the most remote ages before that eternal thing which is in you, which is
your heirloom.  And is it my fault that what I had to give was real
flame, and not a mystic’s incense?  It is neither your fault nor mine.
And now whatever we say to each other at night or in daylight, that
sentiment must be taken for granted.  It will be there on the day I
die—when you won’t be there.”

She continued to look fixedly at the red embers; and from her lips that
hardly moved came the quietest possible whisper: “Nothing would be easier
than to die for you.”

“Really,” I cried.  “And you expect me perhaps after this to kiss your
feet in a transport of gratitude while I hug the pride of your words to
my breast.  But as it happens there is nothing in me but contempt for
this sublime declaration.  How dare you offer me this charlatanism of
passion?  What has it got to do between you and me who are the only two
beings in the world that may safely say that we have no need of shams
between ourselves?  Is it possible that you are a charlatan at heart?
Not from egoism, I admit, but from some sort of fear.  Yet, should you be
sincere, then—listen well to me—I would never forgive you.  I would visit
your grave every day to curse you for an evil thing.”

“Evil thing,” she echoed softly.

“Would you prefer to be a sham—that one could forget?”

“You will never forget me,” she said in the same tone at the glowing
embers.  “Evil or good.  But, my dear, I feel neither an evil nor a sham.
I have got to be what I am, and that, _amigo_, is not so easy; because I
may be simple, but like all those on whom there is no peace I am not One.
No, I am not One!”

“You are all the women in the world,” I whispered bending over her.  She
didn’t seem to be aware of anything and only spoke—always to the glow.

“If I were that I would say: God help them then.  But that would be more
appropriate for Therese.  For me, I can only give them my infinite
compassion.  I have too much reverence in me to invoke the name of a God
of whom clever men have robbed me a long time ago.  How could I help it?
For the talk was clever and—and I had a mind.  And I am also, as Therese
says, naturally sinful.  Yes, my dear, I may be naturally wicked but I am
not evil and I could die for you.”

“You!” I said.  “You are afraid to die.”

“Yes.  But not for you.”

The whole structure of glowing logs fell down, raising a small turmoil of
white ashes and sparks.  The tiny crash seemed to wake her up thoroughly.
She turned her head upon the cushion to look at me.

“It’s a very extraordinary thing, we two coming together like this,” she
said with conviction.  “You coming in without knowing I was here and then
telling me that you can’t very well go out of the room.  That sounds
funny.  I wouldn’t have been angry if you had said that you wouldn’t.  It
would have hurt me.  But nobody ever paid much attention to my feelings.
Why do you smile like this?”

“At a thought.  Without any charlatanism of passion I am able to tell you
of something to match your devotion.  I was not afraid for your sake to
come within a hair’s breadth of what to all the world would have been a
squalid crime.  Note that you and I are persons of honour.  And there
might have been a criminal trial at the end of it for me.  Perhaps the
scaffold.”

“Do you say these horrors to make me tremble?”

“Oh, you needn’t tremble.  There shall be no crime.  I need not risk the
scaffold, since now you are safe.  But I entered this room meditating
resolutely on the ways of murder, calculating possibilities and chances
without the slightest compunction.  It’s all over now.  It was all over
directly I saw you here, but it had been so near that I shudder yet.”

She must have been very startled because for a time she couldn’t speak.
Then in a faint voice:

“For me!  For me!” she faltered out twice.

“For you—or for myself?  Yet it couldn’t have been selfish.  What would
it have been to me that you remained in the world?  I never expected to
see you again.  I even composed a most beautiful letter of farewell.
Such a letter as no woman had ever received.”

Instantly she shot out a hand towards me.  The edges of the fur cloak
fell apart.  A wave of the faintest possible scent floated into my
nostrils.

“Let me have it,” she said imperiously.

“You can’t have it.  It’s all in my head.  No woman will read it.  I
suspect it was something that could never have been written.  But what a
farewell!  And now I suppose we shall say good-bye without even a
handshake.  But you are safe!  Only I must ask you not to come out of
this room till I tell you you may.”

I was extremely anxious that Señor Ortega should never even catch a
glimpse of Doña Rita, never guess how near he had been to her.  I was
extremely anxious the fellow should depart for Tolosa and get shot in a
ravine; or go to the Devil in his own way, as long as he lost the track
of Doña Rita completely.  He then, probably, would get mad and get shut
up, or else get cured, forget all about it, and devote himself to his
vocation, whatever it was—keep a shop and grow fat.  All this flashed
through my mind in an instant and while I was still dazzled by those
comforting images, the voice of Doña Rita pulled me up with a jerk.

“You mean not out of the house?”

“No, I mean not out of this room,” I said with some embarrassment.

“What do you mean?  Is there something in the house then?  This is most
extraordinary!  Stay in this room?  And you, too, it seems?  Are you also
afraid for yourself?”

“I can’t even give you an idea how afraid I was.  I am not so much now.
But you know very well, Doña Rita, that I never carry any sort of weapon
in my pocket.”

“Why don’t you, then?” she asked in a flash of scorn which bewitched me
so completely for an instant that I couldn’t even smile at it.

“Because if I am unconventionalized I am an old European,” I murmured
gently.  “No, _Excellentissima_, I shall go through life without as much
as a switch in my hand.  It’s no use you being angry.  Adapting to this
great moment some words you’ve heard before: I am like that.  Such is my
character!”

Doña Rita frankly stared at me—a most unusual expression for her to have.
Suddenly she sat up.

“Don George,” she said with lovely animation, “I insist upon knowing who
is in my house.”

“You insist! . . . But Therese says it is _her_ house.”

Had there been anything handy, such as a cigarette box, for instance, it
would have gone sailing through the air spouting cigarettes as it went.
Rosy all over, cheeks, neck, shoulders, she seemed lighted up softly from
inside like a beautiful transparency.  But she didn’t raise her voice.

“You and Therese have sworn my ruin.  If you don’t tell me what you mean
I will go outside and shout up the stairs to make her come down.  I know
there is no one but the three of us in the house.”

“Yes, three; but not counting my Jacobin.  There is a Jacobin in the
house.”

“A Jac . . .!  Oh, George, is this the time to jest?” she began in
persuasive tones when a faint but peculiar noise stilled her lips as
though they had been suddenly frozen.  She became quiet all over
instantly.  I, on the contrary, made an involuntary movement before I,
too, became as still as death.  We strained our ears; but that peculiar
metallic rattle had been so slight and the silence now was so perfect
that it was very difficult to believe one’s senses.  Doña Rita looked
inquisitively at me.  I gave her a slight nod.  We remained looking into
each other’s eyes while we listened and listened till the silence became
unbearable.  Doña Rita whispered composedly: “Did you hear?”

“I am asking myself . . . I almost think I didn’t.”

“Don’t shuffle with me.  It was a scraping noise.”

“Something fell.”

“Something!  What thing?  What are the things that fall by themselves?
Who is that man of whom you spoke?  Is there a man?”

“No doubt about it whatever.  I brought him here myself.”

“What for?”

“Why shouldn’t I have a Jacobin of my own?  Haven’t you one, too?  But
mine is a different problem from that white-haired humbug of yours.  He
is a genuine article.  There must be plenty like him about.  He has
scores to settle with half a dozen people, he says, and he clamours for
revolutions to give him a chance.”

“But why did you bring him here?”

“I don’t know—from sudden affection . . . ”

All this passed in such low tones that we seemed to make out the words
more by watching each other’s lips than through our sense of hearing.
Man is a strange animal.  I didn’t care what I said.  All I wanted was to
keep her in her pose, excited and still, sitting up with her hair loose,
softly glowing, the dark brown fur making a wonderful contrast with the
white lace on her breast.  All I was thinking of was that she was
adorable and too lovely for words!  I cared for nothing but that
sublimely aesthetic impression.  It summed up all life, all joy, all
poetry!  It had a divine strain.  I am certain that I was not in my right
mind.  I suppose I was not quite sane.  I am convinced that at that
moment of the four people in the house it was Doña Rita who upon the
whole was the most sane.  She observed my face and I am sure she read
there something of my inward exaltation.  She knew what to do.  In the
softest possible tone and hardly above her breath she commanded: “George,
come to yourself.”

Her gentleness had the effect of evening light.  I was soothed.  Her
confidence in her own power touched me profoundly.  I suppose my love was
too great for madness to get hold of me.  I can’t say that I passed to a
complete calm, but I became slightly ashamed of myself.  I whispered:

“No, it was not from affection, it was for the love of you that I brought
him here.  That imbecile H. was going to send him to Tolosa.”

“That Jacobin!” Doña Rita was immensely surprised, as she might well have
been.  Then resigned to the incomprehensible: “Yes,” she breathed out,
“what did you do with him?”

“I put him to bed in the studio.”

How lovely she was with the effort of close attention depicted in the
turn of her head and in her whole face honestly trying to approve.  “And
then?” she inquired.

“Then I came in here to face calmly the necessity of doing away with a
human life.  I didn’t shirk it for a moment.  That’s what a short
twelvemonth has brought me to.  Don’t think I am reproaching you, O blind
force!  You are justified because you _are_.  Whatever had to happen you
would not even have heard of it.”

Horror darkened her marvellous radiance.  Then her face became utterly
blank with the tremendous effort to understand.  Absolute silence reigned
in the house.  It seemed to me that everything had been said now that
mattered in the world; and that the world itself had reached its ultimate
stage, had reached its appointed end of an eternal, phantom-like silence.
Suddenly Doña Rita raised a warning finger.  I had heard nothing and
shook my head; but she nodded hers and murmured excitedly,

“Yes, yes, in the fencing-room, as before.”

In the same way I answered her: “Impossible!  The door is locked and
Therese has the key.”  She asked then in the most cautious manner,

“Have you seen Therese to-night?”

“Yes,” I confessed without misgiving.  “I left her making up the fellow’s
bed when I came in here.”

“The bed of the Jacobin?” she said in a peculiar tone as if she were
humouring a lunatic.

“I think I had better tell you he is a Spaniard—that he seems to know you
from early days. . . .”  I glanced at her face, it was extremely tense,
apprehensive.  For myself I had no longer any doubt as to the man and I
hoped she would reach the correct conclusion herself.  But I believe she
was too distracted and worried to think consecutively.  She only seemed
to feel some terror in the air.  In very pity I bent down and whispered
carefully near her ear, “His name is Ortega.”

I expected some effect from that name but I never expected what happened.
With the sudden, free, spontaneous agility of a young animal she leaped
off the sofa, leaving her slippers behind, and in one bound reached
almost the middle of the room.  The vigour, the instinctive precision of
that spring, were something amazing.  I just escaped being knocked over.
She landed lightly on her bare feet with a perfect balance, without the
slightest suspicion of swaying in her instant immobility.  It lasted less
than a second, then she spun round distractedly and darted at the first
door she could see.  My own agility was just enough to enable me to grip
the back of the fur coat and then catch her round the body before she
could wriggle herself out of the sleeves.  She was muttering all the
time, “No, no, no.”  She abandoned herself to me just for an instant
during which I got her back to the middle of the room.  There she
attempted to free herself and I let her go at once.  With her face very
close to mine, but apparently not knowing what she was looking at she
repeated again twice, “No—No,” with an intonation which might well have
brought dampness to my eyes but which only made me regret that I didn’t
kill the honest Ortega at sight.  Suddenly Doña Rita swung round and
seizing her loose hair with both hands started twisting it up before one
of the sumptuous mirrors.  The wide fur sleeves slipped down her white
arms.  In a brusque movement like a downward stab she transfixed the
whole mass of tawny glints and sparks with the arrow of gold which she
perceived lying there, before her, on the marble console.  Then she
sprang away from the glass muttering feverishly, “Out—out—out of this
house,” and trying with an awful, senseless stare to dodge past me who
had put myself in her way with open arms.  At last I managed to seize her
by the shoulders and in the extremity of my distress I shook her roughly.
If she hadn’t quieted down then I believe my heart would have broken.  I
spluttered right into her face: “I won’t let you.  Here you stay.”  She
seemed to recognize me at last, and suddenly still, perfectly firm on her
white feet, she let her arms fall and, from an abyss of desolation,
whispered, “O! George!  No!  No!  Not Ortega.”

There was a passion of mature grief in this tone of appeal.  And yet she
remained as touching and helpless as a distressed child.  It had all the
simplicity and depth of a child’s emotion.  It tugged at one’s
heart-strings in the same direct way.  But what could one do?  How could
one soothe her?  It was impossible to pat her on the head, take her on
the knee, give her a chocolate or show her a picture-book.  I found
myself absolutely without resource.  Completely at a loss.

“Yes, Ortega.  Well, what of it?” I whispered with immense assurance.



CHAPTER VII


My brain was in a whirl.  I am safe to say that at this precise moment
there was nobody completely sane in the house.  Setting apart Therese and
Ortega, both in the grip of unspeakable passions, all the moral economy
of Doña Rita had gone to pieces.  Everything was gone except her strong
sense of life with all its implied menaces.  The woman was a mere chaos
of sensations and vitality.  I, too, suffered most from inability to get
hold of some fundamental thought.  The one on which I could best build
some hopes was the thought that, of course, Ortega did not know anything.
I whispered this into the ear of Doña Rita, into her precious, her
beautifully shaped ear.

But she shook her head, very much like an inconsolable child and very
much with a child’s complete pessimism she murmured, “Therese has told
him.”

The words, “Oh, nonsense,” never passed my lips, because I could not
cheat myself into denying that there had been a noise; and that the noise
was in the fencing-room.  I knew that room.  There was nothing there that
by the wildest stretch of imagination could be conceived as falling with
that particular sound.  There was a table with a tall strip of
looking-glass above it at one end; but since Blunt took away his
campaigning kit there was no small object of any sort on the console or
anywhere else that could have been jarred off in some mysterious manner.
Along one of the walls there was the whole complicated apparatus of solid
brass pipes, and quite close to it an enormous bath sunk into the floor.
The greatest part of the room along its whole length was covered with
matting and had nothing else but a long, narrow leather-upholstered bench
fixed to the wall.  And that was all.  And the door leading to the studio
was locked.  And Therese had the key.  And it flashed on my mind,
independently of Doña Rita’s pessimism, by the force of personal
conviction, that, of course, Therese would tell him.  I beheld the whole
succession of events perfectly connected and tending to that particular
conclusion.  Therese would tell him!  I could see the contrasted heads of
those two formidable lunatics close together in a dark mist of whispers
compounded of greed, piety, and jealousy, plotting in a sense of perfect
security as if under the very wing of Providence.  So at least Therese
would think.  She could not be but under the impression that
(providentially) I had been called out for the rest of the night.

And now there was one sane person in the house, for I had regained
complete command of my thoughts.  Working in a logical succession of
images they showed me at last as clearly as a picture on a wall, Therese
pressing with fervour the key into the fevered palm of the rich,
prestigious, virtuous cousin, so that he should go and urge his
self-sacrificing offer to Rita, and gain merit before Him whose Eye sees
all the actions of men.  And this image of those two with the key in the
studio seemed to me a most monstrous conception of fanaticism, of a
perfectly horrible aberration.  For who could mistake the state that made
José Ortega the figure he was, inspiring both pity and fear?  I could not
deny that I understood, not the full extent but the exact nature of his
suffering.  Young as I was I had solved for myself that grotesque and
sombre personality.  His contact with me, the personal contact with (as
he thought) one of the actual lovers of that woman who brought to him as
a boy the curse of the gods, had tipped over the trembling scales.  No
doubt I was very near death in the “grand salon” of the Maison Dorée,
only that his torture had gone too far.  It seemed to me that I ought to
have heard his very soul scream while we were seated at supper.  But in a
moment he had ceased to care for me.  I was nothing.  To the crazy
exaggeration of his jealousy I was but one amongst a hundred thousand.
What was my death?  Nothing.  All mankind had possessed that woman.  I
knew what his wooing of her would be: Mine—or Dead.

All this ought to have had the clearness of noon-day, even to the veriest
idiot that ever lived; and Therese was, properly speaking, exactly that.
An idiot.  A one-ideaed creature.  Only the idea was complex; therefore
it was impossible really to say what she wasn’t capable of.  This was
what made her obscure processes so awful.  She had at times the most
amazing perceptions.  Who could tell where her simplicity ended and her
cunning began?  She had also the faculty of never forgetting any fact
bearing upon her one idea; and I remembered now that the conversation
with me about the will had produced on her an indelible impression of the
Law’s surprising justice.  Recalling her naïve admiration of the “just”
law that required no “paper” from a sister, I saw her casting loose the
raging fate with a sanctimonious air.  And Therese would naturally give
the key of the fencing-room to her dear, virtuous, grateful,
disinterested cousin, to that damned soul with delicate whiskers, because
she would think it just possible that Rita might have locked the door
leading front her room into the hall; whereas there was no earthly
reason, not the slightest likelihood, that she would bother about the
other.  Righteousness demanded that the erring sister should be taken
unawares.

All the above is the analysis of one short moment.  Images are to words
like light to sound—incomparably swifter.  And all this was really one
flash of light through my mind.  A comforting thought succeeded it: that
both doors were locked and that really there was no danger.

However, there had been that noise—the why and the how of it?  Of course
in the dark he might have fallen into the bath, but that wouldn’t have
been a faint noise.  It wouldn’t have been a rattle.  There was
absolutely nothing he could knock over.  He might have dropped a
candle-stick if Therese had left him her own.  That was possible, but
then those thick mats—and then, anyway, why should he drop it? and, hang
it all, why shouldn’t he have gone straight on and tried the door?  I had
suddenly a sickening vision of the fellow crouching at the key-hole,
listening, listening, listening, for some movement or sigh of the sleeper
he was ready to tear away from the world, alive or dead.  I had a
conviction that he was still listening.  Why?  Goodness knows!  He may
have been only gloating over the assurance that the night was long and
that he had all these hours to himself.

I was pretty certain that he could have heard nothing of our whispers,
the room was too big for that and the door too solid.  I hadn’t the same
confidence in the efficiency of the lock.  Still I . . . Guarding my lips
with my hand I urged Doña Rita to go back to the sofa.  She wouldn’t
answer me and when I got hold of her arm I discovered that she wouldn’t
move.  She had taken root in that thick-pile Aubusson carpet; and she was
so rigidly still all over that the brilliant stones in the shaft of the
arrow of gold, with the six candles at the head of the sofa blazing full
on them, emitted no sparkle.

I was extremely anxious that she shouldn’t betray herself.  I reasoned,
save the mark, as a psychologist.  I had no doubt that the man knew of
her being there; but he only knew it by hearsay.  And that was bad
enough.  I could not help feeling that if he obtained some evidence for
his senses by any sort of noise, voice, or movement, his madness would
gain strength enough to burst the lock.  I was rather ridiculously
worried about the locks.  A horrid mistrust of the whole house possessed
me.  I saw it in the light of a deadly trap.  I had no weapon, I couldn’t
say whether he had one or not.  I wasn’t afraid of a struggle as far as
I, myself, was concerned, but I was afraid of it for Doña Rita.  To be
rolling at her feet, locked in a literally tooth-and-nail struggle with
Ortega would have been odious.  I wanted to spare her feelings, just as I
would have been anxious to save from any contact with mud the feet of
that goatherd of the mountains with a symbolic face.  I looked at her
face.  For immobility it might have been a carving.  I wished I knew how
to deal with that embodied mystery, to influence it, to manage it.  Oh,
how I longed for the gift of authority!  In addition, since I had become
completely sane, all my scruples against laying hold of her had returned.
I felt shy and embarrassed.  My eyes were fixed on the bronze handle of
the fencing-room door as if it were something alive.  I braced myself up
against the moment when it would move.  This was what was going to happen
next.  It would move very gently.  My heart began to thump.  But I was
prepared to keep myself as still as death and I hoped Doña Rita would
have sense enough to do the same.  I stole another glance at her face and
at that moment I heard the word: “Beloved!” form itself in the still air
of the room, weak, distinct, piteous, like the last request of the dying.

With great presence of mind I whispered into Doña Rita’s ear: “Perfect
silence!” and was overjoyed to discover that she had heard me, understood
me; that she even had command over her rigid lips.  She answered me in a
breath (our cheeks were nearly touching): “Take me out of this house.”

I glanced at all her clothing scattered about the room and hissed
forcibly the warning “Perfect immobility”; noticing with relief that she
didn’t offer to move, though animation was returning to her and her lips
had remained parted in an awful, unintended effect of a smile.  And I
don’t know whether I was pleased when she, who was not to be touched,
gripped my wrist suddenly.  It had the air of being done on purpose
because almost instantly another: “Beloved!” louder, more agonized if
possible, got into the room and, yes, went home to my heart.  It was
followed without any transition, preparation, or warning, by a positively
bellowed: “Speak, perjured beast!” which I felt pass in a thrill right
through Doña Rita like an electric shock, leaving her as motionless as
before.

Till he shook the door handle, which he did immediately afterwards, I
wasn’t certain through which door he had spoken.  The two doors (in
different walls) were rather near each other.  It was as I expected.  He
was in the fencing-room, thoroughly aroused, his senses on the alert to
catch the slightest sound.  A situation not to be trifled with.  Leaving
the room was for us out of the question.  It was quite possible for him
to dash round into the hall before we could get clear of the front door.
As to making a bolt of it upstairs there was the same objection; and to
allow ourselves to be chased all over the empty house by this maniac
would have been mere folly.  There was no advantage in locking ourselves
up anywhere upstairs where the original doors and locks were much
lighter.  No, true safety was in absolute stillness and silence, so that
even his rage should be brought to doubt at last and die expended, or
choke him before it died; I didn’t care which.

For me to go out and meet him would have been stupid.  Now I was certain
that he was armed.  I had remembered the wall in the fencing-room
decorated with trophies of cold steel in all the civilized and savage
forms; sheaves of assegais, in the guise of columns and grouped between
them stars and suns of choppers, swords, knives; from Italy, from
Damascus, from Abyssinia, from the ends of the world.  Ortega had only to
make his barbarous choice.  I suppose he had got up on the bench, and
fumbling about amongst them must have brought one down, which, falling,
had produced that rattling noise.  But in any case to go to meet him
would have been folly, because, after all, I might have been overpowered
(even with bare hands) and then Doña Rita would have been left utterly
defenceless.

“He will speak,” came to me the ghostly, terrified murmur of her voice.
“Take me out of the house before he begins to speak.”

“Keep still,” I whispered.  “He will soon get tired of this.”

“You don’t know him.”

“Oh, yes, I do.  Been with him two hours.”

At this she let go my wrist and covered her face with her hands
passionately.  When she dropped them she had the look of one morally
crushed.

“What did he say to you?”

“He raved.”

“Listen to me.  It was all true!”

“I daresay, but what of that?”

These ghostly words passed between us hardly louder than thoughts; but
after my last answer she ceased and gave me a searching stare, then drew
in a long breath.  The voice on the other side of the door burst out with
an impassioned request for a little pity, just a little, and went on
begging for a few words, for two words, for one word—one poor little
word.  Then it gave up, then repeated once more, “Say you are there,
Rita, Say one word, just one word.  Say ‘yes.’  Come!  Just one little
yes.”

“You see,” I said.  She only lowered her eyelids over the anxious glance
she had turned on me.

For a minute we could have had the illusion that he had stolen away,
unheard, on the thick mats.  But I don’t think that either of us was
deceived.  The voice returned, stammering words without connection,
pausing and faltering, till suddenly steadied it soared into impassioned
entreaty, sank to low, harsh tones, voluble, lofty sometimes and
sometimes abject.  When it paused it left us looking profoundly at each
other.

“It’s almost comic,” I whispered.

“Yes.  One could laugh,” she assented, with a sort of sinister
conviction.  Never had I seen her look exactly like that, for an instant
another, an incredible Rita!  “Haven’t I laughed at him innumerable
times?” she added in a sombre whisper.

He was muttering to himself out there, and unexpectedly shouted: “What?”
as though he had fancied he had heard something.  He waited a while
before he started up again with a loud: “Speak up, Queen of the goats,
with your goat tricks. . .”  All was still for a time, then came a most
awful bang on the door.  He must have stepped back a pace to hurl himself
bodily against the panels.  The whole house seemed to shake.  He repeated
that performance once more, and then varied it by a prolonged drumming
with his fists.  It _was_ comic.  But I felt myself struggling mentally
with an invading gloom as though I were no longer sure of myself.

“Take me out,” whispered Doña Rita feverishly, “take me out of this house
before it is too late.”

“You will have to stand it,” I answered.

“So be it; but then you must go away yourself.  Go now, before it is too
late.”

I didn’t condescend to answer this.  The drumming on the panels stopped
and the absurd thunder of it died out in the house.  I don’t know why
precisely then I had the acute vision of the red mouth of José Ortega
wriggling with rage between his funny whiskers.  He began afresh but in a
tired tone:

“Do you expect a fellow to forget your tricks, you wicked little devil?
Haven’t you ever seen me dodging about to get a sight of you amongst
those pretty gentlemen, on horseback, like a princess, with pure cheeks
like a carved saint?  I wonder I didn’t throw stones at you, I wonder I
didn’t run after you shouting the tale—curse my timidity!  But I daresay
they knew as much as I did.  More.  All the new tricks—if that were
possible.”

While he was making this uproar, Doña Rita put her fingers in her ears
and then suddenly changed her mind and clapped her hands over my ears.
Instinctively I disengaged my head but she persisted.  We had a short
tussle without moving from the spot, and suddenly I had my head free, and
there was complete silence.  He had screamed himself out of breath, but
Doña Rita muttering: “Too late, too late,” got her hands away from my
grip and slipping altogether out of her fur coat seized some garment
lying on a chair near by (I think it was her skirt), with the intention
of dressing herself, I imagine, and rushing out of the house.  Determined
to prevent this, but indeed without thinking very much what I was doing,
I got hold of her arm.  That struggle was silent, too; but I used the
least force possible and she managed to give me an unexpected push.
Stepping back to save myself from falling I overturned the little table,
bearing the six-branched candlestick.  It hit the floor, rebounded with a
dull ring on the carpet, and by the time it came to a rest every single
candle was out.  He on the other side of the door naturally heard the
noise and greeted it with a triumphant screech: “Aha!  I’ve managed to
wake you up,” the very savagery of which had a laughable effect.  I felt
the weight of Doña Rita grow on my arm and thought it best to let her
sink on the floor, wishing to be free in my movements and really afraid
that now he had actually heard a noise he would infallibly burst the
door.  But he didn’t even thump it.  He seemed to have exhausted himself
in that scream.  There was no other light in the room but the darkened
glow of the embers and I could hardly make out amongst the shadows of
furniture Doña Rita sunk on her knees in a penitential and despairing
attitude.  Before this collapse I, who had been wrestling desperately
with her a moment before, felt that I dare not touch her.  This emotion,
too, I could not understand; this abandonment of herself, this
conscience-stricken humility.  A humbly imploring request to open the
door came from the other side.  Ortega kept on repeating: “Open the door,
open the door,” in such an amazing variety of intonations, imperative,
whining, persuasive, insinuating, and even unexpectedly jocose, that I
really stood there smiling to myself, yet with a gloomy and uneasy heart.
Then he remarked, parenthetically as it were, “Oh, you know how to
torment a man, you brown-skinned, lean, grinning, dishevelled imp, you.
And mark,” he expounded further, in a curiously doctoral tone—“you are in
all your limbs hateful: your eyes are hateful and your mouth is hateful,
and your hair is hateful, and your body is cold and vicious like a
snake—and altogether you are perdition.”

This statement was astonishingly deliberate.  He drew a moaning breath
after it and uttered in a heart-rending tone, “You know, Rita, that I
cannot live without you.  I haven’t lived.  I am not living now.  This
isn’t life.  Come, Rita, you can’t take a boy’s soul away and then let
him grow up and go about the world, poor devil, while you go amongst the
rich from one pair of arms to another, showing all your best tricks.  But
I will forgive you if you only open the door,” he ended in an inflated
tone: “You remember how you swore time after time to be my wife.  You are
more fit to be Satan’s wife but I don’t mind.  You shall be my wife!”

A sound near the floor made me bend down hastily with a stern: “Don’t
laugh,” for in his grotesque, almost burlesque discourses there seemed to
me to be truth, passion, and horror enough to move a mountain.

Suddenly suspicion seized him out there.  With perfectly farcical
unexpectedness he yelled shrilly: “Oh, you deceitful wretch!  You won’t
escape me!  I will have you. . . .”

And in a manner of speaking he vanished.  Of course I couldn’t see him
but somehow that was the impression.  I had hardly time to receive it
when crash! . . . he was already at the other door.  I suppose he thought
that his prey was escaping him.  His swiftness was amazing, almost
inconceivable, more like the effect of a trick or of a mechanism.  The
thump on the door was awful as if he had not been able to stop himself in
time.  The shock seemed enough to stun an elephant.  It was really funny.
And after the crash there was a moment of silence as if he were
recovering himself.  The next thing was a low grunt, and at once he
picked up the thread of his fixed idea.

“You will have to be my wife.  I have no shame.  You swore you would be
and so you will have to be.”  Stifled low sounds made me bend down again
to the kneeling form, white in the flush of the dark red glow.  “For
goodness’ sake don’t,” I whispered down.  She was struggling with an
appalling fit of merriment, repeating to herself, “Yes, every day, for
two months.  Sixty times at least, sixty times at least.”  Her voice was
rising high.  She was struggling against laughter, but when I tried to
put my hand over her lips I felt her face wet with tears.  She turned it
this way and that, eluding my hand with repressed low, little moans.  I
lost my caution and said, “Be quiet,” so sharply as to startle myself
(and her, too) into expectant stillness.

Ortega’s voice in the hall asked distinctly: “Eh?  What’s this?” and then
he kept still on his side listening, but he must have thought that his
ears had deceived him.  He was getting tired, too.  He was keeping quiet
out there—resting.  Presently he sighed deeply; then in a harsh
melancholy tone he started again.

“My love, my soul, my life, do speak to me.  What am I that you should
take so much trouble to pretend that you aren’t there?  Do speak to me,”
he repeated tremulously, following this mechanical appeal with a string
of extravagantly endearing names, some of them quite childish, which all
of a sudden stopped dead; and then after a pause there came a distinct,
unutterably weary: “What shall I do now?” as though he were speaking to
himself.

I shuddered to hear rising from the floor, by my side, a vibrating,
scornful: “Do!  Why, slink off home looking over your shoulder as you
used to years ago when I had done with you—all but the laughter.”

“Rita,” I murmured, appalled.  He must have been struck dumb for a
moment.  Then, goodness only knows why, in his dismay or rage he was
moved to speak in French with a most ridiculous accent.

“So you have found your tongue at last—_Catin_!  You were that from the
cradle.  Don’t you remember how . . .”

Doña Rita sprang to her feet at my side with a loud cry, “No, George,
no,” which bewildered me completely.  The suddenness, the loudness of it
made the ensuing silence on both sides of the door perfectly awful.  It
seemed to me that if I didn’t resist with all my might something in me
would die on the instant.  In the straight, falling folds of the
night-dress she looked cold like a block of marble; while I, too, was
turned into stone by the terrific clamour in the hall.

“Therese, Therese,” yelled Ortega.  “She has got a man in there.”  He ran
to the foot of the stairs and screamed again, “Therese, Therese!  There
is a man with her.  A man!  Come down, you miserable, starved peasant,
come down and see.”

I don’t know where Therese was but I am sure that this voice reached her,
terrible, as if clamouring to heaven, and with a shrill over-note which
made me certain that if she was in bed the only thing she would think of
doing would be to put her head under the bed-clothes.  With a final yell:
“Come down and see,” he flew back at the door of the room and started
shaking it violently.

It was a double door, very tall, and there must have been a lot of things
loose about its fittings, bolts, latches, and all those brass
applications with broken screws, because it rattled, it clattered, it
jingled; and produced also the sound as of thunder rolling in the big,
empty hall.  It was deafening, distressing, and vaguely alarming as if it
could bring the house down.  At the same time the futility of it had, it
cannot be denied, a comic effect.  The very magnitude of the racket he
raised was funny.  But he couldn’t keep up that violent exertion
continuously, and when he stopped to rest we could hear him shouting to
himself in vengeful tones.  He saw it all!  He had been decoyed there!
(Rattle, rattle, rattle.)  He had been decoyed into that town, he
screamed, getting more and more excited by the noise he made himself, in
order to be exposed to this!  (Rattle, rattle.)  By this shameless
“_Catin_! _Catin_! _Catin_!”

He started at the door again with superhuman vigour.  Behind me I heard
Doña Rita laughing softly, statuesque, turned all dark in the fading
glow.  I called out to her quite openly, “Do keep your self-control.”
And she called back to me in a clear voice: “Oh, my dear, will you ever
consent to speak to me after all this?  But don’t ask for the impossible.
He was born to be laughed at.”

“Yes,” I cried.  “But don’t let yourself go.”

I don’t know whether Ortega heard us.  He was exerting then his utmost
strength of lung against the infamous plot to expose him to the derision
of the fiendish associates of that obscene woman! . . . Then he began
another interlude upon the door, so sustained and strong that I had the
thought that this was growing absurdly impossible, that either the
plaster would begin to fall off the ceiling or he would drop dead next
moment, out there.

He stopped, uttered a few curses at the door, and seemed calmer from
sheer exhaustion.

“This story will be all over the world,” we heard him begin.  “Deceived,
decoyed, inveighed, in order to be made a laughing-stock before the most
debased of all mankind, that woman and her associates.”  This was really
a meditation.  And then he screamed: “I will kill you all.”  Once more he
started worrying the door but it was a startlingly feeble effort which he
abandoned almost at once.  He must have been at the end of his strength.
Doña Rita from the middle of the room asked me recklessly loud: “Tell me!
Wasn’t he born to be laughed at?”  I didn’t answer her.  I was so near
the door that I thought I ought to hear him panting there.  He was
terrifying, but he was not serious.  He was at the end of his strength,
of his breath, of every kind of endurance, but I did not know it.  He was
done up, finished; but perhaps he did not know it himself.  How still he
was!  Just as I began to wonder at it, I heard him distinctly give a slap
to his forehead.  “I see it all!” he cried.  “That miserable, canting
peasant-woman upstairs has arranged it all.  No doubt she consulted her
priests.  I must regain my self-respect.  Let her die first.”  I heard
him make a dash for the foot of the stairs.  I was appalled; yet to think
of Therese being hoisted with her own petard was like a turn of affairs
in a farce.  A very ferocious farce.  Instinctively I unlocked the door.
Doña Rita’s contralto laugh rang out loud, bitter, and contemptuous; and
I heard Ortega’s distracted screaming as if under torture.  “It hurts!
It hurts!  It hurts!”  I hesitated just an instant, half a second, no
more, but before I could open the door wide there was in the hall a short
groan and the sound of a heavy fall.

The sight of Ortega lying on his back at the foot of the stairs arrested
me in the doorway.  One of his legs was drawn up, the other extended
fully, his foot very near the pedestal of the silver statuette holding
the feeble and tenacious gleam which made the shadows so heavy in that
hall.  One of his arms lay across his breast.  The other arm was extended
full length on the white-and-black pavement with the hand palm upwards
and the fingers rigidly spread out.  The shadow of the lowest step
slanted across his face but one whisker and part of his chin could be
made out.  He appeared strangely flattened.  He didn’t move at all.  He
was in his shirt-sleeves.  I felt an extreme distaste for that sight.
The characteristic sound of a key worrying in the lock stole into my
ears.  I couldn’t locate it but I didn’t attend much to that at first.  I
was engaged in watching Señor Ortega.  But for his raised leg he clung so
flat to the floor and had taken on himself such a distorted shape that he
might have been the mere shadow of Señor Ortega.  It was rather
fascinating to see him so quiet at the end of all that fury, clamour,
passion, and uproar.  Surely there was never anything so still in the
world as this Ortega.  I had a bizarre notion that he was not to be
disturbed.

A noise like the rattling of chain links, a small grind and click
exploded in the stillness of the hall and a voice began to swear in
Italian.  These surprising sounds were quite welcome, they recalled me to
myself, and I perceived they came from the front door which seemed pushed
a little ajar.  Was somebody trying to get in?  I had no objection, I
went to the door and said: “Wait a moment, it’s on the chain.”  The deep
voice on the other side said: “What an extraordinary thing,” and I
assented mentally.  It was extraordinary.  The chain was never put up,
but Therese was a thorough sort of person, and on this night she had put
it up to keep no one out except myself.  It was the old Italian and his
daughters returning from the ball who were trying to get in.

Suddenly I became intensely alive to the whole situation.  I bounded
back, closed the door of Blunt’s room, and the next moment was speaking
to the Italian.  “A little patience.”  My hands trembled but I managed to
take down the chain and as I allowed the door to swing open a little more
I put myself in his way.  He was burly, venerable, a little indignant,
and full of thanks.  Behind him his two girls, in short-skirted costumes,
white stockings, and low shoes, their heads powdered and earrings
sparkling in their ears, huddled together behind their father, wrapped up
in their light mantles.  One had kept her little black mask on her face,
the other held hers in her hand.

The Italian was surprised at my blocking the way and remarked pleasantly,
“It’s cold outside, Signor.”  I said, “Yes,” and added in a hurried
whisper: “There is a dead man in the hall.”  He didn’t say a single word
but put me aside a little, projected his body in for one searching
glance.  “Your daughters,” I murmured.  He said kindly, “_Va bene_, _va
bene_.”  And then to them, “Come in, girls.”

There is nothing like dealing with a man who has had a long past of
out-of-the-way experiences.  The skill with which he rounded up and drove
the girls across the hall, paternal and irresistible, venerable and
reassuring, was a sight to see.  They had no time for more than one
scared look over the shoulder.  He hustled them in and locked them up
safely in their part of the house, then crossed the hall with a quick,
practical stride.  When near Señor Ortega he trod short just in time and
said: “In truth, blood”; then selecting the place, knelt down by the body
in his tall hat and respectable overcoat, his white beard giving him
immense authority somehow.  “But—this man is not dead,” he exclaimed,
looking up at me.  With profound sagacity, inherent as it were in his
great beard, he never took the trouble to put any questions to me and
seemed certain that I had nothing to do with the ghastly sight.  “He
managed to give himself an enormous gash in his side,” was his calm
remark.  “And what a weapon!” he exclaimed, getting it out from under the
body.  It was an Abyssinian or Nubian production of a bizarre shape; the
clumsiest thing imaginable, partaking of a sickle and a chopper with a
sharp edge and a pointed end.  A mere cruel-looking curio of
inconceivable clumsiness to European eyes.

The old man let it drop with amused disdain.  “You had better take hold
of his legs,” he decided without appeal.  I certainly had no inclination
to argue.  When we lifted him up the head of Señor Ortega fell back
desolately, making an awful, defenceless display of his large, white
throat.

We found the lamp burning in the studio and the bed made up on the couch
on which we deposited our burden.  My venerable friend jerked the upper
sheet away at once and started tearing it into strips.

“You may leave him to me,” said that efficient sage, “but the doctor is
your affair.  If you don’t want this business to make a noise you will
have to find a discreet man.”

He was most benevolently interested in all the proceedings.  He remarked
with a patriarchal smile as he tore the sheet noisily: “You had better
not lose any time.”  I didn’t lose any time.  I crammed into the next
hour an astonishing amount of bodily activity.  Without more words I flew
out bare-headed into the last night of Carnival.  Luckily I was certain
of the right sort of doctor.  He was an iron-grey man of forty and of a
stout habit of body but who was able to put on a spurt.  In the cold,
dark, and deserted by-streets, he ran with earnest, and ponderous
footsteps, which echoed loudly in the cold night air, while I skimmed
along the ground a pace or two in front of him.  It was only on arriving
at the house that I perceived that I had left the front door wide open.
All the town, every evil in the world could have entered the
black-and-white hall.  But I had no time to meditate upon my imprudence.
The doctor and I worked in silence for nearly an hour and it was only
then while he was washing his hands in the fencing-room that he asked:

“What was he up to, that imbecile?”

“Oh, he was examining this curiosity,” I said.

“Oh, yes, and it accidentally went off,” said the doctor, looking
contemptuously at the Nubian knife I had thrown on the table.  Then while
wiping his hands: “I would bet there is a woman somewhere under this; but
that of course does not affect the nature of the wound.  I hope this
blood-letting will do him good.”

“Nothing will do him any good,” I said.

“Curious house this,” went on the doctor, “It belongs to a curious sort
of woman, too.  I happened to see her once or twice.  I shouldn’t wonder
if she were to raise considerable trouble in the track of her pretty feet
as she goes along.  I believe you know her well.”

“Yes.”

“Curious people in the house, too.  There was a Carlist officer here, a
lean, tall, dark man, who couldn’t sleep.  He consulted me once.  Do you
know what became of him?”

“No.”

The doctor had finished wiping his hands and flung the towel far away.

“Considerable nervous over-strain.  Seemed to have a restless brain.  Not
a good thing, that.  For the rest a perfect gentleman.  And this Spaniard
here, do you know him?”

“Enough not to care what happens to him,” I said, “except for the trouble
he might cause to the Carlist sympathizers here, should the police get
hold of this affair.”

“Well, then, he must take his chance in the seclusion of that
conservatory sort of place where you have put him.  I’ll try to find
somebody we can trust to look after him.  Meantime, I will leave the case
to you.”



CHAPTER VIII


Directly I had shut the door after the doctor I started shouting for
Therese.  “Come down at once, you wretched hypocrite,” I yelled at the
foot of the stairs in a sort of frenzy as though I had been a second
Ortega.  Not even an echo answered me; but all of a sudden a small flame
flickered descending from the upper darkness and Therese appeared on the
first floor landing carrying a lighted candle in front of a livid, hard
face, closed against remorse, compassion, or mercy by the meanness of her
righteousness and of her rapacious instincts.  She was fully dressed in
that abominable brown stuff with motionless folds, and as I watched her
coming down step by step she might have been made of wood.  I stepped
back and pointed my finger at the darkness of the passage leading to the
studio.  She passed within a foot of me, her pale eyes staring straight
ahead, her face still with disappointment and fury.  Yet it is only my
surmise.  She might have been made thus inhuman by the force of an
invisible purpose.  I waited a moment, then, stealthily, with extreme
caution, I opened the door of the so-called Captain Blunt’s room.

The glow of embers was all but out.  It was cold and dark in there; but
before I closed the door behind me the dim light from the hall showed me
Doña Rita standing on the very same spot where I had left her, statuesque
in her night-dress.  Even after I shut the door she loomed up enormous,
indistinctly rigid and inanimate.  I picked up the candelabra, groped for
a candle all over the carpet, found one, and lighted it.  All that time
Doña Rita didn’t stir.  When I turned towards her she seemed to be slowly
awakening from a trance.  She was deathly pale and by contrast the
melted, sapphire-blue of her eyes looked black as coal.  They moved a
little in my direction, incurious, recognizing me slowly.  But when they
had recognized me completely she raised her hands and hid her face in
them.  A whole minute or more passed.  Then I said in a low tone: “Look
at me,” and she let them fall slowly as if accepting the inevitable.

“Shall I make up the fire?” . . . I waited.  “Do you hear me?”  She made
no sound and with the tip of my finger I touched her bare shoulder.  But
for its elasticity it might have been frozen.  At once I looked round for
the fur coat; it seemed to me that there was not a moment to lose if she
was to be saved, as though we had been lost on an Arctic plain.  I had to
put her arms into the sleeves, myself, one after another.  They were
cold, lifeless, but flexible.  Then I moved in front of her and buttoned
the thing close round her throat.  To do that I had actually to raise her
chin with my finger, and it sank slowly down again.  I buttoned all the
other buttons right down to the ground.  It was a very long and splendid
fur.  Before rising from my kneeling position I felt her feet.  Mere ice.
The intimacy of this sort of attendance helped the growth of my
authority.  “Lie down,” I murmured, “I shall pile on you every blanket I
can find here,” but she only shook her head.

Not even in the days when she ran “shrill as a cicada and thin as a
match” through the chill mists of her native mountains could she ever
have felt so cold, so wretched, and so desolate.  Her very soul, her
grave, indignant, and fantastic soul, seemed to drowse like an exhausted
traveller surrendering himself to the sleep of death.  But when I asked
her again to lie down she managed to answer me, “Not in this room.”  The
dumb spell was broken.  She turned her head from side to side, but oh!
how cold she was!  It seemed to come out of her, numbing me, too; and the
very diamonds on the arrow of gold sparkled like hoar frost in the light
of the one candle.

“Not in this room; not here,” she protested, with that peculiar suavity
of tone which made her voice unforgettable, irresistible, no matter what
she said.  “Not after all this!  I couldn’t close my eyes in this place.
It’s full of corruption and ugliness all round, in me, too, everywhere
except in your heart, which has nothing to do where I breathe.  And here
you may leave me.  But wherever you go remember that I am not evil, I am
not evil.”

I said: “I don’t intend to leave you here.  There is my room upstairs.
You have been in it before.”

“Oh, you have heard of that,” she whispered.  The beginning of a wan
smile vanished from her lips.

“I also think you can’t stay in this room; and, surely, you needn’t
hesitate . . .”

“No.  It doesn’t matter now.  He has killed me.  Rita is dead.”

While we exchanged these words I had retrieved the quilted, blue slippers
and had put them on her feet.  She was very tractable.  Then taking her
by the arm I led her towards the door.

“He has killed me,” she repeated in a sigh.  “The little joy that was in
me.”

“He has tried to kill himself out there in the hall,” I said.  She put
back like a frightened child but she couldn’t be dragged on as a child
can be.

I assured her that the man was no longer there but she only repeated, “I
can’t get through the hall.  I can’t walk.  I can’t . . .”

“Well,” I said, flinging the door open and seizing her suddenly in my
arms, “if you can’t walk then you shall be carried,” and I lifted her
from the ground so abruptly that she could not help catching me round the
neck as any child almost will do instinctively when you pick it up.

I ought really to have put those blue slippers in my pocket.  One dropped
off at the bottom of the stairs as I was stepping over an
unpleasant-looking mess on the marble pavement, and the other was lost a
little way up the flight when, for some reason (perhaps from a sense of
insecurity), she began to struggle.  Though I had an odd sense of being
engaged in a sort of nursery adventure she was no child to carry.  I
could just do it.  But not if she chose to struggle.  I set her down
hastily and only supported her round the waist for the rest of the way.
My room, of course, was perfectly dark but I led her straight to the sofa
at once and let her fall on it.  Then as if I had in sober truth rescued
her from an Alpine height or an Arctic floe, I busied myself with nothing
but lighting the gas and starting the fire.  I didn’t even pause to lock
my door.  All the time I was aware of her presence behind me, nay, of
something deeper and more my own—of her existence itself—of a small blue
flame, blue like her eyes, flickering and clear within her frozen body.
When I turned to her she was sitting very stiff and upright, with her
feet posed hieratically on the carpet and her head emerging out of the
ample fur collar, such as a gem-like flower above the rim of a dark vase.
I tore the blankets and the pillows off my bed and piled them up in
readiness in a great heap on the floor near the couch.  My reason for
this was that the room was large, too large for the fireplace, and the
couch was nearest to the fire.  She gave no sign but one of her wistful
attempts at a smile.  In a most business-like way I took the arrow out of
her hair and laid it on the centre table.  The tawny mass fell loose at
once about her shoulders and made her look even more desolate than
before.  But there was an invincible need of gaiety in her heart.  She
said funnily, looking at the arrow sparkling in the gas light:

“Ah!  That poor philistinish ornament!”

An echo of our early days, not more innocent but so much more youthful,
was in her tone; and we both, as if touched with poignant regret, looked
at each other with enlightened eyes.

“Yes,” I said, “how far away all this is.  And you wouldn’t leave even
that object behind when you came last in here.  Perhaps it is for that
reason it haunted me—mostly at night.  I dreamed of you sometimes as a
huntress nymph gleaming white through the foliage and throwing this arrow
like a dart straight at my heart.  But it never reached it.  It always
fell at my feet as I woke up.  The huntress never meant to strike down
that particular quarry.”

“The huntress was wild but she was not evil.  And she was no nymph, but
only a goatherd girl.  Dream of her no more, my dear.”

I had the strength of mind to make a sign of assent and busied myself
arranging a couple of pillows at one end of the sofa.  “Upon my soul,
goatherd, you are not responsible,” I said.  “You are not!  Lay down that
uneasy head,” I continued, forcing a half-playful note into my immense
sadness, “that has even dreamed of a crown—but not for itself.”

She lay down quietly.  I covered her up, looked once into her eyes and
felt the restlessness of fatigue over-power me so that I wanted to
stagger out, walk straight before me, stagger on and on till I dropped.
In the end I lost myself in thought.  I woke with a start to her voice
saying positively:

“No.  Not even in this room.  I can’t close my eyes.  Impossible.  I have
a horror of myself.  That voice in my ears.  All true.  All true.”

She was sitting up, two masses of tawny hair fell on each side of her
tense face.  I threw away the pillows from which she had risen and sat
down behind her on the couch.  “Perhaps like this,” I suggested, drawing
her head gently on my breast.  She didn’t resist, she didn’t even sigh,
she didn’t look at me or attempt to settle herself in any way.  It was I
who settled her after taking up a position which I thought I should be
able to keep for hours—for ages.  After a time I grew composed enough to
become aware of the ticking of the clock, even to take pleasure in it.
The beat recorded the moments of her rest, while I sat, keeping as still
as if my life depended upon it with my eyes fixed idly on the arrow of
gold gleaming and glittering dimly on the table under the lowered
gas-jet.  And presently my breathing fell into the quiet rhythm of the
sleep which descended on her at last.  My thought was that now nothing
mattered in the world because I had the world safe resting in my arms—or
was it in my heart?

Suddenly my heart seemed torn in two within my breast and half of my
breath knocked out of me.  It was a tumultuous awakening.  The day had
come.  Doña Rita had opened her eyes, found herself in my arms, and
instantly had flung herself out of them with one sudden effort.  I saw
her already standing in the filtered sunshine of the closed shutters,
with all the childlike horror and shame of that night vibrating afresh in
the awakened body of the woman.

“Daylight,” she whispered in an appalled voice.  “Don’t look at me,
George.  I can’t face daylight.  No—not with you.  Before we set eyes on
each other all that past was like nothing.  I had crushed it all in my
new pride.  Nothing could touch the Rita whose hand was kissed by you.
But now!  Never in daylight.”

I sat there stupid with surprise and grief.  This was no longer the
adventure of venturesome children in a nursery-book.  A grown man’s
bitterness, informed, suspicious, resembling hatred, welled out of my
heart.

“All this means that you are going to desert me again?” I said with
contempt.  “All right.  I won’t throw stones after you . . . Are you
going, then?”

She lowered her head slowly with a backward gesture of her arm as if to
keep me off, for I had sprung to my feet all at once as if mad.

“Then go quickly,” I said.  “You are afraid of living flesh and blood.
What are you running after?  Honesty, as you say, or some distinguished
carcass to feed your vanity on?  I know how cold you can be—and yet live.
What have I done to you?  You go to sleep in my arms, wake up and go
away.  Is it to impress me?  Charlatanism of character, my dear.”

She stepped forward on her bare feet as firm on that floor which seemed
to heave up and down before my eyes as she had ever been—goatherd child
leaping on the rocks of her native hills which she was never to see
again.  I snatched the arrow of gold from the table and threw it after
her.

“Don’t forget this thing,” I cried, “you would never forgive yourself for
leaving it behind.”

It struck the back of the fur coat and fell on the floor behind her.  She
never looked round.  She walked to the door, opened it without haste, and
on the landing in the diffused light from the ground-glass skylight there
appeared, rigid, like an implacable and obscure fate, the awful
Therese—waiting for her sister.  The heavy ends of a big black shawl
thrown over her head hung massively in biblical folds.  With a faint cry
of dismay Doña Rita stopped just within my room.

The two women faced each other for a few moments silently.  Therese spoke
first.  There was no austerity in her tone.  Her voice was as usual,
pertinacious, unfeeling, with a slight plaint in it; terrible in its
unchanged purpose.

“I have been standing here before this door all night,” she said.  “I
don’t know how I lived through it.  I thought I would die a hundred times
for shame.  So that’s how you are spending your time?  You are worse than
shameless.  But God may still forgive you.  You have a soul.  You are my
sister.  I will never abandon you—till you die.”

“What is it?” Doña Rita was heard wistfully, “my soul or this house that
you won’t abandon.”

“Come out and bow your head in humiliation.  I am your sister and I shall
help you to pray to God and all the Saints.  Come away from that poor
young gentleman who like all the others can have nothing but contempt and
disgust for you in his heart.  Come and hide your head where no one will
reproach you—but I, your sister.  Come out and beat your breast: come,
poor Sinner, and let me kiss you, for you are my sister!”

While Therese was speaking Doña Rita stepped back a pace and as the other
moved forward still extending the hand of sisterly love, she slammed the
door in Therese’s face.  “You abominable girl!” she cried fiercely.  Then
she turned about and walked towards me who had not moved.  I felt hardly
alive but for the cruel pain that possessed my whole being.  On the way
she stooped to pick up the arrow of gold and then moved on quicker,
holding it out to me in her open palm.

“You thought I wouldn’t give it to you.  _Amigo_, I wanted nothing so
much as to give it to you.  And now, perhaps—you will take it.”

“Not without the woman,” I said sombrely.

“Take it,” she said.  “I haven’t the courage to deliver myself up to
Therese.  No.  Not even for your sake.  Don’t you think I have been
miserable enough yet?”

I snatched the arrow out of her hand then and ridiculously pressed it to
my breast; but as I opened my lips she who knew what was struggling for
utterance in my heart cried in a ringing tone:

“Speak no words of love, George!  Not yet.  Not in this house of ill-luck
and falsehood.  Not within a hundred miles of this house, where they came
clinging to me all profaned from the mouth of that man.  Haven’t you
heard them—the horrible things?  And what can words have to do between
you and me?”

Her hands were stretched out imploringly, I said, childishly
disconcerted:

“But, Rita, how can I help using words of love to you?  They come of
themselves on my lips!”

“They come!  Ah!  But I shall seal your lips with the thing itself,” she
said.  “Like this. . . ”




SECOND NOTE


The narrative of our man goes on for some six months more, from this, the
last night of the Carnival season up to and beyond the season of roses.
The tone of it is much less of exultation than might have been expected.
Love as is well known having nothing to do with reason, being insensible
to forebodings and even blind to evidence, the surrender of those two
beings to a precarious bliss has nothing very astonishing in itself; and
its portrayal, as he attempts it, lacks dramatic interest.  The
sentimental interest could only have a fascination for readers themselves
actually in love.  The response of a reader depends on the mood of the
moment, so much so that a book may seem extremely interesting when read
late at night, but might appear merely a lot of vapid verbiage in the
morning.  My conviction is that the mood in which the continuation of his
story would appear sympathetic is very rare.  This consideration has
induced me to suppress it—all but the actual facts which round up the
previous events and satisfy such curiosity as might have been aroused by
the foregoing narrative.

It is to be remarked that this period is characterized more by a deep and
joyous tenderness than by sheer passion.  All fierceness of spirit seems
to have burnt itself out in their preliminary hesitations and struggles
against each other and themselves.  Whether love in its entirety has,
speaking generally, the same elementary meaning for women as for men, is
very doubtful.  Civilization has been at work there.  But the fact is
that those two display, in every phase of discovery and response, an
exact accord.  Both show themselves amazingly ingenuous in the practice
of sentiment.  I believe that those who know women won’t be surprised to
hear me say that she was as new to love as he was.  During their retreat
in the region of the Maritime Alps, in a small house built of dry stones
and embowered with roses, they appear all through to be less like
released lovers than as companions who had found out each other’s fitness
in a specially intense way.  Upon the whole, I think that there must be
some truth in his insistence of there having always been something
childlike in their relation.  In the unreserved and instant sharing of
all thoughts, all impressions, all sensations, we see the naïveness of a
children’s foolhardy adventure.  This unreserved expressed for him the
whole truth of the situation.  With her it may have been different.  It
might have been assumed; yet nobody is altogether a comedian; and even
comedians themselves have got to believe in the part they play.  Of the
two she appears much the more assured and confident.  But if in this she
was a comedienne then it was but a great achievement of her ineradicable
honesty.  Having once renounced her honourable scruples she took good
care that he should taste no flavour of misgivings in the cup.  Being
older it was she who imparted its character to the situation.  As to the
man if he had any superiority of his own it was simply the superiority of
him who loves with the greater self-surrender.

This is what appears from the pages I have discreetly suppressed—partly
out of regard for the pages themselves.  In every, even terrestrial,
mystery there is as it were a sacred core.  A sustained commentary on
love is not fit for every eye.  A universal experience is exactly the
sort of thing which is most difficult to appraise justly in a particular
instance.

How this particular instance affected Rose, who was the only companion of
the two hermits in their rose-embowered hut of stones, I regret not to be
able to report; but I will venture to say that for reasons on which I
need not enlarge, the girl could not have been very reassured by what she
saw.  It seems to me that her devotion could never be appeased; for the
conviction must have been growing on her that, no matter what happened,
Madame could never have any friends.  It may be that Doña Rita had given
her a glimpse of the unavoidable end, and that the girl’s tarnished eyes
masked a certain amount of apprehensive, helpless desolation.

What meantime was becoming of the fortune of Henry Allègre is another
curious question.  We have been told that it was too big to be tied up in
a sack and thrown into the sea.  That part of it represented by the
fabulous collections was still being protected by the police.  But for
the rest, it may be assumed that its power and significance were lost to
an interested world for something like six months.  What is certain is
that the late Henry Allègre’s man of affairs found himself comparatively
idle.  The holiday must have done much good to his harassed brain.  He
had received a note from Doña Rita saying that she had gone into retreat
and that she did not mean to send him her address, not being in the
humour to be worried with letters on any subject whatever.  “It’s enough
for you”—she wrote—“to know that I am alive.”  Later, at irregular
intervals, he received scraps of paper bearing the stamps of various post
offices and containing the simple statement: “I am still alive,” signed
with an enormous, flourished exuberant R.  I imagine Rose had to travel
some distances by rail to post those messages.  A thick veil of secrecy
had been lowered between the world and the lovers; yet even this veil
turned out not altogether impenetrable.

He—it would be convenient to call him Monsieur George to the end—shared
with Doña Rita her perfect detachment from all mundane affairs; but he
had to make two short visits to Marseilles.  The first was prompted by
his loyal affection for Dominic.  He wanted to discover what had happened
or was happening to Dominic and to find out whether he could do something
for that man.  But Dominic was not the sort of person for whom one can do
much.  Monsieur George did not even see him.  It looked uncommonly as if
Dominic’s heart were broken.  Monsieur George remained concealed for
twenty-four hours in the very house in which Madame Léonore had her café.
He spent most of that time in conversing with Madame Léonore about
Dominic.  She was distressed, but her mind was made up.  That
bright-eyed, nonchalant, and passionate woman was making arrangements to
dispose of her café before departing to join Dominic.  She would not say
where.  Having ascertained that his assistance was not required Monsieur
George, in his own words, “managed to sneak out of the town without being
seen by a single soul that mattered.”

The second occasion was very prosaic and shockingly incongruous with the
super-mundane colouring of these days.  He had neither the fortune of
Henry Allègre nor a man of affairs of his own.  But some rent had to be
paid to somebody for the stone hut and Rose could not go marketing in the
tiny hamlet at the foot of the hill without a little money.  There came a
time when Monsieur George had to descend from the heights of his love in
order, in his own words, “to get a supply of cash.”  As he had
disappeared very suddenly and completely for a time from the eyes of
mankind it was necessary that he should show himself and sign some
papers.  That business was transacted in the office of the banker
mentioned in the story.  Monsieur George wished to avoid seeing the man
himself but in this he did not succeed.  The interview was short.  The
banker naturally asked no questions, made no allusions to persons and
events, and didn’t even mention the great Legitimist Principle which
presented to him now no interest whatever.  But for the moment all the
world was talking of the Carlist enterprise.  It had collapsed utterly,
leaving behind, as usual, a large crop of recriminations, charges of
incompetency and treachery, and a certain amount of scandalous gossip.
The banker (his wife’s salon had been very Carlist indeed) declared that
he had never believed in the success of the cause.  “You are well out of
it,” he remarked with a chilly smile to Monsieur George.  The latter
merely observed that he had been very little “in it” as a matter of fact,
and that he was quite indifferent to the whole affair.

“You left a few of your feathers in it, nevertheless,” the banker
concluded with a wooden face and with the curtness of a man who knows.

Monsieur George ought to have taken the very next train out of the town
but he yielded to the temptation to discover what had happened to the
house in the street of the Consuls after he and Doña Rita had stolen out
of it like two scared yet jubilant children.  All he discovered was a
strange, fat woman, a sort of virago, who had, apparently, been put in as
a caretaker by the man of affairs.  She made some difficulties to admit
that she had been in charge for the last four months; ever since the
person who was there before had eloped with some Spaniard who had been
lying in the house ill with fever for more than six weeks.  No, she never
saw the person.  Neither had she seen the Spaniard.  She had only heard
the talk of the street.  Of course she didn’t know where these people had
gone.  She manifested some impatience to get rid of Monsieur George and
even attempted to push him towards the door.  It was, he says, a very
funny experience.  He noticed the feeble flame of the gas-jet in the hall
still waiting for extinction in the general collapse of the world.

Then he decided to have a bit of dinner at the Restaurant de la Gare
where he felt pretty certain he would not meet any of his friends.  He
could not have asked Madame Léonore for hospitality because Madame
Léonore had gone away already.  His acquaintances were not the sort of
people likely to happen casually into a restaurant of that kind and
moreover he took the precaution to seat himself at a small table so as to
face the wall.  Yet before long he felt a hand laid gently on his
shoulder, and, looking up, saw one of his acquaintances, a member of the
Royalist club, a young man of a very cheerful disposition but whose face
looked down at him with a grave and anxious expression.

Monsieur George was far from delighted.  His surprise was extreme when in
the course of the first phrases exchanged with him he learned that this
acquaintance had come to the station with the hope of finding him there.

“You haven’t been seen for some time,” he said.  “You were perhaps
somewhere where the news from the world couldn’t reach you?  There have
been many changes amongst our friends and amongst people one used to hear
of so much.  There is Madame de Lastaola for instance, who seems to have
vanished from the world which was so much interested in her.  You have no
idea where she may be now?”

Monsieur George remarked grumpily that he couldn’t say.

The other tried to appear at ease.  Tongues were wagging about it in
Paris.  There was a sort of international financier, a fellow with an
Italian name, a shady personality, who had been looking for her all over
Europe and talked in clubs—astonishing how such fellows get into the best
clubs—oh! Azzolati was his name.  But perhaps what a fellow like that
said did not matter.  The funniest thing was that there was no man of any
position in the world who had disappeared at the same time.  A friend in
Paris wrote to him that a certain well-known journalist had rushed South
to investigate the mystery but had returned no wiser than he went.

Monsieur George remarked more unamiably than before that he really could
not help all that.

“No,” said the other with extreme gentleness, “only of all the people
more or less connected with the Carlist affair you are the only one that
had also disappeared before the final collapse.”

“What!” cried Monsieur George.

“Just so,” said the other meaningly.  “You know that all my people like
you very much, though they hold various opinions as to your discretion.
Only the other day Jane, you know my married sister, and I were talking
about you.  She was extremely distressed.  I assured her that you must be
very far away or very deeply buried somewhere not to have given a sign of
life under this provocation.”

Naturally Monsieur George wanted to know what it was all about; and the
other appeared greatly relieved.

“I was sure you couldn’t have heard.  I don’t want to be indiscreet, I
don’t want to ask you where you were.  It came to my ears that you had
been seen at the bank to-day and I made a special effort to lay hold of
you before you vanished again; for, after all, we have been always good
friends and all our lot here liked you very much.  Listen.  You know a
certain Captain Blunt, don’t you?”

Monsieur George owned to knowing Captain Blunt but only very slightly.
His friend then informed him that this Captain Blunt was apparently well
acquainted with Madame de Lastaola, or, at any rate, pretended to be.  He
was an honourable man, a member of a good club, he was very Parisian in a
way, and all this, he continued, made all the worse that of which he was
under the painful necessity of warning Monsieur George.  This Blunt on
three distinct occasions when the name of Madame de Lastaola came up in
conversation in a mixed company of men had expressed his regret that she
should have become the prey of a young adventurer who was exploiting her
shamelessly.  He talked like a man certain of his facts and as he
mentioned names . . .

“In fact,” the young man burst out excitedly, “it is your name that he
mentions.  And in order to fix the exact personality he always takes care
to add that you are that young fellow who was known as Monsieur George
all over the South amongst the initiated Carlists.”

How Blunt had got enough information to base that atrocious calumny upon,
Monsieur George couldn’t imagine.  But there it was.  He kept silent in
his indignation till his friend murmured, “I expect you will want him to
know that you are here.”

“Yes,” said Monsieur George, “and I hope you will consent to act for me
altogether.  First of all, pray, let him know by wire that I am waiting
for him.  This will be enough to fetch him down here, I can assure you.
You may ask him also to bring two friends with him.  I don’t intend this
to be an affair for Parisian journalists to write paragraphs about.”

“Yes.  That sort of thing must be stopped at once,” the other admitted.
He assented to Monsieur George’s request that the meeting should be
arranged for at his elder brother’s country place where the family stayed
very seldom.  There was a most convenient walled garden there.  And then
Monsieur George caught his train promising to be back on the fourth day
and leaving all further arrangements to his friend.  He prided himself on
his impenetrability before Doña Rita; on the happiness without a shadow
of those four days.  However, Doña Rita must have had the intuition of
there being something in the wind, because on the evening of the very
same day on which he left her again on some pretence or other, she was
already ensconced in the house in the street of the Consuls, with the
trustworthy Rose scouting all over the town to gain information.

Of the proceedings in the walled garden there is no need to speak in
detail.  They were conventionally correct, but an earnestness of purpose
which could be felt in the very air lifted the business above the common
run of affairs of honour.  One bit of byplay unnoticed by the seconds,
very busy for the moment with their arrangements, must be mentioned.
Disregarding the severe rules of conduct in such cases Monsieur George
approached his adversary and addressed him directly.

“Captain Blunt,” he said, “the result of this meeting may go against me.
In that case you will recognize publicly that you were wrong.  For you
are wrong and you know it.  May I trust your honour?”

In answer to that appeal Captain Blunt, always correct, didn’t open his
lips but only made a little bow.  For the rest he was perfectly ruthless.
If he was utterly incapable of being carried away by love there was
nothing equivocal about his jealousy.  Such psychology is not very rare
and really from the point of view of the combat itself one cannot very
well blame him.  What happened was this.  Monsieur George fired on the
word and, whether luck or skill, managed to hit Captain Blunt in the
upper part of the arm which was holding the pistol.  That gentleman’s arm
dropped powerless by his side.  But he did not drop his weapon.  There
was nothing equivocal about his determination.  With the greatest
deliberation he reached with his left hand for his pistol and taking
careful aim shot Monsieur George through the left side of his breast.
One may imagine the consternation of the four seconds and the activity of
the two surgeons in the confined, drowsy heat of that walled garden.  It
was within an easy drive of the town and as Monsieur George was being
conveyed there at a walking pace a little brougham coming from the
opposite direction pulled up at the side of the road.  A thickly veiled
woman’s head looked out of the window, took in the state of affairs at a
glance, and called out in a firm voice: “Follow my carriage.”  The
brougham turning round took the lead.  Long before this convoy reached
the town another carriage containing four gentlemen (of whom one was
leaning back languidly with his arm in a sling) whisked past and vanished
ahead in a cloud of white, Provençal dust.  And this is the last
appearance of Captain Blunt in Monsieur George’s narrative.  Of course he
was only told of it later.  At the time he was not in a condition to
notice things.  Its interest in his surroundings remained of a hazy and
nightmarish kind for many days together.  From time to time he had the
impression that he was in a room strangely familiar to him, that he had
unsatisfactory visions of Doña Rita, to whom he tried to speak as if
nothing had happened, but that she always put her hand on his mouth to
prevent him and then spoke to him herself in a very strange voice which
sometimes resembled the voice of Rose.  The face, too, sometimes
resembled the face of Rose.  There were also one or two men’s faces which
he seemed to know well enough though he didn’t recall their names.  He
could have done so with a slight effort, but it would have been too much
trouble.  Then came a time when the hallucinations of Doña Rita and the
faithful Rose left him altogether.  Next came a period, perhaps a year,
or perhaps an hour, during which he seemed to dream all through his past
life.  He felt no apprehension, he didn’t try to speculate as to the
future.  He felt that all possible conclusions were out of his power, and
therefore he was indifferent to everything.  He was like that dream’s
disinterested spectator who doesn’t know what is going to happen next.
Suddenly for the first time in his life he had the soul-satisfying
consciousness of floating off into deep slumber.

When he woke up after an hour, or a day, or a month, there was dusk in
the room; but he recognized it perfectly.  It was his apartment in Doña
Rita’s house; those were the familiar surroundings in which he had so
often told himself that he must either die or go mad.  But now he felt
perfectly clear-headed and the full sensation of being alive came all
over him, languidly delicious.  The greatest beauty of it was that there
was no need to move.  This gave him a sort of moral satisfaction.  Then
the first thought independent of personal sensations came into his head.
He wondered when Therese would come in and begin talking.  He saw vaguely
a human figure in the room but that was a man.  He was speaking in a
deadened voice which had yet a preternatural distinctness.

“This is the second case I have had in this house, and I am sure that
directly or indirectly it was connected with that woman.  She will go on
like this leaving a track behind her and then some day there will be
really a corpse.  This young fellow might have been it.”

“In this case, Doctor,” said another voice, “one can’t blame the woman
very much.  I assure you she made a very determined fight.”

“What do you mean?  That she didn’t want to. . . ”

“Yes.  A very good fight.  I heard all about it.  It is easy to blame
her, but, as she asked me despairingly, could she go through life veiled
from head to foot or go out of it altogether into a convent?  No, she
isn’t guilty.  She is simply—what she is.”

“And what’s that?”

“Very much of a woman.  Perhaps a little more at the mercy of
contradictory impulses than other women.  But that’s not her fault.  I
really think she has been very honest.”

The voices sank suddenly to a still lower murmur and presently the shape
of the man went out of the room.  Monsieur George heard distinctly the
door open and shut.  Then he spoke for the first time, discovering, with
a particular pleasure, that it was quite easy to speak.  He was even
under the impression that he had shouted:

“Who is here?”

From the shadow of the room (he recognized at once the characteristic
outlines of the bulky shape) Mills advanced to the side of the bed.  Doña
Rita had telegraphed to him on the day of the duel and the man of books,
leaving his retreat, had come as fast as boats and trains could carry him
South.  For, as he said later to Monsieur George, he had become fully
awake to his part of responsibility.  And he added: “It was not of you
alone that I was thinking.”  But the very first question that Monsieur
George put to him was:

“How long is it since I saw you last?”

“Something like ten months,” answered Mills’ kindly voice.

“Ah!  Is Therese outside the door?  She stood there all night, you know.”

“Yes, I heard of it.  She is hundreds of miles away now.”

“Well, then, ask Rita to come in.”

“I can’t do that, my dear boy,” said Mills with affectionate gentleness.
He hesitated a moment.  “Doña Rita went away yesterday,” he said softly.

“Went away?  Why?” asked Monsieur George.

“Because, I am thankful to say, your life is no longer in danger.  And I
have told you that she is gone because, strange as it may seem, I believe
you can stand this news better now than later when you get stronger.”

It must be believed that Mills was right.  Monsieur George fell asleep
before he could feel any pang at that intelligence.  A sort of confused
surprise was in his mind but nothing else, and then his eyes closed.  The
awakening was another matter.  But that, too, Mills had foreseen.  For
days he attended the bedside patiently letting the man in the bed talk to
him of Doña Rita but saying little himself; till one day he was asked
pointedly whether she had ever talked to him openly.  And then he said
that she had, on more than one occasion.  “She told me amongst other
things,” Mills said, “if this is any satisfaction to you to know, that
till she met you she knew nothing of love.  That you were to her in more
senses than one a complete revelation.”

“And then she went away.  Ran away from the revelation,” said the man in
the bed bitterly.

“What’s the good of being angry?” remonstrated Mills, gently.  “You know
that this world is not a world for lovers, not even for such lovers as
you two who have nothing to do with the world as it is.  No, a world of
lovers would be impossible.  It would be a mere ruin of lives which seem
to be meant for something else.  What this something is, I don’t know;
and I am certain,” he said with playful compassion, “that she and you
will never find out.”

A few days later they were again talking of Doña Rita Mills said:

“Before she left the house she gave me that arrow she used to wear in her
hair to hand over to you as a keepsake and also to prevent you, she said,
from dreaming of her.  This message sounds rather cryptic.”

“Oh, I understand perfectly,” said Monsieur George.  “Don’t give me the
thing now.  Leave it somewhere where I can find it some day when I am
alone.  But when you write to her you may tell her that now at last—surer
than Mr. Blunt’s bullet—the arrow has found its mark.  There will be no
more dreaming.  Tell her.  She will understand.”

“I don’t even know where she is,” murmured Mills.

“No, but her man of affairs knows. . . . Tell me, Mills, what will become
of her?”

“She will be wasted,” said Mills sadly.  “She is a most unfortunate
creature.  Not even poverty could save her now.  She cannot go back to
her goats.  Yet who can tell?  She may find something in life.  She may!
It won’t be love.  She has sacrificed that chance to the integrity of
your life—heroically.  Do you remember telling her once that you meant to
live your life integrally—oh, you lawless young pedant!  Well, she is
gone; but you may be sure that whatever she finds now in life it will not
be peace.  You understand me?  Not even in a convent.”

“She was supremely lovable,” said the wounded man, speaking of her as if
she were lying dead already on his oppressed heart.

“And elusive,” struck in Mills in a low voice.  “Some of them are like
that.  She will never change.  Amid all the shames and shadows of that
life there will always lie the ray of her perfect honesty.  I don’t know
about your honesty, but yours will be the easier lot.  You will always
have your . . . other love—you pig-headed enthusiast of the sea.”

“Then let me go to it,” cried the enthusiast.  “Let me go to it.”

He went to it as soon as he had strength enough to feel the crushing
weight of his loss (or his gain) fully, and discovered that he could bear
it without flinching.  After this discovery he was fit to face anything.
He tells his correspondent that if he had been more romantic he would
never have looked at any other woman.  But on the contrary.  No face
worthy of attention escaped him.  He looked at them all; and each
reminded him of Doña Rita, either by some profound resemblance or by the
startling force of contrast.

The faithful austerity of the sea protected him from the rumours that fly
on the tongues of men.  He never heard of her.  Even the echoes of the
sale of the great Allègre collection failed to reach him.  And that event
must have made noise enough in the world.  But he never heard.  He does
not know.  Then, years later, he was deprived even of the arrow.  It was
lost to him in a stormy catastrophe; and he confesses that next day he
stood on a rocky, wind-assaulted shore, looking at the seas raging over
the very spot of his loss and thought that it was well.  It was not a
thing that one could leave behind one for strange hands—for the cold eyes
of ignorance.  Like the old King of Thule with the gold goblet of his
mistress he would have had to cast it into the sea, before he died.  He
says he smiled at the romantic notion.  But what else could he have done
with it?





The Mirror of the Sea




Contents:


I.       Landfalls and Departures
IV.      Emblems of Hope
VII.     The Fine Art
X.       Cobwebs and Gossamer
XIII.    The Weight of the Burden
XVI.     Overdue and Missing
XX.      The Grip of the Land
XXII.    The Character of the Foe
XXV.     Rules of East and West
XXX.     The Faithful River
XXXIII.  In Captivity
XXXV.    Initiation
XXXVII.  The Nursery of the Craft
XL.      The Tremolino
XLVI.    The Heroic Age



CHAPTER I.



"And shippes by the brinke comen and gon,
And in swich forme endure a day or two."
The Frankeleyn's Tale.


Landfall and Departure mark the rhythmical swing of a seaman's life
and of a ship's career.  From land to land is the most concise
definition of a ship's earthly fate.

A "Departure" is not what a vain people of landsmen may think.  The
term "Landfall" is more easily understood; you fall in with the
land, and it is a matter of a quick eye and of a clear atmosphere.
The Departure is not the ship's going away from her port any more
than the Landfall can be looked upon as the synonym of arrival.
But there is this difference in the Departure:  that the term does
not imply so much a sea event as a definite act entailing a
process--the precise observation of certain landmarks by means of
the compass card.

Your Landfall, be it a peculiarly-shaped mountain, a rocky
headland, or a stretch of sand-dunes, you meet at first with a
single glance.  Further recognition will follow in due course; but
essentially a Landfall, good or bad, is made and done with at the
first cry of "Land ho!"  The Departure is distinctly a ceremony of
navigation.  A ship may have left her port some time before; she
may have been at sea, in the fullest sense of the phrase, for days;
but, for all that, as long as the coast she was about to leave
remained in sight, a southern-going ship of yesterday had not in
the sailor's sense begun the enterprise of a passage.

The taking of Departure, if not the last sight of the land, is,
perhaps, the last professional recognition of the land on the part
of a sailor.  It is the technical, as distinguished from the
sentimental, "good-bye."  Henceforth he has done with the coast
astern of his ship.  It is a matter personal to the man.  It is not
the ship that takes her departure; the seaman takes his Departure
by means of cross-bearings which fix the place of the first tiny
pencil-cross on the white expanse of the track-chart, where the
ship's position at noon shall be marked by just such another tiny
pencil cross for every day of her passage.  And there may be sixty,
eighty, any number of these crosses on the ship's track from land
to land.  The greatest number in my experience was a hundred and
thirty of such crosses from the pilot station at the Sand Heads in
the Bay of Bengal to the Scilly's light.  A bad passage. . .

A Departure, the last professional sight of land, is always good,
or at least good enough.  For, even if the weather be thick, it
does not matter much to a ship having all the open sea before her
bows.  A Landfall may be good or bad.  You encompass the earth with
one particular spot of it in your eye.  In all the devious tracings
the course of a sailing-ship leaves upon the white paper of a chart
she is always aiming for that one little spot--maybe a small island
in the ocean, a single headland upon the long coast of a continent,
a lighthouse on a bluff, or simply the peaked form of a mountain
like an ant-heap afloat upon the waters.  But if you have sighted
it on the expected bearing, then that Landfall is good.  Fogs,
snowstorms, gales thick with clouds and rain--those are the enemies
of good Landfalls.



II.



Some commanders of ships take their Departure from the home coast
sadly, in a spirit of grief and discontent.  They have a wife,
children perhaps, some affection at any rate, or perhaps only some
pet vice, that must be left behind for a year or more.  I remember
only one man who walked his deck with a springy step, and gave the
first course of the passage in an elated voice.  But he, as I
learned afterwards, was leaving nothing behind him, except a welter
of debts and threats of legal proceedings.

On the other hand, I have known many captains who, directly their
ship had left the narrow waters of the Channel, would disappear
from the sight of their ship's company altogether for some three
days or more.  They would take a long dive, as it were, into their
state-room, only to emerge a few days afterwards with a more or
less serene brow.  Those were the men easy to get on with.
Besides, such a complete retirement seemed to imply a satisfactory
amount of trust in their officers, and to be trusted displeases no
seaman worthy of the name.

On my first voyage as chief mate with good Captain MacW- I remember
that I felt quite flattered, and went blithely about my duties,
myself a commander for all practical purposes.  Still, whatever the
greatness of my illusion, the fact remained that the real commander
was there, backing up my self-confidence, though invisible to my
eyes behind a maple-wood veneered cabin-door with a white china
handle.

That is the time, after your Departure is taken, when the spirit of
your commander communes with you in a muffled voice, as if from the
sanctum sanctorum of a temple; because, call her a temple or a
"hell afloat"--as some ships have been called--the captain's state-
room is surely the august place in every vessel.

The good MacW- would not even come out to his meals, and fed
solitarily in his holy of holies from a tray covered with a white
napkin.  Our steward used to bend an ironic glance at the perfectly
empty plates he was bringing out from there.  This grief for his
home, which overcomes so many married seamen, did not deprive
Captain MacW- of his legitimate appetite.  In fact, the steward
would almost invariably come up to me, sitting in the captain's
chair at the head of the table, to say in a grave murmur, "The
captain asks for one more slice of meat and two potatoes."  We, his
officers, could hear him moving about in his berth, or lightly
snoring, or fetching deep sighs, or splashing and blowing in his
bath-room; and we made our reports to him through the keyhole, as
it were.  It was the crowning achievement of his amiable character
that the answers we got were given in a quite mild and friendly
tone.  Some commanders in their periods of seclusion are constantly
grumpy, and seem to resent the mere sound of your voice as an
injury and an insult.

But a grumpy recluse cannot worry his subordinates:  whereas the
man in whom the sense of duty is strong (or, perhaps, only the
sense of self-importance), and who persists in airing on deck his
moroseness all day--and perhaps half the night--becomes a grievous
infliction.  He walks the poop darting gloomy glances, as though he
wished to poison the sea, and snaps your head off savagely whenever
you happen to blunder within earshot.  And these vagaries are the
harder to bear patiently, as becomes a man and an officer, because
no sailor is really good-tempered during the first few days of a
voyage.  There are regrets, memories, the instinctive longing for
the departed idleness, the instinctive hate of all work.  Besides,
things have a knack of going wrong at the start, especially in the
matter of irritating trifles.  And there is the abiding thought of
a whole year of more or less hard life before one, because there
was hardly a southern-going voyage in the yesterday of the sea
which meant anything less than a twelvemonth.  Yes; it needed a few
days after the taking of your departure for a ship's company to
shake down into their places, and for the soothing deep-water ship
routine to establish its beneficent sway.

It is a great doctor for sore hearts and sore heads, too, your
ship's routine, which I have seen soothe--at least for a time--the
most turbulent of spirits.  There is health in it, and peace, and
satisfaction of the accomplished round; for each day of the ship's
life seems to close a circle within the wide ring of the sea
horizon.  It borrows a certain dignity of sameness from the
majestic monotony of the sea.  He who loves the sea loves also the
ship's routine.

Nowhere else than upon the sea do the days, weeks and months fall
away quicker into the past.  They seem to be left astern as easily
as the light air-bubbles in the swirls of the ship's wake, and
vanish into a great silence in which your ship moves on with a sort
of magical effect.  They pass away, the days, the weeks, the
months.  Nothing but a gale can disturb the orderly life of the
ship; and the spell of unshaken monotony that seems to have fallen
upon the very voices of her men is broken only by the near prospect
of a Landfall.

Then is the spirit of the ship's commander stirred strongly again.
But it is not moved to seek seclusion, and to remain, hidden and
inert, shut up in a small cabin with the solace of a good bodily
appetite.  When about to make the land, the spirit of the ship's
commander is tormented by an unconquerable restlessness.  It seems
unable to abide for many seconds together in the holy of holies of
the captain's state-room; it will out on deck and gaze ahead,
through straining eyes, as the appointed moment comes nearer.  It
is kept vigorously upon the stretch of excessive vigilance.
Meantime the body of the ship's commander is being enfeebled by
want of appetite; at least, such is my experience, though
"enfeebled" is perhaps not exactly the word.  I might say, rather,
that it is spiritualized by a disregard for food, sleep, and all
the ordinary comforts, such as they are, of sea life.  In one or
two cases I have known that detachment from the grosser needs of
existence remain regrettably incomplete in the matter of drink.

But these two cases were, properly speaking, pathological cases,
and the only two in all my sea experience.  In one of these two
instances of a craving for stimulants, developed from sheer
anxiety, I cannot assert that the man's seaman-like qualities were
impaired in the least.  It was a very anxious case, too, the land
being made suddenly, close-to, on a wrong bearing, in thick
weather, and during a fresh onshore gale.  Going below to speak to
him soon after, I was unlucky enough to catch my captain in the
very act of hasty cork-drawing.  The sight, I may say, gave me an
awful scare.  I was well aware of the morbidly sensitive nature of
the man.  Fortunately, I managed to draw back unseen, and, taking
care to stamp heavily with my sea-boots at the foot of the cabin
stairs, I made my second entry.  But for this unexpected glimpse,
no act of his during the next twenty-four hours could have given me
the slightest suspicion that all was not well with his nerve.



III.



Quite another case, and having nothing to do with drink, was that
of poor Captain B-.  He used to suffer from sick headaches, in his
young days, every time he was approaching a coast.  Well over fifty
years of age when I knew him, short, stout, dignified, perhaps a
little pompous, he was a man of a singularly well-informed mind,
the least sailor-like in outward aspect, but certainly one of the
best seamen whom it has been my good luck to serve under.  He was a
Plymouth man, I think, the son of a country doctor, and both his
elder boys were studying medicine.  He commanded a big London ship,
fairly well known in her day.  I thought no end of him, and that is
why I remember with a peculiar satisfaction the last words he spoke
to me on board his ship after an eighteen months' voyage.  It was
in the dock in Dundee, where we had brought a full cargo of jute
from Calcutta.  We had been paid off that morning, and I had come
on board to take my sea-chest away and to say good-bye.  In his
slightly lofty but courteous way he inquired what were my plans.  I
replied that I intended leaving for London by the afternoon train,
and thought of going up for examination to get my master's
certificate.  I had just enough service for that.  He commended me
for not wasting my time, with such an evident interest in my case
that I was quite surprised; then, rising from his chair, he said:

"Have you a ship in view after you have passed?"

I answered that I had nothing whatever in view.

He shook hands with me, and pronounced the memorable words:

"If you happen to be in want of employment, remember that as long
as I have a ship you have a ship, too."

In the way of compliment there is nothing to beat this from a
ship's captain to his second mate at the end of a voyage, when the
work is over and the subordinate is done with.  And there is a
pathos in that memory, for the poor fellow never went to sea again
after all.  He was already ailing when we passed St. Helena; was
laid up for a time when we were off the Western Islands, but got
out of bed to make his Landfall.  He managed to keep up on deck as
far as the Downs, where, giving his orders in an exhausted voice,
he anchored for a few hours to send a wire to his wife and take
aboard a North Sea pilot to help him sail the ship up the east
coast.  He had not felt equal to the task by himself, for it is the
sort of thing that keeps a deep-water man on his feet pretty well
night and day.

When we arrived in Dundee, Mrs. B- was already there, waiting to
take him home.  We travelled up to London by the same train; but by
the time I had managed to get through with my examination the ship
had sailed on her next voyage without him, and, instead of joining
her again, I went by request to see my old commander in his home.
This is the only one of my captains I have ever visited in that
way.  He was out of bed by then, "quite convalescent," as he
declared, making a few tottering steps to meet me at the sitting-
room door.  Evidently he was reluctant to take his final cross-
bearings of this earth for a Departure on the only voyage to an
unknown destination a sailor ever undertakes.  And it was all very
nice--the large, sunny room; his deep, easy-chair in a bow window,
with pillows and a footstool; the quiet, watchful care of the
elderly, gentle woman who had borne him five children, and had not,
perhaps, lived with him more than five full years out of the thirty
or so of their married life.  There was also another woman there in
a plain black dress, quite gray-haired, sitting very erect on her
chair with some sewing, from which she snatched side-glances in his
direction, and uttering not a single word during all the time of my
call.  Even when, in due course, I carried over to her a cup of
tea, she only nodded at me silently, with the faintest ghost of a
smile on her tight-set lips.  I imagine she must have been a maiden
sister of Mrs. B- come to help nurse her brother-in-law.  His
youngest boy, a late-comer, a great cricketer it seemed, twelve
years old or thereabouts, chattered enthusiastically of the
exploits of W. G. Grace.  And I remember his eldest son, too, a
newly-fledged doctor, who took me out to smoke in the garden, and,
shaking his head with professional gravity, but with genuine
concern, muttered:  "Yes, but he doesn't get back his appetite.  I
don't like that--I don't like that at all."  The last sight of
Captain B- I had was as he nodded his head to me out of the bow
window when I turned round to close the front gate.

It was a distinct and complete impression, something that I don't
know whether to call a Landfall or a Departure.  Certainly he had
gazed at times very fixedly before him with the Landfall's vigilant
look, this sea-captain seated incongruously in a deep-backed chair.
He had not then talked to me of employment, of ships, of being
ready to take another command; but he had discoursed of his early
days, in the abundant but thin flow of a wilful invalid's talk.
The women looked worried, but sat still, and I learned more of him
in that interview than in the whole eighteen months we had sailed
together.  It appeared he had "served his time" in the copper-ore
trade, the famous copper-ore trade of old days between Swansea and
the Chilian coast, coal out and ore in, deep-loaded both ways, as
if in wanton defiance of the great Cape Horn seas--a work, this,
for staunch ships, and a great school of staunchness for West-
Country seamen.  A whole fleet of copper-bottomed barques, as
strong in rib and planking, as well-found in gear, as ever was sent
upon the seas, manned by hardy crews and commanded by young
masters, was engaged in that now long defunct trade.  "That was the
school I was trained in," he said to me almost boastfully, lying
back amongst his pillows with a rug over his legs.  And it was in
that trade that he obtained his first command at a very early age.
It was then that he mentioned to me how, as a young commander, he
was always ill for a few days before making land after a long
passage.  But this sort of sickness used to pass off with the first
sight of a familiar landmark.  Afterwards, he added, as he grew
older, all that nervousness wore off completely; and I observed his
weary eyes gaze steadily ahead, as if there had been nothing
between him and the straight line of sea and sky, where whatever a
seaman is looking for is first bound to appear.  But I have also
seen his eyes rest fondly upon the faces in the room, upon the
pictures on the wall, upon all the familiar objects of that home,
whose abiding and clear image must have flashed often on his memory
in times of stress and anxiety at sea.  Was he looking out for a
strange Landfall, or taking with an untroubled mind the bearings
for his last Departure?

It is hard to say; for in that voyage from which no man returns
Landfall and Departure are instantaneous, merging together into one
moment of supreme and final attention.  Certainly I do not remember
observing any sign of faltering in the set expression of his wasted
face, no hint of the nervous anxiety of a young commander about to
make land on an uncharted shore.  He had had too much experience of
Departures and Landfalls!  And had he not "served his time" in the
famous copper-ore trade out of the Bristol Channel, the work of the
staunchest ships afloat, and the school of staunch seamen?



IV.



Before an anchor can ever be raised, it must be let go; and this
perfectly obvious truism brings me at once to the subject of the
degradation of the sea language in the daily press of this country.

Your journalist, whether he takes charge of a ship or a fleet,
almost invariably "casts" his anchor.  Now, an anchor is never
cast, and to take a liberty with technical language is a crime
against the clearness, precision, and beauty of perfected speech.

An anchor is a forged piece of iron, admirably adapted to its end,
and technical language is an instrument wrought into perfection by
ages of experience, a flawless thing for its purpose.  An anchor of
yesterday (because nowadays there are contrivances like mushrooms
and things like claws, of no particular expression or shape--just
hooks)--an anchor of yesterday is in its way a most efficient
instrument.  To its perfection its size bears witness, for there is
no other appliance so small for the great work it has to do.  Look
at the anchors hanging from the cat-heads of a big ship!  How tiny
they are in proportion to the great size of the hull!  Were they
made of gold they would look like trinkets, like ornamental toys,
no bigger in proportion than a jewelled drop in a woman's ear.  And
yet upon them will depend, more than once, the very life of the
ship.

An anchor is forged and fashioned for faithfulness; give it ground
that it can bite, and it will hold till the cable parts, and then,
whatever may afterwards befall its ship, that anchor is "lost."
The honest, rough piece of iron, so simple in appearance, has more
parts than the human body has limbs:  the ring, the stock, the
crown, the flukes, the palms, the shank.  All this, according to
the journalist, is "cast" when a ship arriving at an anchorage is
brought up.

This insistence in using the odious word arises from the fact that
a particularly benighted landsman must imagine the act of anchoring
as a process of throwing something overboard, whereas the anchor
ready for its work is already overboard, and is not thrown over,
but simply allowed to fall.  It hangs from the ship's side at the
end of a heavy, projecting timber called the cat-head, in the bight
of a short, thick chain whose end link is suddenly released by a
blow from a top-maul or the pull of a lever when the order is
given.  And the order is not "Heave over!" as the paragraphist
seems to imagine, but "Let go!"

As a matter of fact, nothing is ever cast in that sense on board
ship but the lead, of which a cast is taken to search the depth of
water on which she floats.  A lashed boat, a spare spar, a cask or
what not secured about the decks, is "cast adrift" when it is
untied.  Also the ship herself is "cast to port or starboard" when
getting under way.  She, however, never "casts" her anchor.

To speak with severe technicality, a ship or a fleet is "brought
up"--the complementary words unpronounced and unwritten being, of
course, "to an anchor."  Less technically, but not less correctly,
the word "anchored," with its characteristic appearance and
resolute sound, ought to be good enough for the newspapers of the
greatest maritime country in the world.  "The fleet anchored at
Spithead":  can anyone want a better sentence for brevity and
seamanlike ring?  But the "cast-anchor" trick, with its affectation
of being a sea-phrase--for why not write just as well "threw
anchor," "flung anchor," or "shied anchor"?--is intolerably odious
to a sailor's ear.  I remember a coasting pilot of my early
acquaintance (he used to read the papers assiduously) who, to
define the utmost degree of lubberliness in a landsman, used to
say, "He's one of them poor, miserable 'cast-anchor' devils."



V.



From first to last the seaman's thoughts are very much concerned
with his anchors.  It is not so much that the anchor is a symbol of
hope as that it is the heaviest object that he has to handle on
board his ship at sea in the usual routine of his duties.  The
beginning and the end of every passage are marked distinctly by
work about the ship's anchors.  A vessel in the Channel has her
anchors always ready, her cables shackled on, and the land almost
always in sight.  The anchor and the land are indissolubly
connected in a sailor's thoughts.  But directly she is clear of the
narrow seas, heading out into the world with nothing solid to speak
of between her and the South Pole, the anchors are got in and the
cables disappear from the deck.  But the anchors do not disappear.
Technically speaking, they are "secured in-board"; and, on the
forecastle head, lashed down to ring-bolts with ropes and chains,
under the straining sheets of the head-sails, they look very idle
and as if asleep.  Thus bound, but carefully looked after, inert
and powerful, those emblems of hope make company for the look-out
man in the night watches; and so the days glide by, with a long
rest for those characteristically shaped pieces of iron, reposing
forward, visible from almost every part of the ship's deck, waiting
for their work on the other side of the world somewhere, while the
ship carries them on with a great rush and splutter of foam
underneath, and the sprays of the open sea rust their heavy limbs.

The first approach to the land, as yet invisible to the crew's
eyes, is announced by the brisk order of the chief mate to the
boatswain:  "We will get the anchors over this afternoon" or "first
thing to-morrow morning," as the case may be.  For the chief mate
is the keeper of the ship's anchors and the guardian of her cable.
There are good ships and bad ships, comfortable ships and ships
where, from first day to last of the voyage, there is no rest for a
chief mate's body and soul.  And ships are what men make them:
this is a pronouncement of sailor wisdom, and, no doubt, in the
main it is true.

However, there are ships where, as an old grizzled mate once told
me, "nothing ever seems to go right!"  And, looking from the poop
where we both stood (I had paid him a neighbourly call in dock), he
added:  "She's one of them."  He glanced up at my face, which
expressed a proper professional sympathy, and set me right in my
natural surmise:  "Oh no; the old man's right enough.  He never
interferes.  Anything that's done in a seamanlike way is good
enough for him.  And yet, somehow, nothing ever seems to go right
in this ship.  I tell you what:  she is naturally unhandy."

The "old man," of course, was his captain, who just then came on
deck in a silk hat and brown overcoat, and, with a civil nod to us,
went ashore.  He was certainly not more than thirty, and the
elderly mate, with a murmur to me of "That's my old man," proceeded
to give instances of the natural unhandiness of the ship in a sort
of deprecatory tone, as if to say, "You mustn't think I bear a
grudge against her for that."

The instances do not matter.  The point is that there are ships
where things DO go wrong; but whatever the ship--good or bad, lucky
or unlucky--it is in the forepart of her that her chief mate feels
most at home.  It is emphatically HIS end of the ship, though, of
course, he is the executive supervisor of the whole.  There are HIS
anchors, HIS headgear, his foremast, his station for manoeuvring
when the captain is in charge.  And there, too, live the men, the
ship's hands, whom it is his duty to keep employed, fair weather or
foul, for the ship's welfare.  It is the chief mate, the only
figure of the ship's afterguard, who comes bustling forward at the
cry of "All hands on deck!"  He is the satrap of that province in
the autocratic realm of the ship, and more personally responsible
for anything that may happen there.

There, too, on the approach to the land, assisted by the boatswain
and the carpenter, he "gets the anchors over" with the men of his
own watch, whom he knows better than the others.  There he sees the
cable ranged, the windlass disconnected, the compressors opened;
and there, after giving his own last order, "Stand clear of the
cable!" he waits attentive, in a silent ship that forges slowly
ahead towards her picked-out berth, for the sharp shout from aft,
"Let go!"  Instantly bending over, he sees the trusty iron fall
with a heavy plunge under his eyes, which watch and note whether it
has gone clear.

For the anchor "to go clear" means to go clear of its own chain.
Your anchor must drop from the bow of your ship with no turn of
cable on any of its limbs, else you would be riding to a foul
anchor.  Unless the pull of the cable is fair on the ring, no
anchor can be trusted even on the best of holding ground.  In time
of stress it is bound to drag, for implements and men must be
treated fairly to give you the "virtue" which is in them.  The
anchor is an emblem of hope, but a foul anchor is worse than the
most fallacious of false hopes that ever lured men or nations into
a sense of security.  And the sense of security, even the most
warranted, is a bad councillor.  It is the sense which, like that
exaggerated feeling of well-being ominous of the coming on of
madness, precedes the swift fall of disaster.  A seaman labouring
under an undue sense of security becomes at once worth hardly half
his salt.  Therefore, of all my chief officers, the one I trusted
most was a man called B-.  He had a red moustache, a lean face,
also red, and an uneasy eye.  He was worth all his salt.

On examining now, after many years, the residue of the feeling
which was the outcome of the contact of our personalities, I
discover, without much surprise, a certain flavour of dislike.
Upon the whole, I think he was one of the most uncomfortable
shipmates possible for a young commander.  If it is permissible to
criticise the absent, I should say he had a little too much of the
sense of insecurity which is so invaluable in a seaman.  He had an
extremely disturbing air of being everlastingly ready (even when
seated at table at my right hand before a plate of salt beef) to
grapple with some impending calamity.  I must hasten to add that he
had also the other qualification necessary to make a trustworthy
seaman--that of an absolute confidence in himself.  What was really
wrong with him was that he had these qualities in an unrestful
degree.  His eternally watchful demeanour, his jerky, nervous talk,
even his, as it were, determined silences, seemed to imply--and, I
believe, they did imply--that to his mind the ship was never safe
in my hands.  Such was the man who looked after the anchors of a
less than five-hundred-ton barque, my first command, now gone from
the face of the earth, but sure of a tenderly remembered existence
as long as I live.  No anchor could have gone down foul under Mr.
B-'s piercing eye.  It was good for one to be sure of that when, in
an open roadstead, one heard in the cabin the wind pipe up; but
still, there were moments when I detested Mr. B- exceedingly.  From
the way he used to glare sometimes, I fancy that more than once he
paid me back with interest.  It so happened that we both loved the
little barque very much.  And it was just the defect of Mr. B-'s
inestimable qualities that he would never persuade himself to
believe that the ship was safe in my hands.  To begin with, he was
more than five years older than myself at a time of life when five
years really do count, I being twenty-nine and he thirty-four;
then, on our first leaving port (I don't see why I should make a
secret of the fact that it was Bangkok), a bit of manoeuvring of
mine amongst the islands of the Gulf of Siam had given him an
unforgettable scare.  Ever since then he had nursed in secret a
bitter idea of my utter recklessness.  But upon the whole, and
unless the grip of a man's hand at parting means nothing whatever,
I conclude that we did like each other at the end of two years and
three months well enough.

The bond between us was the ship; and therein a ship, though she
has female attributes and is loved very unreasonably, is different
from a woman.  That I should have been tremendously smitten with my
first command is nothing to wonder at, but I suppose I must admit
that Mr. B-'s sentiment was of a higher order.  Each of us, of
course, was extremely anxious about the good appearance of the
beloved object; and, though I was the one to glean compliments
ashore, B- had the more intimate pride of feeling, resembling that
of a devoted handmaiden.  And that sort of faithful and proud
devotion went so far as to make him go about flicking the dust off
the varnished teak-wood rail of the little craft with a silk
pocket-handkerchief--a present from Mrs. B-, I believe.

That was the effect of his love for the barque.  The effect of his
admirable lack of the sense of security once went so far as to make
him remark to me:  "Well, sir, you ARE a lucky man!"

It was said in a tone full of significance, but not exactly
offensive, and it was, I suppose, my innate tact that prevented my
asking, "What on earth do you mean by that?"

Later on his meaning was illustrated more fully on a dark night in
a tight corner during a dead on-shore gale.  I had called him up on
deck to help me consider our extremely unpleasant situation.  There
was not much time for deep thinking, and his summing-up was:  "It
looks pretty bad, whichever we try; but, then, sir, you always do
get out of a mess somehow."



VI.



It is difficult to disconnect the idea of ships' anchors from the
idea of the ship's chief mate--the man who sees them go down clear
and come up sometimes foul; because not even the most unremitting
care can always prevent a ship, swinging to winds and tide, from
taking an awkward turn of the cable round stock or fluke.  Then the
business of "getting the anchor" and securing it afterwards is
unduly prolonged, and made a weariness to the chief mate.  He is
the man who watches the growth of the cable--a sailor's phrase
which has all the force, precision, and imagery of technical
language that, created by simple men with keen eyes for the real
aspect of the things they see in their trade, achieves the just
expression seizing upon the essential, which is the ambition of the
artist in words.  Therefore the sailor will never say, "cast
anchor," and the ship-master aft will hail his chief mate on the
forecastle in impressionistic phrase:  "How does the cable grow?"
Because "grow" is the right word for the long drift of a cable
emerging aslant under the strain, taut as a bow-string above the
water.  And it is the voice of the keeper of the ship's anchors
that will answer:  "Grows right ahead, sir," or "Broad on the bow,"
or whatever concise and deferential shout will fit the case.

There is no order more noisily given or taken up with lustier
shouts on board a homeward-bound merchant ship than the command,
"Man the windlass!"  The rush of expectant men out of the
forecastle, the snatching of hand-spikes, the tramp of feet, the
clink of the pawls, make a stirring accompaniment to a plaintive
up-anchor song with a roaring chorus; and this burst of noisy
activity from a whole ship's crew seems like a voiceful awakening
of the ship herself, till then, in the picturesque phrase of Dutch
seamen, "lying asleep upon her iron."

For a ship with her sails furled on her squared yards, and
reflected from truck to water-line in the smooth gleaming sheet of
a landlocked harbour, seems, indeed, to a seaman's eye the most
perfect picture of slumbering repose.  The getting of your anchor
was a noisy operation on board a merchant ship of yesterday--an
inspiring, joyous noise, as if, with the emblem of hope, the ship's
company expected to drag up out of the depths, each man all his
personal hopes into the reach of a securing hand--the hope of home,
the hope of rest, of liberty, of dissipation, of hard pleasure,
following the hard endurance of many days between sky and water.
And this noisiness, this exultation at the moment of the ship's
departure, make a tremendous contrast to the silent moments of her
arrival in a foreign roadstead--the silent moments when, stripped
of her sails, she forges ahead to her chosen berth, the loose
canvas fluttering softly in the gear above the heads of the men
standing still upon her decks, the master gazing intently forward
from the break of the poop.  Gradually she loses her way, hardly
moving, with the three figures on her forecastle waiting
attentively about the cat-head for the last order of, perhaps, full
ninety days at sea:  "Let go!"

This is the final word of a ship's ended journey, the closing word
of her toil and of her achievement.  In a life whose worth is told
out in passages from port to port, the splash of the anchor's fall
and the thunderous rumbling of the chain are like the closing of a
distinct period, of which she seems conscious with a slight deep
shudder of all her frame.  By so much is she nearer to her
appointed death, for neither years nor voyages can go on for ever.
It is to her like the striking of a clock, and in the pause which
follows she seems to take count of the passing time.

This is the last important order; the others are mere routine
directions.  Once more the master is heard:  "Give her forty-five
fathom to the water's edge," and then he, too, is done for a time.
For days he leaves all the harbour work to his chief mate, the
keeper of the ship's anchor and of the ship's routine.  For days
his voice will not be heard raised about the decks, with that curt,
austere accent of the man in charge, till, again, when the hatches
are on, and in a silent and expectant ship, he shall speak up from
aft in commanding tones:  "Man the windlass!"



VII.



The other year, looking through a newspaper of sound principles,
but whose staff WILL persist in "casting" anchors and going to sea
"on" a ship (ough!), I came across an article upon the season's
yachting.  And, behold! it was a good article.  To a man who had
but little to do with pleasure sailing (though all sailing is a
pleasure), and certainly nothing whatever with racing in open
waters, the writer's strictures upon the handicapping of yachts
were just intelligible and no more.  And I do not pretend to any
interest in the enumeration of the great races of that year.  As to
the 52-foot linear raters, praised so much by the writer, I am
warmed up by his approval of their performances; but, as far as any
clear conception goes, the descriptive phrase, so precise to the
comprehension of a yachtsman, evokes no definite image in my mind.

The writer praises that class of pleasure vessels, and I am willing
to endorse his words, as any man who loves every craft afloat would
be ready to do.  I am disposed to admire and respect the 52-foot
linear raters on the word of a man who regrets in such a
sympathetic and understanding spirit the threatened decay of
yachting seamanship.

Of course, yacht racing is an organized pastime, a function of
social idleness ministering to the vanity of certain wealthy
inhabitants of these isles nearly as much as to their inborn love
of the sea.  But the writer of the article in question goes on to
point out, with insight and justice, that for a great number of
people (20,000, I think he says) it is a means of livelihood--that
it is, in his own words, an industry.  Now, the moral side of an
industry, productive or unproductive, the redeeming and ideal
aspect of this bread-winning, is the attainment and preservation of
the highest possible skill on the part of the craftsmen.  Such
skill, the skill of technique, is more than honesty; it is
something wider, embracing honesty and grace and rule in an
elevated and clear sentiment, not altogether utilitarian, which may
be called the honour of labour.  It is made up of accumulated
tradition, kept alive by individual pride, rendered exact by
professional opinion, and, like the higher arts, it spurred on and
sustained by discriminating praise.

This is why the attainment of proficiency, the pushing of your
skill with attention to the most delicate shades of excellence, is
a matter of vital concern.  Efficiency of a practically flawless
kind may be reached naturally in the struggle for bread.  But there
is something beyond--a higher point, a subtle and unmistakable
touch of love and pride beyond mere skill; almost an inspiration
which gives to all work that finish which is almost art--which IS
art.

As men of scrupulous honour set up a high standard of public
conscience above the dead-level of an honest community, so men of
that skill which passes into art by ceaseless striving raise the
dead-level of correct practice in the crafts of land and sea.  The
conditions fostering the growth of that supreme, alive excellence,
as well in work as in play, ought to be preserved with a most
careful regard lest the industry or the game should perish of an
insidious and inward decay.  Therefore I have read with profound
regret, in that article upon the yachting season of a certain year,
that the seamanship on board racing yachts is not now what it used
to be only a few, very few, years ago.

For that was the gist of that article, written evidently by a man
who not only knows but UNDERSTANDS--a thing (let me remark in
passing) much rarer than one would expect, because the sort of
understanding I mean is inspired by love; and love, though in a
sense it may be admitted to be stronger than death, is by no means
so universal and so sure.  In fact, love is rare--the love of men,
of things, of ideas, the love of perfected skill.  For love is the
enemy of haste; it takes count of passing days, of men who pass
away, of a fine art matured slowly in the course of years and
doomed in a short time to pass away too, and be no more.  Love and
regret go hand in hand in this world of changes swifter than the
shifting of the clouds reflected in the mirror of the sea.

To penalize a yacht in proportion to the fineness of her
performance is unfair to the craft and to her men.  It is unfair to
the perfection of her form and to the skill of her servants.  For
we men are, in fact, the servants of our creations.  We remain in
everlasting bondage to the productions of our brain and to the work
of our hands.  A man is born to serve his time on this earth, and
there is something fine in the service being given on other grounds
than that of utility.  The bondage of art is very exacting.  And,
as the writer of the article which started this train of thought
says with lovable warmth, the sailing of yachts is a fine art.

His contention is that racing, without time allowances for anything
else but tonnage--that is, for size--has fostered the fine art of
sailing to the pitch of perfection.  Every sort of demand is made
upon the master of a sailing-yacht, and to be penalized in
proportion to your success may be of advantage to the sport itself,
but it has an obviously deteriorating effect upon the seamanship.
The fine art is being lost.



VIII.



The sailing and racing of yachts has developed a class of fore-and-
aft sailors, men born and bred to the sea, fishing in winter and
yachting in summer; men to whom the handling of that particular rig
presents no mystery.  It is their striving for victory that has
elevated the sailing of pleasure craft to the dignity of a fine art
in that special sense.  As I have said, I know nothing of racing
and but little of fore-and-aft rig; but the advantages of such a
rig are obvious, especially for purposes of pleasure, whether in
cruising or racing.  It requires less effort in handling; the
trimming of the sail-planes to the wind can be done with speed and
accuracy; the unbroken spread of the sail-area is of infinite
advantage; and the greatest possible amount of canvas can be
displayed upon the least possible quantity of spars.  Lightness and
concentrated power are the great qualities of fore-and-aft rig.

A fleet of fore-and-afters at anchor has its own slender
graciousness.  The setting of their sails resembles more than
anything else the unfolding of a bird's wings; the facility of
their evolutions is a pleasure to the eye.  They are birds of the
sea, whose swimming is like flying, and resembles more a natural
function than the handling of man-invented appliances.  The fore-
and-aft rig in its simplicity and the beauty of its aspect under
every angle of vision is, I believe, unapproachable.  A schooner,
yawl, or cutter in charge of a capable man seems to handle herself
as if endowed with the power of reasoning and the gift of swift
execution.  One laughs with sheer pleasure at a smart piece of
manoeuvring, as at a manifestation of a living creature's quick wit
and graceful precision.

Of those three varieties of fore-and-aft rig, the cutter--the
racing rig par excellence--is of an appearance the most imposing,
from the fact that practically all her canvas is in one piece.  The
enormous mainsail of a cutter, as she draws slowly past a point of
land or the end of a jetty under your admiring gaze, invests her
with an air of lofty and silent majesty.  At anchor a schooner
looks better; she has an aspect of greater efficiency and a better
balance to the eye, with her two masts distributed over the hull
with a swaggering rake aft.  The yawl rig one comes in time to
love.  It is, I should think, the easiest of all to manage.

For racing, a cutter; for a long pleasure voyage, a schooner; for
cruising in home waters, the yawl; and the handling of them all is
indeed a fine art.  It requires not only the knowledge of the
general principles of sailing, but a particular acquaintance with
the character of the craft.  All vessels are handled in the same
way as far as theory goes, just as you may deal with all men on
broad and rigid principles.  But if you want that success in life
which comes from the affection and confidence of your fellows, then
with no two men, however similar they may appear in their nature,
will you deal in the same way.  There may be a rule of conduct;
there is no rule of human fellowship.  To deal with men is as fine
an art as it is to deal with ships.  Both men and ships live in an
unstable element, are subject to subtle and powerful influences,
and want to have their merits understood rather than their faults
found out.

It is not what your ship will NOT do that you want to know to get
on terms of successful partnership with her; it is, rather, that
you ought to have a precise knowledge of what she will do for you
when called upon to put forth what is in her by a sympathetic
touch.  At first sight the difference does not seem great in either
line of dealing with the difficult problem of limitations.  But the
difference is great.  The difference lies in the spirit in which
the problem is approached.  After all, the art of handling ships is
finer, perhaps, than the art of handling men.

And, like all fine arts, it must be based upon a broad, solid
sincerity, which, like a law of Nature, rules an infinity of
different phenomena.  Your endeavour must be single-minded.  You
would talk differently to a coal-heaver and to a professor.  But is
this duplicity?  I deny it.  The truth consists in the genuineness
of the feeling, in the genuine recognition of the two men, so
similar and so different, as your two partners in the hazard of
life.  Obviously, a humbug, thinking only of winning his little
race, would stand a chance of profiting by his artifices.  Men,
professors or coal-heavers, are easily deceived; they even have an
extraordinary knack of lending themselves to deception, a sort of
curious and inexplicable propensity to allow themselves to be led
by the nose with their eyes open.  But a ship is a creature which
we have brought into the world, as it were on purpose to keep us up
to the mark.  In her handling a ship will not put up with a mere
pretender, as, for instance, the public will do with Mr. X, the
popular statesman, Mr. Y, the popular scientist, or Mr. Z, the
popular--what shall we say?--anything from a teacher of high
morality to a bagman--who have won their little race.  But I would
like (though not accustomed to betting) to wager a large sum that
not one of the few first-rate skippers of racing yachts has ever
been a humbug.  It would have been too difficult.  The difficulty
arises from the fact that one does not deal with ships in a mob,
but with a ship as an individual.  So we may have to do with men.
But in each of us there lurks some particle of the mob spirit, of
the mob temperament.  No matter how earnestly we strive against
each other, we remain brothers on the lowest side of our intellect
and in the instability of our feelings.  With ships it is not so.
Much as they are to us, they are nothing to each other.  Those
sensitive creatures have no ears for our blandishments.  It takes
something more than words to cajole them to do our will, to cover
us with glory.  Luckily, too, or else there would have been more
shoddy reputations for first-rate seamanship.  Ships have no ears,
I repeat, though, indeed, I think I have known ships who really
seemed to have had eyes, or else I cannot understand on what ground
a certain 1,000-ton barque of my acquaintance on one particular
occasion refused to answer her helm, thereby saving a frightful
smash to two ships and to a very good man's reputation.  I knew her
intimately for two years, and in no other instance either before or
since have I known her to do that thing.  The man she had served so
well (guessing, perhaps, at the depths of his affection for her) I
have known much longer, and in bare justice to him I must say that
this confidence-shattering experience (though so fortunate) only
augmented his trust in her.  Yes, our ships have no ears, and thus
they cannot be deceived.  I would illustrate my idea of fidelity as
between man and ship, between the master and his art, by a
statement which, though it might appear shockingly sophisticated,
is really very simple.  I would say that a racing-yacht skipper who
thought of nothing else but the glory of winning the race would
never attain to any eminence of reputation.  The genuine masters of
their craft--I say this confidently from my experience of ships--
have thought of nothing but of doing their very best by the vessel
under their charge.  To forget one's self, to surrender all
personal feeling in the service of that fine art, is the only way
for a seaman to the faithful discharge of his trust.

Such is the service of a fine art and of ships that sail the sea.
And therein I think I can lay my finger upon the difference between
the seamen of yesterday, who are still with us, and the seamen of
to-morrow, already entered upon the possession of their
inheritance.  History repeats itself, but the special call of an
art which has passed away is never reproduced.  It is as utterly
gone out of the world as the song of a destroyed wild bird.
Nothing will awaken the same response of pleasurable emotion or
conscientious endeavour.  And the sailing of any vessel afloat is
an art whose fine form seems already receding from us on its way to
the overshadowed Valley of Oblivion.  The taking of a modern
steamship about the world (though one would not minimize its
responsibilities) has not the same quality of intimacy with nature,
which, after all, is an indispensable condition to the building up
of an art.  It is less personal and a more exact calling; less
arduous, but also less gratifying in the lack of close communion
between the artist and the medium of his art.  It is, in short,
less a matter of love.  Its effects are measured exactly in time
and space as no effect of an art can be.  It is an occupation which
a man not desperately subject to sea-sickness can be imagined to
follow with content, without enthusiasm, with industry, without
affection.  Punctuality is its watchword.  The incertitude which
attends closely every artistic endeavour is absent from its
regulated enterprise.  It has no great moments of self-confidence,
or moments not less great of doubt and heart-searching.  It is an
industry which, like other industries, has its romance, its honour
and its rewards, its bitter anxieties and its hours of ease.  But
such sea-going has not the artistic quality of a single-handed
struggle with something much greater than yourself; it is not the
laborious absorbing practice of an art whose ultimate result
remains on the knees of the gods.  It is not an individual,
temperamental achievement, but simply the skilled use of a captured
force, merely another step forward upon the way of universal
conquest.



IX.



Every passage of a ship of yesterday, whose yards were braced round
eagerly the very moment the pilot, with his pockets full of
letters, had got over the side, was like a race--a race against
time, against an ideal standard of achievement outstripping the
expectations of common men.  Like all true art, the general conduct
of a ship and her handling in particular cases had a technique
which could be discussed with delight and pleasure by men who found
in their work, not bread alone, but an outlet for the peculiarities
of their temperament.  To get the best and truest effect from the
infinitely varying moods of sky and sea, not pictorially, but in
the spirit of their calling, was their vocation, one and all; and
they recognised this with as much sincerity, and drew as much
inspiration from this reality, as any man who ever put brush to
canvas.  The diversity of temperaments was immense amongst those
masters of the fine art.

Some of them were like Royal Academicians of a certain kind.  They
never startled you by a touch of originality, by a fresh audacity
of inspiration.  They were safe, very safe.  They went about
solemnly in the assurance of their consecrated and empty
reputation.  Names are odious, but I remember one of them who might
have been their very president, the P.R.A. of the sea-craft.  His
weather-beaten and handsome face, his portly presence, his shirt-
fronts and broad cuffs and gold links, his air of bluff
distinction, impressed the humble beholders (stevedores, tally
clerks, tide-waiters) as he walked ashore over the gangway of his
ship lying at the Circular Quay in Sydney.  His voice was deep,
hearty, and authoritative--the voice of a very prince amongst
sailors.  He did everything with an air which put your attention on
the alert and raised your expectations, but the result somehow was
always on stereotyped lines, unsuggestive, empty of any lesson that
one could lay to heart.  He kept his ship in apple-pie order, which
would have been seamanlike enough but for a finicking touch in its
details.  His officers affected a superiority over the rest of us,
but the boredom of their souls appeared in their manner of dreary
submission to the fads of their commander.  It was only his
apprenticed boys whose irrepressible spirits were not affected by
the solemn and respectable mediocrity of that artist.  There were
four of these youngsters:  one the son of a doctor, another of a
colonel, the third of a jeweller; the name of the fourth was
Twentyman, and this is all I remember of his parentage.  But not
one of them seemed to possess the smallest spark of gratitude in
his composition.  Though their commander was a kind man in his way,
and had made a point of introducing them to the best people in the
town in order that they should not fall into the bad company of
boys belonging to other ships, I regret to say that they made faces
at him behind his back, and imitated the dignified carriage of his
head without any concealment whatever.

This master of the fine art was a personage and nothing more; but,
as I have said, there was an infinite diversity of temperament
amongst the masters of the fine art I have known.  Some were great
impressionists.  They impressed upon you the fear of God and
Immensity--or, in other words, the fear of being drowned with every
circumstance of terrific grandeur.  One may think that the locality
of your passing away by means of suffocation in water does not
really matter very much.  I am not so sure of that.  I am, perhaps,
unduly sensitive, but I confess that the idea of being suddenly
spilt into an infuriated ocean in the midst of darkness and uproar
affected me always with a sensation of shrinking distaste.  To be
drowned in a pond, though it might be called an ignominious fate by
the ignorant, is yet a bright and peaceful ending in comparison
with some other endings to one's earthly career which I have
mentally quaked at in the intervals or even in the midst of violent
exertions.

But let that pass.  Some of the masters whose influence left a
trace upon my character to this very day, combined a fierceness of
conception with a certitude of execution upon the basis of just
appreciation of means and ends which is the highest quality of the
man of action.  And an artist is a man of action, whether he
creates a personality, invents an expedient, or finds the issue of
a complicated situation.

There were masters, too, I have known, whose very art consisted in
avoiding every conceivable situation.  It is needless to say that
they never did great things in their craft; but they were not to be
despised for that.  They were modest; they understood their
limitations.  Their own masters had not handed the sacred fire into
the keeping of their cold and skilful hands.  One of those last I
remember specially, now gone to his rest from that sea which his
temperament must have made a scene of little more than a peaceful
pursuit.  Once only did he attempt a stroke of audacity, one early
morning, with a steady breeze, entering a crowded roadstead.  But
he was not genuine in this display which might have been art.  He
was thinking of his own self; he hankered after the meretricious
glory of a showy performance.

As, rounding a dark, wooded point, bathed in fresh air and
sunshine, we opened to view a crowd of shipping at anchor lying
half a mile ahead of us perhaps, he called me aft from my station
on the forecastle head, and, turning over and over his binoculars
in his brown hands, said:  "Do you see that big, heavy ship with
white lower masts?  I am going to take up a berth between her and
the shore.  Now do you see to it that the men jump smartly at the
first order."

I answered, "Ay, ay, sir," and verily believed that this would be a
fine performance.  We dashed on through the fleet in magnificent
style.  There must have been many open mouths and following eyes on
board those ships--Dutch, English, with a sprinkling of Americans
and a German or two--who had all hoisted their flags at eight
o'clock as if in honour of our arrival.  It would have been a fine
performance if it had come off, but it did not.  Through a touch of
self-seeking that modest artist of solid merit became untrue to his
temperament.  It was not with him art for art's sake:  it was art
for his own sake; and a dismal failure was the penalty he paid for
that greatest of sins.  It might have been even heavier, but, as it
happened, we did not run our ship ashore, nor did we knock a large
hole in the big ship whose lower masts were painted white.  But it
is a wonder that we did not carry away the cables of both our
anchors, for, as may be imagined, I did not stand upon the order to
"Let go!" that came to me in a quavering, quite unknown voice from
his trembling lips.  I let them both go with a celerity which to
this day astonishes my memory.  No average merchantman's anchors
have ever been let go with such miraculous smartness.  And they
both held.  I could have kissed their rough, cold iron palms in
gratitude if they had not been buried in slimy mud under ten
fathoms of water.  Ultimately they brought us up with the jibboom
of a Dutch brig poking through our spanker--nothing worse.  And a
miss is as good as a mile.

But not in art.  Afterwards the master said to me in a shy mumble,
"She wouldn't luff up in time, somehow.  What's the matter with
her?"  And I made no answer.

Yet the answer was clear.  The ship had found out the momentary
weakness of her man.  Of all the living creatures upon land and
sea, it is ships alone that cannot be taken in by barren pretences,
that will not put up with bad art from their masters.



X.



From the main truck of the average tall ship the horizon describes
a circle of many miles, in which you can see another ship right
down to her water-line; and these very eyes which follow this
writing have counted in their time over a hundred sail becalmed, as
if within a magic ring, not very far from the Azores--ships more or
less tall.  There were hardly two of them heading exactly the same
way, as if each had meditated breaking out of the enchanted circle
at a different point of the compass.  But the spell of the calm is
a strong magic.  The following day still saw them scattered within
sight of each other and heading different ways; but when, at last,
the breeze came with the darkling ripple that ran very blue on a
pale sea, they all went in the same direction together.  For this
was the homeward-bound fleet from the far-off ends of the earth,
and a Falmouth fruit-schooner, the smallest of them all, was
heading the flight.  One could have imagined her very fair, if not
divinely tall, leaving a scent of lemons and oranges in her wake.

The next day there were very few ships in sight from our mast-
heads--seven at most, perhaps, with a few more distant specks, hull
down, beyond the magic ring of the horizon.  The spell of the fair
wind has a subtle power to scatter a white-winged company of ships
looking all the same way, each with its white fillet of tumbling
foam under the bow.  It is the calm that brings ships mysteriously
together; it is your wind that is the great separator.

The taller the ship, the further she can be seen; and her white
tallness breathed upon by the wind first proclaims her size.  The
tall masts holding aloft the white canvas, spread out like a snare
for catching the invisible power of the air, emerge gradually from
the water, sail after sail, yard after yard, growing big, till,
under the towering structure of her machinery, you perceive the
insignificant, tiny speck of her hull.

The tall masts are the pillars supporting the balanced planes that,
motionless and silent, catch from the air the ship's motive-power,
as it were a gift from Heaven vouchsafed to the audacity of man;
and it is the ship's tall spars, stripped and shorn of their white
glory, that incline themselves before the anger of the clouded
heaven.

When they yield to a squall in a gaunt and naked submission, their
tallness is brought best home even to the mind of a seaman.  The
man who has looked upon his ship going over too far is made aware
of the preposterous tallness of a ship's spars.  It seems
impossible but that those gilt trucks which one had to tilt one's
head back to see, now falling into the lower plane of vision, must
perforce hit the very edge of the horizon.  Such an experience
gives you a better impression of the loftiness of your spars than
any amount of running aloft could do.  And yet in my time the royal
yards of an average profitable ship were a good way up above her
decks.

No doubt a fair amount of climbing up iron ladders can be achieved
by an active man in a ship's engine-room, but I remember moments
when even to my supple limbs and pride of nimbleness the sailing-
ship's machinery seemed to reach up to the very stars.

For machinery it is, doing its work in perfect silence and with a
motionless grace, that seems to hide a capricious and not always
governable power, taking nothing away from the material stores of
the earth.  Not for it the unerring precision of steel moved by
white steam and living by red fire and fed with black coal.  The
other seems to draw its strength from the very soul of the world,
its formidable ally, held to obedience by the frailest bonds, like
a fierce ghost captured in a snare of something even finer than
spun silk.  For what is the array of the strongest ropes, the
tallest spars and the stoutest canvas against the mighty breath of
the infinite, but thistle stalks, cobwebs and gossamer?



XI.



Indeed, it is less than nothing, and I have seen, when the great
soul of the world turned over with a heavy sigh, a perfectly new,
extra-stout foresail vanish like a bit of some airy stuff much
lighter than gossamer.  Then was the time for the tall spars to
stand fast in the great uproar.  The machinery must do its work
even if the soul of the world has gone mad.

The modern steamship advances upon a still and overshadowed sea
with a pulsating tremor of her frame, an occasional clang in her
depths, as if she had an iron heart in her iron body; with a
thudding rhythm in her progress and the regular beat of her
propeller, heard afar in the night with an august and plodding
sound as of the march of an inevitable future.  But in a gale, the
silent machinery of a sailing-ship would catch not only the power,
but the wild and exulting voice of the world's soul.  Whether she
ran with her tall spars swinging, or breasted it with her tall
spars lying over, there was always that wild song, deep like a
chant, for a bass to the shrill pipe of the wind played on the sea-
tops, with a punctuating crash, now and then, of a breaking wave.
At times the weird effects of that invisible orchestra would get
upon a man's nerves till he wished himself deaf.

And this recollection of a personal wish, experienced upon several
oceans, where the soul of the world has plenty of room to turn over
with a mighty sigh, brings me to the remark that in order to take a
proper care of a ship's spars it is just as well for a seaman to
have nothing the matter with his ears.  Such is the intimacy with
which a seaman had to live with his ship of yesterday that his
senses were like her senses, that the stress upon his body made him
judge of the strain upon the ship's masts.

I had been some time at sea before I became aware of the fact that
hearing plays a perceptible part in gauging the force of the wind.
It was at night.  The ship was one of those iron wool-clippers that
the Clyde had floated out in swarms upon the world during the
seventh decade of the last century.  It was a fine period in ship-
building, and also, I might say, a period of over-masting.  The
spars rigged up on the narrow hulls were indeed tall then, and the
ship of which I think, with her coloured-glass skylight ends
bearing the motto, "Let Glasgow Flourish," was certainly one of the
most heavily-sparred specimens.  She was built for hard driving,
and unquestionably she got all the driving she could stand.  Our
captain was a man famous for the quick passages he had been used to
make in the old Tweed, a ship famous the world over for her speed.
The Tweed had been a wooden vessel, and he brought the tradition of
quick passages with him into the iron clipper.  I was the junior in
her, a third mate, keeping watch with the chief officer; and it was
just during one of the night watches in a strong, freshening breeze
that I overheard two men in a sheltered nook of the main deck
exchanging these informing remarks.  Said one:

"Should think 'twas time some of them light sails were coming off
her."

And the other, an older man, uttered grumpily:  "No fear! not while
the chief mate's on deck.  He's that deaf he can't tell how much
wind there is."

And, indeed, poor P-, quite young, and a smart seaman, was very
hard of hearing.  At the same time, he had the name of being the
very devil of a fellow for carrying on sail on a ship.  He was
wonderfully clever at concealing his deafness, and, as to carrying
on heavily, though he was a fearless man, I don't think that he
ever meant to take undue risks.  I can never forget his naive sort
of astonishment when remonstrated with for what appeared a most
dare-devil performance.  The only person, of course, that could
remonstrate with telling effect was our captain, himself a man of
dare-devil tradition; and really, for me, who knew under whom I was
serving, those were impressive scenes.  Captain S- had a great name
for sailor-like qualities--the sort of name that compelled my
youthful admiration.  To this day I preserve his memory, for,
indeed, it was he in a sense who completed my training.  It was
often a stormy process, but let that pass.  I am sure he meant
well, and I am certain that never, not even at the time, could I
bear him malice for his extraordinary gift of incisive criticism.
And to hear HIM make a fuss about too much sail on the ship seemed
one of those incredible experiences that take place only in one's
dreams.

It generally happened in this way:  Night, clouds racing overhead,
wind howling, royals set, and the ship rushing on in the dark, an
immense white sheet of foam level with the lee rail.  Mr. P-, in
charge of the deck, hooked on to the windward mizzen rigging in a
state of perfect serenity; myself, the third mate, also hooked on
somewhere to windward of the slanting poop, in a state of the
utmost preparedness to jump at the very first hint of some sort of
order, but otherwise in a perfectly acquiescent state of mind.
Suddenly, out of the companion would appear a tall, dark figure,
bareheaded, with a short white beard of a perpendicular cut, very
visible in the dark--Captain S-, disturbed in his reading down
below by the frightful bounding and lurching of the ship.  Leaning
very much against the precipitous incline of the deck, he would
take a turn or two, perfectly silent, hang on by the compass for a
while, take another couple of turns, and suddenly burst out:

"What are you trying to do with the ship?"

And Mr. P-, who was not good at catching what was shouted in the
wind, would say interrogatively:

"Yes, sir?"

Then in the increasing gale of the sea there would be a little
private ship's storm going on in which you could detect strong
language, pronounced in a tone of passion and exculpatory
protestations uttered with every possible inflection of injured
innocence.

"By Heavens, Mr. P-!  I used to carry on sail in my time, but--"

And the rest would be lost to me in a stormy gust of wind.

Then, in a lull, P-'s protesting innocence would become audible:

"She seems to stand it very well."

And then another burst of an indignant voice:

"Any fool can carry sail on a ship--"

And so on and so on, the ship meanwhile rushing on her way with a
heavier list, a noisier splutter, a more threatening hiss of the
white, almost blinding, sheet of foam to leeward.  For the best of
it was that Captain S- seemed constitutionally incapable of giving
his officers a definite order to shorten sail; and so that
extraordinarily vague row would go on till at last it dawned upon
them both, in some particularly alarming gust, that it was time to
do something.  There is nothing like the fearful inclination of
your tall spars overloaded with canvas to bring a deaf man and an
angry one to their senses.



XII.



So sail did get shortened more or less in time even in that ship,
and her tall spars never went overboard while I served in her.
However, all the time I was with them, Captain S- and Mr. P- did
not get on very well together.  If P- carried on "like the very
devil" because he was too deaf to know how much wind there was,
Captain S- (who, as I have said, seemed constitutionally incapable
of ordering one of his officers to shorten sail) resented the
necessity forced upon him by Mr. P-'s desperate goings on.  It was
in Captain S-'s tradition rather to reprove his officers for not
carrying on quite enough--in his phrase "for not taking every ounce
of advantage of a fair wind."  But there was also a psychological
motive that made him extremely difficult to deal with on board that
iron clipper.  He had just come out of the marvellous Tweed, a
ship, I have heard, heavy to look at but of phenomenal speed.  In
the middle sixties she had beaten by a day and a half the steam
mail-boat from Hong Kong to Singapore.  There was something
peculiarly lucky, perhaps, in the placing of her masts--who knows?
Officers of men-of-war used to come on board to take the exact
dimensions of her sail-plan.  Perhaps there had been a touch of
genius or the finger of good fortune in the fashioning of her lines
at bow and stern.  It is impossible to say.  She was built in the
East Indies somewhere, of teak-wood throughout, except the deck.
She had a great sheer, high bows, and a clumsy stern.  The men who
had seen her described her to me as "nothing much to look at."  But
in the great Indian famine of the seventies that ship, already old
then, made some wonderful dashes across the Gulf of Bengal with
cargoes of rice from Rangoon to Madras.

She took the secret of her speed with her, and, unsightly as she
was, her image surely has its glorious place in the mirror of the
old sea.

The point, however, is that Captain S-, who used to say frequently,
"She never made a decent passage after I left her," seemed to think
that the secret of her speed lay in her famous commander.  No doubt
the secret of many a ship's excellence does lie with the man on
board, but it was hopeless for Captain S- to try to make his new
iron clipper equal the feats which made the old Tweed a name of
praise upon the lips of English-speaking seamen.  There was
something pathetic in it, as in the endeavour of an artist in his
old age to equal the masterpieces of his youth--for the Tweed's
famous passages were Captain S-'s masterpieces.  It was pathetic,
and perhaps just the least bit dangerous.  At any rate, I am glad
that, what between Captain S-'s yearning for old triumphs and Mr.
P-'s deafness, I have seen some memorable carrying on to make a
passage.  And I have carried on myself upon the tall spars of that
Clyde shipbuilder's masterpiece as I have never carried on in a
ship before or since.

The second mate falling ill during the passage, I was promoted to
officer of the watch, alone in charge of the deck.  Thus the
immense leverage of the ship's tall masts became a matter very near
my own heart.  I suppose it was something of a compliment for a
young fellow to be trusted, apparently without any supervision, by
such a commander as Captain S-; though, as far as I can remember,
neither the tone, nor the manner, nor yet the drift of Captain S-'s
remarks addressed to myself did ever, by the most strained
interpretation, imply a favourable opinion of my abilities.  And he
was, I must say, a most uncomfortable commander to get your orders
from at night.  If I had the watch from eight till midnight, he
would leave the deck about nine with the words, "Don't take any
sail off her."  Then, on the point of disappearing down the
companion-way, he would add curtly:  "Don't carry anything away."
I am glad to say that I never did; one night, however, I was
caught, not quite prepared, by a sudden shift of wind.

There was, of course, a good deal of noise--running about, the,
shouts of the sailors, the thrashing of the sails--enough, in fact,
to wake the dead.  But S- never came on deck.  When I was relieved
by the chief mate an hour afterwards, he sent for me.  I went into
his stateroom; he was lying on his couch wrapped up in a rug, with
a pillow under his head.

"What was the matter with you up there just now?" he asked.

"Wind flew round on the lee quarter, sir," I said.

"Couldn't you see the shift coming?"

"Yes, sir, I thought it wasn't very far off."

"Why didn't you have your courses hauled up at once, then?" he
asked in a tone that ought to have made my blood run cold.

But this was my chance, and I did not let it slip.

"Well, sir," I said in an apologetic tone, "she was going eleven
knots very nicely, and I thought she would do for another half-hour
or so."

He gazed at me darkly out of his head, lying very still on the
white pillow, for a time.

"Ah, yes, another half-hour.  That's the way ships get dismasted."

And that was all I got in the way of a wigging.  I waited a little
while and then went out, shutting carefully the door of the state-
room after me.

Well, I have loved, lived with, and left the sea without ever
seeing a ship's tall fabric of sticks, cobwebs and gossamer go by
the board.  Sheer good luck, no doubt.  But as to poor P-, I am
sure that he would not have got off scot-free like this but for the
god of gales, who called him away early from this earth, which is
three parts ocean, and therefore a fit abode for sailors.  A few
years afterwards I met in an Indian port a man who had served in
the ships of the same company.  Names came up in our talk, names of
our colleagues in the same employ, and, naturally enough, I asked
after P-.  Had he got a command yet?  And the other man answered
carelessly:

"No; but he's provided for, anyhow.  A heavy sea took him off the
poop in the run between New Zealand and the Horn."

Thus P- passed away from amongst the tall spars of ships that he
had tried to their utmost in many a spell of boisterous weather.
He had shown me what carrying on meant, but he was not a man to
learn discretion from.  He could not help his deafness.  One can
only remember his cheery temper, his admiration for the jokes in
Punch, his little oddities--like his strange passion for borrowing
looking-glasses, for instance.  Each of our cabins had its own
looking-glass screwed to the bulkhead, and what he wanted with more
of them we never could fathom.  He asked for the loan in
confidential tones.  Why?  Mystery.  We made various surmises.  No
one will ever know now.  At any rate, it was a harmless
eccentricity, and may the god of gales, who took him away so
abruptly between New Zealand and the Horn, let his soul rest in
some Paradise of true seamen, where no amount of carrying on will
ever dismast a ship!



XIII.



There has been a time when a ship's chief mate, pocket-book in hand
and pencil behind his ear, kept one eye aloft upon his riggers and
the other down the hatchway on the stevedores, and watched the
disposition of his ship's cargo, knowing that even before she
started he was already doing his best to secure for her an easy and
quick passage.

The hurry of the times, the loading and discharging organization of
the docks, the use of hoisting machinery which works quickly and
will not wait, the cry for prompt despatch, the very size of his
ship, stand nowadays between the modern seaman and the thorough
knowledge of his craft.

There are profitable ships and unprofitable ships.  The profitable
ship will carry a large load through all the hazards of the
weather, and, when at rest, will stand up in dock and shift from
berth to berth without ballast.  There is a point of perfection in
a ship as a worker when she is spoken of as being able to SAIL
without ballast.  I have never met that sort of paragon myself, but
I have seen these paragons advertised amongst ships for sale.  Such
excess of virtue and good-nature on the part of a ship always
provoked my mistrust.  It is open to any man to say that his ship
will sail without ballast; and he will say it, too, with every mark
of profound conviction, especially if he is not going to sail in
her himself.  The risk of advertising her as able to sail without
ballast is not great, since the statement does not imply a warranty
of her arriving anywhere.  Moreover, it is strictly true that most
ships will sail without ballast for some little time before they
turn turtle upon the crew.

A shipowner loves a profitable ship; the seaman is proud of her; a
doubt of her good looks seldom exists in his mind; but if he can
boast of her more useful qualities it is an added satisfaction for
his self-love.

The loading of ships was once a matter of skill, judgment, and
knowledge.  Thick books have been written about it.  "Stevens on
Stowage" is a portly volume with the renown and weight (in its own
world) of Coke on Littleton.  Stevens is an agreeable writer, and,
as is the case with men of talent, his gifts adorn his sterling
soundness.  He gives you the official teaching on the whole
subject, is precise as to rules, mentions illustrative events,
quotes law cases where verdicts turned upon a point of stowage.  He
is never pedantic, and, for all his close adherence to broad
principles, he is ready to admit that no two ships can be treated
exactly alike.

Stevedoring, which had been a skilled labour, is fast becoming a
labour without the skill.  The modern steamship with her many holds
is not loaded within the sailor-like meaning of the word.  She is
filled up.  Her cargo is not stowed in any sense; it is simply
dumped into her through six hatchways, more or less, by twelve
winches or so, with clatter and hurry and racket and heat, in a
cloud of steam and a mess of coal-dust.  As long as you keep her
propeller under water and take care, say, not to fling down barrels
of oil on top of bales of silk, or deposit an iron bridge-girder of
five ton or so upon a bed of coffee-bags, you have done about all
in the way of duty that the cry for prompt despatch will allow you
to do.



XIV.



The sailing-ship, when I knew her in her days of perfection, was a
sensible creature.  When I say her days of perfection, I mean
perfection of build, gear, seaworthy qualities and case of
handling, not the perfection of speed.  That quality has departed
with the change of building material.  No iron ship of yesterday
ever attained the marvels of speed which the seamanship of men
famous in their time had obtained from their wooden, copper-sheeted
predecessors.  Everything had been done to make the iron ship
perfect, but no wit of man had managed to devise an efficient
coating composition to keep her bottom clean with the smooth
cleanness of yellow metal sheeting.  After a spell of a few weeks
at sea, an iron ship begins to lag as if she had grown tired too
soon.  It is only her bottom that is getting foul.  A very little
affects the speed of an iron ship which is not driven on by a
merciless propeller.  Often it is impossible to tell what
inconsiderate trifle puts her off her stride.  A certain
mysteriousness hangs around the quality of speed as it was
displayed by the old sailing-ships commanded by a competent seaman.
In those days the speed depended upon the seaman; therefore, apart
from the laws, rules, and regulations for the good preservation of
his cargo, he was careful of his loading,--or what is technically
called the trim of his ship.  Some ships sailed fast on an even
keel, others had to be trimmed quite one foot by the stern, and I
have heard of a ship that gave her best speed on a wind when so
loaded as to float a couple of inches by the head.

I call to mind a winter landscape in Amsterdam--a flat foreground
of waste land, with here and there stacks of timber, like the huts
of a camp of some very miserable tribe; the long stretch of the
Handelskade; cold, stone-faced quays, with the snow-sprinkled
ground and the hard, frozen water of the canal, in which were set
ships one behind another with their frosty mooring-ropes hanging
slack and their decks idle and deserted, because, as the master
stevedore (a gentle, pale person, with a few golden hairs on his
chin and a reddened nose) informed me, their cargoes were frozen-in
up-country on barges and schuyts.  In the distance, beyond the
waste ground, and running parallel with the line of ships, a line
of brown, warm-toned houses seemed bowed under snow-laden roofs.
From afar at the end of Tsar Peter Straat, issued in the frosty air
the tinkle of bells of the horse tramcars, appearing and
disappearing in the opening between the buildings, like little toy
carriages harnessed with toy horses and played with by people that
appeared no bigger than children.

I was, as the French say, biting my fists with impatience for that
cargo frozen up-country; with rage at that canal set fast, at the
wintry and deserted aspect of all those ships that seemed to decay
in grim depression for want of the open water.  I was chief mate,
and very much alone.  Directly I had joined I received from my
owners instructions to send all the ship's apprentices away on
leave together, because in such weather there was nothing for
anybody to do, unless to keep up a fire in the cabin stove.  That
was attended to by a snuffy and mop-headed, inconceivably dirty,
and weirdly toothless Dutch ship-keeper, who could hardly speak
three words of English, but who must have had some considerable
knowledge of the language, since he managed invariably to interpret
in the contrary sense everything that was said to him.

Notwithstanding the little iron stove, the ink froze on the swing-
table in the cabin, and I found it more convenient to go ashore
stumbling over the arctic waste-land and shivering in glazed
tramcars in order to write my evening letter to my owners in a
gorgeous cafe in the centre of the town.  It was an immense place,
lofty and gilt, upholstered in red plush, full of electric lights
and so thoroughly warmed that even the marble tables felt tepid to
the touch.  The waiter who brought me my cup of coffee bore, by
comparison with my utter isolation, the dear aspect of an intimate
friend.  There, alone in a noisy crowd, I would write slowly a
letter addressed to Glasgow, of which the gist would be:  There is
no cargo, and no prospect of any coming till late spring
apparently.  And all the time I sat there the necessity of getting
back to the ship bore heavily on my already half-congealed spirits-
-the shivering in glazed tramcars, the stumbling over the snow-
sprinkled waste ground, the vision of ships frozen in a row,
appearing vaguely like corpses of black vessels in a white world,
so silent, so lifeless, so soulless they seemed to be.

With precaution I would go up the side of my own particular corpse,
and would feel her as cold as ice itself and as slippery under my
feet.  My cold berth would swallow up like a chilly burial niche my
bodily shivers and my mental excitement.  It was a cruel winter.
The very air seemed as hard and trenchant as steel; but it would
have taken much more than this to extinguish my sacred fire for the
exercise of my craft.  No young man of twenty-four appointed chief
mate for the first time in his life would have let that Dutch
tenacious winter penetrate into his heart.  I think that in those
days I never forgot the fact of my elevation for five consecutive
minutes.  I fancy it kept me warm, even in my slumbers, better than
the high pile of blankets, which positively crackled with frost as
I threw them off in the morning.  And I would get up early for no
reason whatever except that I was in sole charge.  The new captain
had not been appointed yet.

Almost each morning a letter from my owners would arrive, directing
me to go to the charterers and clamour for the ship's cargo; to
threaten them with the heaviest penalties of demurrage; to demand
that this assortment of varied merchandise, set fast in a landscape
of ice and windmills somewhere up-country, should be put on rail
instantly, and fed up to the ship in regular quantities every day.
After drinking some hot coffee, like an Arctic explorer setting off
on a sledge journey towards the North Pole, I would go ashore and
roll shivering in a tramcar into the very heart of the town, past
clean-faced houses, past thousands of brass knockers upon a
thousand painted doors glimmering behind rows of trees of the
pavement species, leafless, gaunt, seemingly dead for ever.

That part of the expedition was easy enough, though the horses were
painfully glistening with icicles, and the aspect of the tram-
conductors' faces presented a repulsive blending of crimson and
purple.  But as to frightening or bullying, or even wheedling some
sort of answer out of Mr. Hudig, that was another matter
altogether.  He was a big, swarthy Netherlander, with black
moustaches and a bold glance.  He always began by shoving me into a
chair before I had time to open my mouth, gave me cordially a large
cigar, and in excellent English would start to talk everlastingly
about the phenomenal severity of the weather.  It was impossible to
threaten a man who, though he possessed the language perfectly,
seemed incapable of understanding any phrase pronounced in a tone
of remonstrance or discontent.  As to quarrelling with him, it
would have been stupid.  The weather was too bitter for that.  His
office was so warm, his fire so bright, his sides shook so heartily
with laughter, that I experienced always a great difficulty in
making up my mind to reach for my hat.

At last the cargo did come.  At first it came dribbling in by rail
in trucks, till the thaw set in; and then fast, in a multitude of
barges, with a great rush of unbound waters.  The gentle master
stevedore had his hands very full at last; and the chief mate
became worried in his mind as to the proper distribution of the
weight of his first cargo in a ship he did not personally know
before.

Ships do want humouring.  They want humouring in handling; and if
you mean to handle them well, they must have been humoured in the
distribution of the weight which you ask them to carry through the
good and evil fortune of a passage.  Your ship is a tender
creature, whose idiosyncrasies must be attended to if you mean her
to come with credit to herself and you through the rough-and-tumble
of her life.



XV.



So seemed to think the new captain, who arrived the day after we
had finished loading, on the very eve of the day of sailing.  I
first beheld him on the quay, a complete stranger to me, obviously
not a Hollander, in a black bowler and a short drab overcoat,
ridiculously out of tone with the winter aspect of the waste-lands,
bordered by the brown fronts of houses with their roofs dripping
with melting snow.

This stranger was walking up and down absorbed in the marked
contemplation of the ship's fore and aft trim; but when I saw him
squat on his heels in the slush at the very edge of the quay to
peer at the draught of water under her counter, I said to myself,
"This is the captain."  And presently I descried his luggage coming
along--a real sailor's chest, carried by means of rope-beckets
between two men, with a couple of leather portmanteaus and a roll
of charts sheeted in canvas piled upon the lid.  The sudden,
spontaneous agility with which he bounded aboard right off the rail
afforded me the first glimpse of his real character.  Without
further preliminaries than a friendly nod, he addressed me:  "You
have got her pretty well in her fore and aft trim.  Now, what about
your weights?"

I told him I had managed to keep the weight sufficiently well up,
as I thought, one-third of the whole being in the upper part "above
the beams," as the technical expression has it.  He whistled
"Phew!" scrutinizing me from head to foot.  A sort of smiling
vexation was visible on his ruddy face.

"Well, we shall have a lively time of it this passage, I bet," he
said.

He knew.  It turned out he had been chief mate of her for the two
preceding voyages; and I was already familiar with his handwriting
in the old log-books I had been perusing in my cabin with a natural
curiosity, looking up the records of my new ship's luck, of her
behaviour, of the good times she had had, and of the troubles she
had escaped.

He was right in his prophecy.  On our passage from Amsterdam to
Samarang with a general cargo, of which, alas! only one-third in
weight was stowed "above the beams," we had a lively time of it.
It was lively, but not joyful.  There was not even a single moment
of comfort in it, because no seaman can feel comfortable in body or
mind when he has made his ship uneasy.

To travel along with a cranky ship for ninety days or so is no
doubt a nerve-trying experience; but in this case what was wrong
with our craft was this:  that by my system of loading she had been
made much too stable.

Neither before nor since have I felt a ship roll so abruptly, so
violently, so heavily.  Once she began, you felt that she would
never stop, and this hopeless sensation, characterizing the motion
of ships whose centre of gravity is brought down too low in
loading, made everyone on board weary of keeping on his feet.  I
remember once over-hearing one of the hands say:  "By Heavens,
Jack!  I feel as if I didn't mind how soon I let myself go, and let
the blamed hooker knock my brains out if she likes."  The captain
used to remark frequently:  "Ah, yes; I dare say one-third weight
above beams would have been quite enough for most ships.  But then,
you see, there's no two of them alike on the seas, and she's an
uncommonly ticklish jade to load."

Down south, running before the gales of high latitudes, she made
our life a burden to us.  There were days when nothing would keep
even on the swing-tables, when there was no position where you
could fix yourself so as not to feel a constant strain upon all the
muscles of your body.  She rolled and rolled with an awful
dislodging jerk and that dizzily fast sweep of her masts on every
swing.  It was a wonder that the men sent aloft were not flung off
the yards, the yards not flung off the masts, the masts not flung
overboard.  The captain in his armchair, holding on grimly at the
head of the table, with the soup-tureen rolling on one side of the
cabin and the steward sprawling on the other, would observe,
looking at me:  "That's your one-third above the beams.  The only
thing that surprises me is that the sticks have stuck to her all
this time."

Ultimately some of the minor spars did go--nothing important:
spanker-booms and such-like--because at times the frightful impetus
of her rolling would part a fourfold tackle of new three-inch
Manilla line as if it were weaker than pack-thread.

It was only poetic justice that the chief mate who had made a
mistake--perhaps a half-excusable one--about the distribution of
his ship's cargo should pay the penalty.  A piece of one of the
minor spars that did carry away flew against the chief mate's back,
and sent him sliding on his face for quite a considerable distance
along the main deck.  Thereupon followed various and unpleasant
consequences of a physical order--"queer symptoms," as the captain,
who treated them, used to say; inexplicable periods of
powerlessness, sudden accesses of mysterious pain; and the patient
agreed fully with the regretful mutters of his very attentive
captain wishing that it had been a straightforward broken leg.
Even the Dutch doctor who took the case up in Samarang offered no
scientific explanation.  All he said was:  "Ah, friend, you are
young yet; it may be very serious for your whole life.  You must
leave your ship; you must quite silent be for three months--quite
silent."

Of course, he meant the chief mate to keep quiet--to lay up, as a
matter of fact.  His manner was impressive enough, if his English
was childishly imperfect when compared with the fluency of Mr.
Hudig, the figure at the other end of that passage, and memorable
enough in its way.  In a great airy ward of a Far Eastern hospital,
lying on my back, I had plenty of leisure to remember the dreadful
cold and snow of Amsterdam, while looking at the fronds of the
palm-trees tossing and rustling at the height of the window.  I
could remember the elated feeling and the soul-gripping cold of
those tramway journeys taken into town to put what in diplomatic
language is called pressure upon the good Hudig, with his warm
fire, his armchair, his big cigar, and the never-failing suggestion
in his good-natured voice:  "I suppose in the end it is you they
will appoint captain before the ship sails?"  It may have been his
extreme good-nature, the serious, unsmiling good-nature of a fat,
swarthy man with coal-black moustache and steady eyes; but he might
have been a bit of a diplomatist, too.  His enticing suggestions I
used to repel modestly by the assurance that it was extremely
unlikely, as I had not enough experience.  "You know very well how
to go about business matters," he used to say, with a sort of
affected moodiness clouding his serene round face.  I wonder
whether he ever laughed to himself after I had left the office.  I
dare say he never did, because I understand that diplomatists, in
and out of the career, take themselves and their tricks with an
exemplary seriousness.

But he had nearly persuaded me that I was fit in every way to be
trusted with a command.  There came three months of mental worry,
hard rolling, remorse, and physical pain to drive home the lesson
of insufficient experience.

Yes, your ship wants to be humoured with knowledge.  You must treat
with an understanding consideration the mysteries of her feminine
nature, and then she will stand by you faithfully in the unceasing
struggle with forces wherein defeat is no shame.  It is a serious
relation, that in which a man stands to his ship.  She has her
rights as though she could breathe and speak; and, indeed, there
are ships that, for the right man, will do anything but speak, as
the saying goes.

A ship is not a slave.  You must make her easy in a seaway, you
must never forget that you owe her the fullest share of your
thought, of your skill, of your self-love.  If you remember that
obligation, naturally and without effort, as if it were an
instinctive feeling of your inner life, she will sail, stay, run
for you as long as she is able, or, like a sea-bird going to rest
upon the angry waves, she will lay out the heaviest gale that ever
made you doubt living long enough to see another sunrise.



XVI.



Often I turn with melancholy eagerness to the space reserved in the
newspapers under the general heading of "Shipping Intelligence."  I
meet there the names of ships I have known.  Every year some of
these names disappear--the names of old friends.  "Tempi passati!"

The different divisions of that kind of news are set down in their
order, which varies but slightly in its arrangement of concise
headlines.  And first comes "Speakings"--reports of ships met and
signalled at sea, name, port, where from, where bound for, so many
days out, ending frequently with the words "All well."  Then come
"Wrecks and Casualties"--a longish array of paragraphs, unless the
weather has been fair and clear, and friendly to ships all over the
world.

On some days there appears the heading "Overdue"--an ominous threat
of loss and sorrow trembling yet in the balance of fate.  There is
something sinister to a seaman in the very grouping of the letters
which form this word, clear in its meaning, and seldom threatening
in vain.

Only a very few days more--appallingly few to the hearts which had
set themselves bravely to hope against hope--three weeks, a month
later, perhaps, the name of ships under the blight of the "Overdue"
heading shall appear again in the column of "Shipping
Intelligence," but under the final declaration of "Missing."

"The ship, or barque, or brig So-and-so, bound from such a port,
with such and such cargo, for such another port, having left at
such and such a date, last spoken at sea on such a day, and never
having been heard of since, was posted to-day as missing."  Such in
its strictly official eloquence is the form of funeral orations on
ships that, perhaps wearied with a long struggle, or in some
unguarded moment that may come to the readiest of us, had let
themselves be overwhelmed by a sudden blow from the enemy.

Who can say?  Perhaps the men she carried had asked her to do too
much, had stretched beyond breaking-point the enduring faithfulness
which seems wrought and hammered into that assemblage of iron ribs
and plating, of wood and steel and canvas and wire, which goes to
the making of a ship--a complete creation endowed with character,
individuality, qualities and defects, by men whose hands launch her
upon the water, and that other men shall learn to know with an
intimacy surpassing the intimacy of man with man, to love with a
love nearly as great as that of man for woman, and often as blind
in its infatuated disregard of defects.

There are ships which bear a bad name, but I have yet to meet one
whose crew for the time being failed to stand up angrily for her
against every criticism.  One ship which I call to mind now had the
reputation of killing somebody every voyage she made.  This was no
calumny, and yet I remember well, somewhere far back in the late
seventies, that the crew of that ship were, if anything, rather
proud of her evil fame, as if they had been an utterly corrupt lot
of desperadoes glorying in their association with an atrocious
creature.  We, belonging to other vessels moored all about the
Circular Quay in Sydney, used to shake our heads at her with a
great sense of the unblemished virtue of our own well-loved ships.

I shall not pronounce her name.  She is "missing" now, after a
sinister but, from the point of view of her owners, a useful career
extending over many years, and, I should say, across every ocean of
our globe.  Having killed a man for every voyage, and perhaps
rendered more misanthropic by the infirmities that come with years
upon a ship, she had made up her mind to kill all hands at once
before leaving the scene of her exploits.  A fitting end, this, to
a life of usefulness and crime--in a last outburst of an evil
passion supremely satisfied on some wild night, perhaps, to the
applauding clamour of wind and wave.

How did she do it?  In the word "missing" there is a horrible depth
of doubt and speculation.  Did she go quickly from under the men's
feet, or did she resist to the end, letting the sea batter her to
pieces, start her butts, wrench her frame, load her with an
increasing weight of salt water, and, dismasted, unmanageable,
rolling heavily, her boats gone, her decks swept, had she wearied
her men half to death with the unceasing labour at the pumps before
she sank with them like a stone?

However, such a case must be rare.  I imagine a raft of some sort
could always be contrived; and, even if it saved no one, it would
float on and be picked up, perhaps conveying some hint of the
vanished name.  Then that ship would not be, properly speaking,
missing.  She would be "lost with all hands," and in that
distinction there is a subtle difference--less horror and a less
appalling darkness.



XVII.



The unholy fascination of dread dwells in the thought of the last
moments of a ship reported as "missing" in the columns of the
Shipping Gazette.  Nothing of her ever comes to light--no grating,
no lifebuoy, no piece of boat or branded oar--to give a hint of the
place and date of her sudden end.  The Shipping Gazette does not
even call her "lost with all hands."  She remains simply "missing";
she has disappeared enigmatically into a mystery of fate as big as
the world, where your imagination of a brother-sailor, of a fellow-
servant and lover of ships, may range unchecked.

And yet sometimes one gets a hint of what the last scene may be
like in the life of a ship and her crew, which resembles a drama in
its struggle against a great force bearing it up, formless,
ungraspable, chaotic and mysterious, as fate.

It was on a gray afternoon in the lull of a three days' gale that
had left the Southern Ocean tumbling heavily upon our ship, under a
sky hung with rags of clouds that seemed to have been cut and
hacked by the keen edge of a sou'-west gale.

Our craft, a Clyde-built barque of 1,000 tons, rolled so heavily
that something aloft had carried away.  No matter what the damage
was, but it was serious enough to induce me to go aloft myself with
a couple of hands and the carpenter to see the temporary repairs
properly done.

Sometimes we had to drop everything and cling with both hands to
the swaying spars, holding our breath in fear of a terribly heavy
roll.  And, wallowing as if she meant to turn over with us, the
barque, her decks full of water, her gear flying in bights, ran at
some ten knots an hour.  We had been driven far south--much farther
that way than we had meant to go; and suddenly, up there in the
slings of the foreyard, in the midst of our work, I felt my
shoulder gripped with such force in the carpenter's powerful paw
that I positively yelled with unexpected pain.  The man's eyes
stared close in my face, and he shouted, "Look, sir! look!  What's
this?" pointing ahead with his other hand.

At first I saw nothing.  The sea was one empty wilderness of black
and white hills.  Suddenly, half-concealed in the tumult of the
foaming rollers I made out awash, something enormous, rising and
falling--something spread out like a burst of foam, but with a more
bluish, more solid look.

It was a piece of an ice-floe melted down to a fragment, but still
big enough to sink a ship, and floating lower than any raft, right
in our way, as if ambushed among the waves with murderous intent.
There was no time to get down on deck.  I shouted from aloft till
my head was ready to split.  I was heard aft, and we managed to
clear the sunken floe which had come all the way from the Southern
ice-cap to have a try at our unsuspecting lives.  Had it been an
hour later, nothing could have saved the ship, for no eye could
have made out in the dusk that pale piece of ice swept over by the
white-crested waves.

And as we stood near the taffrail side by side, my captain and I,
looking at it, hardly discernible already, but still quite close-to
on our quarter, he remarked in a meditative tone:

"But for the turn of that wheel just in time, there would have been
another case of a 'missing' ship."

Nobody ever comes back from a "missing" ship to tell how hard was
the death of the craft, and how sudden and overwhelming the last
anguish of her men.  Nobody can say with what thoughts, with what
regrets, with what words on their lips they died.  But there is
something fine in the sudden passing away of these hearts from the
extremity of struggle and stress and tremendous uproar--from the
vast, unrestful rage of the surface to the profound peace of the
depths, sleeping untroubled since the beginning of ages.



XVIII.



But if the word "missing" brings all hope to an end and settles the
loss of the underwriters, the word "overdue" confirms the fears
already born in many homes ashore, and opens the door of
speculation in the market of risks.

Maritime risks, be it understood.  There is a class of optimists
ready to reinsure an "overdue" ship at a heavy premium.  But
nothing can insure the hearts on shore against the bitterness of
waiting for the worst.

For if a "missing" ship has never turned up within the memory of
seamen of my generation, the name of an "overdue" ship, trembling
as it were on the edge of the fatal heading, has been known to
appear as "arrived."

It must blaze up, indeed, with a great brilliance the dull
printer's ink expended on the assemblage of the few letters that
form the ship's name to the anxious eyes scanning the page in fear
and trembling.  It is like the message of reprieve from the
sentence of sorrow suspended over many a home, even if some of the
men in her have been the most homeless mortals that you may find
among the wanderers of the sea.

The reinsurer, the optimist of ill-luck and disaster, slaps his
pocket with satisfaction.  The underwriter, who had been trying to
minimize the amount of impending loss, regrets his premature
pessimism.  The ship has been stauncher, the skies more merciful,
the seas less angry, or perhaps the men on board of a finer temper
than he has been willing to take for granted.

"The ship So-and-so, bound to such a port, and posted as 'overdue,'
has been reported yesterday as having arrived safely at her
destination."

Thus run the official words of the reprieve addressed to the hearts
ashore lying under a heavy sentence.  And they come swiftly from
the other side of the earth, over wires and cables, for your
electric telegraph is a great alleviator of anxiety.  Details, of
course, shall follow.  And they may unfold a tale of narrow escape,
of steady ill-luck, of high winds and heavy weather, of ice, of
interminable calms or endless head-gales; a tale of difficulties
overcome, of adversity defied by a small knot of men upon the great
loneliness of the sea; a tale of resource, of courage--of
helplessness, perhaps.

Of all ships disabled at sea, a steamer who has lost her propeller
is the most helpless.  And if she drifts into an unpopulated part
of the ocean she may soon become overdue.  The menace of the
"overdue" and the finality of "missing" come very quickly to
steamers whose life, fed on coals and breathing the black breath of
smoke into the air, goes on in disregard of wind and wave.  Such a
one, a big steamship, too, whose working life had been a record of
faithful keeping time from land to land, in disregard of wind and
sea, once lost her propeller down south, on her passage out to New
Zealand.

It was the wintry, murky time of cold gales and heavy seas.  With
the snapping of her tail-shaft her life seemed suddenly to depart
from her big body, and from a stubborn, arrogant existence she
passed all at once into the passive state of a drifting log.  A
ship sick with her own weakness has not the pathos of a ship
vanquished in a battle with the elements, wherein consists the
inner drama of her life.  No seaman can look without compassion
upon a disabled ship, but to look at a sailing-vessel with her
lofty spars gone is to look upon a defeated but indomitable
warrior.  There is defiance in the remaining stumps of her masts,
raised up like maimed limbs against the menacing scowl of a stormy
sky; there is high courage in the upward sweep of her lines towards
the bow; and as soon as, on a hastily-rigged spar, a strip of
canvas is shown to the wind to keep her head to sea, she faces the
waves again with an unsubdued courage.



XIX.



The efficiency of a steamship consists not so much in her courage
as in the power she carries within herself.  It beats and throbs
like a pulsating heart within her iron ribs, and when it stops, the
steamer, whose life is not so much a contest as the disdainful
ignoring of the sea, sickens and dies upon the waves.  The sailing-
ship, with her unthrobbing body, seemed to lead mysteriously a sort
of unearthly existence, bordering upon the magic of the invisible
forces, sustained by the inspiration of life-giving and death-
dealing winds.

So that big steamer, dying by a sudden stroke, drifted, an unwieldy
corpse, away from the track of other ships.  And she would have
been posted really as "overdue," or maybe as "missing," had she not
been sighted in a snowstorm, vaguely, like a strange rolling
island, by a whaler going north from her Polar cruising ground.
There was plenty of food on board, and I don't know whether the
nerves of her passengers were at all affected by anything else than
the sense of interminable boredom or the vague fear of that unusual
situation.  Does a passenger ever feel the life of the ship in
which he is being carried like a sort of honoured bale of highly
sensitive goods?  For a man who has never been a passenger it is
impossible to say.  But I know that there is no harder trial for a
seaman than to feel a dead ship under his feet.

There is no mistaking that sensation, so dismal, so tormenting and
so subtle, so full of unhappiness and unrest.  I could imagine no
worse eternal punishment for evil seamen who die unrepentant upon
the earthly sea than that their souls should be condemned to man
the ghosts of disabled ships, drifting for ever across a ghostly
and tempestuous ocean.

She must have looked ghostly enough, that broken-down steamer,
rolling in that snowstorm--a dark apparition in a world of white
snowflakes to the staring eyes of that whaler's crew.  Evidently
they didn't believe in ghosts, for on arrival into port her captain
unromantically reported having sighted a disabled steamer in
latitude somewhere about 50 degrees S. and a longitude still more
uncertain.  Other steamers came out to look for her, and ultimately
towed her away from the cold edge of the world into a harbour with
docks and workshops, where, with many blows of hammers, her
pulsating heart of steel was set going again to go forth presently
in the renewed pride of its strength, fed on fire and water,
breathing black smoke into the air, pulsating, throbbing,
shouldering its arrogant way against the great rollers in blind
disdain of winds and sea.

The track she had made when drifting while her heart stood still
within her iron ribs looked like a tangled thread on the white
paper of the chart.  It was shown to me by a friend, her second
officer.  In that surprising tangle there were words in minute
letters--"gales," "thick fog," "ice"--written by him here and there
as memoranda of the weather.  She had interminably turned upon her
tracks, she had crossed and recrossed her haphazard path till it
resembled nothing so much as a puzzling maze of pencilled lines
without a meaning.  But in that maze there lurked all the romance
of the "overdue" and a menacing hint of "missing."

"We had three weeks of it," said my friend, "just think of that!"

"How did you feel about it?" I asked.

He waved his hand as much as to say:  It's all in the day's work.
But then, abruptly, as if making up his mind:

"I'll tell you.  Towards the last I used to shut myself up in my
berth and cry."

"Cry?"

"Shed tears," he explained briefly, and rolled up the chart.

I can answer for it, he was a good man--as good as ever stepped
upon a ship's deck--but he could not bear the feeling of a dead
ship under his feet:  the sickly, disheartening feeling which the
men of some "overdue" ships that come into harbour at last under a
jury-rig must have felt, combated, and overcome in the faithful
discharge of their duty.



XX.



It is difficult for a seaman to believe that his stranded ship does
not feel as unhappy at the unnatural predicament of having no water
under her keel as he is himself at feeling her stranded.

Stranding is, indeed, the reverse of sinking.  The sea does not
close upon the water-logged hull with a sunny ripple, or maybe with
the angry rush of a curling wave, erasing her name from the roll of
living ships.  No.  It is as if an invisible hand had been
stealthily uplifted from the bottom to catch hold of her keel as it
glides through the water.

More than any other event does stranding bring to the sailor a
sense of utter and dismal failure.  There are strandings and
strandings, but I am safe to say that 90 per cent. of them are
occasions in which a sailor, without dishonour, may well wish
himself dead; and I have no doubt that of those who had the
experience of their ship taking the ground, 90 per cent. did
actually for five seconds or so wish themselves dead.

"Taking the ground" is the professional expression for a ship that
is stranded in gentle circumstances.  But the feeling is more as if
the ground had taken hold of her.  It is for those on her deck a
surprising sensation.  It is as if your feet had been caught in an
imponderable snare; you feel the balance of your body threatened,
and the steady poise of your mind is destroyed at once.  This
sensation lasts only a second, for even while you stagger something
seems to turn over in your head, bringing uppermost the mental
exclamation, full of astonishment and dismay, "By Jove! she's on
the ground!"

And that is very terrible.  After all, the only mission of a
seaman's calling is to keep ships' keels off the ground.  Thus the
moment of her stranding takes away from him every excuse for his
continued existence.  To keep ships afloat is his business; it is
his trust; it is the effective formula of the bottom of all these
vague impulses, dreams, and illusions that go to the making up of a
boy's vocation.  The grip of the land upon the keel of your ship,
even if nothing worse comes of it than the wear and tear of tackle
and the loss of time, remains in a seaman's memory an indelibly
fixed taste of disaster.

"Stranded" within the meaning of this paper stands for a more or
less excusable mistake.  A ship may be "driven ashore" by stress of
weather.  It is a catastrophe, a defeat.  To be "run ashore" has
the littleness, poignancy, and bitterness of human error.



XXI.



That is why your "strandings" are for the most part so unexpected.
In fact, they are all unexpected, except those heralded by some
short glimpse of the danger, full of agitation and excitement, like
an awakening from a dream of incredible folly.

The land suddenly at night looms up right over your bows, or
perhaps the cry of "Broken water ahead!" is raised, and some long
mistake, some complicated edifice of self-delusion, over-
confidence, and wrong reasoning is brought down in a fatal shock,
and the heart-searing experience of your ship's keel scraping and
scrunching over, say, a coral reef.  It is a sound, for its size,
far more terrific to your soul than that of a world coming
violently to an end.  But out of that chaos your belief in your own
prudence and sagacity reasserts itself.  You ask yourself, Where on
earth did I get to?  How on earth did I get there? with a
conviction that it could not be your own act, that there has been
at work some mysterious conspiracy of accident; that the charts are
all wrong, and if the charts are not wrong, that land and sea have
changed their places; that your misfortune shall for ever remain
inexplicable, since you have lived always with the sense of your
trust, the last thing on closing your eyes, the first on opening
them, as if your mind had kept firm hold of your responsibility
during the hours of sleep.

You contemplate mentally your mischance, till little by little your
mood changes, cold doubt steals into the very marrow of your bones,
you see the inexplicable fact in another light.  That is the time
when you ask yourself, How on earth could I have been fool enough
to get there?  And you are ready to renounce all belief in your
good sense, in your knowledge, in your fidelity, in what you
thought till then was the best in you, giving you the daily bread
of life and the moral support of other men's confidence.

The ship is lost or not lost.  Once stranded, you have to do your
best by her.  She may be saved by your efforts, by your resource
and fortitude bearing up against the heavy weight of guilt and
failure.  And there are justifiable strandings in fogs, on
uncharted seas, on dangerous shores, through treacherous tides.
But, saved or not saved, there remains with her commander a
distinct sense of loss, a flavour in the mouth of the real, abiding
danger that lurks in all the forms of human existence.  It is an
acquisition, too, that feeling.  A man may be the better for it,
but he will not be the same.  Damocles has seen the sword suspended
by a hair over his head, and though a good man need not be made
less valuable by such a knowledge, the feast shall not henceforth
have the same flavour.

Years ago I was concerned as chief mate in a case of stranding
which was not fatal to the ship.  We went to work for ten hours on
end, laying out anchors in readiness to heave off at high water.
While I was still busy about the decks forward I heard the steward
at my elbow saying:  "The captain asks whether you mean to come in,
sir, and have something to eat to-day."

I went into the cuddy.  My captain sat at the head of the table
like a statue.  There was a strange motionlessness of everything in
that pretty little cabin.  The swing-table which for seventy odd
days had been always on the move, if ever so little, hung quite
still above the soup-tureen.  Nothing could have altered the rich
colour of my commander's complexion, laid on generously by wind and
sea; but between the two tufts of fair hair above his ears, his
skull, generally suffused with the hue of blood, shone dead white,
like a dome of ivory.  And he looked strangely untidy.  I perceived
he had not shaved himself that day; and yet the wildest motion of
the ship in the most stormy latitudes we had passed through, never
made him miss one single morning ever since we left the Channel.
The fact must be that a commander cannot possibly shave himself
when his ship is aground.  I have commanded ships myself, but I
don't know; I have never tried to shave in my life.

He did not offer to help me or himself till I had coughed markedly
several times.  I talked to him professionally in a cheery tone,
and ended with the confident assertion:

"We shall get her off before midnight, sir."

He smiled faintly without looking up, and muttered as if to
himself:

"Yes, yes; the captain put the ship ashore and we got her off."

Then, raising his head, he attacked grumpily the steward, a lanky,
anxious youth with a long, pale face and two big front teeth.

"What makes this soup so bitter?  I am surprised the mate can
swallow the beastly stuff.  I'm sure the cook's ladled some salt
water into it by mistake."

The charge was so outrageous that the steward for all answer only
dropped his eyelids bashfully.

There was nothing the matter with the soup.  I had a second
helping.  My heart was warm with hours of hard work at the head of
a willing crew.  I was elated with having handled heavy anchors,
cables, boats without the slightest hitch; pleased with having laid
out scientifically bower, stream, and kedge exactly where I
believed they would do most good.  On that occasion the bitter
taste of a stranding was not for my mouth.  That experience came
later, and it was only then that I understood the loneliness of the
man in charge.

It's the captain who puts the ship ashore; it's we who get her off.



XXII.



It seems to me that no man born and truthful to himself could
declare that he ever saw the sea looking young as the earth looks
young in spring.  But some of us, regarding the ocean with
understanding and affection, have seen it looking old, as if the
immemorial ages had been stirred up from the undisturbed bottom of
ooze.  For it is a gale of wind that makes the sea look old.

From a distance of years, looking at the remembered aspects of the
storms lived through, it is that impression which disengages itself
clearly from the great body of impressions left by many years of
intimate contact.

If you would know the age of the earth, look upon the sea in a
storm.  The grayness of the whole immense surface, the wind furrows
upon the faces of the waves, the great masses of foam, tossed about
and waving, like matted white locks, give to the sea in a gale an
appearance of hoary age, lustreless, dull, without gleams, as
though it had been created before light itself.

Looking back after much love and much trouble, the instinct of
primitive man, who seeks to personify the forces of Nature for his
affection and for his fear, is awakened again in the breast of one
civilized beyond that stage even in his infancy.  One seems to have
known gales as enemies, and even as enemies one embraces them in
that affectionate regret which clings to the past.

Gales have their personalities, and, after all, perhaps it is not
strange; for, when all is said and done, they are adversaries whose
wiles you must defeat, whose violence you must resist, and yet with
whom you must live in the intimacies of nights and days.

Here speaks the man of masts and sails, to whom the sea is not a
navigable element, but an intimate companion.  The length of
passages, the growing sense of solitude, the close dependence upon
the very forces that, friendly to-day, without changing their
nature, by the mere putting forth of their might, become dangerous
to-morrow, make for that sense of fellowship which modern seamen,
good men as they are, cannot hope to know.  And, besides, your
modern ship which is a steamship makes her passages on other
principles than yielding to the weather and humouring the sea.  She
receives smashing blows, but she advances; it is a slogging fight,
and not a scientific campaign.  The machinery, the steel, the fire,
the steam, have stepped in between the man and the sea.  A modern
fleet of ships does not so much make use of the sea as exploit a
highway.  The modern ship is not the sport of the waves.  Let us
say that each of her voyages is a triumphant progress; and yet it
is a question whether it is not a more subtle and more human
triumph to be the sport of the waves and yet survive, achieving
your end.

In his own time a man is always very modern.  Whether the seamen of
three hundred years hence will have the faculty of sympathy it is
impossible to say.  An incorrigible mankind hardens its heart in
the progress of its own perfectability.  How will they feel on
seeing the illustrations to the sea novels of our day, or of our
yesterday?  It is impossible to guess.  But the seaman of the last
generation, brought into sympathy with the caravels of ancient time
by his sailing-ship, their lineal descendant, cannot look upon
those lumbering forms navigating the naive seas of ancient woodcuts
without a feeling of surprise, of affectionate derision, envy, and
admiration.  For those things, whose unmanageableness, even when
represented on paper, makes one gasp with a sort of amused horror,
were manned by men who are his direct professional ancestors.

No; the seamen of three hundred years hence will probably be
neither touched nor moved to derision, affection, or admiration.
They will glance at the photogravures of our nearly defunct
sailing-ships with a cold, inquisitive and indifferent eye.  Our
ships of yesterday will stand to their ships as no lineal
ancestors, but as mere predecessors whose course will have been run
and the race extinct.  Whatever craft he handles with skill, the
seaman of the future shall be, not our descendant, but only our
successor.



XXIII.



And so much depends upon the craft which, made by man, is one with
man, that the sea shall wear for him another aspect.  I remember
once seeing the commander--officially the master, by courtesy the
captain--of a fine iron ship of the old wool fleet shaking his head
at a very pretty brigantine.  She was bound the other way.  She was
a taut, trim, neat little craft, extremely well kept; and on that
serene evening when we passed her close she looked the embodiment
of coquettish comfort on the sea.  It was somewhere near the Cape--
THE Cape being, of course, the Cape of Good Hope, the Cape of
Storms of its Portuguese discoverer.  And whether it is that the
word "storm" should not be pronounced upon the sea where the storms
dwell thickly, or because men are shy of confessing their good
hopes, it has become the nameless cape--the Cape tout court.  The
other great cape of the world, strangely enough, is seldom if ever
called a cape.  We say, "a voyage round the Horn"; "we rounded the
Horn"; "we got a frightful battering off the Horn"; but rarely
"Cape Horn," and, indeed, with some reason, for Cape Horn is as
much an island as a cape.  The third stormy cape of the world,
which is the Leeuwin, receives generally its full name, as if to
console its second-rate dignity.  These are the capes that look
upon the gales.

The little brigantine, then, had doubled the Cape.  Perhaps she was
coming from Port Elizabeth, from East London--who knows?  It was
many years ago, but I remember well the captain of the wool-clipper
nodding at her with the words, "Fancy having to go about the sea in
a thing like that!"

He was a man brought up in big deep-water ships, and the size of
the craft under his feet was a part of his conception of the sea.
His own ship was certainly big as ships went then.  He may have
thought of the size of his cabin, or--unconsciously, perhaps--have
conjured up a vision of a vessel so small tossing amongst the great
seas.  I didn't inquire, and to a young second mate the captain of
the little pretty brigantine, sitting astride a camp stool with his
chin resting on his hands that were crossed upon the rail, might
have appeared a minor king amongst men.  We passed her within
earshot, without a hail, reading each other's names with the naked
eye.

Some years later, the second mate, the recipient of that almost
involuntary mutter, could have told his captain that a man brought
up in big ships may yet take a peculiar delight in what we should
both then have called a small craft.  Probably the captain of the
big ship would not have understood very well.  His answer would
have been a gruff, "Give me size," as I heard another man reply to
a remark praising the handiness of a small vessel.  It was not a
love of the grandiose or the prestige attached to the command of
great tonnage, for he continued, with an air of disgust and
contempt, "Why, you get flung out of your bunk as likely as not in
any sort of heavy weather."

I don't know.  I remember a few nights in my lifetime, and in a big
ship, too (as big as they made them then), when one did not get
flung out of one's bed simply because one never even attempted to
get in; one had been made too weary, too hopeless, to try.  The
expedient of turning your bedding out on to a damp floor and lying
on it there was no earthly good, since you could not keep your
place or get a second's rest in that or any other position.  But of
the delight of seeing a small craft run bravely amongst the great
seas there can be no question to him whose soul does not dwell
ashore.  Thus I well remember a three days' run got out of a little
barque of 400 tons somewhere between the islands of St. Paul and
Amsterdam and Cape Otway on the Australian coast.  It was a hard,
long gale, gray clouds and green sea, heavy weather undoubtedly,
but still what a sailor would call manageable.  Under two lower
topsails and a reefed foresail the barque seemed to race with a
long, steady sea that did not becalm her in the troughs.  The
solemn thundering combers caught her up from astern, passed her
with a fierce boiling up of foam level with the bulwarks, swept on
ahead with a swish and a roar:  and the little vessel, dipping her
jib-boom into the tumbling froth, would go on running in a smooth,
glassy hollow, a deep valley between two ridges of the sea, hiding
the horizon ahead and astern.  There was such fascination in her
pluck, nimbleness, the continual exhibition of unfailing
seaworthiness, in the semblance of courage and endurance, that I
could not give up the delight of watching her run through the three
unforgettable days of that gale which my mate also delighted to
extol as "a famous shove."

And this is one of those gales whose memory in after-years returns,
welcome in dignified austerity, as you would remember with pleasure
the noble features of a stranger with whom you crossed swords once
in knightly encounter and are never to see again.  In this way
gales have their physiognomy.  You remember them by your own
feelings, and no two gales stamp themselves in the same way upon
your emotions.  Some cling to you in woebegone misery; others come
back fiercely and weirdly, like ghouls bent upon sucking your
strength away; others, again, have a catastrophic splendour; some
are unvenerated recollections, as of spiteful wild-cats clawing at
your agonized vitals; others are severe, like a visitation; and one
or two rise up draped and mysterious, with an aspect of ominous
menace.  In each of them there is a characteristic point at which
the whole feeling seems contained in one single moment.  Thus there
is a certain four o'clock in the morning in the confused roar of a
black and white world when coming on deck to take charge of my
watch I received the instantaneous impression that the ship could
not live for another hour in such a raging sea.

I wonder what became of the men who silently (you couldn't hear
yourself speak) must have shared that conviction with me.  To be
left to write about it is not, perhaps, the most enviable fate; but
the point is that this impression resumes in its intensity the
whole recollection of days and days of desperately dangerous
weather.  We were then, for reasons which it is not worth while to
specify, in the close neighbourhood of Kerguelen Land; and now,
when I open an atlas and look at the tiny dots on the map of the
Southern Ocean, I see as if engraved upon the paper the enraged
physiognomy of that gale.

Another, strangely, recalls a silent man.  And yet it was not din
that was wanting; in fact, it was terrific.  That one was a gale
that came upon the ship swiftly, like a parnpero, which last is a
very sudden wind indeed.  Before we knew very well what was coming
all the sails we had set had burst; the furled ones were blowing
loose, ropes flying, sea hissing--it hissed tremendously--wind
howling, and the ship lying on her side, so that half of the crew
were swimming and the other half clawing desperately at whatever
came to hand, according to the side of the deck each man had been
caught on by the catastrophe, either to leeward or to windward.
The shouting I need not mention--it was the merest drop in an ocean
of noise--and yet the character of the gale seems contained in the
recollection of one small, not particularly impressive, sallow man
without a cap and with a very still face.  Captain Jones--let us
call him Jones--had been caught unawares.  Two orders he had given
at the first sign of an utterly unforeseen onset; after that the
magnitude of his mistake seemed to have overwhelmed him.  We were
doing what was needed and feasible.  The ship behaved well.  Of
course, it was some time before we could pause in our fierce and
laborious exertions; but all through the work, the excitement, the
uproar, and some dismay, we were aware of this silent little man at
the break of the poop, perfectly motionless, soundless, and often
hidden from us by the drift of sprays.

When we officers clambered at last upon the poop, he seemed to come
out of that numbed composure, and shouted to us down wind:  "Try
the pumps."  Afterwards he disappeared.  As to the ship, I need not
say that, although she was presently swallowed up in one of the
blackest nights I can remember, she did not disappear.  In truth, I
don't fancy that there had ever been much danger of that, but
certainly the experience was noisy and particularly distracting--
and yet it is the memory of a very quiet silence that survives.



XXIV.



For, after all, a gale of wind, the thing of mighty sound, is
inarticulate.  It is man who, in a chance phrase, interprets the
elemental passion of his enemy.  Thus there is another gale in my
memory, a thing of endless, deep, humming roar, moonlight, and a
spoken sentence.

It was off that other cape which is always deprived of its title as
the Cape of Good Hope is robbed of its name.  It was off the Horn.
For a true expression of dishevelled wildness there is nothing like
a gale in the bright moonlight of a high latitude.

The ship, brought-to and bowing to enormous flashing seas,
glistened wet from deck to trucks; her one set sail stood out a
coal-black shape upon the gloomy blueness of the air.  I was a
youngster then, and suffering from weariness, cold, and imperfect
oilskins which let water in at every seam.  I craved human
companionship, and, coming off the poop, took my place by the side
of the boatswain (a man whom I did not like) in a comparatively dry
spot where at worst we had water only up to our knees.  Above our
heads the explosive booming gusts of wind passed continuously,
justifying the sailor's saying "It blows great guns."  And just
from that need of human companionship, being very close to the man,
I said, or rather shouted:

"Blows very hard, boatswain."

His answer was:

"Ay, and if it blows only a little harder things will begin to go.
I don't mind as long as everything holds, but when things begin to
go it's bad."

The note of dread in the shouting voice, the practical truth of
these words, heard years ago from a man I did not like, have
stamped its peculiar character on that gale.

A look in the eyes of a shipmate, a low murmur in the most
sheltered spot where the watch on duty are huddled together, a
meaning moan from one to the other with a glance at the windward
sky, a sigh of weariness, a gesture of disgust passing into the
keeping of the great wind, become part and parcel of the gale.  The
olive hue of hurricane clouds presents an aspect peculiarly
appalling.  The inky ragged wrack, flying before a nor'-west wind,
makes you dizzy with its headlong speed that depicts the rush of
the invisible air.  A hard sou'-wester startles you with its close
horizon and its low gray sky, as if the world were a dungeon
wherein there is no rest for body or soul.  And there are black
squalls, white squalls, thunder squalls, and unexpected gusts that
come without a single sign in the sky; and of each kind no one of
them resembles another.

There is infinite variety in the gales of wind at sea, and except
for the peculiar, terrible, and mysterious moaning that may be
heard sometimes passing through the roar of a hurricane--except for
that unforgettable sound, as if the soul of the universe had been
goaded into a mournful groan--it is, after all, the human voice
that stamps the mark of human consciousness upon the character of a
gale.



XXV.



There is no part of the world of coasts, continents, oceans, seas,
straits, capes, and islands which is not under the sway of a
reigning wind, the sovereign of its typical weather.  The wind
rules the aspects of the sky and the action of the sea.  But no
wind rules unchallenged his realm of land and water.  As with the
kingdoms of the earth, there are regions more turbulent than
others.  In the middle belt of the earth the Trade Winds reign
supreme, undisputed, like monarchs of long-settled kingdoms, whose
traditional power, checking all undue ambitions, is not so much an
exercise of personal might as the working of long-established
institutions.  The intertropical kingdoms of the Trade Winds are
favourable to the ordinary life of a merchantman.  The trumpet-call
of strife is seldom borne on their wings to the watchful ears of
men on the decks of ships.  The regions ruled by the north-east and
south-east Trade Winds are serene.  In a southern-going ship, bound
out for a long voyage, the passage through their dominions is
characterized by a relaxation of strain and vigilance on the part
of the seamen.  Those citizens of the ocean feel sheltered under
the aegis of an uncontested law, of an undisputed dynasty.  There,
indeed, if anywhere on earth, the weather may be trusted.

Yet not too implicitly.  Even in the constitutional realm of Trade
Winds, north and south of the equator, ships are overtaken by
strange disturbances.  Still, the easterly winds, and, generally
speaking, the easterly weather all the world over, is characterized
by regularity and persistence.

As a ruler, the East Wind has a remarkable stability; as an invader
of the high latitudes lying under the tumultuous sway of his great
brother, the Wind of the West, he is extremely difficult to
dislodge, by the reason of his cold craftiness and profound
duplicity.

The narrow seas around these isles, where British admirals keep
watch and ward upon the marches of the Atlantic Ocean, are subject
to the turbulent sway of the West Wind.  Call it north-west or
south-west, it is all one--a different phase of the same character,
a changed expression on the same face.  In the orientation of the
winds that rule the seas, the north and south directions are of no
importance.  There are no North and South Winds of any account upon
this earth.  The North and South Winds are but small princes in the
dynasties that make peace and war upon the sea.  They never assert
themselves upon a vast stage.  They depend upon local causes--the
configuration of coasts, the shapes of straits, the accidents of
bold promontories round which they play their little part.  In the
polity of winds, as amongst the tribes of the earth, the real
struggle lies between East and West.



XXVI.



The West Wind reigns over the seas surrounding the coasts of these
kingdoms; and from the gateways of the channels, from promontories
as if from watch-towers, from estuaries of rivers as if from
postern gates, from passage-ways, inlets, straits, firths, the
garrison of the Isle and the crews of the ships going and returning
look to the westward to judge by the varied splendours of his
sunset mantle the mood of that arbitrary ruler.  The end of the day
is the time to gaze at the kingly face of the Westerly Weather, who
is the arbiter of ships' destinies.  Benignant and splendid, or
splendid and sinister, the western sky reflects the hidden purposes
of the royal mind.  Clothed in a mantle of dazzling gold or draped
in rags of black clouds like a beggar, the might of the Westerly
Wind sits enthroned upon the western horizon with the whole North
Atlantic as a footstool for his feet and the first twinkling stars
making a diadem for his brow.  Then the seamen, attentive courtiers
of the weather, think of regulating the conduct of their ships by
the mood of the master.  The West Wind is too great a king to be a
dissembler:  he is no calculator plotting deep schemes in a sombre
heart; he is too strong for small artifices; there is passion in
all his moods, even in the soft mood of his serene days, in the
grace of his blue sky whose immense and unfathomable tenderness
reflected in the mirror of the sea embraces, possesses, lulls to
sleep the ships with white sails.  He is all things to all oceans;
he is like a poet seated upon a throne--magnificent, simple,
barbarous, pensive, generous, impulsive, changeable, unfathomable--
but when you understand him, always the same.  Some of his sunsets
are like pageants devised for the delight of the multitude, when
all the gems of the royal treasure-house are displayed above the
sea.  Others are like the opening of his royal confidence, tinged
with thoughts of sadness and compassion in a melancholy splendour
meditating upon the short-lived peace of the waters.  And I have
seen him put the pent-up anger of his heart into the aspect of the
inaccessible sun, and cause it to glare fiercely like the eye of an
implacable autocrat out of a pale and frightened sky.

He is the war-lord who sends his battalions of Atlantic rollers to
the assault of our seaboard.  The compelling voice of the West Wind
musters up to his service all the might of the ocean.  At the
bidding of the West Wind there arises a great commotion in the sky
above these Islands, and a great rush of waters falls upon our
shores.  The sky of the westerly weather is full of flying clouds,
of great big white clouds coming thicker and thicker till they seem
to stand welded into a solid canopy, upon whose gray face the lower
wrack of the gale, thin, black and angry-looking, flies past with
vertiginous speed.  Denser and denser grows this dome of vapours,
descending lower and lower upon the sea, narrowing the horizon
around the ship.  And the characteristic aspect of westerly
weather, the thick, gray, smoky and sinister tone sets in,
circumscribing the view of the men, drenching their bodies,
oppressing their souls, taking their breath away with booming
gusts, deafening, blinding, driving, rushing them onwards in a
swaying ship towards our coasts lost in mists and rain.

The caprice of the winds, like the wilfulness of men, is fraught
with the disastrous consequences of self-indulgence.  Long anger,
the sense of his uncontrolled power, spoils the frank and generous
nature of the West Wind.  It is as if his heart were corrupted by a
malevolent and brooding rancour.  He devastates his own kingdom in
the wantonness of his force.  South-west is the quarter of the
heavens where he presents his darkened brow.  He breathes his rage
in terrific squalls, and overwhelms his realm with an inexhaustible
welter of clouds.  He strews the seeds of anxiety upon the decks of
scudding ships, makes the foam-stripped ocean look old, and
sprinkles with gray hairs the heads of ship-masters in the
homeward-bound ships running for the Channel.  The Westerly Wind
asserting his sway from the south-west quarter is often like a
monarch gone mad, driving forth with wild imprecations the most
faithful of his courtiers to shipwreck, disaster, and death.

The south-westerly weather is the thick weather par excellence.  It
is not the thickness of the fog; it is rather a contraction of the
horizon, a mysterious veiling of the shores with clouds that seem
to make a low-vaulted dungeon around the running ship.  It is not
blindness; it is a shortening of the sight.  The West Wind does not
say to the seaman, "You shall be blind"; it restricts merely the
range of his vision and raises the dread of land within his breast.
It makes of him a man robbed of half his force, of half his
efficiency.  Many times in my life, standing in long sea-boots and
streaming oilskins at the elbow of my commander on the poop of a
homeward-bound ship making for the Channel, and gazing ahead into
the gray and tormented waste, I have heard a weary sigh shape
itself into a studiously casual comment:

"Can't see very far in this weather."

And have made answer in the same low, perfunctory tone

"No, sir."

It would be merely the instinctive voicing of an ever-present
thought associated closely with the consciousness of the land
somewhere ahead and of the great speed of the ship.  Fair wind,
fair wind!  Who would dare to grumble at a fair wind?  It was a
favour of the Western King, who rules masterfully the North
Atlantic from the latitude of the Azores to the latitude of Cape
Farewell.  A famous shove this to end a good passage with; and yet,
somehow, one could not muster upon one's lips the smile of a
courtier's gratitude.  This favour was dispensed to you from under
an overbearing scowl, which is the true expression of the great
autocrat when he has made up his mind to give a battering to some
ships and to hunt certain others home in one breath of cruelty and
benevolence, equally distracting.

"No, sir.  Can't see very far."

Thus would the mate's voice repeat the thought of the master, both
gazing ahead, while under their feet the ship rushes at some twelve
knots in the direction of the lee shore; and only a couple of miles
in front of her swinging and dripping jib-boom, carried naked with
an upward slant like a spear, a gray horizon closes the view with a
multitude of waves surging upwards violently as if to strike at the
stooping clouds.

Awful and threatening scowls darken the face of the West Wind in
his clouded, south-west mood; and from the King's throne-hall in
the western board stronger gusts reach you, like the fierce shouts
of raving fury to which only the gloomy grandeur of the scene
imparts a saving dignity.  A shower pelts the deck and the sails of
the ship as if flung with a scream by an angry hand; and when the
night closes in, the night of a south-westerly gale, it seems more
hopeless than the shade of Hades.  The south-westerly mood of the
great West Wind is a lightless mood, without sun, moon, or stars,
with no gleam of light but the phosphorescent flashes of the great
sheets of foam that, boiling up on each side of the ship, fling
bluish gleams upon her dark and narrow hull, rolling as she runs,
chased by enormous seas, distracted in the tumult.

There are some bad nights in the kingdom of the West Wind for
homeward-bound ships making for the Channel; and the days of wrath
dawn upon them colourless and vague like the timid turning up of
invisible lights upon the scene of a tyrannical and passionate
outbreak, awful in the monotony of its method and the increasing
strength of its violence.  It is the same wind, the same clouds,
the same wildly racing seas, the same thick horizon around the
ship.  Only the wind is stronger, the clouds seem denser and more
overwhelming, the waves appear to have grown bigger and more
threatening during the night.  The hours, whose minutes are marked
by the crash of the breaking seas, slip by with the screaming,
pelting squalls overtaking the ship as she runs on and on with
darkened canvas, with streaming spars and dripping ropes.  The
down-pours thicken.  Preceding each shower a mysterious gloom, like
the passage of a shadow above the firmament of gray clouds, filters
down upon the ship.  Now and then the rain pours upon your head in
streams as if from spouts.  It seems as if your ship were going to
be drowned before she sank, as if all atmosphere had turned to
water.  You gasp, you splutter, you are blinded and deafened, you
are submerged, obliterated, dissolved, annihilated, streaming all
over as if your limbs, too, had turned to water.  And every nerve
on the alert you watch for the clearing-up mood of the Western
King, that shall come with a shift of wind as likely as not to whip
all the three masts out of your ship in the twinkling of an eye.



XXVII.



Heralded by the increasing fierceness of the squalls, sometimes by
a faint flash of lightning like the signal of a lighted torch waved
far away behind the clouds, the shift of wind comes at last, the
crucial moment of the change from the brooding and veiled violence
of the south-west gale to the sparkling, flashing, cutting, clear-
eyed anger of the King's north-westerly mood.  You behold another
phase of his passion, a fury bejewelled with stars, mayhap bearing
the crescent of the moon on its brow, shaking the last vestiges of
its torn cloud-mantle in inky-black squalls, with hail and sleet
descending like showers of crystals and pearls, bounding off the
spars, drumming on the sails, pattering on the oilskin coats,
whitening the decks of homeward-bound ships.  Faint, ruddy flashes
of lightning flicker in the starlight upon her mastheads.  A chilly
blast hums in the taut rigging, causing the ship to tremble to her
very keel, and the soaked men on her decks to shiver in their wet
clothes to the very marrow of their bones.  Before one squall has
flown over to sink in the eastern board, the edge of another peeps
up already above the western horizon, racing up swift, shapeless,
like a black bag full of frozen water ready to burst over your
devoted head.  The temper of the ruler of the ocean has changed.
Each gust of the clouded mood that seemed warmed by the heat of a
heart flaming with anger has its counterpart in the chilly blasts
that seem blown from a breast turned to ice with a sudden revulsion
of feeling.  Instead of blinding your eyes and crushing your soul
with a terrible apparatus of cloud and mists and seas and rain, the
King of the West turns his power to contemptuous pelting of your
back with icicles, to making your weary eyes water as if in grief,
and your worn-out carcass quake pitifully.  But each mood of the
great autocrat has its own greatness, and each is hard to bear.
Only the north-west phase of that mighty display is not
demoralizing to the same extent, because between the hail and sleet
squalls of a north-westerly gale one can see a long way ahead.

To see! to see!--this is the craving of the sailor, as of the rest
of blind humanity.  To have his path made clear for him is the
aspiration of every human being in our beclouded and tempestuous
existence.  I have heard a reserved, silent man, with no nerves to
speak of, after three days of hard running in thick south-westerly
weather, burst out passionately:  "I wish to God we could get sight
of something!"

We had just gone down below for a moment to commune in a battened-
down cabin, with a large white chart lying limp and damp upon a
cold and clammy table under the light of a smoky lamp.  Sprawling
over that seaman's silent and trusted adviser, with one elbow upon
the coast of Africa and the other planted in the neighbourhood of
Cape Hatteras (it was a general track-chart of the North Atlantic),
my skipper lifted his rugged, hairy face, and glared at me in a
half-exasperated, half-appealing way.  We have seen no sun, moon,
or stars for something like seven days.  By the effect of the West
Wind's wrath the celestial bodies had gone into hiding for a week
or more, and the last three days had seen the force of a south-west
gale grow from fresh, through strong, to heavy, as the entries in
my log-book could testify.  Then we separated, he to go on deck
again, in obedience to that mysterious call that seems to sound for
ever in a shipmaster's ears, I to stagger into my cabin with some
vague notion of putting down the words "Very heavy weather" in a
log-book not quite written up-to-date.  But I gave it up, and
crawled into my bunk instead, boots and hat on, all standing (it
did not matter; everything was soaking wet, a heavy sea having
burst the poop skylights the night before), to remain in a
nightmarish state between waking and sleeping for a couple of hours
of so-called rest.

The south-westerly mood of the West Wind is an enemy of sleep, and
even of a recumbent position, in the responsible officers of a
ship.  After two hours of futile, light-headed, inconsequent
thinking upon all things under heaven in that dark, dank, wet and
devastated cabin, I arose suddenly and staggered up on deck.  The
autocrat of the North Atlantic was still oppressing his kingdom and
its outlying dependencies, even as far as the Bay of Biscay, in the
dismal secrecy of thick, very thick, weather.  The force of the
wind, though we were running before it at the rate of some ten
knots an hour, was so great that it drove me with a steady push to
the front of the poop, where my commander was holding on.

"What do you think of it?" he addressed me in an interrogative
yell.

What I really thought was that we both had had just about enough of
it.  The manner in which the great West Wind chooses at times to
administer his possessions does not commend itself to a person of
peaceful and law-abiding disposition, inclined to draw distinctions
between right and wrong in the face of natural forces, whose
standard, naturally, is that of might alone.  But, of course, I
said nothing.  For a man caught, as it were, between his skipper
and the great West Wind silence is the safest sort of diplomacy.
Moreover, I knew my skipper.  He did not want to know what I
thought.  Shipmasters hanging on a breath before the thrones of the
winds ruling the seas have their psychology, whose workings are as
important to the ship and those on board of her as the changing
moods of the weather.  The man, as a matter of fact, under no
circumstances, ever cared a brass farthing for what I or anybody
else in his ship thought.  He had had just about enough of it, I
guessed, and what he was at really was a process of fishing for a
suggestion.  It was the pride of his life that he had never wasted
a chance, no matter how boisterous, threatening, and dangerous, of
a fair wind.  Like men racing blindfold for a gap in a hedge, we
were finishing a splendidly quick passage from the Antipodes, with
a tremendous rush for the Channel in as thick a weather as any I
can remember, but his psychology did not permit him to bring the
ship to with a fair wind blowing--at least not on his own
initiative.  And yet he felt that very soon indeed something would
have to be done.  He wanted the suggestion to come from me, so that
later on, when the trouble was over, he could argue this point with
his own uncompromising spirit, laying the blame upon my shoulders.
I must render him the justice that this sort of pride was his only
weakness.

But he got no suggestion from me.  I understood his psychology.
Besides, I had my own stock of weaknesses at the time (it is a
different one now), and amongst them was the conceit of being
remarkably well up in the psychology of the Westerly weather.  I
believed--not to mince matters--that I had a genius for reading the
mind of the great ruler of high latitudes.  I fancied I could
discern already the coming of a change in his royal mood.  And all
I said was:

"The weather's bound to clear up with the shift of wind."

"Anybody knows that much!" he snapped at me, at the highest pitch
of his voice.

"I mean before dark!" I cried.

This was all the opening he ever got from me.  The eagerness with
which he seized upon it gave me the measure of the anxiety he had
been labouring under.

"Very well," he shouted, with an affectation of impatience, as if
giving way to long entreaties.  "All right.  If we don't get a
shift by then we'll take that foresail off her and put her head
under her wing for the night."

I was struck by the picturesque character of the phrase as applied
to a ship brought-to in order to ride out a gale with wave after
wave passing under her breast.  I could see her resting in the
tumult of the elements like a sea-bird sleeping in wild weather
upon the raging waters with its head tucked under its wing.  In
imaginative precision, in true feeling, this is one of the most
expressive sentences I have ever heard on human lips.  But as to
taking the foresail off that ship before we put her head under her
wing, I had my grave doubts.  They were justified.  That long
enduring piece of canvas was confiscated by the arbitrary decree of
the West Wind, to whom belong the lives of men and the contrivances
of their hands within the limits of his kingdom.  With the sound of
a faint explosion it vanished into the thick weather bodily,
leaving behind of its stout substance not so much as one solitary
strip big enough to be picked into a handful of lint for, say, a
wounded elephant.  Torn out of its bolt-ropes, it faded like a
whiff of smoke in the smoky drift of clouds shattered and torn by
the shift of wind.  For the shift of wind had come.  The unveiled,
low sun glared angrily from a chaotic sky upon a confused and
tremendous sea dashing itself upon a coast.  We recognised the
headland, and looked at each other in the silence of dumb wonder.
Without knowing it in the least, we had run up alongside the Isle
of Wight, and that tower, tinged a faint evening red in the salt
wind-haze, was the lighthouse on St. Catherine's Point.

My skipper recovered first from his astonishment.  His bulging eyes
sank back gradually into their orbits.  His psychology, taking it
all round, was really very creditable for an average sailor.  He
had been spared the humiliation of laying his ship to with a fair
wind; and at once that man, of an open and truthful nature, spoke
up in perfect good faith, rubbing together his brown, hairy hands--
the hands of a master-craftsman upon the sea:

"Humph! that's just about where I reckoned we had got to."

The transparency and ingenuousness, in a way, of that delusion, the
airy tone, the hint of already growing pride, were perfectly
delicious.  But, in truth, this was one of the greatest surprises
ever sprung by the clearing up mood of the West Wind upon one of
the most accomplished of his courtiers.



XXVIII.



The winds of North and South are, as I have said, but small princes
amongst the powers of the sea.  They have no territory of their
own; they are not reigning winds anywhere.  Yet it is from their
houses that the reigning dynasties which have shared between them
the waters of the earth are sprung.  All the weather of the world
is based upon the contest of the Polar and Equatorial strains of
that tyrannous race.  The West Wind is the greatest king.  The East
rules between the Tropics.  They have shared each ocean between
them.  Each has his genius of supreme rule.  The King of the West
never intrudes upon the recognised dominion of his kingly brother.
He is a barbarian, of a northern type.  Violent without craftiness,
and furious without malice, one may imagine him seated masterfully
with a double-edged sword on his knees upon the painted and gilt
clouds of the sunset, bowing his shock head of golden locks, a
flaming beard over his breast, imposing, colossal, mighty-limbed,
with a thundering voice, distended cheeks and fierce blue eyes,
urging the speed of his gales.  The other, the East king, the king
of blood-red sunrises, I represent to myself as a spare Southerner
with clear-cut features, black-browed and dark-eyed, gray-robed,
upright in sunshine, resting a smooth-shaven cheek in the palm of
his hand, impenetrable, secret, full of wiles, fine-drawn, keen--
meditating aggressions.

The West Wind keeps faith with his brother, the King of the
Easterly weather.  "What we have divided we have divided," he seems
to say in his gruff voice, this ruler without guile, who hurls as
if in sport enormous masses of cloud across the sky, and flings the
great waves of the Atlantic clear across from the shores of the New
World upon the hoary headlands of Old Europe, which harbours more
kings and rulers upon its seamed and furrowed body than all the
oceans of the world together.  "What we have divided we have
divided; and if no rest and peace in this world have fallen to my
share, leave me alone.  Let me play at quoits with cyclonic gales,
flinging the discs of spinning cloud and whirling air from one end
of my dismal kingdom to the other:  over the Great Banks or along
the edges of pack-ice--this one with true aim right into the bight
of the Bay of Biscay, that other upon the fiords of Norway, across
the North Sea where the fishermen of many nations look watchfully
into my angry eye.  This is the time of kingly sport."

And the royal master of high latitudes sighs mightily, with the
sinking sun upon his breast and the double-edged sword upon his
knees, as if wearied by the innumerable centuries of a strenuous
rule and saddened by the unchangeable aspect of the ocean under his
feet--by the endless vista of future ages where the work of sowing
the wind and reaping the whirlwind shall go on and on till his
realm of living waters becomes a frozen and motionless ocean.  But
the other, crafty and unmoved, nursing his shaven chin between the
thumb and forefinger of his slim and treacherous hand, thinks deep
within his heart full of guile:  "Aha! our brother of the West has
fallen into the mood of kingly melancholy.  He is tired of playing
with circular gales, and blowing great guns, and unrolling thick
streamers of fog in wanton sport at the cost of his own poor,
miserable subjects.  Their fate is most pitiful.  Let us make a
foray upon the dominions of that noisy barbarian, a great raid from
Finisterre to Hatteras, catching his fishermen unawares, baffling
the fleets that trust to his power, and shooting sly arrows into
the livers of men who court his good graces.  He is, indeed, a
worthless fellow."  And forthwith, while the West Wind meditates
upon the vanity of his irresistible might, the thing is done, and
the Easterly weather sets in upon the North Atlantic.

The prevailing weather of the North Atlantic is typical of the way
in which the West Wind rules his realm on which the sun never sets.
North Atlantic is the heart of a great empire.  It is the part of
the West Wind's dominions most thickly populated with generations
of fine ships and hardy men.  Heroic deeds and adventurous exploits
have been performed there, within the very stronghold of his sway.
The best sailors in the world have been born and bred under the
shadow of his sceptre, learning to manage their ships with skill
and audacity before the steps of his stormy throne.  Reckless
adventurers, toiling fishermen, admirals as wise and brave as the
world has ever known, have waited upon the signs of his westerly
sky.  Fleets of victorious ships have hung upon his breath.  He has
tossed in his hand squadrons of war-scarred three-deckers, and
shredded out in mere sport the bunting of flags hallowed in the
traditions of honour and glory.  He is a good friend and a
dangerous enemy, without mercy to unseaworthy ships and faint-
hearted seamen.  In his kingly way he has taken but little account
of lives sacrificed to his impulsive policy; he is a king with a
double-edged sword bared in his right hand.  The East Wind, an
interloper in the dominions of Westerly weather, is an impassive-
faced tyrant with a sharp poniard held behind his back for a
treacherous stab.

In his forays into the North Atlantic the East Wind behaves like a
subtle and cruel adventurer without a notion of honour or fair
play.  Veiling his clear-cut, lean face in a thin layer of a hard,
high cloud, I have seen him, like a wizened robber sheik of the
sea, hold up large caravans of ships to the number of three hundred
or more at the very gates of the English Channel.  And the worst of
it was that there was no ransom that we could pay to satisfy his
avidity; for whatever evil is wrought by the raiding East Wind, it
is done only to spite his kingly brother of the West.  We gazed
helplessly at the systematic, cold, gray-eyed obstinacy of the
Easterly weather, while short rations became the order of the day,
and the pinch of hunger under the breast-bone grew familiar to
every sailor in that held-up fleet.  Every day added to our
numbers.  In knots and groups and straggling parties we flung to
and fro before the closed gate.  And meantime the outward-bound
ships passed, running through our humiliated ranks under all the
canvas they could show.  It is my idea that the Easterly Wind helps
the ships away from home in the wicked hope that they shall all
come to an untimely end and be heard of no more.  For six weeks did
the robber sheik hold the trade route of the earth, while our liege
lord, the West Wind, slept profoundly like a tired Titan, or else
remained lost in a mood of idle sadness known only to frank
natures.  All was still to the westward; we looked in vain towards
his stronghold:  the King slumbered on so deeply that he let his
foraging brother steal the very mantle of gold-lined purple clouds
from his bowed shoulders.  What had become of the dazzling hoard of
royal jewels exhibited at every close of day?  Gone, disappeared,
extinguished, carried off without leaving a single gold band or the
flash of a single sunbeam in the evening sky!  Day after day
through a cold streak of heavens as bare and poor as the inside of
a rifled safe a rayless and despoiled sun would slink shamefacedly,
without pomp or show, to hide in haste under the waters.  And still
the King slept on, or mourned the vanity of his might and his
power, while the thin-lipped intruder put the impress of his cold
and implacable spirit upon the sky and sea.  With every daybreak
the rising sun had to wade through a crimson stream, luminous and
sinister, like the spilt blood of celestial bodies murdered during
the night.

In this particular instance the mean interloper held the road for
some six weeks on end, establishing his particular administrative
methods over the best part of the North Atlantic.  It looked as if
the easterly weather had come to stay for ever, or, at least, till
we had all starved to death in the held-up fleet--starved within
sight, as it were, of plenty, within touch, almost, of the
bountiful heart of the Empire.  There we were, dotting with our
white dry sails the hard blueness of the deep sea.  There we were,
a growing company of ships, each with her burden of grain, of
timber, of wool, of hides, and even of oranges, for we had one or
two belated fruit schooners in company.  There we were, in that
memorable spring of a certain year in the late seventies, dodging
to and fro, baffled on every tack, and with our stores running down
to sweepings of bread-lockers and scrapings of sugar-casks.  It was
just like the East Wind's nature to inflict starvation upon the
bodies of unoffending sailors, while he corrupted their simple
souls by an exasperation leading to outbursts of profanity as lurid
as his blood-red sunrises.  They were followed by gray days under
the cover of high, motionless clouds that looked as if carved in a
slab of ash-coloured marble.  And each mean starved sunset left us
calling with imprecations upon the West Wind even in its most
veiled misty mood to wake up and give us our liberty, if only to
rush on and dash the heads of our ships against the very walls of
our unapproachable home.



XXIX.



In the atmosphere of the Easterly weather, as pellucid as a piece
of crystal and refracting like a prism, we could see the appalling
numbers of our helpless company, even to those who in more normal
conditions would have remained invisible, sails down under the
horizon.  It is the malicious pleasure of the East Wind to augment
the power of your eyesight, in order, perhaps, that you should see
better the perfect humiliation, the hopeless character of your
captivity.  Easterly weather is generally clear, and that is all
that can be said for it--almost supernaturally clear when it likes;
but whatever its mood, there is something uncanny in its nature.
Its duplicity is such that it will deceive a scientific instrument.
No barometer will give warning of an easterly gale, were it ever so
wet.  It would be an unjust and ungrateful thing to say that a
barometer is a stupid contrivance.  It is simply that the wiles of
the East Wind are too much for its fundamental honesty.  After
years and years of experience the most trusty instrument of the
sort that ever went to sea screwed on to a ship's cabin bulkhead
will, almost invariably, be induced to rise by the diabolic
ingenuity of the Easterly weather, just at the moment when the
Easterly weather, discarding its methods of hard, dry, impassive
cruelty, contemplates drowning what is left of your spirit in
torrents of a peculiarly cold and horrid rain.  The sleet-and-hail
squalls following the lightning at the end of a westerly gale are
cold and benumbing and stinging and cruel enough.  But the dry,
Easterly weather, when it turns to wet, seems to rain poisoned
showers upon your head.  It is a sort of steady, persistent,
overwhelming, endlessly driving downpour, which makes your heart
sick, and opens it to dismal forebodings.  And the stormy mood of
the Easterly weather looms black upon the sky with a peculiar and
amazing blackness.  The West Wind hangs heavy gray curtains of mist
and spray before your gaze, but the Eastern interloper of the
narrow seas, when he has mustered his courage and cruelty to the
point of a gale, puts your eyes out, puts them out completely,
makes you feel blind for life upon a lee-shore.  It is the wind,
also, that brings snow.

Out of his black and merciless heart he flings a white blinding
sheet upon the ships of the sea.  He has more manners of villainy,
and no more conscience than an Italian prince of the seventeenth
century.  His weapon is a dagger carried under a black cloak when
he goes out on his unlawful enterprises.  The mere hint of his
approach fills with dread every craft that swims the sea, from
fishing-smacks to four-masted ships that recognise the sway of the
West Wind.  Even in his most accommodating mood he inspires a dread
of treachery.  I have heard upwards of ten score of windlasses
spring like one into clanking life in the dead of night, filling
the Downs with a panic-struck sound of anchors being torn hurriedly
out of the ground at the first breath of his approach.
Fortunately, his heart often fails him:  he does not always blow
home upon our exposed coast; he has not the fearless temper of his
Westerly brother.

The natures of those two winds that share the dominions of the
great oceans are fundamentally different.  It is strange that the
winds which men are prone to style capricious remain true to their
character in all the various regions of the earth.  To us here, for
instance, the East Wind comes across a great continent, sweeping
over the greatest body of solid land upon this earth.  For the
Australian east coast the East Wind is the wind of the ocean,
coming across the greatest body of water upon the globe; and yet
here and there its characteristics remain the same with a strange
consistency in everything that is vile and base.  The members of
the West Wind's dynasty are modified in a way by the regions they
rule, as a Hohenzollern, without ceasing to be himself, becomes a
Roumanian by virtue of his throne, or a Saxe-Coburg learns to put
the dress of Bulgarian phrases upon his particular thoughts,
whatever they are.

The autocratic sway of the West Wind, whether forty north or forty
south of the Equator, is characterized by an open, generous, frank,
barbarous recklessness.  For he is a great autocrat, and to be a
great autocrat you must be a great barbarian.  I have been too much
moulded to his sway to nurse now any idea of rebellion in my heart.
Moreover, what is a rebellion within the four walls of a room
against the tempestuous rule of the West Wind?  I remain faithful
to the memory of the mighty King with a double-edged sword in one
hand, and in the other holding out rewards of great daily runs and
famously quick passages to those of his courtiers who knew how to
wait watchfully for every sign of his secret mood.  As we deep-
water men always reckoned, he made one year in three fairly lively
for anybody having business upon the Atlantic or down there along
the "forties" of the Southern Ocean.  You had to take the bitter
with the sweet; and it cannot be denied he played carelessly with
our lives and fortunes.  But, then, he was always a great king, fit
to rule over the great waters where, strictly speaking, a man would
have no business whatever but for his audacity.

The audacious should not complain.  A mere trader ought not to
grumble at the tolls levied by a mighty king.  His mightiness was
sometimes very overwhelming; but even when you had to defy him
openly, as on the banks of the Agulhas homeward bound from the East
Indies, or on the outward passage round the Horn, he struck at you
fairly his stinging blows (full in the face, too), and it was your
business not to get too much staggered.  And, after all, if you
showed anything of a countenance, the good-natured barbarian would
let you fight your way past the very steps of his throne.  It was
only now and then that the sword descended and a head fell; but if
you fell you were sure of impressive obsequies and of a roomy,
generous grave.

Such is the king to whom Viking chieftains bowed their heads, and
whom the modern and palatial steamship defies with impunity seven
times a week.  And yet it is but defiance, not victory.  The
magnificent barbarian sits enthroned in a mantle of gold-lined
clouds looking from on high on great ships gliding like mechanical
toys upon his sea and on men who, armed with fire and iron, no
longer need to watch anxiously for the slightest sign of his royal
mood.  He is disregarded; but he has kept all his strength, all his
splendour, and a great part of his power.  Time itself, that shakes
all the thrones, is on the side of that king.  The sword in his
hand remains as sharp as ever upon both its edges; and he may well
go on playing his royal game of quoits with hurricanes, tossing
them over from the continent of republics to the continent of
kingdoms, in the assurance that both the new republics and the old
kingdoms, the heat of fire and the strength of iron, with the
untold generations of audacious men, shall crumble to dust at the
steps of his throne, and pass away, and be forgotten before his own
rule comes to an end.



XXX.



The estuaries of rivers appeal strongly to an adventurous
imagination.  This appeal is not always a charm, for there are
estuaries of a particularly dispiriting ugliness:  lowlands, mud-
flats, or perhaps barren sandhills without beauty of form or
amenity of aspect, covered with a shabby and scanty vegetation
conveying the impression of poverty and uselessness.  Sometimes
such an ugliness is merely a repulsive mask.  A river whose estuary
resembles a breach in a sand rampart may flow through a most
fertile country.  But all the estuaries of great rivers have their
fascination, the attractiveness of an open portal.  Water is
friendly to man.  The ocean, a part of Nature furthest removed in
the unchangeableness and majesty of its might from the spirit of
mankind, has ever been a friend to the enterprising nations of the
earth.  And of all the elements this is the one to which men have
always been prone to trust themselves, as if its immensity held a
reward as vast as itself.

From the offing the open estuary promises every possible fruition
to adventurous hopes.  That road open to enterprise and courage
invites the explorer of coasts to new efforts towards the
fulfilment of great expectations.  The commander of the first Roman
galley must have looked with an intense absorption upon the estuary
of the Thames as he turned the beaked prow of his ship to the
westward under the brow of the North Foreland.  The estuary of the
Thames is not beautiful; it has no noble features, no romantic
grandeur of aspect, no smiling geniality; but it is wide open,
spacious, inviting, hospitable at the first glance, with a strange
air of mysteriousness which lingers about it to this very day.  The
navigation of his craft must have engrossed all the Roman's
attention in the calm of a summer's day (he would choose his
weather), when the single row of long sweeps (the galley would be a
light one, not a trireme) could fall in easy cadence upon a sheet
of water like plate-glass, reflecting faithfully the classic form
of his vessel and the contour of the lonely shores close on his
left hand.  I assume he followed the land and passed through what
is at present known as Margate Roads, groping his careful way along
the hidden sandbanks, whose every tail and spit has its beacon or
buoy nowadays.  He must have been anxious, though no doubt he had
collected beforehand on the shores of the Gauls a store of
information from the talk of traders, adventurers, fishermen,
slave-dealers, pirates--all sorts of unofficial men connected with
the sea in a more or less reputable way.  He would have heard of
channels and sandbanks, of natural features of the land useful for
sea-marks, of villages and tribes and modes of barter and
precautions to take:  with the instructive tales about native
chiefs dyed more or less blue, whose character for greediness,
ferocity, or amiability must have been expounded to him with that
capacity for vivid language which seems joined naturally to the
shadiness of moral character and recklessness of disposition.  With
that sort of spiced food provided for his anxious thought, watchful
for strange men, strange beasts, strange turns of the tide, he
would make the best of his way up, a military seaman with a short
sword on thigh and a bronze helmet on his head, the pioneer post-
captain of an imperial fleet.  Was the tribe inhabiting the Isle of
Thanet of a ferocious disposition, I wonder, and ready to fall with
stone-studded clubs and wooden lances hardened in the fire, upon
the backs of unwary mariners?

Amongst the great commercial streams of these islands, the Thames
is the only one, I think, open to romantic feeling, from the fact
that the sight of human labour and the sounds of human industry do
not come down its shores to the very sea, destroying the suggestion
of mysterious vastness caused by the configuration of the shore.
The broad inlet of the shallow North Sea passes gradually into the
contracted shape of the river; but for a long time the feeling of
the open water remains with the ship steering to the westward
through one of the lighted and buoyed passage-ways of the Thames,
such as Queen's Channel, Prince's Channel, Four-Fathom Channel; or
else coming down the Swin from the north.  The rush of the yellow
flood-tide hurries her up as if into the unknown between the two
fading lines of the coast.  There are no features to this land, no
conspicuous, far-famed landmarks for the eye; there is nothing so
far down to tell you of the greatest agglomeration of mankind on
earth dwelling no more than five and twenty miles away, where the
sun sets in a blaze of colour flaming on a gold background, and the
dark, low shores trend towards each other.  And in the great
silence the deep, faint booming of the big guns being tested at
Shoeburyness hangs about the Nore--a historical spot in the keeping
of one of England's appointed guardians.



XXXI.



The Nore sand remains covered at low-water, and never seen by human
eye; but the Nore is a name to conjure with visions of historical
events, of battles, of fleets, of mutinies, of watch and ward kept
upon the great throbbing heart of the State.  This ideal point of
the estuary, this centre of memories, is marked upon the steely
gray expanse of the waters by a lightship painted red that, from a
couple of miles off, looks like a cheap and bizarre little toy.  I
remember how, on coming up the river for the first time, I was
surprised at the smallness of that vivid object--a tiny warm speck
of crimson lost in an immensity of gray tones.  I was startled, as
if of necessity the principal beacon in the water-way of the
greatest town on earth should have presented imposing proportions.
And, behold! the brown sprit-sail of a barge hid it entirely from
my view.

Coming in from the eastward, the bright colouring of the lightship
marking the part of the river committed to the charge of an Admiral
(the Commander-in-Chief at the Nore) accentuates the dreariness and
the great breadth of the Thames Estuary.  But soon the course of
the ship opens the entrance of the Medway, with its men-of-war
moored in line, and the long wooden jetty of Port Victoria, with
its few low buildings like the beginning of a hasty settlement upon
a wild and unexplored shore.  The famous Thames barges sit in brown
clusters upon the water with an effect of birds floating upon a
pond.  On the imposing expanse of the great estuary the traffic of
the port where so much of the world's work and the world's thinking
is being done becomes insignificant, scattered, streaming away in
thin lines of ships stringing themselves out into the eastern
quarter through the various navigable channels of which the Nore
lightship marks the divergence.  The coasting traffic inclines to
the north; the deep-water ships steer east with a southern
inclination, on through the Downs, to the most remote ends of the
world.  In the widening of the shores sinking low in the gray,
smoky distances the greatness of the sea receives the mercantile
fleet of good ships that London sends out upon the turn of every
tide.  They follow each other, going very close by the Essex shore.
Such as the beads of a rosary told by business-like shipowners for
the greater profit of the world they slip one by one into the open:
while in the offing the inward-bound ships come up singly and in
bunches from under the sea horizon closing the mouth of the river
between Orfordness and North Foreland.  They all converge upon the
Nore, the warm speck of red upon the tones of drab and gray, with
the distant shores running together towards the west, low and flat,
like the sides of an enormous canal.  The sea-reach of the Thames
is straight, and, once Sheerness is left behind, its banks seem
very uninhabited, except for the cluster of houses which is
Southend, or here and there a lonely wooden jetty where petroleum
ships discharge their dangerous cargoes, and the oil-storage tanks,
low and round with slightly-domed roofs, peep over the edge of the
fore-shore, as it were a village of Central African huts imitated
in iron.  Bordered by the black and shining mud-flats, the level
marsh extends for miles.  Away in the far background the land
rises, closing the view with a continuous wooded slope, forming in
the distance an interminable rampart overgrown with bushes.

Then, on the slight turn of the Lower Hope Reach, clusters of
factory chimneys come distinctly into view, tall and slender above
the squat ranges of cement works in Grays and Greenhithe.  Smoking
quietly at the top against the great blaze of a magnificent sunset,
they give an industrial character to the scene, speak of work,
manufactures, and trade, as palm-groves on the coral strands of
distant islands speak of the luxuriant grace, beauty and vigour of
tropical nature.  The houses of Gravesend crowd upon the shore with
an effect of confusion as if they had tumbled down haphazard from
the top of the hill at the back.  The flatness of the Kentish shore
ends there.  A fleet of steam-tugs lies at anchor in front of the
various piers.  A conspicuous church spire, the first seen
distinctly coming from the sea, has a thoughtful grace, the
serenity of a fine form above the chaotic disorder of men's houses.
But on the other side, on the flat Essex side, a shapeless and
desolate red edifice, a vast pile of bricks with many windows and a
slate roof more inaccessible than an Alpine slope, towers over the
bend in monstrous ugliness, the tallest, heaviest building for
miles around, a thing like an hotel, like a mansion of flats (all
to let), exiled into these fields out of a street in West
Kensington.  Just round the corner, as it were, on a pier defined
with stone blocks and wooden piles, a white mast, slender like a
stalk of straw and crossed by a yard like a knitting-needle, flying
the signals of flag and balloon, watches over a set of heavy dock-
gates.  Mast-heads and funnel-tops of ships peep above the ranges
of corrugated iron roofs.  This is the entrance to Tilbury Dock,
the most recent of all London docks, the nearest to the sea.

Between the crowded houses of Gravesend and the monstrous red-brick
pile on the Essex shore the ship is surrendered fairly to the grasp
of the river.  That hint of loneliness, that soul of the sea which
had accompanied her as far as the Lower Hope Reach, abandons her at
the turn of the first bend above.  The salt, acrid flavour is gone
out of the air, together with a sense of unlimited space opening
free beyond the threshold of sandbanks below the Nore.  The waters
of the sea rush on past Gravesend, tumbling the big mooring buoys
laid along the face of the town; but the sea-freedom stops short
there, surrendering the salt tide to the needs, the artifices, the
contrivances of toiling men.  Wharves, landing-places, dock-gates,
waterside stairs, follow each other continuously right up to London
Bridge, and the hum of men's work fills the river with a menacing,
muttering note as of a breathless, ever-driving gale.  The water-
way, so fair above and wide below, flows oppressed by bricks and
mortar and stone, by blackened timber and grimed glass and rusty
iron, covered with black barges, whipped up by paddles and screws,
overburdened with craft, overhung with chains, overshadowed by
walls making a steep gorge for its bed, filled with a haze of smoke
and dust.

This stretch of the Thames from London Bridge to the Albert Docks
is to other watersides of river ports what a virgin forest would be
to a garden.  It is a thing grown up, not made.  It recalls a
jungle by the confused, varied, and impenetrable aspect of the
buildings that line the shore, not according to a planned purpose,
but as if sprung up by accident from scattered seeds.  Like the
matted growth of bushes and creepers veiling the silent depths of
an unexplored wilderness, they hide the depths of London's
infinitely varied, vigorous, seething life.  In other river ports
it is not so.  They lie open to their stream, with quays like broad
clearings, with streets like avenues cut through thick timber for
the convenience of trade.  I am thinking now of river ports I have
seen--of Antwerp, for instance; of Nantes or Bordeaux, or even old
Rouen, where the night-watchmen of ships, elbows on rail, gaze at
shop-windows and brilliant cafes, and see the audience go in and
come out of the opera-house.  But London, the oldest and greatest
of river ports, does not possess as much as a hundred yards of open
quays upon its river front.  Dark and impenetrable at night, like
the face of a forest, is the London waterside.  It is the waterside
of watersides, where only one aspect of the world's life can be
seen, and only one kind of men toils on the edge of the stream.
The lightless walls seem to spring from the very mud upon which the
stranded barges lie; and the narrow lanes coming down to the
foreshore resemble the paths of smashed bushes and crumbled earth
where big game comes to drink on the banks of tropical streams.

Behind the growth of the London waterside the docks of London
spread out unsuspected, smooth, and placid, lost amongst the
buildings like dark lagoons hidden in a thick forest.  They lie
concealed in the intricate growth of houses with a few stalks of
mastheads here and there overtopping the roof of some four-story
warehouse.

It is a strange conjunction this of roofs and mastheads, of walls
and yard-arms.  I remember once having the incongruity of the
relation brought home to me in a practical way.  I was the chief
officer of a fine ship, just docked with a cargo of wool from
Sydney, after a ninety days' passage.  In fact, we had not been in
more than half an hour and I was still busy making her fast to the
stone posts of a very narrow quay in front of a lofty warehouse.
An old man with a gray whisker under the chin and brass buttons on
his pilot-cloth jacket, hurried up along the quay hailing my ship
by name.  He was one of those officials called berthing-masters--
not the one who had berthed us, but another, who, apparently, had
been busy securing a steamer at the other end of the dock.  I could
see from afar his hard blue eyes staring at us, as if fascinated,
with a queer sort of absorption.  I wondered what that worthy sea-
dog had found to criticise in my ship's rigging.  And I, too,
glanced aloft anxiously.  I could see nothing wrong there.  But
perhaps that superannuated fellow-craftsman was simply admiring the
ship's perfect order aloft, I thought, with some secret pride; for
the chief officer is responsible for his ship's appearance, and as
to her outward condition, he is the man open to praise or blame.
Meantime the old salt ("ex-coasting skipper" was writ large all
over his person) had hobbled up alongside in his bumpy, shiny
boots, and, waving an arm, short and thick like the flipper of a
seal, terminated by a paw red as an uncooked beef-steak, addressed
the poop in a muffled, faint, roaring voice, as if a sample of
every North-Sea fog of his life had been permanently lodged in his
throat:  "Haul 'em round, Mr. Mate!" were his words.  "If you don't
look sharp, you'll have your topgallant yards through the windows
of that 'ere warehouse presently!"  This was the only cause of his
interest in the ship's beautiful spars.  I own that for a time I
was struck dumb by the bizarre associations of yard-arms and
window-panes.  To break windows is the last thing one would think
of in connection with a ship's topgallant yard, unless, indeed, one
were an experienced berthing-master in one of the London docks.
This old chap was doing his little share of the world's work with
proper efficiency.  His little blue eyes had made out the danger
many hundred yards off.  His rheumaticky feet, tired with balancing
that squat body for many years upon the decks of small coasters,
and made sore by miles of tramping upon the flagstones of the dock
side, had hurried up in time to avert a ridiculous catastrophe.  I
answered him pettishly, I fear, and as if I had known all about it
before.

"All right, all right! can't do everything at once."

He remained near by, muttering to himself till the yards had been
hauled round at my order, and then raised again his foggy, thick
voice:

"None too soon," he observed, with a critical glance up at the
towering side of the warehouse.  "That's a half-sovereign in your
pocket, Mr. Mate.  You should always look first how you are for
them windows before you begin to breast in your ship to the quay."

It was good advice.  But one cannot think of everything or foresee
contacts of things apparently as remote as stars and hop-poles.



XXXII.



The view of ships lying moored in some of the older docks of London
has always suggested to my mind the image of a flock of swans kept
in the flooded backyard of grim tenement houses.  The flatness of
the walls surrounding the dark pool on which they float brings out
wonderfully the flowing grace of the lines on which a ship's hull
is built.  The lightness of these forms, devised to meet the winds
and the seas, makes, by contrast with the great piles of bricks,
the chains and cables of their moorings appear very necessary, as
if nothing less could prevent them from soaring upwards and over
the roofs.  The least puff of wind stealing round the corners of
the dock buildings stirs these captives fettered to rigid shores.
It is as if the soul of a ship were impatient of confinement.
Those masted hulls, relieved of their cargo, become restless at the
slightest hint of the wind's freedom.  However tightly moored, they
range a little at their berths, swaying imperceptibly the spire-
like assemblages of cordage and spars.  You can detect their
impatience by watching the sway of the mastheads against the
motionless, the soulless gravity of mortar and stones.  As you pass
alongside each hopeless prisoner chained to the quay, the slight
grinding noise of the wooden fenders makes a sound of angry
muttering.  But, after all, it may be good for ships to go through
a period of restraint and repose, as the restraint and self-
communion of inactivity may be good for an unruly soul--not,
indeed, that I mean to say that ships are unruly; on the contrary,
they are faithful creatures, as so many men can testify.  And
faithfulness is a great restraint, the strongest bond laid upon the
self-will of men and ships on this globe of land and sea.

This interval of bondage in the docks rounds each period of a
ship's life with the sense of accomplished duty, of an effectively
played part in the work of the world.  The dock is the scene of
what the world would think the most serious part in the light,
bounding, swaying life of a ship.  But there are docks and docks.
The ugliness of some docks is appalling.  Wild horses would not
drag from me the name of a certain river in the north whose narrow
estuary is inhospitable and dangerous, and whose docks are like a
nightmare of dreariness and misery.  Their dismal shores are
studded thickly with scaffold-like, enormous timber structures,
whose lofty heads are veiled periodically by the infernal gritty
night of a cloud of coal-dust.  The most important ingredient for
getting the world's work along is distributed there under the
circumstances of the greatest cruelty meted out to helpless ships.
Shut up in the desolate circuit of these basins, you would think a
free ship would droop and die like a wild bird put into a dirty
cage.  But a ship, perhaps because of her faithfulness to men, will
endure an extraordinary lot of ill-usage.  Still, I have seen ships
issue from certain docks like half-dead prisoners from a dungeon,
bedraggled, overcome, wholly disguised in dirt, and with their men
rolling white eyeballs in black and worried faces raised to a
heaven which, in its smoky and soiled aspect, seemed to reflect the
sordidness of the earth below.  One thing, however, may be said for
the docks of the Port of London on both sides of the river:  for
all the complaints of their insufficient equipment, of their
obsolete rules, of failure (they say) in the matter of quick
despatch, no ship need ever issue from their gates in a half-
fainting condition.  London is a general cargo port, as is only
proper for the greatest capital of the world to be.  General cargo
ports belong to the aristocracy of the earth's trading places, and
in that aristocracy London, as it is its way, has a unique
physiognomy.

The absence of picturesqueness cannot be laid to the charge of the
docks opening into the Thames.  For all my unkind comparisons to
swans and backyards, it cannot be denied that each dock or group of
docks along the north side of the river has its own individual
attractiveness.  Beginning with the cosy little St. Katherine's
Dock, lying overshadowed and black like a quiet pool amongst rocky
crags, through the venerable and sympathetic London Docks, with not
a single line of rails in the whole of their area and the aroma of
spices lingering between its warehouses, with their far-famed wine-
cellars--down through the interesting group of West India Docks,
the fine docks at Blackwall, on past the Galleons Reach entrance of
the Victoria and Albert Docks, right down to the vast gloom of the
great basins in Tilbury, each of those places of restraint for
ships has its own peculiar physiognomy, its own expression.  And
what makes them unique and attractive is their common trait of
being romantic in their usefulness.

In their way they are as romantic as the river they serve is unlike
all the other commercial streams of the world.  The cosiness of the
St. Katherine's Dock, the old-world air of the London Docks, remain
impressed upon the memory.  The docks down the river, abreast of
Woolwich, are imposing by their proportions and the vast scale of
the ugliness that forms their surroundings--ugliness so picturesque
as to become a delight to the eye.  When one talks of the Thames
docks, "beauty" is a vain word, but romance has lived too long upon
this river not to have thrown a mantle of glamour upon its banks.

The antiquity of the port appeals to the imagination by the long
chain of adventurous enterprises that had their inception in the
town and floated out into the world on the waters of the river.
Even the newest of the docks, the Tilbury Dock, shares in the
glamour conferred by historical associations.  Queen Elizabeth has
made one of her progresses down there, not one of her journeys of
pomp and ceremony, but an anxious business progress at a crisis of
national history.  The menace of that time has passed away, and now
Tilbury is known by its docks.  These are very modern, but their
remoteness and isolation upon the Essex marsh, the days of failure
attending their creation, invested them with a romantic air.
Nothing in those days could have been more striking than the vast,
empty basins, surrounded by miles of bare quays and the ranges of
cargo-sheds, where two or three ships seemed lost like bewitched
children in a forest of gaunt, hydraulic cranes.  One received a
wonderful impression of utter abandonment, of wasted efficiency.
From the first the Tilbury Docks were very efficient and ready for
their task, but they had come, perhaps, too soon into the field.  A
great future lies before Tilbury Docks.  They shall never fill a
long-felt want (in the sacramental phrase that is applied to
railways, tunnels, newspapers, and new editions of books).  They
were too early in the field.  The want shall never be felt because,
free of the trammels of the tide, easy of access, magnificent and
desolate, they are already there, prepared to take and keep the
biggest ships that float upon the sea.  They are worthy of the
oldest river port in the world.

 And, truth to say, for all the criticisms flung upon the heads of
the dock companies, the other docks of the Thames are no disgrace
to the town with a population greater than that of some
commonwealths.  The growth of London as a well-equipped port has
been slow, while not unworthy of a great capital, of a great centre
of distribution.  It must not be forgotten that London has not the
backing of great industrial districts or great fields of natural
exploitation.  In this it differs from Liverpool, from Cardiff,
from Newcastle, from Glasgow; and therein the Thames differs from
the Mersey, from the Tyne, from the Clyde.  It is an historical
river; it is a romantic stream flowing through the centre of great
affairs, and for all the criticism of the river's administration,
my contention is that its development has been worthy of its
dignity.  For a long time the stream itself could accommodate quite
easily the oversea and coasting traffic.  That was in the days
when, in the part called the Pool, just below London Bridge, the
vessels moored stem and stern in the very strength of the tide
formed one solid mass like an island covered with a forest of
gaunt, leafless trees; and when the trade had grown too big for the
river there came the St. Katherine's Docks and the London Docks,
magnificent undertakings answering to the need of their time.  The
same may be said of the other artificial lakes full of ships that
go in and out upon this high road to all parts of the world.  The
labour of the imperial waterway goes on from generation to
generation, goes on day and night.  Nothing ever arrests its
sleepless industry but the coming of a heavy fog, which clothes the
teeming stream in a mantle of impenetrable stillness.

After the gradual cessation of all sound and movement on the
faithful river, only the ringing of ships' bells is heard,
mysterious and muffled in the white vapour from London Bridge right
down to the Nore, for miles and miles in a decrescendo tinkling, to
where the estuary broadens out into the North Sea, and the anchored
ships lie scattered thinly in the shrouded channels between the
sand-banks of the Thames' mouth.  Through the long and glorious
tale of years of the river's strenuous service to its people these
are its only breathing times.



XXXIII.



A ship in dock, surrounded by quays and the walls of warehouses,
has the appearance of a prisoner meditating upon freedom in the
sadness of a free spirit put under restraint.  Chain cables and
stout ropes keep her bound to stone posts at the edge of a paved
shore, and a berthing-master, with brass buttons on his coat, walks
about like a weather-beaten and ruddy gaoler, casting jealous,
watchful glances upon the moorings that fetter a ship lying passive
and still and safe, as if lost in deep regrets of her days of
liberty and danger on the sea.

The swarm of renegades--dock-masters, berthing-masters, gatemen,
and such like--appear to nurse an immense distrust of the captive
ship's resignation.  There never seem chains and ropes enough to
satisfy their minds concerned with the safe binding of free ships
to the strong, muddy, enslaved earth.  "You had better put another
bight of a hawser astern, Mr. Mate," is the usual phrase in their
mouth.  I brand them for renegades, because most of them have been
sailors in their time.  As if the infirmities of old age--the gray
hair, the wrinkles at the corners of the eyes, and the knotted
veins of the hands--were the symptoms of moral poison, they prowl
about the quays with an underhand air of gloating over the broken
spirit of noble captives.  They want more fenders, more breasting-
ropes; they want more springs, more shackles, more fetters; they
want to make ships with volatile souls as motionless as square
blocks of stone.  They stand on the mud of pavements, these
degraded sea-dogs, with long lines of railway-trucks clanking their
couplings behind their backs, and run malevolent glances over your
ship from headgear to taffrail, only wishing to tyrannize over the
poor creature under the hypocritical cloak of benevolence and care.
Here and there cargo cranes looking like instruments of torture for
ships swing cruel hooks at the end of long chains.  Gangs of dock-
labourers swarm with muddy feet over the gangways.  It is a moving
sight this, of so many men of the earth, earthy, who never cared
anything for a ship, trampling unconcerned, brutal and hob-nailed
upon her helpless body.

Fortunately, nothing can deface the beauty of a ship.  That sense
of a dungeon, that sense of a horrible and degrading misfortune
overtaking a creature fair to see and safe to trust, attaches only
to ships moored in the docks of great European ports.  You feel
that they are dishonestly locked up, to be hunted about from wharf
to wharf on a dark, greasy, square pool of black water as a brutal
reward at the end of a faithful voyage.

A ship anchored in an open roadstead, with cargo-lighters alongside
and her own tackle swinging the burden over the rail, is
accomplishing in freedom a function of her life.  There is no
restraint; there is space:  clear water around her, and a clear sky
above her mastheads, with a landscape of green hills and charming
bays opening around her anchorage.  She is not abandoned by her own
men to the tender mercies of shore people.  She still shelters, and
is looked after by, her own little devoted band, and you feel that
presently she will glide between the headlands and disappear.  It
is only at home, in dock, that she lies abandoned, shut off from
freedom by all the artifices of men that think of quick despatch
and profitable freights.  It is only then that the odious,
rectangular shadows of walls and roofs fall upon her decks, with
showers of soot.

To a man who has never seen the extraordinary nobility, strength,
and grace that the devoted generations of ship-builders have
evolved from some pure nooks of their simple souls, the sight that
could be seen five-and-twenty years ago of a large fleet of
clippers moored along the north side of the New South Dock was an
inspiring spectacle.  Then there was a quarter of a mile of them,
from the iron dockyard-gates guarded by policemen, in a long,
forest-like perspective of masts, moored two and two to many stout
wooden jetties.  Their spars dwarfed with their loftiness the
corrugated-iron sheds, their jibbooms extended far over the shore,
their white-and-gold figure-heads, almost dazzling in their purity,
overhung the straight, long quay above the mud and dirt of the
wharfside, with the busy figures of groups and single men moving to
and fro, restless and grimy under their soaring immobility.

At tide-time you would see one of the loaded ships with battened-
down hatches drop out of the ranks and float in the clear space of
the dock, held by lines dark and slender, like the first threads of
a spider's web, extending from her bows and her quarters to the
mooring-posts on shore.  There, graceful and still, like a bird
ready to spread its wings, she waited till, at the opening of the
gates, a tug or two would hurry in noisily, hovering round her with
an air of fuss and solicitude, and take her out into the river,
tending, shepherding her through open bridges, through dam-like
gates between the flat pier-heads, with a bit of green lawn
surrounded by gravel and a white signal-mast with yard and gaff,
flying a couple of dingy blue, red, or white flags.

This New South Dock (it was its official name), round which my
earlier professional memories are centred, belongs to the group of
West India Docks, together with two smaller and much older basins
called Import and Export respectively, both with the greatness of
their trade departed from them already.  Picturesque and clean as
docks go, these twin basins spread side by side the dark lustre of
their glassy water, sparely peopled by a few ships laid up on buoys
or tucked far away from each other at the end of sheds in the
corners of empty quays, where they seemed to slumber quietly
remote, untouched by the bustle of men's affairs--in retreat rather
than in captivity.  They were quaint and sympathetic, those two
homely basins, unfurnished and silent, with no aggressive display
of cranes, no apparatus of hurry and work on their narrow shores.
No railway-lines cumbered them.  The knots of labourers trooping in
clumsily round the corners of cargo-sheds to eat their food in
peace out of red cotton handkerchiefs had the air of picnicking by
the side of a lonely mountain pool.  They were restful (and I
should say very unprofitable), those basins, where the chief
officer of one of the ships involved in the harassing, strenuous,
noisy activity of the New South Dock only a few yards away could
escape in the dinner-hour to stroll, unhampered by men and affairs,
meditating (if he chose) on the vanity of all things human.  At one
time they must have been full of good old slow West Indiamen of the
square-stern type, that took their captivity, one imagines, as
stolidly as they had faced the buffeting of the waves with their
blunt, honest bows, and disgorged sugar, rum, molasses, coffee, or
logwood sedately with their own winch and tackle.  But when I knew
them, of exports there was never a sign that one could detect; and
all the imports I have ever seen were some rare cargoes of tropical
timber, enormous baulks roughed out of iron trunks grown in the
woods about the Gulf of Mexico.  They lay piled up in stacks of
mighty boles, and it was hard to believe that all this mass of dead
and stripped trees had come out of the flanks of a slender,
innocent-looking little barque with, as likely as not, a homely
woman's name--Ellen this or Annie that--upon her fine bows.  But
this is generally the case with a discharged cargo.  Once spread at
large over the quay, it looks the most impossible bulk to have all
come there out of that ship along-side.

They were quiet, serene nooks in the busy world of docks, these
basins where it has never been my good luck to get a berth after
some more or less arduous passage.  But one could see at a glance
that men and ships were never hustled there.  They were so quiet
that, remembering them well, one comes to doubt that they ever
existed--places of repose for tired ships to dream in, places of
meditation rather than work, where wicked ships--the cranky, the
lazy, the wet, the bad sea boats, the wild steerers, the
capricious, the pig-headed, the generally ungovernable--would have
full leisure to take count and repent of their sins, sorrowful and
naked, with their rent garments of sailcloth stripped off them, and
with the dust and ashes of the London atmosphere upon their
mastheads.  For that the worst of ships would repent if she were
ever given time I make no doubt.  I have known too many of them.
No ship is wholly bad; and now that their bodies that had braved so
many tempests have been blown off the face of the sea by a puff of
steam, the evil and the good together into the limbo of things that
have served their time, there can be no harm in affirming that in
these vanished generations of willing servants there never has been
one utterly unredeemable soul.

In the New South Dock there was certainly no time for remorse,
introspection, repentance, or any phenomena of inner life either
for the captive ships or for their officers.  From six in the
morning till six at night the hard labour of the prison-house,
which rewards the valiance of ships that win the harbour went on
steadily, great slings of general cargo swinging over the rail, to
drop plumb into the hatchways at the sign of the gangway-tender's
hand.  The New South Dock was especially a loading dock for the
Colonies in those great (and last) days of smart wool-clippers,
good to look at and--well--exciting to handle.  Some of them were
more fair to see than the others; many were (to put it mildly)
somewhat over-masted; all were expected to make good passages; and
of all that line of ships, whose rigging made a thick, enormous
network against the sky, whose brasses flashed almost as far as the
eye of the policeman at the gates could reach, there was hardly one
that knew of any other port amongst all the ports on the wide earth
but London and Sydney, or London and Melbourne, or London and
Adelaide, perhaps with Hobart Town added for those of smaller
tonnage.  One could almost have believed, as her gray-whiskered
second mate used to say of the old Duke of S-, that they knew the
road to the Antipodes better than their own skippers, who, year in,
year out, took them from London--the place of captivity--to some
Australian port where, twenty-five years ago, though moored well
and tight enough to the wooden wharves, they felt themselves no
captives, but honoured guests.



XXXIV.



These towns of the Antipodes, not so great then as they are now,
took an interest in the shipping, the running links with "home,"
whose numbers confirmed the sense of their growing importance.
They made it part and parcel of their daily interests.  This was
especially the case in Sydney, where, from the heart of the fair
city, down the vista of important streets, could be seen the wool-
clippers lying at the Circular Quay--no walled prison-house of a
dock that, but the integral part of one of the finest, most
beautiful, vast, and safe bays the sun ever shone upon.  Now great
steam-liners lie at these berths, always reserved for the sea
aristocracy--grand and imposing enough ships, but here to-day and
gone next week; whereas the general cargo, emigrant, and passenger
clippers of my time, rigged with heavy spars, and built on fine
lines, used to remain for months together waiting for their load of
wool.  Their names attained the dignity of household words.  On
Sundays and holidays the citizens trooped down, on visiting bent,
and the lonely officer on duty solaced himself by playing the
cicerone--especially to the citizenesses with engaging manners and
a well-developed sense of the fun that may be got out of the
inspection of a ship's cabins and state-rooms.  The tinkle of more
or less untuned cottage pianos floated out of open stern-ports till
the gas-lamps began to twinkle in the streets, and the ship's
night-watchman, coming sleepily on duty after his unsatisfactory
day slumbers, hauled down the flags and fastened a lighted lantern
at the break of the gangway.  The night closed rapidly upon the
silent ships with their crews on shore.  Up a short, steep ascent
by the King's Head pub., patronized by the cooks and stewards of
the fleet, the voice of a man crying "Hot saveloys!" at the end of
George Street, where the cheap eating-houses (sixpence a meal) were
kept by Chinamen (Sun-kum-on's was not bad), is heard at regular
intervals.  I have listened for hours to this most pertinacious
pedlar (I wonder whether he is dead or has made a fortune), while
sitting on the rail of the old Duke of S- (she's dead, poor thing!
a violent death on the coast of New Zealand), fascinated by the
monotony, the regularity, the abruptness of the recurring cry, and
so exasperated at the absurd spell, that I wished the fellow would
choke himself to death with a mouthful of his own infamous wares.

A stupid job, and fit only for an old man, my comrades used to tell
me, to be the night-watchman of a captive (though honoured) ship.
And generally the oldest of the able seamen in a ship's crew does
get it.  But sometimes neither the oldest nor any other fairly
steady seaman is forthcoming.  Ships' crews had the trick of
melting away swiftly in those days.  So, probably on account of my
youth, innocence, and pensive habits (which made me sometimes
dilatory in my work about the rigging), I was suddenly nominated,
in our chief mate Mr. B-'s most sardonic tones, to that enviable
situation.  I do not regret the experience.  The night humours of
the town descended from the street to the waterside in the still
watches of the night:  larrikins rushing down in bands to settle
some quarrel by a stand-up fight, away from the police, in an
indistinct ring half hidden by piles of cargo, with the sounds of
blows, a groan now and then, the stamping of feet, and the cry of
"Time!" rising suddenly above the sinister and excited murmurs;
night-prowlers, pursued or pursuing, with a stifled shriek followed
by a profound silence, or slinking stealthily along-side like
ghosts, and addressing me from the quay below in mysterious tones
with incomprehensible propositions.  The cabmen, too, who twice a
week, on the night when the A.S.N. Company's passenger-boat was due
to arrive, used to range a battalion of blazing lamps opposite the
ship, were very amusing in their way.  They got down from their
perches and told each other impolite stories in racy language,
every word of which reached me distinctly over the bulwarks as I
sat smoking on the main-hatch.  On one occasion I had an hour or so
of a most intellectual conversation with a person whom I could not
see distinctly, a gentleman from England, he said, with a
cultivated voice, I on deck and he on the quay sitting on the case
of a piano (landed out of our hold that very afternoon), and
smoking a cigar which smelt very good.  We touched, in our
discourse, upon science, politics, natural history, and operatic
singers.  Then, after remarking abruptly, "You seem to be rather
intelligent, my man," he informed me pointedly that his name was
Mr. Senior, and walked off--to his hotel, I suppose.  Shadows!
Shadows!  I think I saw a white whisker as he turned under the
lamp-post.  It is a shock to think that in the natural course of
nature he must be dead by now.  There was nothing to object to in
his intelligence but a little dogmatism maybe.  And his name was
Senior!  Mr. Senior!

The position had its drawbacks, however.  One wintry, blustering,
dark night in July, as I stood sleepily out of the rain under the
break of the poop something resembling an ostrich dashed up the
gangway.  I say ostrich because the creature, though it ran on two
legs, appeared to help its progress by working a pair of short
wings; it was a man, however, only his coat, ripped up the back and
flapping in two halves above his shoulders, gave him that weird and
fowl-like appearance.  At least, I suppose it was his coat, for it
was impossible to make him out distinctly.  How he managed to come
so straight upon me, at speed and without a stumble over a strange
deck, I cannot imagine.  He must have been able to see in the dark
better than any cat.  He overwhelmed me with panting entreaties to
let him take shelter till morning in our forecastle.  Following my
strict orders, I refused his request, mildly at first, in a sterner
tone as he insisted with growing impudence.

"For God's sake let me, matey!  Some of 'em are after me--and I've
got hold of a ticker here."

"You clear out of this!" I said.

"Don't be hard on a chap, old man!" he whined pitifully.

"Now then, get ashore at once.  Do you hear?"

Silence.  He appeared to cringe, mute, as if words had failed him
through grief; then--bang! came a concussion and a great flash of
light in which he vanished, leaving me prone on my back with the
most abominable black eye that anybody ever got in the faithful
discharge of duty.  Shadows!  Shadows!  I hope he escaped the
enemies he was fleeing from to live and flourish to this day.  But
his fist was uncommonly hard and his aim miraculously true in the
dark.

There were other experiences, less painful and more funny for the
most part, with one amongst them of a dramatic complexion; but the
greatest experience of them all was Mr. B-, our chief mate himself.

He used to go ashore every night to foregather in some hotel's
parlour with his crony, the mate of the barque Cicero, lying on the
other side of the Circular Quay.  Late at night I would hear from
afar their stumbling footsteps and their voices raised in endless
argument.  The mate of the Cicero was seeing his friend on board.
They would continue their senseless and muddled discourse in tones
of profound friendship for half an hour or so at the shore end of
our gangway, and then I would hear Mr. B- insisting that he must
see the other on board his ship.  And away they would go, their
voices, still conversing with excessive amity, being heard moving
all round the harbour.  It happened more than once that they would
thus perambulate three or four times the distance, each seeing the
other on board his ship out of pure and disinterested affection.
Then, through sheer weariness, or perhaps in a moment of
forgetfulness, they would manage to part from each other somehow,
and by-and-by the planks of our long gangway would bend and creak
under the weight of Mr. B- coming on board for good at last.

On the rail his burly form would stop and stand swaying.

"Watchman!"

"Sir."

A pause.

He waited for a moment of steadiness before negotiating the three
steps of the inside ladder from rail to deck; and the watchman,
taught by experience, would forbear offering help which would be
received as an insult at that particular stage of the mate's
return.  But many times I trembled for his neck.  He was a heavy
man.

Then with a rush and a thump it would be done.  He never had to
pick himself up; but it took him a minute or so to pull himself
together after the descent.

"Watchman!"

"Sir."

"Captain aboard?"

"Yes, sir."

Pause.

"Dog aboard?"

"Yes, sir."

Pause.

Our dog was a gaunt and unpleasant beast, more like a wolf in poor
health than a dog, and I never noticed Mr. B- at any other time
show the slightest interest in the doings of the animal.  But that
question never failed.

"Let's have your arm to steady me along."

I was always prepared for that request.  He leaned on me heavily
till near enough the cabin-door to catch hold of the handle.  Then
he would let go my arm at once.

"That'll do.  I can manage now."

And he could manage.  He could manage to find his way into his
berth, light his lamp, get into his bed--ay, and get out of it when
I called him at half-past five, the first man on deck, lifting the
cup of morning coffee to his lips with a steady hand, ready for
duty as though he had virtuously slept ten solid hours--a better
chief officer than many a man who had never tasted grog in his
life.  He could manage all that, but could never manage to get on
in life.

Only once he failed to seize the cabin-door handle at the first
grab.  He waited a little, tried again, and again failed.  His
weight was growing heavier on my arm.  He sighed slowly.

"D-n that handle!"

Without letting go his hold of me he turned about, his face lit up
bright as day by the full moon.

"I wish she were out at sea," he growled savagely.

"Yes, sir."

I felt the need to say something, because he hung on to me as if
lost, breathing heavily.

"Ports are no good--ships rot, men go to the devil!"

I kept still, and after a while he repeated with a sigh.

"I wish she were at sea out of this."

"So do I, sir," I ventured.

Holding my shoulder, he turned upon me.

"You!  What's that to you where she is?  You don't--drink."

And even on that night he "managed it" at last.  He got hold of the
handle.  But he did not manage to light his lamp (I don't think he
even tried), though in the morning as usual he was the first on
deck, bull-necked, curly-headed, watching the hands turn-to with
his sardonic expression and unflinching gaze.

I met him ten years afterwards, casually, unexpectedly, in the
street, on coming out of my consignee office.  I was not likely to
have forgotten him with his "I can manage now."  He recognised me
at once, remembered my name, and in what ship I had served under
his orders.  He looked me over from head to foot.

"What are you doing here?" he asked.

"I am commanding a little barque," I said, "loading here for
Mauritius."  Then, thoughtlessly, I added:  "And what are you
doing, Mr. B-?"

"I," he said, looking at me unflinchingly, with his old sardonic
grin--"I am looking for something to do."

I felt I would rather have bitten out my tongue.  His jet-black,
curly hair had turned iron-gray; he was scrupulously neat as ever,
but frightfully threadbare.  His shiny boots were worn down at
heel.  But he forgave me, and we drove off together in a hansom to
dine on board my ship.  He went over her conscientiously, praised
her heartily, congratulated me on my command with absolute
sincerity.  At dinner, as I offered him wine and beer he shook his
head, and as I sat looking at him interrogatively, muttered in an
undertone:

"I've given up all that."

After dinner we came again on deck.  It seemed as though he could
not tear himself away from the ship.  We were fitting some new
lower rigging, and he hung about, approving, suggesting, giving me
advice in his old manner.  Twice he addressed me as "My boy," and
corrected himself quickly to "Captain."  My mate was about to leave
me (to get married), but I concealed the fact from Mr. B-.  I was
afraid he would ask me to give him the berth in some ghastly
jocular hint that I could not refuse to take.  I was afraid.  It
would have been impossible.  I could not have given orders to Mr.
B-, and I am sure he would not have taken them from me very long.
He could not have managed that, though he had managed to break
himself from drink--too late.

He said good-bye at last.  As I watched his burly, bull-necked
figure walk away up the street, I wondered with a sinking heart
whether he had much more than the price of a night's lodging in his
pocket.  And I understood that if that very minute I were to call
out after him, he would not even turn his head.  He, too, is no
more than a shadow, but I seem to hear his words spoken on the
moonlit deck of the old Duke--:

"Ports are no good--ships rot, men go to the devil!"



XXXV.



"Ships!" exclaimed an elderly seaman in clean shore togs.  "Ships"-
-and his keen glance, turning away from my face, ran along the
vista of magnificent figure-heads that in the late seventies used
to overhang in a serried rank the muddy pavement by the side of the
New South Dock--"ships are all right; it's the men in 'em. . ."

Fifty hulls, at least, moulded on lines of beauty and speed--hulls
of wood, of iron, expressing in their forms the highest achievement
of modern ship-building--lay moored all in a row, stem to quay, as
if assembled there for an exhibition, not of a great industry, but
of a great art.  Their colours were gray, black, dark green, with a
narrow strip of yellow moulding defining their sheer, or with a row
of painted ports decking in warlike decoration their robust flanks
of cargo-carriers that would know no triumph but of speed in
carrying a burden, no glory other than of a long service, no
victory but that of an endless, obscure contest with the sea.  The
great empty hulls with swept holds, just out of dry-dock, with
their paint glistening freshly, sat high-sided with ponderous
dignity alongside the wooden jetties, looking more like unmovable
buildings than things meant to go afloat; others, half loaded, far
on the way to recover the true sea-physiognomy of a ship brought
down to her load-line, looked more accessible.  Their less steeply
slanting gangways seemed to invite the strolling sailors in search
of a berth to walk on board and try "for a chance" with the chief
mate, the guardian of a ship's efficiency.  As if anxious to remain
unperceived amongst their overtopping sisters, two or three
"finished" ships floated low, with an air of straining at the leash
of their level headfasts, exposing to view their cleared decks and
covered hatches, prepared to drop stern first out of the labouring
ranks, displaying the true comeliness of form which only her proper
sea-trim gives to a ship.  And for a good quarter of a mile, from
the dockyard gate to the farthest corner, where the old housed-in
hulk, the President (drill-ship, then, of the Naval Reserve), used
to lie with her frigate side rubbing against the stone of the quay,
above all these hulls, ready and unready, a hundred and fifty lofty
masts, more or less, held out the web of their rigging like an
immense net, in whose close mesh, black against the sky, the heavy
yards seemed to be entangled and suspended.

It was a sight.  The humblest craft that floats makes its appeal to
a seaman by the faithfulness of her life; and this was the place
where one beheld the aristocracy of ships.  It was a noble
gathering of the fairest and the swiftest, each bearing at the bow
the carved emblem of her name, as in a gallery of plaster-casts,
figures of women with mural crowns, women with flowing robes, with
gold fillets on their hair or blue scarves round their waists,
stretching out rounded arms as if to point the way; heads of men
helmeted or bare; full lengths of warriors, of kings, of statesmen,
of lords and princesses, all white from top to toe; with here and
there a dusky turbaned figure, bedizened in many colours, of some
Eastern sultan or hero, all inclined forward under the slant of
mighty bowsprits as if eager to begin another run of 11,000 miles
in their leaning attitudes.  These were the fine figure-heads of
the finest ships afloat.  But why, unless for the love of the life
those effigies shared with us in their wandering impassivity,
should one try to reproduce in words an impression of whose
fidelity there can be no critic and no judge, since such an
exhibition of the art of shipbuilding and the art of figure-head
carving as was seen from year's end to year's end in the open-air
gallery of the New South Dock no man's eye shall behold again?  All
that patient, pale company of queens and princesses, of kings and
warriors, of allegorical women, of heroines and statesmen and
heathen gods, crowned, helmeted, bare-headed, has run for good off
the sea stretching to the last above the tumbling foam their fair,
rounded arms; holding out their spears, swords, shields, tridents
in the same unwearied, striving forward pose.  And nothing remains
but lingering perhaps in the memory of a few men, the sound of
their names, vanished a long time ago from the first page of the
great London dailies; from big posters in railway-stations and the
doors of shipping offices; from the minds of sailors, dockmasters,
pilots, and tugmen; from the hail of gruff voices and the flutter
of signal flags exchanged between ships closing upon each other and
drawing apart in the open immensity of the sea.

The elderly, respectable seaman, withdrawing his gaze from that
multitude of spars, gave me a glance to make sure of our fellowship
in the craft and mystery of the sea.  We had met casually, and had
got into contact as I had stopped near him, my attention being
caught by the same peculiarity he was looking at in the rigging of
an obviously new ship, a ship with her reputation all to make yet
in the talk of the seamen who were to share their life with her.
Her name was already on their lips.  I had heard it uttered between
two thick, red-necked fellows of the semi-nautical type at the
Fenchurch Street Railway-station, where, in those days, the
everyday male crowd was attired in jerseys and pilot-cloth mostly,
and had the air of being more conversant with the times of high-
water than with the times of the trains.  I had noticed that new
ship's name on the first page of my morning paper.  I had stared at
the unfamiliar grouping of its letters, blue on white ground, on
the advertisement-boards, whenever the train came to a standstill
alongside one of the shabby, wooden, wharf-like platforms of the
dock railway-line.  She had been named, with proper observances, on
the day she came off the stocks, no doubt, but she was very far yet
from "having a name."  Untried, ignorant of the ways of the sea,
she had been thrust amongst that renowned company of ships to load
for her maiden voyage.  There was nothing to vouch for her
soundness and the worth of her character, but the reputation of the
building-yard whence she was launched headlong into the world of
waters.  She looked modest to me.  I imagined her diffident, lying
very quiet, with her side nestling shyly against the wharf to which
she was made fast with very new lines, intimidated by the company
of her tried and experienced sisters already familiar with all the
violences of the ocean and the exacting love of men.  They had had
more long voyages to make their names in than she had known weeks
of carefully tended life, for a new ship receives as much attention
as if she were a young bride.  Even crabbed old dock-masters look
at her with benevolent eyes.  In her shyness at the threshold of a
laborious and uncertain life, where so much is expected of a ship,
she could not have been better heartened and comforted, had she
only been able to hear and understand, than by the tone of deep
conviction in which my elderly, respectable seaman repeated the
first part of his saying, "Ships are all right . . ."

His civility prevented him from repeating the other, the bitter
part.  It had occurred to him that it was perhaps indelicate to
insist.  He had recognised in me a ship's officer, very possibly
looking for a berth like himself, and so far a comrade, but still a
man belonging to that sparsely-peopled after-end of a ship, where a
great part of her reputation as a "good ship," in seaman's
parlance, is made or marred.

"Can you say that of all ships without exception?" I asked, being
in an idle mood, because, if an obvious ship's officer, I was not,
as a matter of fact, down at the docks to "look for a berth," an
occupation as engrossing as gambling, and as little favourable to
the free exchange of ideas, besides being destructive of the kindly
temper needed for casual intercourse with one's fellow-creatures.

"You can always put up with 'em," opined the respectable seaman
judicially.

He was not averse from talking, either.  If he had come down to the
dock to look for a berth, he did not seem oppressed by anxiety as
to his chances.  He had the serenity of a man whose estimable
character is fortunately expressed by his personal appearance in an
unobtrusive, yet convincing, manner which no chief officer in want
of hands could resist.  And, true enough, I learned presently that
the mate of the Hyperion had "taken down" his name for quarter-
master.  "We sign on Friday, and join next day for the morning
tide," he remarked, in a deliberate, careless tone, which
contrasted strongly with his evident readiness to stand there
yarning for an hour or so with an utter stranger.

"Hyperion," I said.  "I don't remember ever seeing that ship
anywhere.  What sort of a name has she got?"

It appeared from his discursive answer that she had not much of a
name one way or another.  She was not very fast.  It took no fool,
though, to steer her straight, he believed.  Some years ago he had
seen her in Calcutta, and he remembered being told by somebody
then, that on her passage up the river she had carried away both
her hawse-pipes.  But that might have been the pilot's fault.  Just
now, yarning with the apprentices on board, he had heard that this
very voyage, brought up in the Downs, outward bound, she broke her
sheer, struck adrift, and lost an anchor and chain.  But that might
have occurred through want of careful tending in a tideway.  All
the same, this looked as though she were pretty hard on her ground-
tackle.  Didn't it?  She seemed a heavy ship to handle, anyway.
For the rest, as she had a new captain and a new mate this voyage,
he understood, one couldn't say how she would turn out. . . .

In such marine shore-talk as this is the name of a ship slowly
established, her fame made for her, the tale of her qualities and
of her defects kept, her idiosyncrasies commented upon with the
zest of personal gossip, her achievements made much of, her faults
glossed over as things that, being without remedy in our imperfect
world, should not be dwelt upon too much by men who, with the help
of ships, wrest out a bitter living from the rough grasp of the
sea.  All that talk makes up her "name," which is handed over from
one crew to another without bitterness, without animosity, with the
indulgence of mutual dependence, and with the feeling of close
association in the exercise of her perfections and in the danger of
her defects.

This feeling explains men's pride in ships.  "Ships are all right,"
as my middle-aged, respectable quartermaster said with much
conviction and some irony; but they are not exactly what men make
them.  They have their own nature; they can of themselves minister
to our self-esteem by the demand their qualities make upon our
skill and their shortcomings upon our hardiness and endurance.
Which is the more flattering exaction it is hard to say; but there
is the fact that in listening for upwards of twenty years to the
sea-talk that goes on afloat and ashore I have never detected the
true note of animosity.  I won't deny that at sea, sometimes, the
note of profanity was audible enough in those chiding
interpellations a wet, cold, weary seaman addresses to his ship,
and in moments of exasperation is disposed to extend to all ships
that ever were launched--to the whole everlastingly exacting brood
that swims in deep waters.  And I have heard curses launched at the
unstable element itself, whose fascination, outlasting the
accumulated experience of ages, had captured him as it had captured
the generations of his forebears.

For all that has been said of the love that certain natures (on
shore) have professed to feel for it, for all the celebrations it
had been the object of in prose and song, the sea has never been
friendly to man.  At most it has been the accomplice of human
restlessness, and playing the part of dangerous abettor of world-
wide ambitions.  Faithful to no race after the manner of the kindly
earth, receiving no impress from valour and toil and self-
sacrifice, recognising no finality of dominion, the sea has never
adopted the cause of its masters like those lands where the
victorious nations of mankind have taken root, rocking their
cradles and setting up their gravestones.  He--man or people--who,
putting his trust in the friendship of the sea, neglects the
strength and cunning of his right hand, is a fool!  As if it were
too great, too mighty for common virtues, the ocean has no
compassion, no faith, no law, no memory.  Its fickleness is to be
held true to men's purposes only by an undaunted resolution and by
a sleepless, armed, jealous vigilance, in which, perhaps, there has
always been more hate than love.  Odi et amo may well be the
confession of those who consciously or blindly have surrendered
their existence to the fascination of the sea.  All the tempestuous
passions of mankind's young days, the love of loot and the love of
glory, the love of adventure and the love of danger, with the great
love of the unknown and vast dreams of dominion and power, have
passed like images reflected from a mirror, leaving no record upon
the mysterious face of the sea.  Impenetrable and heartless, the
sea has given nothing of itself to the suitors for its precarious
favours.  Unlike the earth, it cannot be subjugated at any cost of
patience and toil.  For all its fascination that has lured so many
to a violent death, its immensity has never been loved as the
mountains, the plains, the desert itself, have been loved.  Indeed,
I suspect that, leaving aside the protestations and tributes of
writers who, one is safe in saying, care for little else in the
world than the rhythm of their lines and the cadence of their
phrase, the love of the sea, to which some men and nations confess
so readily, is a complex sentiment wherein pride enters for much,
necessity for not a little, and the love of ships--the untiring
servants of our hopes and our self-esteem--for the best and most
genuine part.  For the hundreds who have reviled the sea, beginning
with Shakespeare in the line


"More fell than hunger, anguish, or the sea,"


down to the last obscure sea-dog of the "old model," having but few
words and still fewer thoughts, there could not be found, I
believe, one sailor who has ever coupled a curse with the good or
bad name of a ship.  If ever his profanity, provoked by the
hardships of the sea, went so far as to touch his ship, it would be
lightly, as a hand may, without sin, be laid in the way of kindness
on a woman.



XXXVI.



The love that is given to ships is profoundly different from the
love men feel for every other work of their hands--the love they
bear to their houses, for instance--because it is untainted by the
pride of possession.  The pride of skill, the pride of
responsibility, the pride of endurance there may be, but otherwise
it is a disinterested sentiment.  No seaman ever cherished a ship,
even if she belonged to him, merely because of the profit she put
in his pocket.  No one, I think, ever did; for a ship-owner, even
of the best, has always been outside the pale of that sentiment
embracing in a feeling of intimate, equal fellowship the ship and
the man, backing each other against the implacable, if sometimes
dissembled, hostility of their world of waters.  The sea--this
truth must be confessed--has no generosity.  No display of manly
qualities--courage, hardihood, endurance, faithfulness--has ever
been known to touch its irresponsible consciousness of power.  The
ocean has the conscienceless temper of a savage autocrat spoiled by
much adulation.  He cannot brook the slightest appearance of
defiance, and has remained the irreconcilable enemy of ships and
men ever since ships and men had the unheard of audacity to go
afloat together in the face of his frown.  From that day he has
gone on swallowing up fleets and men without his resentment being
glutted by the number of victims--by so many wrecked ships and
wrecked lives.  To-day, as ever, he is ready to beguile and betray,
to smash and to drown the incorrigible optimism of men who, backed
by the fidelity of ships, are trying to wrest from him the fortune
of their house, the dominion of their world, or only a dole of food
for their hunger.  If not always in the hot mood to smash, he is
always stealthily ready for a drowning.  The most amazing wonder of
the deep is its unfathomable cruelty.

I felt its dread for the first time in mid-Atlantic one day, many
years ago, when we took off the crew of a Danish brig homeward
bound from the West Indies.  A thin, silvery mist softened the calm
and majestic splendour of light without shadows--seemed to render
the sky less remote and the ocean less immense.  It was one of the
days, when the might of the sea appears indeed lovable, like the
nature of a strong man in moments of quiet intimacy.  At sunrise we
had made out a black speck to the westward, apparently suspended
high up in the void behind a stirring, shimmering veil of silvery
blue gauze that seemed at times to stir and float in the breeze
which fanned us slowly along.  The peace of that enchanting
forenoon was so profound, so untroubled, that it seemed that every
word pronounced loudly on our deck would penetrate to the very
heart of that infinite mystery born from the conjunction of water
and sky.  We did not raise our voices.  "A water-logged derelict, I
think, sir," said the second officer quietly, coming down from
aloft with the binoculars in their case slung across his shoulders;
and our captain, without a word, signed to the helmsman to steer
for the black speck.  Presently we made out a low, jagged stump
sticking up forward--all that remained of her departed masts.

The captain was expatiating in a low conversational tone to the
chief mate upon the danger of these derelicts, and upon his dread
of coming upon them at night, when suddenly a man forward screamed
out, "There's people on board of her, sir!  I see them!" in a most
extraordinary voice--a voice never heard before in our ship; the
amazing voice of a stranger.  It gave the signal for a sudden
tumult of shouts.  The watch below ran up the forecastle head in a
body, the cook dashed out of the galley.  Everybody saw the poor
fellows now.  They were there!  And all at once our ship, which had
the well-earned name of being without a rival for speed in light
winds, seemed to us to have lost the power of motion, as if the
sea, becoming viscous, had clung to her sides.  And yet she moved.
Immensity, the inseparable companion of a ship's life, chose that
day to breathe upon her as gently as a sleeping child.  The clamour
of our excitement had died out, and our living ship, famous for
never losing steerage way as long as there was air enough to float
a feather, stole, without a ripple, silent and white as a ghost,
towards her mutilated and wounded sister, come upon at the point of
death in the sunlit haze of a calm day at sea.

With the binoculars glued to his eyes, the captain said in a
quavering tone:  "They are waving to us with something aft there."
He put down the glasses on the skylight brusquely, and began to
walk about the poop.  "A shirt or a flag," he ejaculated irritably.
"Can't make it out. . . Some damn rag or other!"  He took a few
more turns on the poop, glancing down over the rail now and then to
see how fast we were moving.  His nervous footsteps rang sharply in
the quiet of the ship, where the other men, all looking the same
way, had forgotten themselves in a staring immobility.  "This will
never do!" he cried out suddenly.  "Lower the boats at once!  Down
with them!"

Before I jumped into mine he took me aside, as being an
inexperienced junior, for a word of warning:

"You look out as you come alongside that she doesn't take you down
with her.  You understand?"

He murmured this confidentially, so that none of the men at the
falls should overhear, and I was shocked.  "Heavens! as if in such
an emergency one stopped to think of danger!" I exclaimed to myself
mentally, in scorn of such cold-blooded caution.

It takes many lessons to make a real seaman, and I got my rebuke at
once.  My experienced commander seemed in one searching glance to
read my thoughts on my ingenuous face.

"What you're going for is to save life, not to drown your boat's
crew for nothing," he growled severely in my ear.  But as we shoved
off he leaned over and cried out:  "It all rests on the power of
your arms, men.  Give way for life!"

We made a race of it, and I would never have believed that a common
boat's crew of a merchantman could keep up so much determined
fierceness in the regular swing of their stroke.  What our captain
had clearly perceived before we left had become plain to all of us
since.  The issue of our enterprise hung on a hair above that abyss
of waters which will not give up its dead till the Day of Judgment.
It was a race of two ship's boats matched against Death for a prize
of nine men's lives, and Death had a long start.  We saw the crew
of the brig from afar working at the pumps--still pumping on that
wreck, which already had settled so far down that the gentle, low
swell, over which our boats rose and fell easily without a check to
their speed, welling up almost level with her head-rails, plucked
at the ends of broken gear swinging desolately under her naked
bowsprit.

We could not, in all conscience, have picked out a better day for
our regatta had we had the free choice of all the days that ever
dawned upon the lonely struggles and solitary agonies of ships
since the Norse rovers first steered to the westward against the
run of Atlantic waves.  It was a very good race.  At the finish
there was not an oar's length between the first and second boat,
with Death coming in a good third on the top of the very next
smooth swell, for all one knew to the contrary.  The scuppers of
the brig gurgled softly all together when the water rising against
her sides subsided sleepily with a low wash, as if playing about an
immovable rock.  Her bulwarks were gone fore and aft, and one saw
her bare deck low-lying like a raft and swept clean of boats,
spars, houses--of everything except the ringbolts and the heads of
the pumps.  I had one dismal glimpse of it as I braced myself up to
receive upon my breast the last man to leave her, the captain, who
literally let himself fall into my arms.

It had been a weirdly silent rescue--a rescue without a hail,
without a single uttered word, without a gesture or a sign, without
a conscious exchange of glances.  Up to the very last moment those
on board stuck to their pumps, which spouted two clear streams of
water upon their bare feet.  Their brown skin showed through the
rents of their shirts; and the two small bunches of half-naked,
tattered men went on bowing from the waist to each other in their
back-breaking labour, up and down, absorbed, with no time for a
glance over the shoulder at the help that was coming to them.  As
we dashed, unregarded, alongside a voice let out one, only one
hoarse howl of command, and then, just as they stood, without caps,
with the salt drying gray in the wrinkles and folds of their hairy,
haggard faces, blinking stupidly at us their red eyelids, they made
a bolt away from the handles, tottering and jostling against each
other, and positively flung themselves over upon our very heads.
The clatter they made tumbling into the boats had an
extraordinarily destructive effect upon the illusion of tragic
dignity our self-esteem had thrown over the contests of mankind
with the sea.  On that exquisite day of gently breathing peace and
veiled sunshine perished my romantic love to what men's imagination
had proclaimed the most august aspect of Nature.  The cynical
indifference of the sea to the merits of human suffering and
courage, laid bare in this ridiculous, panic-tainted performance
extorted from the dire extremity of nine good and honourable
seamen, revolted me.  I saw the duplicity of the sea's most tender
mood.  It was so because it could not help itself, but the awed
respect of the early days was gone.  I felt ready to smile bitterly
at its enchanting charm and glare viciously at its furies.  In a
moment, before we shoved off, I had looked coolly at the life of my
choice.  Its illusions were gone, but its fascination remained.  I
had become a seaman at last.

We pulled hard for a quarter of an hour, then laid on our oars
waiting for our ship.  She was coming down on us with swelling
sails, looking delicately tall and exquisitely noble through the
mist.  The captain of the brig, who sat in the stern sheets by my
side with his face in his hands, raised his head and began to speak
with a sort of sombre volubility.  They had lost their masts and
sprung a leak in a hurricane; drifted for weeks, always at the
pumps, met more bad weather; the ships they sighted failed to make
them out, the leak gained upon them slowly, and the seas had left
them nothing to make a raft of.  It was very hard to see ship after
ship pass by at a distance, "as if everybody had agreed that we
must be left to drown," he added.  But they went on trying to keep
the brig afloat as long as possible, and working the pumps
constantly on insufficient food, mostly raw, till "yesterday
evening," he continued monotonously, "just as the sun went down,
the men's hearts broke."

He made an almost imperceptible pause here, and went on again with
exactly the same intonation:

"They told me the brig could not be saved, and they thought they
had done enough for themselves.  I said nothing to that.  It was
true.  It was no mutiny.  I had nothing to say to them.  They lay
about aft all night, as still as so many dead men.  I did not lie
down.  I kept a look-out.  When the first light came I saw your
ship at once.  I waited for more light; the breeze began to fail on
my face.  Then I shouted out as loud as I was able, 'Look at that
ship!' but only two men got up very slowly and came to me.  At
first only we three stood alone, for a long time, watching you
coming down to us, and feeling the breeze drop to a calm almost;
but afterwards others, too, rose, one after another, and by-and-by
I had all my crew behind me.  I turned round and said to them that
they could see the ship was coming our way, but in this small
breeze she might come too late after all, unless we turned to and
tried to keep the brig afloat long enough to give you time to save
us all.  I spoke like that to them, and then I gave the command to
man the pumps."

He gave the command, and gave the example, too, by going himself to
the handles, but it seems that these men did actually hang back for
a moment, looking at each other dubiously before they followed him.
"He! he! he!"  He broke out into a most unexpected, imbecile,
pathetic, nervous little giggle.  "Their hearts were broken so!
They had been played with too long," he explained apologetically,
lowering his eyes, and became silent.

Twenty-five years is a long time--a quarter of a century is a dim
and distant past; but to this day I remember the dark-brown feet,
hands, and faces of two of these men whose hearts had been broken
by the sea.  They were lying very still on their sides on the
bottom boards between the thwarts, curled up like dogs.  My boat's
crew, leaning over the looms of their oars, stared and listened as
if at the play.  The master of the brig looked up suddenly to ask
me what day it was.

They had lost the date.  When I told him it was Sunday, the 22nd,
he frowned, making some mental calculation, then nodded twice sadly
to himself, staring at nothing.

His aspect was miserably unkempt and wildly sorrowful.  Had it not
been for the unquenchable candour of his blue eyes, whose unhappy,
tired glance every moment sought his abandoned, sinking brig, as if
it could find rest nowhere else, he would have appeared mad.  But
he was too simple to go mad, too simple with that manly simplicity
which alone can bear men unscathed in mind and body through an
encounter with the deadly playfulness of the sea or with its less
abominable fury.

Neither angry, nor playful, nor smiling, it enveloped our distant
ship growing bigger as she neared us, our boats with the rescued
men and the dismantled hull of the brig we were leaving behind, in
the large and placid embrace of its quietness, half lost in the
fair haze, as if in a dream of infinite and tender clemency.  There
was no frown, no wrinkle on its face, not a ripple.  And the run of
the slight swell was so smooth that it resembled the graceful
undulation of a piece of shimmering gray silk shot with gleams of
green.  We pulled an easy stroke; but when the master of the brig,
after a glance over his shoulder, stood up with a low exclamation,
my men feathered their oars instinctively, without an order, and
the boat lost her way.

He was steadying himself on my shoulder with a strong grip, while
his other arm, flung up rigidly, pointed a denunciatory finger at
the immense tranquillity of the ocean.  After his first
exclamation, which stopped the swing of our oars, he made no sound,
but his whole attitude seemed to cry out an indignant "Behold!" . .
. I could not imagine what vision of evil had come to him.  I was
startled, and the amazing energy of his immobilized gesture made my
heart beat faster with the anticipation of something monstrous and
unsuspected.  The stillness around us became crushing.

For a moment the succession of silky undulations ran on innocently.
I saw each of them swell up the misty line of the horizon, far, far
away beyond the derelict brig, and the next moment, with a slight
friendly toss of our boat, it had passed under us and was gone.
The lulling cadence of the rise and fall, the invariable gentleness
of this irresistible force, the great charm of the deep waters,
warmed my breast deliciously, like the subtle poison of a love-
potion.  But all this lasted only a few soothing seconds before I
jumped up too, making the boat roll like the veriest landlubber.

Something startling, mysterious, hastily confused, was taking
place.  I watched it with incredulous and fascinated awe, as one
watches the confused, swift movements of some deed of violence done
in the dark.  As if at a given signal, the run of the smooth
undulations seemed checked suddenly around the brig.  By a strange
optical delusion the whole sea appeared to rise upon her in one
overwhelming heave of its silky surface, where in one spot a
smother of foam broke out ferociously.  And then the effort
subsided.  It was all over, and the smooth swell ran on as before
from the horizon in uninterrupted cadence of motion, passing under
us with a slight friendly toss of our boat.  Far away, where the
brig had been, an angry white stain undulating on the surface of
steely-gray waters, shot with gleams of green, diminished swiftly,
without a hiss, like a patch of pure snow melting in the sun.  And
the great stillness after this initiation into the sea's implacable
hate seemed full of dread thoughts and shadows of disaster.

"Gone!" ejaculated from the depths of his chest my bowman in a
final tone.  He spat in his hands, and took a better grip on his
oar.  The captain of the brig lowered his rigid arm slowly, and
looked at our faces in a solemnly conscious silence, which called
upon us to share in his simple-minded, marvelling awe.  All at once
he sat down by my side, and leaned forward earnestly at my boat's
crew, who, swinging together in a long, easy stroke, kept their
eyes fixed upon him faithfully.

"No ship could have done so well," he addressed them firmly, after
a moment of strained silence, during which he seemed with trembling
lips to seek for words fit to bear such high testimony.  "She was
small, but she was good.  I had no anxiety.  She was strong.  Last
voyage I had my wife and two children in her.  No other ship could
have stood so long the weather she had to live through for days and
days before we got dismasted a fortnight ago.  She was fairly worn
out, and that's all.  You may believe me.  She lasted under us for
days and days, but she could not last for ever.  It was long
enough.  I am glad it is over.  No better ship was ever left to
sink at sea on such a day as this."

He was competent to pronounce the funereal oration of a ship, this
son of ancient sea-folk, whose national existence, so little
stained by the excesses of manly virtues, had demanded nothing but
the merest foothold from the earth.  By the merits of his sea-wise
forefathers and by the artlessness of his heart, he was made fit to
deliver this excellent discourse.  There was nothing wanting in its
orderly arrangement--neither piety nor faith, nor the tribute of
praise due to the worthy dead, with the edifying recital of their
achievement.  She had lived, he had loved her; she had suffered,
and he was glad she was at rest.  It was an excellent discourse.
And it was orthodox, too, in its fidelity to the cardinal article
of a seaman's faith, of which it was a single-minded confession.
"Ships are all right."  They are.  They who live with the sea have
got to hold by that creed first and last; and it came to me, as I
glanced at him sideways, that some men were not altogether unworthy
in honour and conscience to pronounce the funereal eulogium of a
ship's constancy in life and death.

After this, sitting by my side with his loosely-clasped hands
hanging between his knees, he uttered no word, made no movement
till the shadow of our ship's sails fell on the boat, when, at the
loud cheer greeting the return of the victors with their prize, he
lifted up his troubled face with a faint smile of pathetic
indulgence.  This smile of the worthy descendant of the most
ancient sea-folk whose audacity and hardihood had left no trace of
greatness and glory upon the waters, completed the cycle of my
initiation.  There was an infinite depth of hereditary wisdom in
its pitying sadness.  It made the hearty bursts of cheering sound
like a childish noise of triumph.  Our crew shouted with immense
confidence--honest souls!  As if anybody could ever make sure of
having prevailed against the sea, which has betrayed so many ships
of great "name," so many proud men, so many towering ambitions of
fame, power, wealth, greatness!

As I brought the boat under the falls my captain, in high good-
humour, leaned over, spreading his red and freckled elbows on the
rail, and called down to me sarcastically, out of the depths of his
cynic philosopher's beard:

"So you have brought the boat back after all, have you?"

Sarcasm was "his way," and the most that can be said for it is that
it was natural.  This did not make it lovable.  But it is decorous
and expedient to fall in with one's commander's way.  "Yes.  I
brought the boat back all right, sir," I answered.  And the good
man believed me.  It was not for him to discern upon me the marks
of my recent initiation.  And yet I was not exactly the same
youngster who had taken the boat away--all impatience for a race
against death, with the prize of nine men's lives at the end.

Already I looked with other eyes upon the sea.  I knew it capable
of betraying the generous ardour of youth as implacably as,
indifferent to evil and good, it would have betrayed the basest
greed or the noblest heroism.  My conception of its magnanimous
greatness was gone.  And I looked upon the true sea--the sea that
plays with men till their hearts are broken, and wears stout ships
to death.  Nothing can touch the brooding bitterness of its heart.
Open to all and faithful to none, it exercises its fascination for
the undoing of the best.  To love it is not well.  It knows no bond
of plighted troth, no fidelity to misfortune, to long
companionship, to long devotion.  The promise it holds out
perpetually is very great; but the only secret of its possession is
strength, strength--the jealous, sleepless strength of a man
guarding a coveted treasure within his gates.



XXXVII.



The cradle of oversea traffic and of the art of naval combats, the
Mediterranean, apart from all the associations of adventure and
glory, the common heritage of all mankind, makes a tender appeal to
a seaman.  It has sheltered the infancy of his craft.  He looks
upon it as a man may look at a vast nursery in an old, old mansion
where innumerable generations of his own people have learned to
walk.  I say his own people because, in a sense, all sailors belong
to one family:  all are descended from that adventurous and shaggy
ancestor who, bestriding a shapeless log and paddling with a
crooked branch, accomplished the first coasting-trip in a sheltered
bay ringing with the admiring howls of his tribe.  It is a matter
of regret that all those brothers in craft and feeling, whose
generations have learned to walk a ship's deck in that nursery,
have been also more than once fiercely engaged in cutting each
other's throats there.  But life, apparently, has such exigencies.
Without human propensity to murder and other sorts of
unrighteousness there would have been no historical heroism.  It is
a consoling reflection.  And then, if one examines impartially the
deeds of violence, they appear of but small consequence.  From
Salamis to Actium, through Lepanto and the Nile to the naval
massacre of Navarino, not to mention other armed encounters of
lesser interest, all the blood heroically spilt into the
Mediterranean has not stained with a single trail of purple the
deep azure of its classic waters.

Of course, it may be argued that battles have shaped the destiny of
mankind.  The question whether they have shaped it well would
remain open, however.  But it would be hardly worth discussing.  It
is very probable that, had the Battle of Salamis never been fought,
the face of the world would have been much as we behold it now,
fashioned by the mediocre inspiration and the short-sighted labours
of men.  From a long and miserable experience of suffering,
injustice, disgrace and aggression the nations of the earth are
mostly swayed by fear--fear of the sort that a little cheap oratory
turns easily to rage, hate, and violence.  Innocent, guileless fear
has been the cause of many wars.  Not, of course, the fear of war
itself, which, in the evolution of sentiments and ideas, has come
to be regarded at last as a half-mystic and glorious ceremony with
certain fashionable rites and preliminary incantations, wherein the
conception of its true nature has been lost.  To apprehend the true
aspect, force, and morality of war as a natural function of mankind
one requires a feather in the hair and a ring in the nose, or,
better still, teeth filed to a point and a tattooed breast.
Unfortunately, a return to such simple ornamentation is impossible.
We are bound to the chariot of progress.  There is no going back;
and, as bad luck would have it, our civilization, which has done so
much for the comfort and adornment of our bodies and the elevation
of our minds, has made lawful killing frightfully and needlessly
expensive.

The whole question of improved armaments has been approached by the
governments of the earth in a spirit of nervous and unreflecting
haste, whereas the right way was lying plainly before them, and had
only to be pursued with calm determination.  The learned vigils and
labours of a certain class of inventors should have been rewarded
with honourable liberality as justice demanded; and the bodies of
the inventors should have been blown to pieces by means of their
own perfected explosives and improved weapons with extreme
publicity as the commonest prudence dictated.  By this method the
ardour of research in that direction would have been restrained
without infringing the sacred privileges of science.  For the lack
of a little cool thinking in our guides and masters this course has
not been followed, and a beautiful simplicity has been sacrificed
for no real advantage.  A frugal mind cannot defend itself from
considerable bitterness when reflecting that at the Battle of
Actium (which was fought for no less a stake than the dominion of
the world) the fleet of Octavianus Caesar and the fleet of
Antonius, including the Egyptian division and Cleopatra's galley
with purple sails, probably cost less than two modern battleships,
or, as the modern naval book-jargon has it, two capital units.  But
no amount of lubberly book-jargon can disguise a fact well
calculated to afflict the soul of every sound economist.  It is not
likely that the Mediterranean will ever behold a battle with a
greater issue; but when the time comes for another historical fight
its bottom will be enriched as never before by a quantity of jagged
scrap-iron, paid for at pretty nearly its weight of gold by the
deluded populations inhabiting the isles and continents of this
planet.



XXXVIII.



Happy he who, like Ulysses, has made an adventurous voyage; and
there is no such sea for adventurous voyages as the Mediterranean--
the inland sea which the ancients looked upon as so vast and so
full of wonders.  And, indeed, it was terrible and wonderful; for
it is we alone who, swayed by the audacity of our minds and the
tremors of our hearts, are the sole artisans of all the wonder and
romance of the world.

It was for the Mediterranean sailors that fair-haired sirens sang
among the black rocks seething in white foam and mysterious voices
spoke in the darkness above the moving wave--voices menacing,
seductive, or prophetic, like that voice heard at the beginning of
the Christian era by the master of an African vessel in the Gulf of
Syrta, whose calm nights are full of strange murmurs and flitting
shadows.  It called him by name, bidding him go and tell all men
that the great god Pan was dead.  But the great legend of the
Mediterranean, the legend of traditional song and grave history,
lives, fascinating and immortal, in our minds.

The dark and fearful sea of the subtle Ulysses' wanderings,
agitated by the wrath of Olympian gods, harbouring on its isles the
fury of strange monsters and the wiles of strange women; the
highway of heroes and sages, of warriors, pirates, and saints; the
workaday sea of Carthaginian merchants and the pleasure lake of the
Roman Caesars, claims the veneration of every seaman as the
historical home of that spirit of open defiance against the great
waters of the earth which is the very soul of his calling.  Issuing
thence to the west and south, as a youth leaves the shelter of his
parental house, this spirit found the way to the Indies, discovered
the coasts of a new continent, and traversed at last the immensity
of the great Pacific, rich in groups of islands remote and
mysterious like the constellations of the sky.

The first impulse of navigation took its visible form in that
tideless basin freed from hidden shoals and treacherous currents,
as if in tender regard for the infancy of the art.  The steep
shores of the Mediterranean favoured the beginners in one of
humanity's most daring enterprises, and the enchanting inland sea
of classic adventure has led mankind gently from headland to
headland, from bay to bay, from island to island, out into the
promise of world-wide oceans beyond the Pillars of Hercules.



XXXIX.



The charm of the Mediterranean dwells in the unforgettable flavour
of my early days, and to this hour this sea, upon which the Romans
alone ruled without dispute, has kept for me the fascination of
youthful romance.  The very first Christmas night I ever spent away
from land was employed in running before a Gulf of Lions gale,
which made the old ship groan in every timber as she skipped before
it over the short seas until we brought her to, battered and out of
breath, under the lee of Majorca, where the smooth water was torn
by fierce cat's-paws under a very stormy sky.

We--or, rather, they, for I had hardly had two glimpses of salt
water in my life till then--kept her standing off and on all that
day, while I listened for the first time with the curiosity of my
tender years to the song of the wind in a ship's rigging.  The
monotonous and vibrating note was destined to grow into the
intimacy of the heart, pass into blood and bone, accompany the
thoughts and acts of two full decades, remain to haunt like a
reproach the peace of the quiet fireside, and enter into the very
texture of respectable dreams dreamed safely under a roof of
rafters and tiles.  The wind was fair, but that day we ran no more.

The thing (I will not call her a ship twice in the same half-hour)
leaked.  She leaked fully, generously, overflowingly, all over--
like a basket.  I took an enthusiastic part in the excitement
caused by that last infirmity of noble ships, without concerning
myself much with the why or the wherefore.  The surmise of my
maturer years is that, bored by her interminable life, the
venerable antiquity was simply yawning with ennui at every seam.
But at the time I did not know; I knew generally very little, and
least of all what I was doing in that galere.

I remember that, exactly as in the comedy of Moliere, my uncle
asked the precise question in the very words--not of my
confidential valet, however, but across great distances of land, in
a letter whose mocking but indulgent turn ill concealed his almost
paternal anxiety.  I fancy I tried to convey to him my (utterly
unfounded) impression that the West Indies awaited my coming.  I
had to go there.  It was a sort of mystic conviction--something in
the nature of a call.  But it was difficult to state intelligibly
the grounds of this belief to that man of rigorous logic, if of
infinite charity.

The truth must have been that, all unversed in the arts of the wily
Greek, the deceiver of gods, the lover of strange women, the evoker
of bloodthirsty shades, I yet longed for the beginning of my own
obscure Odyssey, which, as was proper for a modern, should unroll
its wonders and terrors beyond the Pillars of Hercules.  The
disdainful ocean did not open wide to swallow up my audacity,
though the ship, the ridiculous and ancient galere of my folly, the
old, weary, disenchanted sugar-waggon, seemed extremely disposed to
open out and swallow up as much salt water as she could hold.
This, if less grandiose, would have been as final a catastrophe.

But no catastrophe occurred.  I lived to watch on a strange shore a
black and youthful Nausicaa, with a joyous train of attendant
maidens, carrying baskets of linen to a clear stream overhung by
the heads of slender palm-trees.  The vivid colours of their draped
raiment and the gold of their earrings invested with a barbaric and
regal magnificence their figures, stepping out freely in a shower
of broken sunshine.  The whiteness of their teeth was still more
dazzling than the splendour of jewels at their ears.  The shaded
side of the ravine gleamed with their smiles.  They were as
unabashed as so many princesses, but, alas! not one of them was the
daughter of a jet-black sovereign.  Such was my abominable luck in
being born by the mere hair's breadth of twenty-five centuries too
late into a world where kings have been growing scarce with
scandalous rapidity, while the few who remain have adopted the
uninteresting manners and customs of simple millionaires.
Obviously it was a vain hope in 187- to see the ladies of a royal
household walk in chequered sunshine, with baskets of linen on
their heads, to the banks of a clear stream overhung by the starry
fronds of palm-trees.  It was a vain hope.  If I did not ask myself
whether, limited by such discouraging impossibilities, life were
still worth living, it was only because I had then before me
several other pressing questions, some of which have remained
unanswered to this day.  The resonant, laughing voices of these
gorgeous maidens scared away the multitude of humming-birds, whose
delicate wings wreathed with the mist of their vibration the tops
of flowering bushes.

No, they were not princesses.  Their unrestrained laughter filling
the hot, fern-clad ravine had a soulless limpidity, as of wild,
inhuman dwellers in tropical woodlands.  Following the example of
certain prudent travellers, I withdrew unseen--and returned, not
much wiser, to the Mediterranean, the sea of classic adventures.



XL.



It was written that there, in the nursery of our navigating
ancestors, I should learn to walk in the ways of my craft and grow
in the love of the sea, blind as young love often is, but absorbing
and disinterested as all true love must be.  I demanded nothing
from it--not even adventure.  In this I showed, perhaps, more
intuitive wisdom than high self-denial.  No adventure ever came to
one for the asking.  He who starts on a deliberate quest of
adventure goes forth but to gather dead-sea fruit, unless, indeed,
he be beloved of the gods and great amongst heroes, like that most
excellent cavalier Don Quixote de la Mancha.  By us ordinary
mortals of a mediocre animus that is only too anxious to pass by
wicked giants for so many honest windmills, adventures are
entertained like visiting angels.  They come upon our complacency
unawares.  As unbidden guests are apt to do, they often come at
inconvenient times.  And we are glad to let them go unrecognised,
without any acknowledgment of so high a favour.  After many years,
on looking back from the middle turn of life's way at the events of
the past, which, like a friendly crowd, seem to gaze sadly after us
hastening towards the Cimmerian shore, we may see here and there,
in the gray throng, some figure glowing with a faint radiance, as
though it had caught all the light of our already crepuscular sky.
And by this glow we may recognise the faces of our true adventures,
of the once unbidden guests entertained unawares in our young days.

If the Mediterranean, the venerable (and sometimes atrociously ill-
tempered) nurse of all navigators, was to rock my youth, the
providing of the cradle necessary for that operation was entrusted
by Fate to the most casual assemblage of irresponsible young men
(all, however, older than myself) that, as if drunk with Provencal
sunshine, frittered life away in joyous levity on the model of
Balzac's "Histoire des Treize" qualified by a dash of romance de
cape et d'epee.

She who was my cradle in those years had been built on the River of
Savona by a famous builder of boats, was rigged in Corsica by
another good man, and was described on her papers as a 'tartane' of
sixty tons.  In reality, she was a true balancelle, with two short
masts raking forward and two curved yards, each as long as her
hull; a true child of the Latin lake, with a spread of two enormous
sails resembling the pointed wings on a sea-bird's slender body,
and herself, like a bird indeed, skimming rather than sailing the
seas.

Her name was the Tremolino.  How is this to be translated?  The
Quiverer?  What a name to give the pluckiest little craft that ever
dipped her sides in angry foam!  I had felt her, it is true,
trembling for nights and days together under my feet, but it was
with the high-strung tenseness of her faithful courage.  In her
short, but brilliant, career she has taught me nothing, but she has
given me everything.  I owe to her the awakened love for the sea
that, with the quivering of her swift little body and the humming
of the wind under the foot of her lateen sails, stole into my heart
with a sort of gentle violence, and brought my imagination under
its despotic sway.  The Tremolino!  To this day I cannot utter or
even write that name without a strange tightening of the breast and
the gasp of mingled delight and dread of one's first passionate
experience.



XLI.



We four formed (to use a term well understood nowadays in every
social sphere) a "syndicate" owning the Tremolino:  an
international and astonishing syndicate.  And we were all ardent
Royalists of the snow-white Legitimist complexion--Heaven only
knows why!  In all associations of men there is generally one who,
by the authority of age and of a more experienced wisdom, imparts a
collective character to the whole set.  If I mention that the
oldest of us was very old, extremely old--nearly thirty years old--
and that he used to declare with gallant carelessness, "I live by
my sword," I think I have given enough information on the score of
our collective wisdom.  He was a North Carolinian gentleman, J. M.
K. B. were the initials of his name, and he really did live by the
sword, as far as I know.  He died by it, too, later on, in a
Balkanian squabble, in the cause of some Serbs or else Bulgarians,
who were neither Catholics nor gentlemen--at least, not in the
exalted but narrow sense he attached to that last word.

Poor J. M. K. B., Americain, Catholique, et gentilhomme, as he was
disposed to describe himself in moments of lofty expansion!  Are
there still to be found in Europe gentlemen keen of face and
elegantly slight of body, of distinguished aspect, with a
fascinating drawing-room manner and with a dark, fatal glance, who
live by their swords, I wonder?  His family had been ruined in the
Civil War, I fancy, and seems for a decade or so to have led a
wandering life in the Old World.  As to Henry C-, the next in age
and wisdom of our band, he had broken loose from the unyielding
rigidity of his family, solidly rooted, if I remember rightly, in a
well-to-do London suburb.  On their respectable authority he
introduced himself meekly to strangers as a "black sheep."  I have
never seen a more guileless specimen of an outcast.  Never.

However, his people had the grace to send him a little money now
and then.  Enamoured of the South, of Provence, of its people, its
life, its sunshine and its poetry, narrow-chested, tall and short-
sighted, he strode along the streets and the lanes, his long feet
projecting far in advance of his body, and his white nose and
gingery moustache buried in an open book:  for he had the habit of
reading as he walked.  How he avoided falling into precipices, off
the quays, or down staircases is a great mystery.  The sides of his
overcoat bulged out with pocket editions of various poets.  When
not engaged in reading Virgil, Homer, or Mistral, in parks,
restaurants, streets, and suchlike public places, he indited
sonnets (in French) to the eyes, ears, chin, hair, and other
visible perfections of a nymph called Therese, the daughter,
honesty compels me to state, of a certain Madame Leonore who kept a
small cafe for sailors in one of the narrowest streets of the old
town.

No more charming face, clear-cut like an antique gem, and delicate
in colouring like the petal of a flower, had ever been set on,
alas! a somewhat squat body.  He read his verses aloud to her in
the very cafe with the innocence of a little child and the vanity
of a poet.  We followed him there willingly enough, if only to
watch the divine Therese laugh, under the vigilant black eyes of
Madame Leonore, her mother.  She laughed very prettily, not so much
at the sonnets, which she could not but esteem, as at poor Henry's
French accent, which was unique, resembling the warbling of birds,
if birds ever warbled with a stuttering, nasal intonation.

Our third partner was Roger P. de la S-, the most Scandinavian-
looking of Provencal squires, fair, and six feet high, as became a
descendant of sea-roving Northmen, authoritative, incisive, wittily
scornful, with a comedy in three acts in his pocket, and in his
breast a heart blighted by a hopeless passion for his beautiful
cousin, married to a wealthy hide and tallow merchant.  He used to
take us to lunch at their house without ceremony.  I admired the
good lady's sweet patience.  The husband was a conciliatory soul,
with a great fund of resignation, which he expended on "Roger's
friends."  I suspect he was secretly horrified at these invasions.
But it was a Carlist salon, and as such we were made welcome.  The
possibility of raising Catalonia in the interest of the Rey netto,
who had just then crossed the Pyrenees, was much discussed there.

Don Carlos, no doubt, must have had many queer friends (it is the
common lot of all Pretenders), but amongst them none more
extravagantly fantastic than the Tremolino Syndicate, which used to
meet in a tavern on the quays of the old port.  The antique city of
Massilia had surely never, since the days of the earliest
Phoenicians, known an odder set of ship-owners.  We met to discuss
and settle the plan of operations for each voyage of the Tremolino.
In these operations a banking-house, too, was concerned--a very
respectable banking-house.  But I am afraid I shall end by saying
too much.  Ladies, too, were concerned (I am really afraid I am
saying too much)--all sorts of ladies, some old enough to know
better than to put their trust in princes, others young and full of
illusions.

One of these last was extremely amusing in the imitations, she gave
us in confidence, of various highly-placed personages she was
perpetually rushing off to Paris to interview in the interests of
the cause--Por el Rey!  For she was a Carlist, and of Basque blood
at that, with something of a lioness in the expression of her
courageous face (especially when she let her hair down), and with
the volatile little soul of a sparrow dressed in fine Parisian
feathers, which had the trick of coming off disconcertingly at
unexpected moments.

But her imitations of a Parisian personage, very highly placed
indeed, as she represented him standing in the corner of a room
with his face to the wall, rubbing the back of his head and moaning
helplessly, "Rita, you are the death of me!" were enough to make
one (if young and free from cares) split one's sides laughing.  She
had an uncle still living, a very effective Carlist, too, the
priest of a little mountain parish in Guipuzcoa.  As the sea-going
member of the syndicate (whose plans depended greatly on Dona
Rita's information), I used to be charged with humbly affectionate
messages for the old man.  These messages I was supposed to deliver
to the Arragonese muleteers (who were sure to await at certain
times the Tremolino in the neighbourhood of the Gulf of Rosas), for
faithful transportation inland, together with the various unlawful
goods landed secretly from under the Tremolino's hatches.

Well, now, I have really let out too much (as I feared I should in
the end) as to the usual contents of my sea-cradle.  But let it
stand.  And if anybody remarks cynically that I must have been a
promising infant in those days, let that stand, too.  I am
concerned but for the good name of the Tremolino, and I affirm that
a ship is ever guiltless of the sins, transgressions, and follies
of her men.



XLII.



It was not Tremolino's fault that the syndicate depended so much on
the wit and wisdom and the information of Dona Rita.  She had taken
a little furnished house on the Prado for the good of the cause--
Por el Rey!  She was always taking little houses for somebody's
good, for the sick or the sorry, for broken-down artists, cleaned-
out gamblers, temporarily unlucky speculators--vieux amis--old
friends, as she used to explain apologetically, with a shrug of her
fine shoulders.

Whether Don Carlos was one of the "old friends," too, it's hard to
say.  More unlikely things have been heard of in smoking-rooms.
All I know is that one evening, entering incautiously the salon of
the little house just after the news of a considerable Carlist
success had reached the faithful, I was seized round the neck and
waist and whirled recklessly three times round the room, to the
crash of upsetting furniture and the humming of a valse tune in a
warm contralto voice.

When released from the dizzy embrace, I sat down on the carpet--
suddenly, without affectation.  In this unpretentious attitude I
became aware that J. M. K. B. had followed me into the room,
elegant, fatal, correct and severe in a white tie and large shirt-
front.  In answer to his politely sinister, prolonged glance of
inquiry, I overheard Dona Rita murmuring, with some confusion and
annoyance, "Vous etes bete mon cher.  Voyons!  Ca n'a aucune
consequence."  Well content in this case to be of no particular
consequence, I had already about me the elements of some worldly
sense.

Rearranging my collar, which, truth to say, ought to have been a
round one above a short jacket, but was not, I observed
felicitously that I had come to say good-bye, being ready to go off
to sea that very night with the Tremolino.  Our hostess, slightly
panting yet, and just a shade dishevelled, turned tartly upon J. M.
K. B., desiring to know when HE would be ready to go off by the
Tremolino, or in any other way, in order to join the royal
headquarters.  Did he intend, she asked ironically, to wait for the
very eve of the entry into Madrid?  Thus by a judicious exercise of
tact and asperity we re-established the atmospheric equilibrium of
the room long before I left them a little before midnight, now
tenderly reconciled, to walk down to the harbour and hail the
Tremolino by the usual soft whistle from the edge of the quay.  It
was our signal, invariably heard by the ever-watchful Dominic, the
padrone.

He would raise a lantern silently to light my steps along the
narrow, springy plank of our primitive gangway.  "And so we are
going off," he would murmur directly my foot touched the deck.  I
was the harbinger of sudden departures, but there was nothing in
the world sudden enough to take Dominic unawares.  His thick black
moustaches, curled every morning with hot tongs by the barber at
the corner of the quay, seemed to hide a perpetual smile.  But
nobody, I believe, had ever seen the true shape of his lips.  From
the slow, imperturbable gravity of that broad-chested man you would
think he had never smiled in his life.  In his eyes lurked a look
of perfectly remorseless irony, as though he had been provided with
an extremely experienced soul; and the slightest distension of his
nostrils would give to his bronzed face a look of extraordinary
boldness.  This was the only play of feature of which he seemed
capable, being a Southerner of a concentrated, deliberate type.
His ebony hair curled slightly on the temples.  He may have been
forty years old, and he was a great voyager on the inland sea.

Astute and ruthless, he could have rivalled in resource the
unfortunate son of Laertes and Anticlea.  If he did not pit his
craft and audacity against the very gods, it is only because the
Olympian gods are dead.  Certainly no woman could frighten him.  A
one-eyed giant would not have had the ghost of a chance against
Dominic Cervoni, of Corsica, not Ithaca; and no king, son of kings,
but of very respectable family--authentic Caporali, he affirmed.
But that is as it may be.  The Caporali families date back to the
twelfth century.

For want of more exalted adversaries Dominic turned his audacity
fertile in impious stratagems against the powers of the earth, as
represented by the institution of Custom-houses and every mortal
belonging thereto--scribes, officers, and guardacostas afloat and
ashore.  He was the very man for us, this modern and unlawful
wanderer with his own legend of loves, dangers, and bloodshed.  He
told us bits of it sometimes in measured, ironic tones.  He spoke
Catalonian, the Italian of Corsica and the French of Provence with
the same easy naturalness.  Dressed in shore-togs, a white starched
shirt, black jacket, and round hat, as I took him once to see Dona
Rita, he was extremely presentable.  He could make himself
interesting by a tactful and rugged reserve set off by a grim,
almost imperceptible, playfulness of tone and manner.

He had the physical assurance of strong-hearted men.  After half an
hour's interview in the dining-room, during which they got in touch
with each other in an amazing way, Rita told us in her best grande
dame manner:  "Mais il esi parfait, cet homme."  He was perfect.
On board the Tremolino, wrapped up in a black caban, the
picturesque cloak of Mediterranean seamen, with those massive
moustaches and his remorseless eyes set off by the shadow of the
deep hood, he looked piratical and monkish and darkly initiated
into the most awful mysteries of the sea.



XLIII.



Anyway, he was perfect, as Dona Rita had declared.  The only thing
unsatisfactory (and even inexplicable) about our Dominic was his
nephew, Cesar.  It was startling to see a desolate expression of
shame veil the remorseless audacity in the eyes of that man
superior to all scruples and terrors.

"I would never have dared to bring him on board your balancelle,"
he once apologized to me.  "But what am I to do?  His mother is
dead, and my brother has gone into the bush."

In this way I learned that our Dominic had a brother.  As to "going
into the bush," this only means that a man has done his duty
successfully in the pursuit of a hereditary vendetta.  The feud
which had existed for ages between the families of Cervoni and
Brunaschi was so old that it seemed to have smouldered out at last.
One evening Pietro Brunaschi, after a laborious day amongst his
olive-trees, sat on a chair against the wall of his house with a
bowl of broth on his knees and a piece of bread in his hand.
Dominic's brother, going home with a gun on his shoulder, found a
sudden offence in this picture of content and rest so obviously
calculated to awaken the feelings of hatred and revenge.  He and
Pietro had never had any personal quarrel; but, as Dominic
explained, "all our dead cried out to him."  He shouted from behind
a wall of stones, "O Pietro!  Behold what is coming!"  And as the
other looked up innocently he took aim at the forehead and squared
the old vendetta account so neatly that, according to Dominic, the
dead man continued to sit with the bowl of broth on his knees and
the piece of bread in his hand.

This is why--because in Corsica your dead will not leave you alone-
-Dominic's brother had to go into the maquis, into the bush on the
wild mountain-side, to dodge the gendarmes for the insignificant
remainder of his life, and Dominic had charge of his nephew with a
mission to make a man of him.

No more unpromising undertaking could be imagined.  The very
material for the task seemed wanting.  The Cervonis, if not
handsome men, were good sturdy flesh and blood.  But this
extraordinarily lean and livid youth seemed to have no more blood
in him than a snail.

"Some cursed witch must have stolen my brother's child from the
cradle and put that spawn of a starved devil in its place," Dominic
would say to me.  "Look at him!  Just look at him!"

To look at Cesar was not pleasant.  His parchment skin, showing
dead white on his cranium through the thin wisps of dirty brown
hair, seemed to be glued directly and tightly upon his big bones,
Without being in any way deformed, he was the nearest approach
which I have ever seen or could imagine to what is commonly
understood by the word "monster."  That the source of the effect
produced was really moral I have no doubt.  An utterly, hopelessly
depraved nature was expressed in physical terms, that taken each
separately had nothing positively startling.  You imagined him
clammily cold to the touch, like a snake.  The slightest reproof,
the most mild and justifiable remonstrance, would be met by a
resentful glare and an evil shrinking of his thin dry upper lip, a
snarl of hate to which he generally added the agreeable sound of
grinding teeth.

It was for this venomous performance rather than for his lies,
impudence, and laziness that his uncle used to knock him down.  It
must not be imagined that it was anything in the nature of a brutal
assault.  Dominic's brawny arm would be seen describing
deliberately an ample horizontal gesture, a dignified sweep, and
Cesar would go over suddenly like a ninepin--which was funny to
see.  But, once down, he would writhe on the deck, gnashing his
teeth in impotent rage--which was pretty horrible to behold.  And
it also happened more than once that he would disappear completely-
-which was startling to observe.  This is the exact truth.  Before
some of these majestic cuffs Cesar would go down and vanish.  He
would vanish heels overhead into open hatchways, into scuttles,
behind up-ended casks, according to the place where he happened to
come into contact with his uncle's mighty arm.

Once--it was in the old harbour, just before the Tremolino's last
voyage--he vanished thus overboard to my infinite consternation.
Dominic and I had been talking business together aft, and Cesar had
sneaked up behind us to listen, for, amongst his other perfections,
he was a consummate eavesdropper and spy.  At the sound of the
heavy plop alongside horror held me rooted to the spot; but Dominic
stepped quietly to the rail and leaned over, waiting for his
nephew's miserable head to bob up for the first time.

"Ohe, Cesar!" he yelled contemptuously to the spluttering wretch.
"Catch hold of that mooring hawser--charogne!"

He approached me to resume the interrupted conversation.

"What about Cesar?" I asked anxiously.

"Canallia!  Let him hang there," was his answer.  And he went on
talking over the business in hand calmly, while I tried vainly to
dismiss from my mind the picture of Cesar steeped to the chin in
the water of the old harbour, a decoction of centuries of marine
refuse.  I tried to dismiss it, because the mere notion of that
liquid made me feel very sick.  Presently Dominic, hailing an idle
boatman, directed him to go and fish his nephew out; and by-and-by
Cesar appeared walking on board from the quay, shivering, streaming
with filthy water, with bits of rotten straws in his hair and a
piece of dirty orange-peel stranded on his shoulder.  His teeth
chattered; his yellow eyes squinted balefully at us as he passed
forward.  I thought it my duty to remonstrate.

"Why are you always knocking him about, Dominic?" I asked.  Indeed,
I felt convinced it was no earthly good--a sheer waste of muscular
force.

"I must try to make a man of him," Dominic answered hopelessly.

I restrained the obvious retort that in this way he ran the risk of
making, in the words of the immortal Mr. Mantalini, "a demnition
damp, unpleasant corpse of him."

"He wants to be a locksmith!" burst out Cervoni.  "To learn how to
pick locks, I suppose," he added with sardonic bitterness.

"Why not let him be a locksmith?" I ventured.

"Who would teach him?" he cried.  "Where could I leave him?" he
asked, with a drop in his voice; and I had my first glimpse of
genuine despair.  "He steals, you know, alas!  Par ta Madonne!  I
believe he would put poison in your food and mine--the viper!"

He raised his face and both his clenched fists slowly to heaven.
However, Cesar never dropped poison into our cups.  One cannot be
sure, but I fancy he went to work in another way.

This voyage, of which the details need not be given, we had to
range far afield for sufficient reasons.  Coming up from the South
to end it with the important and really dangerous part of the
scheme in hand, we found it necessary to look into Barcelona for
certain definite information.  This appears like running one's head
into the very jaws of the lion, but in reality it was not so.  We
had one or two high, influential friends there, and many others
humble but valuable because bought for good hard cash.  We were in
no danger of being molested; indeed, the important information
reached us promptly by the hands of a Custom-house officer, who
came on board full of showy zeal to poke an iron rod into the layer
of oranges which made the visible part of our cargo in the
hatchway.

I forgot to mention before that the Tremolino was officially known
as a fruit and cork-wood trader.  The zealous officer managed to
slip a useful piece of paper into Dominic's hand as he went ashore,
and a few hours afterwards, being off duty, he returned on board
again athirst for drinks and gratitude.  He got both as a matter of
course.  While he sat sipping his liqueur in the tiny cabin,
Dominic plied him with questions as to the whereabouts of the
guardacostas.  The preventive service afloat was really the one for
us to reckon with, and it was material for our success and safety
to know the exact position of the patrol craft in the
neighbourhood.  The news could not have been more favourable.  The
officer mentioned a small place on the coast some twelve miles off,
where, unsuspicious and unready, she was lying at anchor, with her
sails unbent, painting yards and scraping spars.  Then he left us
after the usual compliments, smirking reassurringly over his
shoulder.

I had kept below pretty close all day from excess of prudence.  The
stake played on that trip was big.

"We are ready to go at once, but for Cesar, who has been missing
ever since breakfast," announced Dominic to me in his slow, grim
way.

Where the fellow had gone, and why, we could not imagine.  The
usual surmises in the case of a missing seaman did not apply to
Cesar's absence.  He was too odious for love, friendship, gambling,
or even casual intercourse.  But once or twice he had wandered away
like this before.

Dominic went ashore to look for him, but returned at the end of two
hours alone and very angry, as I could see by the token of the
invisible smile under his moustache being intensified.  We wondered
what had become of the wretch, and made a hurried investigation
amongst our portable property.  He had stolen nothing.

"He will be back before long," I said confidently.

Ten minutes afterwards one of the men on deck called out loudly:

"I can see him coming."

Cesar had only his shirt and trousers on.  He had sold his coat,
apparently for pocket-money.

"You knave!" was all Dominic said, with a terrible softness of
voice.  He restrained his choler for a time.  "Where have you been,
vagabond?" he asked menacingly.

Nothing would induce Cesar to answer that question.  It was as if
he even disdained to lie.  He faced us, drawing back his lips and
gnashing his teeth, and did not shrink an inch before the sweep of
Dominic's arm.  He went down as if shot, of course.  But this time
I noticed that, when picking himself up, he remained longer than
usual on all fours, baring his big teeth over his shoulder and
glaring upwards at his uncle with a new sort of hate in his round,
yellow eyes.  That permanent sentiment seemed pointed at that
moment by especial malice and curiosity.  I became quite
interested.  If he ever manages to put poison in the dishes, I
thought to myself, this is how he will look at us as we sit at our
meal.  But I did not, of course, believe for a moment that he would
ever put poison in our food.  He ate the same things himself.
Moreover, he had no poison.  And I could not imagine a human being
so blinded by cupidity as to sell poison to such an atrocious
creature.



XLIV.



We slipped out to sea quietly at dusk, and all through the night
everything went well.  The breeze was gusty; a southerly blow was
making up.  It was fair wind for our course.  Now and then Dominic
slowly and rhythmically struck his hands together a few times, as
if applauding the performance of the Tremolino.  The balancelle
hummed and quivered as she flew along, dancing lightly under our
feet.

At daybreak I pointed out to Dominic, amongst the several sail in
view running before the gathering storm, one particular vessel.
The press of canvas she carried made her loom up high, end-on, like
a gray column standing motionless directly in our wake.

"Look at this fellow, Dominic," I said.  "He seems to be in a
hurry."

The Padrone made no remark, but, wrapping his black cloak close
about him, stood up to look.  His weather-tanned face, framed in
the hood, had an aspect of authority and challenging force, with
the deep-set eyes gazing far away fixedly, without a wink, like the
intent, merciless, steady eyes of a sea-bird.

"Chi va piano va sano," he remarked at last, with a derisive glance
over the side, in ironic allusion to our own tremendous speed.

The Tremolino was doing her best, and seemed to hardly touch the
great burst of foam over which she darted.  I crouched down again
to get some shelter from the low bulwark.  After more than half an
hour of swaying immobility expressing a concentrated, breathless
watchfulness, Dominic sank on the deck by my side.  Within the
monkish cowl his eyes gleamed with a fierce expression which
surprised me.  All he said was:

"He has come out here to wash the new paint off his yards, I
suppose."

"What?" I shouted, getting up on my knees.  "Is she the
guardacosta?"

The perpetual suggestion of a smile under Dominic's piratical
moustaches seemed to become more accentuated--quite real, grim,
actually almost visible through the wet and uncurled hair.  Judging
by that symptom, he must have been in a towering rage.  But I could
also see that he was puzzled, and that discovery affected me
disagreeably.  Dominic puzzled!  For a long time, leaning against
the bulwark, I gazed over the stern at the gray column that seemed
to stand swaying slightly in our wake always at the same distance.

Meanwhile Dominic, black and cowled, sat cross-legged on the deck,
with his back to the wind, recalling vaguely an Arab chief in his
burnuss sitting on the sand.  Above his motionless figure the
little cord and tassel on the stiff point of the hood swung about
inanely in the gale.  At last I gave up facing the wind and rain,
and crouched down by his side.  I was satisfied that the sail was a
patrol craft.  Her presence was not a thing to talk about, but
soon, between two clouds charged with hail-showers, a burst of
sunshine fell upon her sails, and our men discovered her character
for themselves.  From that moment I noticed that they seemed to
take no heed of each other or of anything else.  They could spare
no eyes and no thought but for the slight column-shape astern of
us.  Its swaying had become perceptible.  For a moment she remained
dazzlingly white, then faded away slowly to nothing in a squall,
only to reappear again, nearly black, resembling a post stuck
upright against the slaty background of solid cloud.  Since first
noticed she had not gained on us a foot.

"She will never catch the Tremolino," I said exultingly.

Dominic did not look at me.  He remarked absently, but justly, that
the heavy weather was in our pursuer's favour.  She was three times
our size.  What we had to do was to keep our distance till dark,
which we could manage easily, and then haul off to seaward and
consider the situation.  But his thoughts seemed to stumble in the
darkness of some not-solved enigma, and soon he fell silent.  We
ran steadily, wing-and-wing.  Cape San Sebastian nearly ahead
seemed to recede from us in the squalls of rain, and come out again
to meet our rush, every time more distinct between the showers.

For my part I was by no means certain that this gabelou (as our men
alluded to her opprobriously) was after us at all.  There were
nautical difficulties in such a view which made me express the
sanguine opinion that she was in all innocence simply changing her
station.  At this Dominic condescended to turn his head.

"I tell you she is in chase," he affirmed moodily, after one short
glance astern.

I never doubted his opinion.  But with all the ardour of a neophyte
and the pride of an apt learner I was at that time a great nautical
casuist.

"What I can't understand," I insisted subtly, "is how on earth,
with this wind, she has managed to be just where she was when we
first made her out.  It is clear that she could not, and did not,
gain twelve miles on us during the night.  And there are other
impossibilities. . . ."

Dominic had been sitting motionless, like an inanimate black cone
posed on the stern deck, near the rudder-head, with a small tassel
fluttering on its sharp point, and for a time he preserved the
immobility of his meditation.  Then, bending over with a short
laugh, he gave my ear the bitter fruit of it.  He understood
everything now perfectly.  She was where we had seen her first, not
because she had caught us up, but because we had passed her during
the night while she was already waiting for us, hove-to, most
likely, on our very track.

"Do you understand--already?" Dominic muttered in a fierce
undertone.  "Already!  You know we left a good eight hours before
we were expected to leave, otherwise she would have been in time to
lie in wait for us on the other side of the Cape, and"--he snapped
his teeth like a wolf close to my face--"and she would have had us
like--that."

I saw it all plainly enough now.  They had eyes in their heads and
all their wits about them in that craft.  We had passed them in the
dark as they jogged on easily towards their ambush with the idea
that we were yet far behind.  At daylight, however, sighting a
balancelle ahead under a press of canvas, they had made sail in
chase.  But if that was so, then--

Dominic seized my arm.

"Yes, yes!  She came out on an information--do you see, it?--on
information. . . . We have been sold--betrayed.  Why?  How?  What
for?  We always paid them all so well on shore. . . . No!  But it
is my head that is going to burst."

He seemed to choke, tugged at the throat button of the cloak,
jumped up open-mouthed as if to hurl curses and denunciation, but
instantly mastered himself, and, wrapping up the cloak closer about
him, sat down on the deck again as quiet as ever.

"Yes, it must be the work of some scoundrel ashore," I observed.

He pulled the edge of the hood well forward over his brow before he
muttered:

"A scoundrel. . . . Yes. . . . It's evident."

"Well," I said, "they can't get us, that's clear."

"No," he assented quietly, "they cannot."

We shaved the Cape very close to avoid an adverse current.  On the
other side, by the effect of the land, the wind failed us so
completely for a moment that the Tremolino's two great lofty sails
hung idle to the masts in the thundering uproar of the seas
breaking upon the shore we had left behind.  And when the returning
gust filled them again, we saw with amazement half of the new
mainsail, which we thought fit to drive the boat under before
giving way, absolutely fly out of the bolt-ropes.  We lowered the
yard at once, and saved it all, but it was no longer a sail; it was
only a heap of soaked strips of canvas cumbering the deck and
weighting the craft.  Dominic gave the order to throw the whole lot
overboard.

I would have had the yard thrown overboard, too, he said, leading
me aft again, "if it had not been for the trouble.  Let no sign
escape you," he continued, lowering his voice, "but I am going to
tell you something terrible.  Listen:  I have observed that the
roping stitches on that sail have been cut!  You hear?  Cut with a
knife in many places.  And yet it stood all that time.  Not enough
cut.  That flap did it at last.  What matters it?  But look!
there's treachery seated on this very deck.  By the horns of the
devil! seated here at our very backs.  Do not turn, signorine."

We were facing aft then.

"What's to be done?" I asked, appalled.

"Nothing.  Silence!  Be a man, signorine."

"What else?" I said.

To show I could be a man, I resolved to utter no sound as long as
Dominic himself had the force to keep his lips closed.  Nothing but
silence becomes certain situations.  Moreover, the experience of
treachery seemed to spread a hopeless drowsiness over my thoughts
and senses.  For an hour or more we watched our pursuer surging out
nearer and nearer from amongst the squalls that sometimes hid her
altogether.  But even when not seen, we felt her there like a knife
at our throats.  She gained on us frightfully.  And the Tremolino,
in a fierce breeze and in much smoother water, swung on easily
under her one sail, with something appallingly careless in the
joyous freedom of her motion.  Another half-hour went by.  I could
not stand it any longer.

"They will get the poor barky," I stammered out suddenly, almost on
the verge of tears.

Dominic stirred no more than a carving.  A sense of catastrophic
loneliness overcame my inexperienced soul.  The vision of my
companions passed before me.  The whole Royalist gang was in Monte
Carlo now, I reckoned.  And they appeared to me clear-cut and very
small, with affected voices and stiff gestures, like a procession
of rigid marionettes upon a toy stage.  I gave a start.  What was
this?  A mysterious, remorseless whisper came from within the
motionless black hood at my side.

"Il faul la tuer."

I heard it very well.

"What do you say, Dominic?" I asked, moving nothing but my lips.

And the whisper within the hood repeated mysteriously, "She must be
killed."

My heart began to beat violently.

"That's it," I faltered out.  "But how?"

"You love her well?"

"I do."

"Then you must find the heart for that work too.  You must steer
her yourself, and I shall see to it that she dies quickly, without
leaving as much as a chip behind."

"Can you?" I murmured, fascinated by the black hood turned
immovably over the stern, as if in unlawful communion with that old
sea of magicians, slave-dealers, exiles and warriors, the sea of
legends and terrors, where the mariners of remote antiquity used to
hear the restless shade of an old wanderer weep aloud in the dark.

"I know a rock," whispered the initiated voice within the hood
secretly.  "But--caution!  It must be done before our men perceive
what we are about.  Whom can we trust now?  A knife drawn across
the fore halyards would bring the foresail down, and put an end to
our liberty in twenty minutes.  And the best of our men may be
afraid of drowning.  There is our little boat, but in an affair
like this no one can be sure of being saved."

The voice ceased.  We had started from Barcelona with our dinghy in
tow; afterwards it was too risky to try to get her in, so we let
her take her chance of the seas at the end of a comfortable scope
of rope.  Many times she had seemed to us completely overwhelmed,
but soon we would see her bob up again on a wave, apparently as
buoyant and whole as ever.

"I understand," I said softly.  "Very well, Dominic.  When?"

"Not yet.  We must get a little more in first," answered the voice
from the hood in a ghostly murmur.



XLV.



It was settled.  I had now the courage to turn about.  Our men
crouched about the decks here and there with anxious, crestfallen
faces, all turned one way to watch the chaser.  For the first time
that morning I perceived Cesar stretched out full length on the
deck near the foremast and wondered where he had been skulking till
then.  But he might in truth have been at my elbow all the time for
all I knew.  We had been too absorbed in watching our fate to pay
attention to each other.  Nobody had eaten anything that morning,
but the men had been coming constantly to drink at the water-butt.

I ran down to the cabin.  I had there, put away in a locker, ten
thousand francs in gold of whose presence on board, so far as I was
aware, not a soul, except Dominic had the slightest inkling.  When
I emerged on deck again Dominic had turned about and was peering
from under his cowl at the coast.  Cape Creux closed the view
ahead.  To the left a wide bay, its waters torn and swept by fierce
squalls, seemed full of smoke.  Astern the sky had a menacing look.

Directly he saw me, Dominic, in a placid tone, wanted to know what
was the matter.  I came close to him and, looking as unconcerned as
I could, told him in an undertone that I had found the locker
broken open and the money-belt gone.  Last evening it was still
there.

"What did you want to do with it?" he asked me, trembling
violently.

"Put it round my waist, of course," I answered, amazed to hear his
teeth chattering.

"Cursed gold!" he muttered.  "The weight of the money might have
cost you your life, perhaps."  He shuddered.  "There is no time to
talk about that now."

"I am ready."

"Not yet.  I am waiting for that squall to come over," he muttered.
And a few leaden minutes passed.

The squall came over at last.  Our pursuer, overtaken by a sort of
murky whirlwind, disappeared from our sight.  The Tremolino
quivered and bounded forward.  The land ahead vanished, too, and we
seemed to be left alone in a world of water and wind.

"Prenez la barre, monsieur," Dominic broke the silence suddenly in
an austere voice.  "Take hold of the tiller."  He bent his hood to
my ear.  "The balancelle is yours.  Your own hands must deal the
blow.  I--I have yet another piece of work to do."  He spoke up
loudly to the man who steered.  "Let the signorino take the tiller,
and you with the others stand by to haul the boat alongside quickly
at the word."

The man obeyed, surprised, but silent.  The others stirred, and
pricked up their ears at this.  I heard their murmurs.  "What now?
Are we going to run in somewhere and take to our heels?  The
Padrone knows what he is doing."

Dominic went forward.  He paused to look down at Cesar, who, as I
have said before, was lying full length face down by the foremast,
then stepped over him, and dived out of my sight under the
foresail.  I saw nothing ahead.  It was impossible for me to see
anything except the foresail open and still, like a great shadowy
wing.  But Dominic had his bearings.  His voice came to me from
forward, in a just audible cry:

"Now, signorino!"

I bore on the tiller, as instructed before.  Again I heard him
faintly, and then I had only to hold her straight.  No ship ran so
joyously to her death before.  She rose and fell, as if floating in
space, and darted forward, whizzing like an arrow.  Dominic,
stooping under the foot of the foresail, reappeared, and stood
steadying himself against the mast, with a raised forefinger in an
attitude of expectant attention.  A second before the shock his arm
fell down by his side.  At that I set my teeth.  And then--

Talk of splintered planks and smashed timbers!  This shipwreck lies
upon my soul with the dread and horror of a homicide, with the
unforgettable remorse of having crushed a living, faithful heart at
a single blow.  At one moment the rush and the soaring swing of
speed; the next a crash, and death, stillness--a moment of horrible
immobility, with the song of the wind changed to a strident wail,
and the heavy waters boiling up menacing and sluggish around the
corpse.  I saw in a distracting minute the foreyard fly fore and
aft with a brutal swing, the men all in a heap, cursing with fear,
and hauling frantically at the line of the boat.  With a strange
welcoming of the familiar I saw also Cesar amongst them, and
recognised Dominic's old, well-known, effective gesture, the
horizontal sweep of his powerful arm.  I recollect distinctly
saying to myself, "Cesar must go down, of course," and then, as I
was scrambling on all fours, the swinging tiller I had let go
caught me a crack under the ear, and knocked me over senseless.

I don't think I was actually unconscious for more than a few
minutes, but when I came to myself the dinghy was driving before
the wind into a sheltered cove, two men just keeping her straight
with their oars.  Dominic, with his arm round my shoulders,
supported me in the stern-sheets.

We landed in a familiar part of the country.  Dominic took one of
the boat's oars with him.  I suppose he was thinking of the stream
we would have presently to cross, on which there was a miserable
specimen of a punt, often robbed of its pole.  But first of all we
had to ascend the ridge of land at the back of the Cape.  He helped
me up.  I was dizzy.  My head felt very large and heavy.  At the
top of the ascent I clung to him, and we stopped to rest.

To the right, below us, the wide, smoky bay was empty.  Dominic had
kept his word.  There was not a chip to be seen around the black
rock from which the Tremolino, with her plucky heart crushed at one
blow, had slipped off into deep water to her eternal rest.  The
vastness of the open sea was smothered in driving mists, and in the
centre of the thinning squall, phantom-like, under a frightful
press of canvas, the unconscious guardacosta dashed on, still
chasing to the northward.  Our men were already descending the
reverse slope to look for that punt which we knew from experience
was not always to be found easily.  I looked after them with dazed,
misty eyes.  One, two, three, four.

"Dominic, where's Cesar?" I cried.

As if repulsing the very sound of the name, the Padrone made that
ample, sweeping, knocking-down gesture.  I stepped back a pace and
stared at him fearfully.  His open shirt uncovered his muscular
neck and the thick hair on his chest.  He planted the oar upright
in the soft soil, and rolling up slowly his right sleeve, extended
the bare arm before my face.

"This," he began, with an extreme deliberation, whose superhuman
restraint vibrated with the suppressed violence of his feelings,
"is the arm which delivered the blow.  I am afraid it is your own
gold that did the rest.  I forgot all about your money."  He
clasped his hands together in sudden distress.  "I forgot, I
forgot," he repeated disconsolately.

"Cesar stole the belt?" I stammered out, bewildered.

"And who else?  Canallia!  He must have been spying on you for
days.  And he did the whole thing.  Absent all day in Barcelona.
Traditore!  Sold his jacket--to hire a horse.  Ha! ha!  A good
affair!  I tell you it was he who set him at us. . . ."

Dominic pointed at the sea, where the guardacosta was a mere dark
speck.  His chin dropped on his breast.

". . . On information," he murmured, in a gloomy voice.  "A
Cervoni!  Oh! my poor brother! . . ."

"And you drowned him," I said feebly.

"I struck once, and the wretch went down like a stone--with the
gold.  Yes.  But he had time to read in my eyes that nothing could
save him while I was alive.  And had I not the right--I, Dominic
Cervoni, Padrone, who brought him aboard your fellucca--my nephew,
a traitor?"

He pulled the oar out of the ground and helped me carefully down
the slope.  All the time he never once looked me in the face.  He
punted us over, then shouldered the oar again and waited till our
men were at some distance before he offered me his arm.  After we
had gone a little way, the fishing hamlet we were making for came
into view.  Dominic stopped.

"Do you think you can make your way as far as the houses by
yourself?" he asked me quietly.

"Yes, I think so.  But why?  Where are you going, Dominic?"

"Anywhere.  What a question!  Signorino, you are but little more
than a boy to ask such a question of a man having this tale in his
family.  Ah!  Traditore!  What made me ever own that spawn of a
hungry devil for our own blood!  Thief, cheat, coward, liar--other
men can deal with that.  But I was his uncle, and so . . . I wish
he had poisoned me--charogne!  But this:  that I, a confidential
man and a Corsican, should have to ask your pardon for bringing on
board your vessel, of which I was Padrone, a Cervoni, who has
betrayed you--a traitor!--that is too much.  It is too much.  Well,
I beg your pardon; and you may spit in Dominic's face because a
traitor of our blood taints us all.  A theft may be made good
between men, a lie may be set right, a death avenged, but what can
one do to atone for a treachery like this? . . . Nothing."

He turned and walked away from me along the bank of the stream,
flourishing a vengeful arm and repeating to himself slowly, with
savage emphasis:  "Ah!  Canaille!  Canaille!  Canaille!. . ."  He
left me there trembling with weakness and mute with awe.  Unable to
make a sound, I gazed after the strangely desolate figure of that
seaman carrying an oar on his shoulder up a barren, rock-strewn
ravine under the dreary leaden sky of Tremolino's last day.  Thus,
walking deliberately, with his back to the sea, Dominic vanished
from my sight.

With the quality of our desires, thoughts, and wonder proportioned
to our infinite littleness, we measure even time itself by our own
stature.  Imprisoned in the house of personal illusions, thirty
centuries in mankind's history seem less to look back upon than
thirty years of our own life.  And Dominic Cervoni takes his place
in my memory by the side of the legendary wanderer on the sea of
marvels and terrors, by the side of the fatal and impious
adventurer, to whom the evoked shade of the soothsayer predicted a
journey inland with an oar on his shoulder, till he met men who had
never set eyes on ships and oars.  It seems to me I can see them
side by side in the twilight of an arid land, the unfortunate
possessors of the secret lore of the sea, bearing the emblem of
their hard calling on their shoulders, surrounded by silent and
curious men:  even as I, too, having turned my back upon the sea,
am bearing those few pages in the twilight, with the hope of
finding in an inland valley the silent welcome of some patient
listener.



XLVI.



"A fellow has now no chance of promotion unless he jumps into the
muzzle of a gun and crawls out of the touch-hole."

He who, a hundred years ago, more or less, pronounced the above
words in the uneasiness of his heart, thirsting for professional
distinction, was a young naval officer.  Of his life, career,
achievements, and end nothing is preserved for the edification of
his young successors in the fleet of to-day--nothing but this
phrase, which, sailor-like in the simplicity of personal sentiment
and strength of graphic expression, embodies the spirit of the
epoch.  This obscure but vigorous testimony has its price, its
significance, and its lesson.  It comes to us from a worthy
ancestor.  We do not know whether he lived long enough for a chance
of that promotion whose way was so arduous.  He belongs to the
great array of the unknown--who are great, indeed, by the sum total
of the devoted effort put out, and the colossal scale of success
attained by their insatiable and steadfast ambition.  We do not
know his name; we only know of him what is material for us to know-
-that he was never backward on occasions of desperate service.  We
have this on the authority of a distinguished seaman of Nelson's
time.  Departing this life as Admiral of the Fleet on the eve of
the Crimean War, Sir Thomas Byam Martin has recorded for us amongst
his all too short autobiographical notes these few characteristic
words uttered by one young man of the many who must have felt that
particular inconvenience of a heroic age.

The distinguished Admiral had lived through it himself, and was a
good judge of what was expected in those days from men and ships.
A brilliant frigate captain, a man of sound judgment, of dashing
bravery and of serene mind, scrupulously concerned for the welfare
and honour of the navy, he missed a larger fame only by the chances
of the service.  We may well quote on this day the words written of
Nelson, in the decline of a well-spent life, by Sir T. B. Martin,
who died just fifty years ago on the very anniversary of Trafalgar.

"Nelson's nobleness of mind was a prominent and beautiful part of
his character.  His foibles--faults if you like--will never be
dwelt upon in any memorandum of mine," he declares, and goes on--
"he whose splendid and matchless achievements will be remembered
with admiration while there is gratitude in the hearts of Britons,
or while a ship floats upon the ocean; he whose example on the
breaking out of the war gave so chivalrous an impulse to the
younger men of the service that all rushed into rivalry of daring
which disdained every warning of prudence, and led to acts of
heroic enterprise which tended greatly to exalt the glory of our
nation."

These are his words, and they are true.  The dashing young frigate
captain, the man who in middle age was nothing loth to give chase
single-handed in his seventy-four to a whole fleet, the man of
enterprise and consummate judgment, the old Admiral of the Fleet,
the good and trusted servant of his country under two kings and a
queen, had felt correctly Nelson's influence, and expressed himself
with precision out of the fulness of his seaman's heart.

"Exalted," he wrote, not "augmented."  And therein his feeling and
his pen captured the very truth.  Other men there were ready and
able to add to the treasure of victories the British navy has given
to the nation.  It was the lot of Lord Nelson to exalt all this
glory.  Exalt! the word seems to be created for the man.



XLVII.



The British navy may well have ceased to count its victories.  It
is rich beyond the wildest dreams of success and fame.  It may
well, rather, on a culminating day of its history, cast about for
the memory of some reverses to appease the jealous fates which
attend the prosperity and triumphs of a nation.  It holds, indeed,
the heaviest inheritance that has ever been entrusted to the
courage and fidelity of armed men.

It is too great for mere pride.  It should make the seamen of to-
day humble in the secret of their hearts, and indomitable in their
unspoken resolution.  In all the records of history there has never
been a time when a victorious fortune has been so faithful to men
making war upon the sea.  And it must be confessed that on their
part they knew how to be faithful to their victorious fortune.
They were exalted.  They were always watching for her smile; night
or day, fair weather or foul, they waited for her slightest sign
with the offering of their stout hearts in their hands.  And for
the inspiration of this high constancy they were indebted to Lord
Nelson alone.  Whatever earthly affection he abandoned or grasped,
the great Admiral was always, before all, beyond all, a lover of
Fame.  He loved her jealously, with an inextinguishable ardour and
an insatiable desire--he loved her with a masterful devotion and an
infinite trustfulness.  In the plenitude of his passion he was an
exacting lover.  And she never betrayed the greatness of his trust!
She attended him to the end of his life, and he died pressing her
last gift (nineteen prizes) to his heart.  "Anchor, Hardy--anchor!"
was as much the cry of an ardent lover as of a consummate seaman.
Thus he would hug to his breast the last gift of Fame.

It was this ardour which made him great.  He was a flaming example
to the wooers of glorious fortune.  There have been great officers
before--Lord Hood, for instance, whom he himself regarded as the
greatest sea officer England ever had.  A long succession of great
commanders opened the sea to the vast range of Nelson's genius.
His time had come; and, after the great sea officers, the great
naval tradition passed into the keeping of a great man.  Not the
least glory of the navy is that it understood Nelson.  Lord Hood
trusted him.  Admiral Keith told him:  "We can't spare you either
as Captain or Admiral."  Earl St. Vincent put into his hands,
untrammelled by orders, a division of his fleet, and Sir Hyde
Parker gave him two more ships at Copenhagen than he had asked for.
So much for the chiefs; the rest of the navy surrendered to him
their devoted affection, trust, and admiration.  In return he gave
them no less than his own exalted soul.  He breathed into them his
own ardour and his own ambition.  In a few short years he
revolutionized, not the strategy or tactics of sea-warfare, but the
very conception of victory itself.  And this is genius.  In that
alone, through the fidelity of his fortune and the power of his
inspiration, he stands unique amongst the leaders of fleets and
sailors.  He brought heroism into the line of duty.  Verily he is a
terrible ancestor.

And the men of his day loved him.  They loved him not only as
victorious armies have loved great commanders; they loved him with
a more intimate feeling as one of themselves.  In the words of a
contemporary, he had "a most happy way of gaining the affectionate
respect of all who had the felicity to serve under his command."

To be so great and to remain so accessible to the affection of
one's fellow-men is the mark of exceptional humanity.  Lord
Nelson's greatness was very human.  It had a moral basis; it needed
to feel itself surrounded by the warm devotion of a band of
brothers.  He was vain and tender.  The love and admiration which
the navy gave him so unreservedly soothed the restlessness of his
professional pride.  He trusted them as much as they trusted him.
He was a seaman of seamen.  Sir T. B. Martin states that he never
conversed with any officer who had served under Nelson "without
hearing the heartiest expressions of attachment to his person and
admiration of his frank and conciliatory manner to his
subordinates."  And Sir Robert Stopford, who commanded one of the
ships with which Nelson chased to the West Indies a fleet nearly
double in number, says in a letter:  "We are half-starved and
otherwise inconvenienced by being so long out of port, but our
reward is that we are with Nelson."

This heroic spirit of daring and endurance, in which all public and
private differences were sunk throughout the whole fleet, is Lord
Nelson's great legacy, triply sealed by the victorious impress of
the Nile, Copenhagen, and Trafalgar.  This is a legacy whose value
the changes of time cannot affect.  The men and the ships he knew
how to lead lovingly to the work of courage and the reward of glory
have passed away, but Nelson's uplifting touch remains in the
standard of achievement he has set for all time.  The principles of
strategy may be immutable.  It is certain they have been, and shall
be again, disregarded from timidity, from blindness, through
infirmity of purpose.  The tactics of great captains on land and
sea can be infinitely discussed.  The first object of tactics is to
close with the adversary on terms of the greatest possible
advantage; yet no hard-and-fast rules can be drawn from experience,
for this capital reason, amongst others--that the quality of the
adversary is a variable element in the problem.  The tactics of
Lord Nelson have been amply discussed, with much pride and some
profit.  And yet, truly, they are already of but archaic interest.
A very few years more and the hazardous difficulties of handling a
fleet under canvas shall have passed beyond the conception of
seamen who hold in trust for their country Lord Nelson's legacy of
heroic spirit.  The change in the character of the ships is too
great and too radical.  It is good and proper to study the acts of
great men with thoughtful reverence, but already the precise
intention of Lord Nelson's famous memorandum seems to lie under
that veil which Time throws over the clearest conceptions of every
great art.  It must not be forgotten that this was the first time
when Nelson, commanding in chief, had his opponents under way--the
first time and the last.  Had he lived, had there been other fleets
left to oppose him, we would, perhaps, have learned something more
of his greatness as a sea officer.  Nothing could have been added
to his greatness as a leader.  All that can be affirmed is, that on
no other day of his short and glorious career was Lord Nelson more
splendidly true to his genius and to his country's fortune.



XLVIII.



And yet the fact remains that, had the wind failed and the fleet
lost steerage way, or, worse still, had it been taken aback from
the eastward, with its leaders within short range of the enemy's
guns, nothing, it seems, could have saved the headmost ships from
capture or destruction.  No skill of a great sea officer would have
availed in such a contingency.  Lord Nelson was more than that, and
his genius would have remained undiminished by defeat.  But
obviously tactics, which are so much at the mercy of irremediable
accident, must seem to a modern seaman a poor matter of study.  The
Commander-in-Chief in the great fleet action that will take its
place next to the Battle of Trafalgar in the history of the British
navy will have no such anxiety, and will feel the weight of no such
dependence.  For a hundred years now no British fleet has engaged
the enemy in line of battle.  A hundred years is a long time, but
the difference of modern conditions is enormous.  The gulf is
great.  Had the last great fight of the English navy been that of
the First of June, for instance, had there been no Nelson's
victories, it would have been wellnigh impassable.  The great
Admiral's slight and passion-worn figure stands at the parting of
the ways.  He had the audacity of genius, and a prophetic
inspiration.

The modern naval man must feel that the time has come for the
tactical practice of the great sea officers of the past to be laid
by in the temple of august memories.  The fleet tactics of the
sailing days have been governed by two points:  the deadly nature
of a raking fire, and the dread, natural to a commander dependent
upon the winds, to find at some crucial moment part of his fleet
thrown hopelessly to leeward.  These two points were of the very
essence of sailing tactics, and these two points have been
eliminated from the modern tactical problem by the changes of
propulsion and armament.  Lord Nelson was the first to disregard
them with conviction and audacity sustained by an unbounded trust
in the men he led.  This conviction, this audacity and this trust
stand out from amongst the lines of the celebrated memorandum,
which is but a declaration of his faith in a crushing superiority
of fire as the only means of victory and the only aim of sound
tactics.  Under the difficulties of the then existing conditions he
strove for that, and for that alone, putting his faith into
practice against every risk.  And in that exclusive faith Lord
Nelson appears to us as the first of the moderns.

Against every risk, I have said; and the men of to-day, born and
bred to the use of steam, can hardly realize how much of that risk
was in the weather.  Except at the Nile, where the conditions were
ideal for engaging a fleet moored in shallow water, Lord Nelson was
not lucky in his weather.  Practically it was nothing but a quite
unusual failure of the wind which cost him his arm during the
Teneriffe expedition.  On Trafalgar Day the weather was not so much
unfavourable as extremely dangerous.

It was one of these covered days of fitful sunshine, of light,
unsteady winds, with a swell from the westward, and hazy in
general, but with the land about the Cape at times distinctly
visible.  It has been my lot to look with reverence upon the very
spot more than once, and for many hours together.  All but thirty
years ago, certain exceptional circumstances made me very familiar
for a time with that bight in the Spanish coast which would be
enclosed within a straight line drawn from Faro to Spartel.  My
well-remembered experience has convinced me that, in that corner of
the ocean, once the wind has got to the northward of west (as it
did on the 20th, taking the British fleet aback), appearances of
westerly weather go for nothing, and that it is infinitely more
likely to veer right round to the east than to shift back again.
It was in those conditions that, at seven on the morning of the
21st, the signal for the fleet to bear up and steer east was made.
Holding a clear recollection of these languid easterly sighs
rippling unexpectedly against the run of the smooth swell, with no
other warning than a ten-minutes' calm and a queer darkening of the
coast-line, I cannot think, without a gasp of professional awe, of
that fateful moment.  Perhaps personal experience, at a time of
life when responsibility had a special freshness and importance,
has induced me to exaggerate to myself the danger of the weather.
The great Admiral and good seaman could read aright the signs of
sea and sky, as his order to prepare to anchor at the end of the
day sufficiently proves; but, all the same, the mere idea of these
baffling easterly airs, coming on at any time within half an hour
or so, after the firing of the first shot, is enough to take one's
breath away, with the image of the rearmost ships of both divisions
falling off, unmanageable, broadside on to the westerly swell, and
of two British Admirals in desperate jeopardy.  To this day I
cannot free myself from the impression that, for some forty
minutes, the fate of the great battle hung upon a breath of wind
such as I have felt stealing from behind, as it were, upon my cheek
while engaged in looking to the westward for the signs of the true
weather.

Never more shall British seamen going into action have to trust the
success of their valour to a breath of wind.  The God of gales and
battles favouring her arms to the last, has let the sun of
England's sailing-fleet and of its greatest master set in unclouded
glory.  And now the old ships and their men are gone; the new ships
and the new men, many of them bearing the old, auspicious names,
have taken up their watch on the stern and impartial sea, which
offers no opportunities but to those who know how to grasp them
with a ready hand and an undaunted heart.



XLIX.



This the navy of the Twenty Years' War knew well how to do, and
never better than when Lord Nelson had breathed into its soul his
own passion of honour and fame.  It was a fortunate navy.  Its
victories were no mere smashing of helpless ships and massacres of
cowed men.  It was spared that cruel favour, for which no brave
heart had ever prayed.  It was fortunate in its adversaries.  I say
adversaries, for on recalling such proud memories we should avoid
the word "enemies," whose hostile sound perpetuates the antagonisms
and strife of nations, so irremediable perhaps, so fateful--and
also so vain.  War is one of the gifts of life; but, alas! no war
appears so very necessary when time has laid its soothing hand upon
the passionate misunderstandings and the passionate desires of
great peoples.  "Le temps," as a distinguished Frenchman has said,
"est un galant homme."  He fosters the spirit of concord and
justice, in whose work there is as much glory to be reaped as in
the deeds of arms.

One of them disorganized by revolutionary changes, the other rusted
in the neglect of a decayed monarchy, the two fleets opposed to us
entered the contest with odds against them from the first.  By the
merit of our daring and our faithfulness, and the genius of a great
leader, we have in the course of the war augmented our advantage
and kept it to the last.  But in the exulting illusion of
irresistible might a long series of military successes brings to a
nation the less obvious aspect of such a fortune may perchance be
lost to view.  The old navy in its last days earned a fame that no
belittling malevolence dare cavil at.  And this supreme favour they
owe to their adversaries alone.

Deprived by an ill-starred fortune of that self-confidence which
strengthens the hands of an armed host, impaired in skill but not
in courage, it may safely be said that our adversaries managed yet
to make a better fight of it in 1797 than they did in 1793.  Later
still, the resistance offered at the Nile was all, and more than
all, that could be demanded from seamen, who, unless blind or
without understanding, must have seen their doom sealed from the
moment that the Goliath, bearing up under the bows of the Guerrier,
took up an inshore berth.  The combined fleets of 1805, just come
out of port, and attended by nothing but the disturbing memories of
reverses, presented to our approach a determined front, on which
Captain Blackwood, in a knightly spirit, congratulated his Admiral.
By the exertions of their valour our adversaries have but added a
greater lustre to our arms.  No friend could have done more, for
even in war, which severs for a time all the sentiments of human
fellowship, this subtle bond of association remains between brave
men--that the final testimony to the value of victory must be
received at the hands of the vanquished.

Those who from the heat of that battle sank together to their
repose in the cool depths of the ocean would not understand the
watchwords of our day, would gaze with amazed eyes at the engines
of our strife.  All passes, all changes:  the animosity of peoples,
the handling of fleets, the forms of ships; and even the sea itself
seems to wear a different and diminished aspect from the sea of
Lord Nelson's day.  In this ceaseless rush of shadows and shades,
that, like the fantastic forms of clouds cast darkly upon the
waters on a windy day, fly past us to fall headlong below the hard
edge of an implacable horizon, we must turn to the national spirit,
which, superior in its force and continuity to good and evil
fortune, can alone give us the feeling of an enduring existence and
of an invincible power against the fates.

Like a subtle and mysterious elixir poured into the perishable clay
of successive generations, it grows in truth, splendour, and
potency with the march of ages.  In its incorruptible flow all
round the globe of the earth it preserves from the decay and
forgetfulness of death the greatness of our great men, and amongst
them the passionate and gentle greatness of Nelson, the nature of
whose genius was, on the faith of a brave seaman and distinguished
Admiral, such as to "Exalt the glory of our nation."





THE NIGGER of THE NARCISSUS

A TALE OF THE FORECASTLE

BY JOSEPH CONRAD

COPYRIGHT, 1897, 1914,

BY DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY


     TO
     EDWARD GARNETT
     THIS TALE
     ABOUT MY FRIENDS
     OF THE SEA


TO MY READERS IN AMERICA

From that evening when James Wait joined the ship--late for the muster
of the crew--to the moment when he left us in the open sea, shrouded in
sailcloth, through the open port, I had much to do with him. He was in
my watch. A negro in a British forecastle is a lonely being. He has no
chums. Yet James Wait, afraid of death and making her his accomplice was
an impostor of some character--mastering our compassion, scornful of our
sentimentalism, triumphing over our suspicions.

But in the book he is nothing; he is merely the centre of the ship's
collective psychology and the pivot of the action. Yet he, who in the
family circle and amongst my friends is familiarly referred to as the
Nigger, remains very precious to me. For the book written round him
is not the sort of thing that can be attempted more than once in a
life-time. It is the book by which, not as a novelist perhaps, but as an
artist striving for the utmost sincerity of expression, I am willing to
stand or fall. Its pages are the tribute of my unalterable and profound
affection for the ships, the seamen, the winds and the great sea--the
moulders of my youth, the companions of the best years of my life.

After writing the last words of that book, in the revulsion of feeling
before the accomplished task, I understood that I had done with the sea,
and that henceforth I had to be a writer. And almost without laying down
the pen I wrote a preface, trying to express the spirit in which I was
entering on the task of my new life. That preface on advice (which I now
think was wrong) was never published with the book. But the late W. E.
Henley, who had the courage at that time (1897) to serialize my "Nigger"
in the New Review judged it worthy to be printed as an afterword at the
end of the last instalment of the tale.

I am glad that this book which means so much to me is coming out again,
under its proper title of "The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'" and under the
auspices of my good, friends and publishers Messrs. Doubleday, Page &
Co. into the light of publicity.

Half the span of a generation has passed since W. E. Henley, after
reading two chapters, sent me a verbal message: "Tell Conrad that if the
rest is up to the sample it shall certainly come out in the New Review."
The most gratifying recollection of my writer's life!

And here is the Suppressed Preface.

1914.

JOSEPH CONRAD.



Contents



PREFACE

THE NIGGER OF THE "NARCISSUS"

CHAPTER ONE

CHAPTER TWO

CHAPTER THREE

CHAPTER FOUR

CHAPTER FIVE





PREFACE

A work that aspires, however humbly, to the condition of art should
carry its justification in every line. And art itself may be defined
as a single-minded attempt to render the highest kind of justice to
the visible universe, by bringing to light the truth, manifold and one,
underlying its every aspect. It is an attempt to find in its forms, in
its colours, in its light, in its shadows, in the aspects of matter and
in the facts of life what of each is fundamental, what is enduring and
essential--their one illuminating and convincing quality--the very truth
of their existence. The artist, then, like the thinker or the scientist,
seeks the truth and makes his appeal. Impressed by the aspect of the
world the thinker plunges into ideas, the scientist into facts--whence,
presently, emerging they make their appeal to those qualities of our
being that fit us best for the hazardous enterprise of living. They
speak authoritatively to our common-sense, to our intelligence, to
our desire of peace or to our desire of unrest; not seldom to our
prejudices, sometimes to our fears, often to our egoism--but always
to our credulity. And their words are heard with reverence, for their
concern is with weighty matters: with the cultivation of our minds and
the proper care of our bodies, with the attainment of our ambitions,
with the perfection of the means and the glorification of our precious
aims.

It is otherwise with the artist.

Confronted by the same enigmatical spectacle the artist descends within
himself, and in that lonely region of stress and strife, if he be
deserving and fortunate, he finds the terms of his appeal. His appeal is
made to our less obvious capacities: to that part of our nature which,
because of the warlike conditions of existence, is necessarily kept
out of sight within the more resisting and hard qualities--like the
vulnerable body within a steel armour. His appeal is less loud, more
profound, less distinct, more stirring--and sooner forgotten. Yet its
effect endures forever. The changing wisdom of successive generations
discards ideas, questions facts, demolishes theories. But the artist
appeals to that part of our being which is not dependent on wisdom; to
that in us which is a gift and not an acquisition--and, therefore, more
permanently enduring. He speaks to our capacity for delight and wonder,
to the sense of mystery surrounding our lives; to our sense of pity,
and beauty, and pain; to the latent feeling of fellowship with all
creation--and to the subtle but invincible conviction of solidarity that
knits together the loneliness of innumerable hearts, to the solidarity
in dreams, in joy, in sorrow, in aspirations, in illusions, in hope,
in fear, which binds men to each other, which binds together all
humanity--the dead to the living and the living to the unborn.

It is only some such train of thought, or rather of feeling, that can
in a measure explain the aim of the attempt, made in the tale which
follows, to present an unrestful episode in the obscure lives of a few
individuals out of all the disregarded multitude of the bewildered, the
simple and the voiceless. For, if any part of truth dwells in the
belief confessed above, it becomes evident that there is not a place of
splendour or a dark corner of the earth that does not deserve, if only
a passing glance of wonder and pity. The motive then, may be held to
justify the matter of the work; but this preface, which is simply an
avowal of endeavour, cannot end here--for the avowal is not yet complete.
Fiction--if it at all aspires to be art--appeals to temperament. And in
truth it must be, like painting, like music, like all art, the appeal of
one temperament to all the other innumerable temperaments whose subtle
and resistless power endows passing events with their true meaning, and
creates the moral, the emotional atmosphere of the place and time. Such
an appeal to be effective must be an impression conveyed through the
senses; and, in fact, it cannot be made in any other way, because
temperament, whether individual or collective, is not amenable to
persuasion. All art, therefore, appeals primarily to the senses, and the
artistic aim when expressing itself in written words must also make its
appeal through the senses, if its highest desire is to reach the
secret spring of responsive emotions. It must strenuously aspire to the
plasticity of sculpture, to the colour of painting, and to the magic
suggestiveness of music--which is the art of arts. And it is only through
complete, unswerving devotion to the perfect blending of form and
substance; it is only through an unremitting never-discouraged care
for the shape and ring of sentences that an approach can be made to
plasticity, to colour, and that the light of magic suggestiveness may be
brought to play for an evanescent instant over the commonplace surface
of words: of the old, old words, worn thin, defaced by ages of careless
usage.

The sincere endeavour to accomplish that creative task, to go as far on
that road as his strength will carry him, to go undeterred by faltering,
weariness or reproach, is the only valid justification for the worker
in prose. And if his conscience is clear, his answer to those who in
the fulness of a wisdom which looks for immediate profit, demand
specifically to be edified, consoled, amused; who demand to be promptly
improved, or encouraged, or frightened, or shocked, or charmed, must
run thus:--My task which I am trying to achieve is, by the power of the
written word to make you hear, to make you feel--it is, before all, to
make you see. That--and no more, and it is everything. If I succeed, you
shall find there according to your deserts: encouragement, consolation,
fear, charm--all you demand--and, perhaps, also that glimpse of truth for
which you have forgotten to ask. To snatch in a moment of courage,
from the remorseless rush of time, a passing phase of life, is only the
beginning of the task. The task approached in tenderness and faith is
to hold up unquestioningly, without choice and without fear, the rescued
fragment before all eyes in the light of a sincere mood. It is to show
its vibration, its colour, its form; and through its movement, its form,
and its colour, reveal the substance of its truth--disclose its inspiring
secret: the stress and passion within the core of each convincing
moment. In a single-minded attempt of that kind, if one be deserving and
fortunate, one may perchance attain to such clearness of sincerity that
at last the presented vision of regret or pity, of terror or mirth,
shall awaken in the hearts of the beholders that feeling of unavoidable
solidarity; of the solidarity in mysterious origin, in toil, in joy, in
hope, in uncertain fate, which binds men to each other and all mankind
to the visible world. It is evident that he who, rightly or wrongly,
holds by the convictions expressed above cannot be faithful to any one
of the temporary formulas of his craft. The enduring part of them--the
truth which each only imperfectly veils--should abide with him as the
most precious of his possessions, but they all: Realism, Romanticism,
Naturalism, even the unofficial sentimentalism (which like the poor, is
exceedingly difficult to get rid of,) all these gods must, after a short
period of fellowship, abandon him--even on the very threshold of the
temple--to the stammerings of his conscience and to the outspoken
consciousness of the difficulties of his work. In that uneasy solitude
the supreme cry of Art for Art itself, loses the exciting ring of its
apparent immorality. It sounds far off. It has ceased to be a cry, and
is heard only as a whisper, often incomprehensible, but at times and
faintly encouraging.

Sometimes, stretched at ease in the shade of a roadside tree, we watch
the motions of a labourer in a distant field, and after a time, begin to
wonder languidly as to what the fellow may be at. We watch the movements
of his body, the waving of his arms, we see him bend down, stand up,
hesitate, begin again. It may add to the charm of an idle hour to be
told the purpose of his exertions. If we know he is trying to lift
a stone, to dig a ditch, to uproot a stump, we look with a more real
interest at his efforts; we are disposed to condone the jar of his
agitation upon the restfulness of the landscape; and even, if in a
brotherly frame of mind, we may bring ourselves to forgive his failure.
We understood his object, and, after all, the fellow has tried, and
perhaps he had not the strength--and perhaps he had not the knowledge. We
forgive, go on our way--and forget.

And so it is with the workman of art. Art is long and life is short,
and success is very far off. And thus, doubtful of strength to travel
so far, we talk a little about the aim--the aim of art, which, like life
itself, is inspiring, difficult--obscured by mists; it is not in the
clear logic of a triumphant conclusion; it is not in the unveiling of
one of those heartless secrets which are called the Laws of Nature. It
is not less great, but only more difficult.

To arrest, for the space of a breath, the hands busy about the work of
the earth, and compel men entranced by the sight of distant goals to
glance for a moment at the surrounding vision of form and colour, of
sunshine and shadows; to make them pause for a look, for a sigh, for a
smile--such is the aim, difficult and evanescent, and reserved only for a
very few to achieve. But sometimes, by the deserving and the fortunate,
even that task is accomplished. And when it is accomplished--behold!--all
the truth of life is there: a moment of vision, a sigh, a smile--and the
return to an eternal rest.

1897. J. C.



THE NIGGER OF THE "NARCISSUS"



CHAPTER ONE

Mr. Baker, chief mate of the ship Narcissus, stepped in one stride out
of his lighted cabin into the darkness of the quarter-deck. Above his
head, on the break of the poop, the night-watchman rang a double stroke.
It was nine o'clock. Mr. Baker, speaking up to the man above him,
asked:--"Are all the hands aboard, Knowles?"

The man limped down the ladder, then said reflectively:--

"I think so, sir. All our old chaps are there, and a lot of new men has
come.... They must be all there."

"Tell the boatswain to send all hands aft," went on Mr. Baker; "and tell
one of the youngsters to bring a good lamp here. I want to muster our
crowd."

The main deck was dark aft, but halfway from forward, through the open
doors of the forecastle, two streaks of brilliant light cut the shadow
of the quiet night that lay upon the ship. A hum of voices was
heard there, while port and starboard, in the illuminated doorways,
silhouettes of moving men appeared for a moment, very black, without
relief, like figures cut out of sheet tin. The ship was ready for sea.
The carpenter had driven in the last wedge of the mainhatch battens,
and, throwing down his maul, had wiped his face with great deliberation,
just on the stroke of five. The decks had been swept, the windlass oiled
and made ready to heave up the anchor; the big tow-rope lay in long
bights along one side of the main deck, with one end carried up and hung
over the bows, in readiness for the tug that would come paddling and
hissing noisily, hot and smoky, in the limpid, cool quietness of the
early morning. The captain was ashore, where he had been engaging some
new hands to make up his full crew; and, the work of the day over,
the ship's officers had kept out of the way, glad of a little
breathing-time. Soon after dark the few liberty-men and the new hands
began to arrive in shore-boats rowed by white-clad Asiatics,
who clamoured fiercely for payment before coming alongside the
gangway-ladder. The feverish and shrill babble of Eastern language
struggled against the masterful tones of tipsy seamen, who argued
against brazen claims and dishonest hopes by profane shouts. The
resplendent and bestarred peace of the East was torn into squalid
tatters by howls of rage and shrieks of lament raised over sums ranging
from five annas to half a rupee; and every soul afloat in Bombay Harbour
became aware that the new hands were joining the Narcissus.

Gradually the distracting noise had subsided. The boats came no longer
in splashing clusters of three or four together, but dropped alongside
singly, in a subdued buzz of expostulation cut short by a "Not a
pace more! You go to the devil!" from some man staggering up the
accommodation-ladder--a dark figure, with a long bag poised on the
shoulder. In the forecastle the newcomers, upright and swaying amongst
corded boxes and bundles of bedding, made friends with the old hands,
who sat one above another in the two tiers of bunks, gazing at their
future shipmates with glances critical but friendly. The two forecastle
lamps were turned up high, and shed an intense hard glare; shore-going
round hats were pushed far on the backs of heads, or rolled about on the
deck amongst the chain-cables; white collars, undone, stuck out on each
side of red faces; big arms in white sleeves gesticulated; the growling
voices hummed steady amongst bursts of laughter and hoarse calls. "Here,
sonny, take that bunk!... Don't you do it!... What's your last ship?...
I know her.... Three years ago, in Puget Sound.... This here berth
leaks, I tell you!... Come on; give us a chance to swing that chest!...
Did you bring a bottle, any of you shore toffs?... Give us a bit of
'baccy.... I know her; her skipper drank himself to death.... He was a
dandy boy!... Liked his lotion inside, he did!... No!... Hold your row,
you chaps!... I tell you, you came on board a hooker, where they get
their money's worth out of poor Jack, by--!..."

A little fellow, called Craik and nicknamed Belfast, abused the ship
violently, romancing on principle, just to give the new hands something
to think over. Archie, sitting aslant on his sea-chest, kept his knees
out of the way, and pushed the needle steadily through a white patch
in a pair of blue trousers. Men in black jackets and stand-up collars,
mixed with men bare-footed, bare-armed, with coloured shirts open
on hairy chests, pushed against one another in the middle of the
forecastle. The group swayed, reeled, turning upon itself with the
motion of a scrimmage, in a haze of tobacco smoke. All were speaking
together, swearing at every second word. A Russian Finn, wearing a
yellow shirt with pink stripes, stared upwards, dreamy-eyed, from under
a mop of tumbled hair. Two young giants with smooth, baby faces--two
Scandinavians--helped each other to spread their bedding, silent, and
smiling placidly at the tempest of good-humoured and meaningless curses.
Old Singleton, the oldest able seaman in the ship, set apart on the deck
right under the lamps, stripped to the waist, tattooed like a cannibal
chief all over his powerful chest and enormous biceps. Between the blue
and red patterns his white skin gleamed like satin; his bare back was
propped against the heel of the bowsprit, and he held a book at
arm's length before his big, sunburnt face. With his spectacles and a
venerable white beard, he resembled a learned and savage patriarch, the
incarnation of barbarian wisdom serene in the blasphemous turmoil of
the world. He was intensely absorbed, and as he turned the pages an
expression of grave surprise would pass over his rugged features. He was
reading "Pelham." The popularity of Bulwer Lytton in the forecastles of
Southern-going ships is a wonderful and bizarre phenomenon. What ideas
do his polished and so curiously insincere sentences awaken in the
simple minds of the big children who people those dark and wandering
places of the earth? What meaning can their rough, inexperienced
souls find in the elegant verbiage of his pages? What excitement?--what
forgetfulness?--what appeasement? Mystery! Is it the fascination of the
incomprehensible?--is it the charm of the impossible? Or are those
beings who exist beyond the pale of life stirred by his tales as by an
enigmatical disclosure of a resplendent world that exists within the
frontier of infamy and filth, within that border of dirt and hunger, of
misery and dissipation, that comes down on all sides to the water's edge
of the incorruptible ocean, and is the only thing they know of life, the
only thing they see of surrounding land--those life-long prisoners of the
sea? Mystery! Singleton, who had sailed to the southward since the
age of twelve, who in the last forty-five years had lived (as we
had calculated from his papers) no more than forty months ashore--old
Singleton, who boasted, with the mild composure of long years well
spent, that generally from the day he was paid off from one ship
till the day he shipped in another he seldom was in a condition to
distinguish daylight--old Singleton sat unmoved in the clash of voices
and cries, spelling through "Pelham" with slow labour, and lost in an
absorption profound enough to resemble a trance. He breathed regularly.
Every time he turned the book in his enormous and blackened hands the
muscles of his big white arms rolled slightly under the smooth skin.
Hidden by the white moustache, his lips, stained with tobacco-juice that
trickled down the long beard, moved in inward whisper. His bleared eyes
gazed fixedly from behind the glitter of black-rimmed glasses. Opposite
to him, and on a level with his face, the ship's cat sat on the barrel
of the windlass in the pose of a crouching chimera, blinking its green
eyes at its old friend. It seemed to meditate a leap on to the old man's
lap over the bent back of the ordinary seaman who sat at Singleton's
feet. Young Charley was lean and long-necked. The ridge of his
backbone made a chain of small hills under the old shirt. His face of a
street-boy--a face precocious, sagacious, and ironic, with deep downward
folds on each side of the thin, wide mouth--hung low over his bony knees.
He was learning to make a lanyard knot with a bit of an old rope. Small
drops of perspiration stood out on his bulging forehead; he sniffed
strongly from time to time, glancing out of the corners of his restless
eyes at the old seaman, who took no notice of the puzzled youngster
muttering at his work.

The noise increased. Little Belfast seemed, in the heavy heat of the
forecastle, to boil with facetious fury. His eyes danced; in the crimson
of his face, comical as a mask, the mouth yawned black, with strange
grimaces. Facing him, a half-undressed man held his sides, and, throwing
his head back, laughed with wet eyelashes. Others stared with amazed
eyes. Men sitting doubled up in the upper bunks smoked short pipes,
swinging bare brown feet above the heads of those who, sprawling below
on sea-chests, listened, smiling stupidly or scornfully. Over the white
rims of berths stuck out heads with blinking eyes; but the bodies were
lost in the gloom of those places, that resembled narrow niches for
coffins in a whitewashed and lighted mortuary. Voices buzzed louder.
Archie, with compressed lips, drew himself in, seemed to shrink into
a smaller space, and sewed steadily, industrious and dumb. Belfast
shrieked like an inspired Dervish:--"... So I seez to him, boys, seez
I, 'Beggin' yer pardon, sorr,' seez I to that second mate of that
steamer--'beggin' your-r-r pardon, sorr, the Board of Trade must 'ave
been drunk when they granted you your certificate!' 'What do you say,
you------!' seez he, comin' at me like a mad bull... all in his white
clothes; and I up with my tar-pot and capsizes it all over his blamed
lovely face and his lovely jacket.... 'Take that!' seez I. 'I am a
sailor, anyhow, you nosing, skipper-licking, useless, sooperfloos
bridge-stanchion, you! That's the kind of man I am!' shouts I.... You
should have seed him skip, boys! Drowned, blind with tar, he was! So..."

"Don't 'ee believe him! He never upset no tar; I was there!" shouted
somebody. The two Norwegians sat on a chest side by side, alike and
placid, resembling a pair of love-birds on a perch, and with round eyes
stared innocently; but the Russian Finn, in the racket of explosive
shouts and rolling laughter, remained motionless, limp and dull, like
a deaf man without a backbone. Near him Archie smiled at his needle. A
broad-chested, slow-eyed newcomer spoke deliberately to Belfast during
an exhausted lull in the noise:--"I wonder any of the mates here are
alive yet with such a chap as you on board! I concloode they ain't that
bad now, if you had the taming of them, sonny."

"Not bad! Not bad!" screamed Belfast. "If it wasn't for us sticking
together.... Not bad! They ain't never bad when they ain't got a
chawnce, blast their black 'arts...."

He foamed, whirling his arms, then suddenly grinned and, taking a tablet
of black tobacco out of his pocket, bit a piece off with a funny show of
ferocity. Another new hand--a man with shifty eyes and a yellow hatchet
face, who had been listening open-mouthed in the shadow of the midship
locker--observed in a squeaky voice:--"Well, it's a 'omeward trip, anyhow.
Bad or good, I can do it on my 'ed--s'long as I get 'ome. And I can look
after my rights! I will show 'em!" All the heads turned towards him.
Only the ordinary seaman and the cat took no notice. He stood with arms
akimbo, a little fellow with white eyelashes. He looked as if he had
known all the degradations and all the furies. He looked as if he had
been cuffed, kicked, rolled in the mud; he looked as if he had been
scratched, spat upon, pelted with unmentionable filth... and he smiled
with a sense of security at the faces around. His ears were bending down
under the weight of his battered felt hat. The torn tails of his black
coat flapped in fringes about the calves of his legs. He unbuttoned the
only two buttons that remained and every one saw that he had no shirt
under it. It was his deserved misfortune that those rags which nobody
could possibly be supposed to own looked on him as if they had been
stolen. His neck was long and thin; his eyelids were red; rare hairs
hung about his jaws; his shoulders were peaked and drooped like the
broken wings of a bird; all his left side was caked with mud which
showed that he had lately slept in a wet ditch. He had saved his
inefficient carcass from violent destruction by running away from an
American ship where, in a moment of forgetful folly, he had dared to
engage himself; and he had knocked about for a fortnight ashore in the
native quarter, cadging for drinks, starving, sleeping on rubbish-heaps,
wandering in sunshine: a startling visitor from a world of nightmares.
He stood repulsive and smiling in the sudden silence. This clean white
forecastle was his refuge; the place where he could be lazy; where he
could wallow, and lie and eat--and curse the food he ate; where he could
display his talents for shirking work, for cheating, for cadging; where
he could find surely some one to wheedle and some one to bully--and where
he would be paid for doing all this. They all knew him. Is there a spot
on earth where such a man is unknown, an ominous survival testifying
to the eternal fitness of lies and impudence? A taciturn long-armed
shellback, with hooked fingers, who had been lying on his back smoking,
turned in his bed to examine him dispassionately, then, over his head,
sent a long jet of clear saliva towards the door. They all knew him! He
was the man that cannot steer, that cannot splice, that dodges the work
on dark nights; that, aloft, holds on frantically with both arms and
legs, and swears at the wind, the sleet, the darkness; the man who
curses the sea while others work. The man who is the last out and the
first in when all hands are called. The man who can't do most things
and won't do the rest. The pet of philanthropists and self-seeking
landlubbers. The sympathetic and deserving creature that knows all
about his rights, but knows nothing of courage, of endurance, and of the
unexpressed faith, of the unspoken loyalty that knits together a ship's
company. The independent offspring of the ignoble freedom of the slums
full of disdain and hate for the austere servitude of the sea.

Some one cried at him: "What's your name?"--"Donkin," he said,
looking round with cheerful effrontery.--"What are you?" asked another
voice.--"Why, a sailor like you, old man," he replied, in a tone that
meant to be hearty but was impudent.--"Blamme if you don't look a blamed
sight worse than a broken-down fireman," was the comment in a convinced
mutter. Charley lifted his head and piped in a cheeky voice: "He is a
man and a sailor"--then wiping his nose with the back of his hand bent
down industriously over his bit of rope. A few laughed. Others stared
doubtfully. The ragged newcomer was indignant--"That's a fine way to
welcome a chap into a fo'c'sle," he snarled. "Are you men or a lot of
'artless canny-bals?"--"Don't take your shirt off for a word, shipmate,"
called out Belfast, jumping up in front, fiery, menacing, and friendly
at the same time.--"Is that 'ere bloke blind?" asked the indomitable
scarecrow, looking right and left with affected surprise. "Can't 'ee see
I 'aven't got no shirt?"

He held both his arms out crosswise and shook the rags that hung over
his bones with dramatic effect.

"'Cos why?" he continued very loud. "The bloody Yankees been tryin' to
jump my guts out 'cos I stood up for my rights like a good 'un. I am an
Englishman, I am. They set upon me an' I 'ad to run. That's why. A'n't
yer never seed a man 'ard up? Yah! What kind of blamed ship is this?
I'm dead broke. I 'aven't got nothink. No bag, no bed, no blanket, no
shirt--not a bloomin' rag but what I stand in. But I 'ad the 'art to
stand up agin' them Yankees. 'As any of you 'art enough to spare a pair
of old pants for a chum?"

He knew how to conquer the naïve instincts of that crowd. In a moment
they gave him their compassion, jocularly, contemptuously, or surlily;
and at first it took the shape of a blanket thrown at him as he stood
there with the white skin of his limbs showing his human kinship through
the black fantasy of his rags. Then a pair of old shoes fell at his
muddy feet. With a cry:--"From under," a rolled-up pair of canvas
trousers, heavy with tar stains, struck him on the shoulder. The gust of
their benevolence sent a wave of sentimental pity through their
doubting hearts. They were touched by their own readiness to alleviate
a shipmate's misery. Voices cried:--"We will fit you out, old man."
Murmurs: "Never seed seech a hard case.... Poor beggar.... I've got an
old singlet.... Will that be of any use to you?... Take it, matey...."
Those friendly murmurs filled the forecastle. He pawed around with his
naked foot, gathering the things in a heap and looked about for more.
Unemotional Archie perfunctorily contributed to the pile an old cloth
cap with the peak torn off. Old Singleton, lost in the serene regions of
fiction, read on unheeding. Charley, pitiless with the wisdom of youth,
squeaked:--"If you want brass buttons for your new unyforms I've got two
for you." The filthy object of universal charity shook his fist at the
youngster.--"I'll make you keep this 'ere fo'c'sle clean, young feller,"
he snarled viciously. "Never you fear. I will learn you to be civil
to an able seaman, you ignerant ass." He glared harmfully, but saw
Singleton shut his book, and his little beady eyes began to roam from
berth to berth.--"Take that bunk by the door there--it's pretty fair,"
suggested Belfast. So advised, he gathered the gifts at his feet,
pressed them in a bundle against his breast, then looked cautiously
at the Russian Finn, who stood on one side with an unconscious gaze,
contemplating, perhaps, one of those weird visions that haunt the men
of his race.--"Get out of my road, Dutchy," said the victim of Yankee
brutality. The Finn did not move--did not hear. "Get out, blast ye,"
shouted the other, shoving him aside with his elbow. "Get out, you
blanked deaf and dumb fool. Get out." The man staggered, recovered
himself, and gazed at the speaker in silence.--"Those damned furriners
should be kept under," opined the amiable Donkin to the forecastle. "If
you don't teach 'em their place they put on you like anythink." He
flung all his worldly possessions into the empty bed-place, gauged with
another shrewd look the risks of the proceeding, then leaped up to the
Finn, who stood pensive and dull.--"I'll teach you to swell around," he
yelled. "I'll plug your eyes for you, you blooming square-head." Most of
the men were now in their bunks and the two had the forecastle clear to
themselves. The development of the destitute Donkin aroused interest. He
danced all in tatters before the amazed Finn, squaring from a distance
at the heavy, unmoved face. One or two men cried encouragingly: "Go it,
Whitechapel!" settling themselves luxuriously in their beds to survey
the fight. Others shouted: "Shut yer row!... Go an' put yer 'ed in a
bag!..." The hubbub was recommencing. Suddenly many heavy blows struck
with a handspike on the deck above boomed like discharges of small
cannon through the forecastle. Then the boatswain's voice rose outside
the door with an authoritative note in its drawl:--"D'ye hear, below
there? Lay aft! Lay aft to muster all hands!"

There was a moment of surprised stillness. Then the forecastle floor
disappeared under men whose bare feet flopped on the planks as they
sprang clear out of their berths. Caps were rooted for amongst tumbled
blankets. Some, yawning, buttoned waistbands. Half-smoked pipes were
knocked hurriedly against woodwork and stuffed under pillows. Voices
growled:--"What's up?... Is there no rest for us?" Donkin yelped:--"If
that's the way of this ship, we'll 'ave to change all that.... You leave
me alone.... I will soon...." None of the crowd noticed him. They were
lurching in twos and threes through the doors, after the manner of
merchant Jacks who cannot go out of a door fairly, like mere landsmen.
The votary of change followed them. Singleton, struggling into his
jacket, came last, tall and fatherly, bearing high his head of a
weather-beaten sage on the body of an old athlete. Only Charley remained
alone in the white glare of the empty place, sitting between the two
rows of iron links that stretched into the narrow gloom forward. He
pulled hard at the strands in a hurried endeavour to finish his knot.
Suddenly he started up, flung the rope at the cat, and skipped after the
black tom which went off leaping sedately over chain compressors, with
its tail carried stiff and upright, like a small flag pole.

Outside the glare of the steaming forecastle the serene purity of the
night enveloped the seamen with its soothing breath, with its tepid
breath flowing under the stars that hung countless above the mastheads
in a thin cloud of luminous dust. On the town side the blackness of the
water was streaked with trails of light which undulated gently on slight
ripples, similar to filaments that float rooted to the shore. Rows
of other lights stood away in straight lines as if drawn up on parade
between towering buildings; but on the other side of the harbour sombre
hills arched high their black spines, on which, here and there, the
point of a star resembled a spark fallen from the sky. Far off, Byculla
way, the electric lamps at the dock gates shone on the end of lofty
standards with a glow blinding and frigid like captive ghosts of some
evil moons. Scattered all over the dark polish of the roadstead, the
ships at anchor floated in perfect stillness under the feeble gleam
of their riding-lights, looming up, opaque and bulky, like strange and
monumental structures abandoned by men to an everlasting repose.

Before the cabin door Mr. Baker was mustering the crew. As they stumbled
and lurched along past the mainmast, they could see aft his round, broad
face with a white paper before it, and beside his shoulder the sleepy
head, writh dropped eyelids, of the boy, who held, suspended at the end
of his raised arm, the luminous globe of a lamp. Even before the shuffle
of naked soles had ceased along the decks, the mate began to call
over the names. He called distinctly in a serious tone befitting this
roll-call to unquiet loneliness, to inglorious and obscure struggle, or
to the more trying endurance of small privations and wearisome duties.
As the chief mate read out a name, one of the men would answer: "Yes,
sir!" or "Here!" and, detaching himself from the shadowy mob of
heads visible above the blackness of starboard bulwarks, would step
bare-footed into the circle of light, and in two noiseless strides pass
into the shadows on the port side of the quarterdeck. They answered in
divers tones: in thick mutters, in clear, ringing voices; and some,
as if the whole thing had been an outrage on their feelings, used an
injured intonation: for discipline is not ceremonious in merchant ships,
where the sense of hierarchy is weak, and where all feel themselves
equal before the unconcerned immensity of the sea and the
exacting appeal of the work. Mr. Baker read on
steadily:--"Hansen--Campbell--Smith--Wamibo. Now, then, Wamibo. Why don't
you answer? Always got to call your name twice." The Finn emitted at
last an uncouth grunt, and, stepping out, passed through the patch of
light, weird and gaudy, with the face of a man marching through a
dream. The mate went on faster:--"Craik--Singleton--Donkin.... O Lord!" he
involuntarily ejaculated as the incredibly dilapidated figure appeared
in the light. It stopped; it uncovered pale gums and long, upper teeth
in a malevolent grin.--"Is there any-think wrong with me, Mister Mate?"
it asked, with a flavour of insolence in the forced simplicity of its
tone. On both sides of the deck subdued titters were heard.--"That'll do.
Go over," growled Mr. Baker, fixing the new hand with steady blue eyes.
And Donkin vanished suddenly out of the light into the dark group
of mustered men, to be slapped on the back and to hear flattering
whispers:--"He ain't afeard, he'll give sport to 'em, see if he don't....
Reg'lar Punch and Judy show.... Did ye see the mate start at him?...
Well! Damme, if I ever!..." The last man had gone over, and there was
a moment of silence while the mate peered at his list.--"Sixteen,
seventeen," he muttered. "I am one hand short, bo'sen," he said aloud.
The big west-countryman at his elbow, swarthy and bearded like a
gigantic Spaniard, said in a rumbling bass:--"There's no one left
forward, sir. I had a look round. He ain't aboard, but he may, turn up
before daylight."--"Ay. He may or he may not," commented the mate, "can't
make out that last name. It's all a smudge.... That will do, men. Go
below."

The distinct and motionless group stirred, broke up, began to move
forward.

"Wait!" cried a deep, ringing voice.

All stood still. Mr. Baker, who had turned away yawning, spun round
open-mouthed. At last, furious, he blurted out:--"What's this? Who said
'Wait'? What...."

But he saw a tall figure standing on the rail. It came down and pushed
through the crowd, marching with a heavy tread towards the light on the
quarterdeck. Then again the sonorous voice said with insistence:--"Wait!"
The lamplight lit up the man's body. He was tall. His head was away
up in the shadows of lifeboats that stood on skids above the deck. The
whites of his eyes and his teeth gleamed distinctly, but the face was
indistinguishable. His hands were big and seemed gloved.

Mr. Baker advanced intrepidly. "Who are you? How dare you..." he began.

The boy, amazed like the rest, raised the light to the man's face. It
was black. A surprised hum--a faint hum that sounded like the suppressed
mutter of the word "Nigger"--ran along the deck and escaped out into the
night. The nigger seemed not to hear. He balanced himself where he stood
in a swagger that marked time. After a moment he said calmly:--"My name
is Wait--James Wait."

"Oh!" said Mr. Baker. Then, after a few seconds of smouldering silence,
his temper blazed out. "Ah! Your name is Wait. What of that? What do you
want? What do you mean, coming shouting here?"

The nigger was calm, cool, towering, superb. The men had approached and
stood behind him in a body. He overtopped the tallest by half a head.
He said: "I belong to the ship." He enunciated distinctly, with soft
precision. The deep, rolling tones of his voice filled the deck without
effort. He was naturally scornful, unaffectedly condescending, as if
from his height of six foot three he had surveyed all the vastness of
human folly and had made up his mind not to be too hard on it. He went
on:--"The captain shipped me this morning. I couldn't get aboard sooner.
I saw you all aft as I came up the ladder, and could see directly you
were mustering the crew. Naturally I called out my name. I thought
you had it on your list, and would understand. You misapprehended."
He stopped short. The folly around him was confounded. He was right as
ever, and as ever ready to forgive. The disdainful tones had ceased,
and, breathing heavily, he stood still, surrounded by all these white
men. He held his head up in the glare of the lamp--a head vigorously
modelled into deep shadows and shining lights--a head powerful and
misshapen with a tormented and flattened face--a face pathetic and
brutal: the tragic, the mysterious, the repulsive mask of a nigger's
soul.

Mr. Baker, recovering his composure, looked at the paper close. "Oh,
yes; that's so. All right, Wait. Take your gear forward," he said.

Suddenly the nigger's eyes rolled wildly, became all whites. He put
his hand to his side and coughed twice, a cough metallic, hollow, and
tremendously loud; it resounded like two explosions in a vault; the dome
of the sky rang to it, and the iron plates of the ship's bulwarks seemed
to vibrate in unison, then he marched off forward with the others. The
officers lingering by the cabin door could hear him say: "Won't some of
you chaps lend a hand with my dunnage? I've got a chest and a bag." The
words, spoken sonorously, with an even intonation, were heard all
over the ship, and the question was put in a manner that made refusal
impossible. The short, quick shuffle of men carrying something heavy
went away forward, but the tall figure of the nigger lingered by the
main hatch in a knot of smaller shapes. Again he was heard asking: "Is
your cook a coloured gentleman?" Then a disappointed and disapproving
"Ah! h'm!" was his comment upon the information that the cook happened
to be a mere white man. Yet, as they went all together towards the
forecastle, he condescended to put his head through the galley door and
boom out inside a magnificent "Good evening, doctor!" that made all the
saucepans ring. In the dim light the cook dozed on the coal locker in
front of the captain's supper. He jumped up as if he had been cut with
a whip, and dashed wildly on deck to see the backs of several men going
away laughing. Afterwards, when talking about that voyage, he used to
say:--"The poor fellow had scared me. I thought I had seen the devil."
The cook had been seven years in the ship with the same captain. He was
a serious-minded man with a wife and three children, whose society he
enjoyed on an average one month out of twelve. When on shore he took
his family to church twice every Sunday. At sea he went to sleep every
evening with his lamp turned up full, a pipe in his mouth, and an open
Bible in his hand. Some one had always to go during the night to put out
the light, take the book from his hand, and the pipe from between his
teeth. "For"--Belfast used to say, irritated and complaining--"some night,
you stupid cookie, you'll swallow your ould clay, and we will have no
cook."--"Ah! sonny, I am ready for my Maker's call... wish you all
were," the other would answer with a benign serenity that was altogether
imbecile and touching. Belfast outside the galley door danced with
vexation. "You holy fool! I don't want you to die," he howled, looking
up with furious, quivering face and tender eyes. "What's the hurry?
You blessed wooden-headed ould heretic, the divvle will have you soon
enough. Think of Us... of Us... of Us!" And he would go away, stamping,
spitting aside, disgusted and worried; while the other, stepping out,
saucepan in hand, hot, begrimed and placid, watched with a superior,
cock-sure smile the back of his "queer little man" reeling in a rage.
They were great friends.

Mr. Baker, lounging over the after-hatch, sniffed the humid night in
the company of the second mate.--"Those West India niggers run fine and
large--some of them... Ough!... Don't they? A fine, big man that, Mr.
Creighton. Feel him on a rope. Hey? Ough! I will take him into my watch,
I think." The second mate, a fair, gentlemanly young fellow, with a
resolute face and a splendid physique, observed quietly that it was
just about what he expected. There could be felt in his tone some slight
bitterness which Mr. Baker very kindly set himself to argue away. "Come,
come, young man," he said, grunting between the words. "Come! Don't be
too greedy. You had that big Finn in your watch all the voyage. I will
do what's fair. You may have those two young Scandinavians and I...
Ough!... I get the nigger, and will take that.... Ough! that cheeky
costermonger chap in a black frock-coat. I'll make him.... Ough!...
make him toe the mark, or my.... Ough!.... name isn't Baker. Ough! Ough!
Ough!"

He grunted thrice--ferociously. He had that trick of grunting so between
his words and at the end of sentences. It was a fine, effective grunt
that went well with his menacing utterance, with his heavy, bull-necked
frame, his jerky, rolling gait; with his big, seamed face, his steady
eyes, and sardonic mouth. But its effect had been long ago discounted
by the men. They liked him; Belfast--who was a favourite, and knew
it--mimicked him, not quite behind his back. Charley--but with greater
caution--imitated his rolling gait. Some of his sayings became
established, daily quotations in the forecastle. Popularity can go
no farther! Besides, all hands were ready to admit that on a fitting
occasion the mate could "jump down a fellow's throat in a reg'lar
Western Ocean style."

Now he was giving his last orders. "Ough! You, Knowles! Call all hands
at four. I want... Ough!... to heave short before the tug comes. Look
out for the captain. I am going to lie down in my clothes.... Ough!...
Call me when you see the boat coming. Ough! Ough!. The old man is sure
to have something to say when he gets aboard," he remarked to Creighton.
"Well, good-night.... Ough! A long day before us to-morrow.... Ough!...
Better turn in now. Ough! Ough!"

Upon the dark deck a band of light flashed, then a door slammed, and Mr.
Baker was gone into his neat cabin. Young Creighton stood leaning over
the rail, and looked dreamily into the night of the East. And he saw in
it a long country lane, a lane of waving leaves and dancing sunshine.
He saw stirring boughs of old trees outspread, and framing in their arch
the tender, the caressing blueness of an English sky. And through the
arch a girl in a light dress, smiling under a sunshade, seemed to be
stepping out of the tender sky.

At the other end of the ship the forecastle, with only one lamp burning
now, was going to sleep in a dim emptiness traversed by loud breathings,
by sudden short sighs. The double row of berths yawned black, like
graves tenanted by uneasy corpses. Here and there a curtain of gaudy
chintz, half drawn, marked the resting-place of a sybarite. A leg hung
over the edge very white and lifeless. An arm stuck straight out with
a dark palm turned up, and thick fingers half closed. Two light snores,
that did not synchronise, quarrelled in funny dialogue. Singleton
stripped again--the old man suffered much from prickly heat--stood cooling
his back in the doorway, with his arms crossed on his bare and adorned
chest. His head touched the beam of the deck above. The nigger, half
undressed, was busy casting adrift the lashing of his box, and spreading
his bedding in an upper berth. He moved about in his socks, tall and
noiseless, with a pair of braces beating about his calves. Amongst
the shadows of stanchions and bowsprit, Donkin munched a piece of hard
ship's bread, sitting on the deck with upturned feet and restless eyes;
he held the biscuit up before his mouth in the whole fist and snapped
his jaws at it with a raging face. Crumbs fell between his outspread
legs. Then he got up.

"Where's our water-cask?" he asked in a contained voice.

Singleton, without a word, pointed with a big hand that held a short
smouldering pipe. Donkin bent over the cask, drank out of the tin,
splashing the water, turned round and noticed the nigger looking at him
over the shoulder with calm loftiness. He moved up sideways.

"There's a blooming supper for a man," he whispered bitterly. "My dorg
at 'ome wouldn't 'ave it. It's fit enouf for you an' me. 'Ere's a big
ship's fo'c'sle!... Not a blooming scrap of meat in the kids. I've
looked in all the lockers...."

The nigger stared like a man addressed unexpectedly in a foreign
language. Donkin changed his tone:--"Giv' us a bit of 'baccy, mate," he
breathed out confidentially, "I 'aven't 'ad smoke or chew for the last
month. I am rampin' mad for it. Come on, old man!"

"Don't be familiar," said the nigger. Donkin started and sat down on a
chest near by, out of sheer surprise. "We haven't kept pigs together,"
continued James Wait in a deep undertone. "Here's your tobacco." Then,
after a pause, he inquired:--"What ship?"--"Golden State," muttered Donkin
indistinctly, biting the tobacco. The nigger whistled low.--"Ran?" he
said curtly. Donkin nodded: one of his cheeks bulged out. "In course
I ran," he mumbled. "They booted the life hout of one Dago chap on the
passage 'ere, then started on me. I cleared hout 'ere.--" "Left your
dunnage behind?"--"Yes, dunnage and money," answered Donkin, raising
his voice a little; "I got nothink. No clothes, no bed. A bandy-legged
little Hirish chap 'ere 'as give me a blanket. Think I'll go an' sleep
in the fore topmast staysail to-night."

He went on deck trailing behind his back a corner of the blanket.
Singleton, without a glance, moved slightly aside to let him pass. The
nigger put away his shore togs and sat in clean working clothes on his
box, one arm stretched over his knees. After staring at Singleton for
some time he asked without emphasis:--"What kind of ship is this? Pretty
fair? Eh?"

Singleton didn't stir. A long while after he said, with unmoved
face:--"Ship!... Ships are all right. It is the men in them!"

He went on smoking in the profound silence. The wisdom of half a century
spent in listening to the thunder of the waves had spoken unconsciously
through his old lips. The cat purred on the windlass. Then James Wait
had a fit of roaring, rattling cough, that shook him, tossed him like
a hurricane, and flung him panting with staring eyes headlong on his
sea-chest. Several men woke up. One said sleepily out of his bunk:
"'Struth! what a blamed row!"--"I have a cold on my chest," gasped
Wait.--"Cold! you call it," grumbled the man; "should think 'twas
something more...."--"Oh! you think so," said the nigger upright and
loftily scornful again. He climbed into his berth and began coughing
persistently while he put his head out to glare all round the
forecastle. There was no further protest. He fell back on the pillow,
and could be heard there wheezing regularly like a man oppressed in his
sleep.

Singleton stood at the door with his face to the light and his back to
the darkness. And alone in the dim emptiness of the sleeping forecastle
he appeared bigger, colossal, very old; old as Father Time himself,
who should have come there into this place as quiet as a sepulchre to
contemplate with patient eyes the short victory of sleep, the consoler.
Yet he was only a child of time, a lonely relic of a devoured and
forgotten generation. He stood, still strong, as ever unthinking; a
ready man with a vast empty past and with no future, with his childlike
impulses and his man's passions already dead within his tattooed breast.
The men who could understand his silence were gone--those men who knew
how to exist beyond the pale of life and within sight of eternity. They
had been strong, as those are strong who know neither doubts nor hopes.
They had been impatient and enduring, turbulent and devoted, unruly
and faithful. Well-meaning people had tried to represent those men as
whining over every mouthful of their food; as going about their work
in fear of their lives. But in truth they had been men who knew toil,
privation, violence, debauchery--but knew not fear, and had no desire
of spite in their hearts. Men hard to manage, but easy to inspire;
voiceless men--but men enough to scorn in their hearts the sentimental
voices that bewailed the hardness of their fate. It was a fate unique
and their own; the capacity to bear it appeared to them the privilege
of the chosen! Their generation lived inarticulate and, indispensable,
without knowing the sweetness of affections or the refuge of a home--and
died free from the dark menace of a narrow grave. They were the
everlasting children of the mysterious sea. Their successors are the
grown-up children of a discontented earth. They are less naughty, but
less innocent; less profane, but perhaps also less believing; and if
they have learned how to speak they have also learned how to whine. But
the others were strong and mute; they were effaced, bowed and enduring,
like stone caryatides that hold up in the night the lighted halls of
a resplendent and glorious edifice. They are gone now--and it does not
matter. The sea and the earth are unfaithful to their children: a truth,
a faith, a generation of men goes--and is forgotten, and it does not
matter! Except, perhaps, to the few of those who believed the truth,
confessed the faith--or loved the men.

A breeze was coming. The ship that had been lying tide-rode swung to
a heavier puff; and suddenly the slack of the chain cable between the
windlass and the hawse-pipe clinked, slipped forward an inch, and rose
gently off the deck with a startling suggestion as of unsuspected life
that had been lurking stealthily in the iron. In the hawse-pipe the
grinding links sent through the ship a sound like a low groan of a
man sighing under a burden. The strain came on the windlass, the chain
tautened like a string, vibrated--and the handle of the screw-brake moved
in slight jerks. Singleton stepped forward.

Till then he had been standing meditative and unthinking, reposeful
and hopeless, with a face grim and blank--a sixty-year-old child of
the mysterious sea. The thoughts of all his lifetime could have been
expressed in six words, but the stir of those things that were as much
part of his existence as his beating heart called up a gleam of alert
understanding upon the sternness of his aged face. The flame of the lamp
swayed, and the old man, with knitted and bushy eyebrows, stood over the
brake, watchful and motionless in the wild saraband of dancing shadows.
Then the ship, obedient to the call of her anchor, forged ahead slightly
and eased the strain. The cable relieved, hung down, and after swaying
imperceptibly to and fro dropped with a loud tap on the hard wood
planks. Singleton seized the high lever, and, by a violent throw forward
of his body, wrung out another half-turn from the brake. He recovered
himself, breathed largely, and remained for a while glaring down at the
powerful and compact engine that squatted on the deck at his feet like
some quiet monster--a creature amazing and tame.

"You... hold!" he growled at it masterfully in the incult tangle of his
white beard.





CHAPTER TWO

Next morning, at daylight, the Narcissus went to sea.

A slight haze blurred the horizon. Outside the harbour the measureless
expanse of smooth water lay sparkling like a floor of jewels, and as
empty as the sky. The short black tug gave a pluck to windward, in the
usual way, then let go the rope, and hovered for a moment on the quarter
with her engines stopped; while the slim, long hull of the ship moved
ahead slowly under lower topsails. The loose upper canvas blew out
in the breeze with soft round contours, resembling small white clouds
snared in the maze of ropes. Then the sheets were hauled home, the yards
hoisted, and the ship became a high and lonely pyramid, gliding, all
shining and white, through the sunlit mist. The tug turned short round
and went away towards the land. Twenty-six pairs of eyes watched her
low broad stern crawling languidly over the smooth swell between the two
paddle-wheels that turned fast, beating the water with fierce hurry. She
resembled an enormous and aquatic black beetle, surprised by the light,
overwhelmed by the sunshine, trying to escape with ineffectual effort
into the distant gloom of the land. She left a lingering smudge of smoke
on the sky, and two vanishing trails of foam on the water. On the place
where she had stopped a round black patch of soot remained, undulating
on the swell--an unclean mark of the creature's rest.

The Narcissus left alone, heading south, seemed to stand resplendent and
still upon the restless sea, under the moving sun. Flakes of foam swept
past her sides; the water struck her with flashing blows; the land
glided away slowly fading; a few birds screamed on motionless wings over
the swaying mastheads. But soon the land disappeared, the birds went
away; and to the west the pointed sail of an Arab dhow running for
Bombay, rose triangular and upright above the sharp edge of the horizon,
lingered and vanished like an illusion. Then the ship's wake, long and
straight, stretched itself out through a day of immense solitude. The
setting sun, burning on the level of the water, flamed crimson below
the blackness of heavy rain clouds. The sunset squall, coming up from
behind, dissolved itself into the short deluge of a hissing shower. It
left the ship glistening from trucks to water-line, and with darkened
sails. She ran easily before a fair monsoon, with her decks cleared
for the night; and, moving along with her, was heard the sustained and
monotonous swishing of the waves, mingled with the low whispers of men
mustered aft for the setting of watches; the short plaint of some block
aloft; or, now and then, a loud sigh of wind.

Mr. Baker, coming out of his cabin, called out the first name sharply
before closing the door behind him. He was going to take charge of the
deck. On the homeward trip, according to an old custom of the sea, the
chief officer takes the first night-watch--from eight till midnight.
So Mr. Baker, after he had heard the last "Yes, sir!" said moodily,
"Relieve the wheel and look-out"; and climbed with heavy feet the
poop ladder to windward. Soon after Mr. Creighton came down, whistling
softly, and went into the cabin. On the doorstep the steward lounged,
in slippers, meditative, and with his shirt-sleeves rolled up to the
armpits.

On the main deck the cook, locking up the galley doors, had an
altercation with young Charley about a pair of socks. He could be heard
saying impressively, in the darkness amidships: "You don't deserve a
kindness. I've been drying them for you, and now you complain about
the holes--and you swear, too! Right in front of me! If I hadn't been a
Christian--which you ain't, you young ruffian--I would give you a clout on
the head.... Go away!" Men in couples or threes stood pensive or moved
silently along the bulwarks in the waist. The first busy day of a
homeward passage was sinking into the dull peace of resumed routine.
Aft, on the high poop, Mr. Baker walked shuffling and grunted to himself
in the pauses of his thoughts. Forward, the look-out man, erect between
the flukes of the two anchors, hummed an endless tune, keeping his eyes
fixed dutifully ahead in a vacant stare. A multitude of stars coming out
into the clear night peopled the emptiness of the sky. They glittered,
as if alive above the sea; they surrounded the running ship on all
sides; more intense than the eyes of a staring crowd, and as inscrutable
as the souls of men.

The passage had begun, and the ship, a fragment detached from the earth,
went on lonely and swift like a small planet. Round her the abysses of
sky and sea met in an unattainable frontier. A great circular solitude
moved with her, ever changing and ever the same, always monotonous and
always imposing. Now and then another wandering white speck, burdened
with life, appeared far off--disappeared; intent on its own destiny.
The sun looked upon her all day, and every morning rose with a burning,
round stare of undying curiosity. She had her own future; she was alive
with the lives of those beings who trod her decks; like that earth which
had given her up to the sea, she had an intolerable load of regrets and
hopes. On her lived timid truth and audacious lies; and, like the earth,
she was unconscious, fair to see--and condemned by men to an ignoble
fate. The august loneliness of her path lent dignity to the sordid
inspiration of her pilgrimage. She drove foaming to the southward, as if
guided by the courage of a high endeavour. The smiling greatness of
the sea dwarfed the extent of time. The days raced after one another,
brilliant and quick like the flashes of a lighthouse, and the nights,
eventful and short, resembled fleeting dreams.

The men had shaken into their places, and the half-hourly voice of the
bells ruled their life of unceasing care. Night and day the head and
shoulders of a seaman could be seen aft by the wheel, outlined high
against sunshine or starlight, very steady above the stir of revolving
spokes. The faces changed, passing in rotation. Youthful faces, bearded
faces, dark faces: faces serene, or faces moody, but all akin with the
brotherhood of the sea; all with the same attentive expression of eyes,
carefully watching the compass or the sails. Captain Allistoun, serious,
and with an old red muffler round his throat, all day long pervaded the
poop. At night, many times he rose out of the darkness of the companion,
such as a phantom above a grave, and stood watchful and mute under the
stars, his night-shirt fluttering like a flag--then, without a sound,
sank down again. He was born on the shores of the Pentland Firth. In his
youth he attained the rank of harpooner in Peterhead whalers. When he
spoke of that time his restless grey eyes became still and cold, like
the loom of ice. Afterwards he went into the East Indian trade for the
sake of change. He had commanded the Narcissus since she was built. He
loved his ship, and drove her unmercifully; for his secret ambition was
to make her accomplish some day a brilliantly quick passage which would
be mentioned in nautical papers. He pronounced his owner's name with a
sardonic smile, spoke but seldom to his officers, and reproved errors
in a gentle voice, with words that cut to the quick. His hair was
iron-grey, his face hard and of the colour of pump-leather. He shaved
every morning of his life--at six--but once (being caught in a fierce
hurricane eighty miles southwest of Mauritius) he had missed three
consecutive days. He feared naught but an unforgiving God, and wished
to end his days in a little house, with a plot of ground attached--far in
the country--out of sight of the sea.

He, the ruler of that minute world, seldom descended from the Olympian
heights of his poop. Below him--at his feet, so to speak--common mortals
led their busy and insignificant lives. Along the main deck, Mr. Baker
grunted in a manner bloodthirsty and innocuous; and kept all our noses
to the grindstone, being--as he once remarked--paid for doing that very
thing. The men working about the deck were healthy and contented--as most
seamen are, when once well out to sea. The true peace of God begins at
any spot a thousand miles from the nearest land; and when He sends there
the messengers of His might it is not in terrible wrath against
crime, presumption, and folly, but paternally, to chasten simple
hearts--ignorant hearts that know nothing of life, and beat undisturbed
by envy or greed.

In the evening the cleared decks had a reposeful aspect, resembling the
autumn of the earth. The sun was sinking to rest, wrapped in a mantle of
warm clouds. Forward, on the end of the spare spars, the boatswain
and the carpenter sat together with crossed arms; two men friendly,
powerful, and deep-chested. Beside them the short, dumpy sailmaker--who
had been in the Navy--related, between the whiffs of his pipe, impossible
stories about Admirals. Couples tramped backwards and forwards, keeping
step and balance without effort, in a confined space. Pigs grunted in
the big pigstye. Belfast, leaning thoughtfully on his elbow, above the
bars, communed with them through the silence of his meditation. Fellows
with shirts open wide on sunburnt breasts sat upon the mooring bits,
and all up the steps of the forecastle ladders. By the foremast a
few discussed in a circle the characteristics of a gentleman. One
said:--"It's money as does it." Another maintained:--"No, it's the way
they speak." Lame Knowles stumped up with an unwashed face (he had the
distinction of being the dirty man of the forecastle), and showing a
few yellow fangs in a shrewd smile, explained craftily that he "had seen
some of their pants." The backsides of them--he had observed--were thinner
than paper from constant sitting down in offices, yet otherwise they
looked first-rate and would last for years. It was all appearance. "It
was," he said, "bloomin' easy to be a gentleman when you had a clean
job for life." They disputed endlessly, obstinate and childish; they
repeated in shouts and with inflamed faces their amazing arguments;
while the soft breeze, eddying down the enormous cavity of the foresail,
distended above their bare heads, stirred the tumbled hair with a touch
passing and light like an indulgent caress.

They were forgetting their toil, they were forgetting themselves.
The cook approached to hear, and stood by, beaming with the inward
consciousness of his faith, like a conceited saint unable to forget his
glorious reward; Donkin, solitary and brooding over his wrongs on the
forecastle-head, moved closer to catch the drift of the discussion below
him; he turned his sallow face to the sea, and his thin nostrils moved,
sniffing the breeze, as he lounged negligently by the rail. In the glow
of sunset faces shone with interest, teeth flashed, eyes sparkled. The
walking couples stood still suddenly, with broad grins; a man, bending
over a wash-tub, sat up, entranced, with the soapsuds flecking his wet
arms. Even the three petty officers listened leaning back, comfortably
propped, and with superior smiles. Belfast left off scratching the ear
of his favourite pig, and, open mouthed, tried with eager eyes to have
his say. He lifted his arms, grimacing and baffled. From a distance
Charley screamed at the ring:--"I know about gentlemen more'n any of you.
I've been intermit with 'em.... I've blacked their boots." The cook,
craning his neck to hear better, was scandalised. "Keep your mouth shut
when your elders speak, you impudent young heathen--you." "All right, old
Hallelujah, I'm done," answered Charley, soothingly. At some opinion of
dirty Knowles, delivered with an air of supernatural cunning, a ripple
of laughter ran along, rose like a wave, burst with a startling roar.
They stamped with both feet; they turned their shouting faces to the
sky; many, spluttering, slapped their thighs; while one or two, bent
double, gasped, hugging themselves with both arms like men in pain. The
carpenter and the boatswain, without changing their attitude, shook with
laughter where they sat; the sailmaker, charged with an anecdote about a
Commodore, looked sulky; the cook was wiping his eyes with a greasy rag;
and lame Knowles, astonished at his own success, stood in their midst
showing a slow smile.

Suddenly the face of Donkin leaning high-shouldered over the after-rail
became grave. Something like a weak rattle was heard through the
forecastle door. It became a murmur; it ended in a sighing groan. The
washerman plunged both his arms into the tub abruptly; the cook became
more crestfallen than an exposed backslider; the boatswain moved his
shoulders uneasily; the carpenter got up with a spring and walked
away--while the sailmaker seemed mentally to give his story up, and began
to puff at his pipe with sombre determination. In the blackness of the
doorway a pair of eyes glimmered white, and big, and staring. Then James
Wait's head protruding, became visible, as if suspended between the two
hands that grasped a doorpost on each side of the face. The tassel of
his blue woollen nightcap, cocked forward, danced gaily over his left
eyelid. He stepped out in a tottering stride. He looked powerful as
ever, but showed a strange and affected unsteadiness in his gait;
his face was perhaps a trifle thinner, and his eyes appeared rather
startlingly prominent. He seemed to hasten the retreat of departing
light by his very presence; the setting sun dipped sharply, as though
fleeing before our nigger; a black mist emanated from him; a subtle
and dismal influence; a something cold and gloomy that floated out and
settled on all the faces like a mourning veil. The circle broke up. The
joy of laughter died on stiffened lips. There was not a smile left among
all the ship's company. Not a word was spoken. Many turned their
backs, trying to look unconcerned; others, with averted heads, sent
half-reluctant glances out of the corners of their eyes. They resembled
criminals conscious of misdeeds more than honest men distracted by
doubt; only two or three stared frankly, but stupidly, with lips
slightly open. All expected James Wait to say something, and, at the
same time, had the air of knowing beforehand what he would say. He
leaned his back against the doorpost, and with heavy eyes swept over
them a glance domineering and pained, like a sick tyrant overawing a
crowd of abject but untrustworthy slaves.

No one went away. They waited in fascinated dread. He said ironically,
with gasps between the words:--

"Thank you... chaps. You... are nice... and... quiet... you are! Yelling
so... before... the door...."

He made a longer pause, during which he worked his ribs in an
exaggerated labour of breathing. It was intolerable. Feet were shuffled.
Belfast let out a groan; but Donkin above blinked his red eyelids with
invisible eyelashes, and smiled bitterly over the nigger's head.

The nigger went on again with surprising ease. He gasped no more, and
his voice rang, hollow and loud, as though he had been talking in an
empty cavern. He was contemptuously angry.

"I tried to get a wink of sleep. You know I can't sleep o' nights.
And you come jabbering near the door here like a blooming lot of old
women.... You think yourselves good shipmates. Do you?... Much you care
for a dying man!"

Belfast spun away from the pigstye. "Jimmy," he cried tremulously, "if
you hadn't been sick I would------"

He stopped. The nigger waited awhile, then said, in a gloomy tone:--"You
would.... What? Go an' fight another such one as yourself. Leave
me alone. It won't be for long. I'll soon die.... It's coming right
enough!"

Men stood around very still and with exasperated eyes. It was just what
they had expected, and hated to hear, that idea of a stalking death,
thrust at them many times a day like a boast and like a menace by this
obnoxious nigger. He seemed to take a pride in that death which, so far,
had attended only upon the ease of his life; he was overbearing about
it, as if no one else in the world had ever been intimate with such
a companion; he paraded it unceasingly before us with an affectionate
persistence that made its presence indubitable, and at the same time
incredible. No man could be suspected of such monstrous friendship! Was
he a reality--or was he a sham--this ever-expected visitor of Jimmy's?
We hesitated between pity and mistrust, while, on the slightest
provocation, he shook before our eyes the bones of his bothersome and
infamous skeleton. He was for ever trotting him out. He would talk of
that coming death as though it had been already there, as if it had been
walking the deck outside, as if it would presently come in to sleep
in the only empty bunk; as if it had sat by his side at every meal.
It interfered daily with our occupations, with our leisure, with our
amusements. We had no songs and no music in the evening, because
Jimmy (we all lovingly called him Jimmy, to conceal our hate of his
accomplice) had managed, with that prospective decease of his, to
disturb even Archie's mental balance. Archie was the owner of the
concertina; but after a couple of stinging lectures from Jimmy he
refused to play any more. He said:--"Yon's an uncanny joker. I dinna ken
what's wrang wi' him, but there's something verra wrang, verra wrang.
It's nae manner of use asking me. I won't play." Our singers became mute
because Jimmy was a dying man. For the same reason no chap--as Knowles
remarked--could "drive in a nail to hang his few poor rags upon," without
being made aware of the enormity he committed in disturbing Jimmy's
interminable last moments. At night, instead of the cheerful yell, "One
bell! Turn out! Do you hear there? Hey! hey! hey! Show leg!" the
watches were called man by man, in whispers, so as not to interfere with
Jimmy's, possibly, last slumber on earth. True, he was always awake, and
managed, as we sneaked out on deck, to plant in our backs some cutting
remark that, for the moment, made us feel as if we had been brutes, and
afterwards made us suspect ourselves of being fools. We spoke in low
tones within that fo'c'sle as though it had been a church. We ate our
meals in silence and dread, for Jimmy was capricious with his food, and
railed bitterly at the salt meat, at the biscuits, at the tea, as at
articles unfit for human consumption--"let alone for a dying man!" He
would say:--"Can't you find a better slice of meat for a sick man who's
trying to get home to be cured--or buried? But there! If I had a chance,
you fellows would do away with it. You would poison me. Look at what
you have given me!" We served him in his bed with rage and humility, as
though we had been the base courtiers of a hated prince; and he rewarded
us by his unconciliating criticism. He had found the secret of keeping
for ever on the run the fundamental imbecility of mankind; he had the
secret of life, that confounded dying man, and he made himself master
of every moment of our existence. We grew desperate, and remained
submissive. Emotional little Belfast was for ever on the verge
of assault or on the verge of tears. One evening he confided to
Archie:--"For a ha'penny I would knock his ugly black head off--the
skulking dodger!" And the straightforward Archie pretended to be
shocked! Such was the infernal spell which that casual St. Kitt's nigger
had cast upon our guileless manhood! But the same night Belfast stole
from the galley the officers' Sunday fruit pie, to tempt the fastidious
appetite of Jimmy. He endangered not only his long friendship with
the cook but also--as it appeared--his eternal welfare. The cook was
overwhelmed with grief; he did not know the culprit but he knew that
wickedness flourished; he knew that Satan was abroad amongst those men,
whom he looked upon as in some way under his spiritual care. Whenever he
saw three or four of us standing together he would leave his stove, to
run out and preach. We fled from him; and only Charley (who knew the
thief) affronted the cook with a candid gaze which irritated the good
man. "It's you, I believe," he groaned, sorrowful and with a patch of
soot on his chin. "It's you. You are a brand for the burning! No more of
your socks in my galley." Soon, unofficially, the information was spread
about that, should there be another case of stealing, our marmalade
(an extra allowance: half a pound per man) would be stopped. Mr.
Baker ceased to heap jocular abuse upon his favourites, and grunted
suspiciously at all. The captain's cold eyes, high up on the poop,
glittered mistrustful, as he surveyed us trooping in a small mob from
halyards to braces for the usual evening pull at all the ropes. Such
stealing in a merchant ship is difficult to check, and may be taken as
a declaration by men of their dislike for their officers. It is a bad
symptom. It may end in God knows what trouble. The Narcissus was still a
peaceful ship, but mutual confidence was shaken. Donkin did not conceal
his delight. We were dismayed.

Then illogical Belfast reproached our nigger with great fury. James
Wait, with his elbow on the pillow, choked, gasped out:--"Did I ask
you to bone the dratted thing? Blow your blamed pie. It has made me
worse--you little Irish lunatic, you!" Belfast, with scarlet face and
trembling lips, made a dash at him. Every man in the forecastle rose
with a shout. There was a moment of wild tumult. Some one shrieked
piercingly:--"Easy, Belfast! Easy!..." We expected Belfast to strangle
Wait without more ado. Dust flew. We heard through it the nigger's
cough, metallic and explosive like a gong. Next moment we saw Belfast
hanging over him. He was saying plaintively:--"Don't! Don't, Jimmy!
Don't be like that. An angel couldn't put up with ye--sick as ye are."
He looked round at us from Jimmy's bedside, his comical mouth twitching,
and through tearful eyes; then he tried to put straight the disarranged
blankets. The unceasing whisper of the sea filled the forecastle. Was
James Wait frightened, or touched, or repentant? He lay on his back with
a hand to his side, and as motionless as if his expected visitor
had come at last. Belfast fumbled about his feet, repeating with
emotion:--"Yes. We know. Ye are bad, but.... Just say what ye want done,
and.... We all know ye are bad--very bad...." No! Decidedly James Wait
was not touched or repentant. Truth to say, he seemed rather startled.
He sat up with incredible suddenness and ease. "Ah! You think I am bad,
do you?" he said gloomily, in his clearest baritone voice (to hear him
speak sometimes you would never think there was anything wrong with that
man). "Do you?... Well, act according! Some of you haven't sense enough
to put a blanket shipshape over a sick man. There! Leave it alone! I
can die anyhow!" Belfast turned away limply with a gesture of
discouragement. In the silence of the forecastle, full of interested
men, Donkin pronounced distinctly:--"Well, I'm blowed!" and sniggered.
Wait looked at him. He looked at him in a quite friendly manner. Nobody
could tell what would please our incomprehensible invalid: but for us
the scorn of that snigger was hard to bear.

Donkin's position in the forecastle was distinguished but unsafe. He
stood on the bad eminence of a general dislike. He was left alone; and
in his isolation he could do nothing but think of the gales of the
Cape of Good Hope and envy us the possession of warm clothing and
waterproofs. Our sea-boots, our oilskin coats, our well-filled
sea-chests, were to him so many causes for bitter meditation: he had
none of those things, and he felt instinctively that no man, when
the need arose, would offer to share them with him. He was impudently
cringing to us and systematically insolent to the officers. He
anticipated the best results, for himself, from such a line of
conduct--and was mistaken. Such natures forget that under extreme
provocation men will be just--whether they want to be so or not. Donkin's
insolence to long-suffering Mr. Baker became at last intolerable to us,
and we rejoiced when the mate, one dark night, tamed him for good.

It was done neatly, with great decency and decorum, and with little
noise. We had been called--just before midnight--to trim the yards, and
Donkin--as usual--made insulting remarks. We stood sleepily in a row with
the forebrace in our hands waiting for the next order, and heard in the
darkness a scuffly trampling of feet, an exclamation of surprise, sounds
of cuffs and slaps, suppressed, hissing whispers:--"Ah! Will you!"...
"Don't!... Don't!"... "Then behave."... "Oh! Oh!..." Afterwards there
were soft thuds mixed with the rattle of iron things as if a man's body
had been tumbling helplessly amongst the main-pump rods. Before we
could realise the situation, Mr. Baker's voice was heard very near and
a little impatient:--"Haul away, men! Lay back on that rope!" And we did
lay back on the rope with great alacrity. As if nothing had happened,
the chief mate went on trimming the yards with his usual and
exasperating fastidiousness. We didn't at the time see anything of
Donkin, and did not care. Had the chief officer thrown him overboard,
no man would have said as much as "Hallo! he's gone!" But, in truth, no
great harm was done--even if Donkin did lose one of his front teeth. We
perceived this in the morning, and preserved a ceremonious silence: the
etiquette of the forecastle commanded us to be blind and dumb in such
a case, and we cherished the decencies of our life more than ordinary
landsmen respect theirs. Charley, with unpardonable want of savoir
vivre, yelled out:--"'Ave you been to your dentyst?... Hurt ye, didn't
it?" He got a box on the ear from one of his best friends. The boy was
surprised, and remained plunged in grief for at least three hours. We
were sorry for him, but youth requires even more discipline than age.
Donkin grinned venomously. From that day he became pitiless; told Jimmy
that he was a "black fraud"; hinted to us that we were an imbecile lot,
daily taken in by a vulgar nigger. And Jimmy seemed to like the fellow!

Singleton lived untouched by human emotions. Taciturn and unsmiling, he
breathed amongst us--in that alone resembling the rest of the crowd.
We were trying to be decent chaps, and found it jolly difficult; we
oscillated between the desire of virtue and the fear of ridicule; we
wished to save ourselves from the pain of remorse, but did not want
to be made the contemptible dupes of our sentiment. Jimmy's hateful
accomplice seemed to have blown with his impure breath undreamt of
subtleties into our hearts. We were disturbed and cowardly. That we
knew. Singleton seemed to know nothing, understand nothing. We had
thought him till then as wise as he looked, but now we dared, at times,
suspect him of being stupid--from old age. One day, however, at dinner,
as we sat on our boxes round a tin dish that stood on the deck within
the circle of our feet, Jimmy expressed his general disgust with men and
things in words that were particularly disgusting. Singleton lifted his
head. We became mute. The old man, addressing Jimmy, asked:--"Are you
dying?" Thus interrogated, James Wait appeared horribly startled and
confused. We all were startled. Mouths remained open; hearts thumped,
eyes blinked; a dropped tin fork rattled in the dish; a man rose as if
to go out, and stood still. In less than a minute Jimmy pulled himself
together:--"Why? Can't you see I am?" he answered shakily. Singleton
lifted a piece of soaked biscuit ("his teeth"--he declared--"had no edge
on them now") to his lips.--"Well, get on with your dying," he said with
venerable mildness; "don't raise a blamed fuss with us over that job.
We can't help you." Jimmy fell back in his bunk, and for a long time lay
very still wiping the perspiration off his chin. The dinner-tins were
put away quickly. On deck we discussed the incident in whispers. Some
showed a chuckling exultation. Many looked grave. Wamibo, after long
periods of staring dreaminess, attempted abortive smiles; and one of
the young Scandinavians, much tormented by doubt, ventured in the second
dog-watch to approach Singleton (the old man did not encourage us much
to speak to him) and ask sheepishly:--"You think he will die?" Singleton
looked up.--"Why, of course he will die," he said deliberately. This
seemed decisive. It was promptly imparted to every one by him who had
consulted the oracle. Shy and eager, he would step up and with averted
gaze recite his formula:--"Old Singleton says he will die." It was a
relief! At last we knew that our compassion would not be misplaced, and
we could again smile without misgivings--but we reckoned without Donkin.
Donkin "didn't want to 'ave no truck with 'em dirty furriners." When
Nilsen came to him with the news: "Singleton says he will die," he
answered him by a spiteful "And so will you--you fat-headed Dutchman.
Wish you Dutchmen were all dead--'stead comin' takin' our money inter
your starvin' country." We were appalled. We perceived that after all
Singleton's answer meant nothing. We began to hate him for making fun
of us. All our certitudes were going; we were on doubtful terms with
our officers; the cook had given us up for lost; we had overheard the
boatswain's opinion that "we were a crowd of softies." We suspected
Jimmy, one another, and even our very selves. We did not know what
to do. At every insignificant turn of our humble life we met Jimmy
overbearing and blocking the way, arm-in-arm with his awful and veiled
familiar. It was a weird servitude.

It began a week after leaving Bombay and came on us stealthily like any
other great misfortune. Every one had remarked that Jimmy from the first
was very slack at his work; but we thought it simply the outcome of his
philosophy of life. Donkin said:--"You put no more weight on a rope
than a bloody sparrer." He disdained him. Belfast, ready for a fight,
exclaimed provokingly:--"You don't kill yourself, old man!"--"Would you?"
he retorted with extreme, scorn--and Belfast retired. One morning, as
we were washing decks, Mr. Baker called to him:--"Bring your broom over
here, Wait." He strolled languidly.

"Move yourself! Ough!" grunted Mr. Baker; "what's the matter with your
hind legs?" He stopped dead short. He gazed slowly with eyes that bulged
out with an expression audacious and sad.--"It isn't my legs," he said,
"it's my lungs." Everybody listened.--"What's... Ough!... What's wrong
with them?" inquired Mr. Baker. All the watch stood around on the wet
deck, grinning, and with brooms or buckets in their hands. He said
mournfully:--"Going--or gone. Can't you see I'm a dying man? I know
it!" Mr. Baker was disgusted.--"Then why the devil did you ship aboard
here?"--"I must live till I die--mustn't I?" he replied. The grins became
audible.--"Go off my deck--get out of my sight," said Mr. Baker. He was
nonplussed. It was a unique experience. James Wait, obedient, dropped
his broom, and walked slowly forward. A burst of laughter followed him.
It was too funny. All hands laughed.... They laughed!... Alas!

He became the tormentor of all our moments; he ''was worse than a
nightmare. You couldn't see that there was anything wrong with him: a
nigger does not show. He was not very fat--certainly--but then he was no
leaner than other niggers we had known. He coughed often, but the most
prejudiced person could perceive that, mostly, he coughed when it suited
his purpose. He wouldn't, or couldn't, do his work--and he wouldn't
lie-up. One day he would skip aloft with the best of them, and next time
we would be obliged to risk our lives to get his limp body down. He
was reported, he was examined; he was remonstrated with, threatened,
cajoled, lectured. He was called into the cabin to interview the
captain. There were wild rumours. It was said he had cheeked the old
man; it was said he had frightened him. Charley maintained that the
"skipper, weepin,' 'as giv' 'im 'is blessin' an' a pot of jam." Knowles
had it from the steward that the unspeakable Jimmy had been reeling
against the cabin furniture; that he had groaned; that he had complained
of general brutality and disbelief; and had ended by coughing all over
the old man's meteorological journals which were then spread on the
table. At any rate, Wait returned forward supported by the steward, who,
in a pained and shocked voice, entreated us:--"Here! Catch hold of him,
one of you. He is to lie-up." Jimmy drank a tin mugful of coffee, and,
after bullying first one and then another, went to bed. He remained
there most of the time, but when it suited him would come on deck and
appear amongst us. He was scornful and brooding; he looked ahead upon
the sea, and no one could tell what was the meaning of that black man
sitting apart in a meditative attitude and as motionless as a carving.

He refused steadily all medicine; he threw sago and cornflour overboard
till the steward got tired of bringing it to him. He asked for
paregoric. They sent him a big bottle; enough to poison a wilderness
of babies. He kept it between his mattress and the deal lining of the
ship's side; and nobody ever saw him take a dose. Donkin abused him to
his face, jeered at him while he gasped; and the same day Wait would
lend him a warm jersey. Once Donkin reviled him for half an hour;
reproached him with the extra work his malingering gave to the watch;
and ended by calling him "a black-faced swine." Under the spell of our
accursed perversity we were horror-struck. But Jimmy positively seemed
to revel in that abuse. It made him look cheerful--and Donkin had a pair
of old sea boots thrown at him. "Here, you East-end trash," boomed Wait,
"you may have that."

At last Mr. Baker had to tell the captain that James Wait was disturbing
the peace of the ship. "Knock discipline on the head--he will, Ough,"
grunted Mr. Baker. As a matter of fact, the starboard watch came as near
as possible to refusing duty, when ordered one morning by the boatswain
to wash out their forecastle. It appears Jimmy objected to a wet
floor--and that morning we were in a compassionate mood. We thought
the boatswain a brute, and, practically, told him so. Only Mr. Baker's
delicate tact prevented an all-fired row: he refused to take us
seriously. He came bustling forward, and called us many unpolite names
but in such a hearty and seamanlike manner that we began to feel ashamed
of ourselves. In truth, we thought him much too good a sailor to annoy
him willingly: and after all Jimmy might have been a fraud--probably
was! The forecastle got a clean up that morning; but in the afternoon
a sick-bay was fitted up in the deck-house. It was a nice little
cabin opening on deck, and with two berths. Jimmy's belongings were
transported there, and then--notwithstanding his protests--Jimmy himself.
He said he couldn't walk. Four men carried him on a blanket. He
complained that he would have to die there alone, like a dog. We grieved
for him, and were delighted to have him removed from the forecastle. We
attended him as before. The galley was next door, and the cook looked in
many times a day. Wait became a little more cheerful. Knowles affirmed
having heard him laugh to himself in peals one day. Others had seen him
walking about on deck at night. His little place, with the door ajar
on a long hook, was always full of tobacco smoke. We spoke through the
crack cheerfully, sometimes abusively, as we passed by, intent on our
work. He fascinated us. He would never let doubt die. He overshadowed
the ship. Invulnerable in his promise of speedy corruption he trampled
on our self-respect, he demonstrated to us daily our want of moral
courage; he tainted our lives. Had we been a miserable gang of wretched
immortals, unhallowed alike by hope and fear, he could not have lorded
it over us with a more pitiless assertion of his sublime privilege.





CHAPTER THREE

Meantime the Narcissus, with square yards, ran out of the fair monsoon.
She drifted slowly, swinging round and round the compass, through a few
days of baffling light airs. Under the patter of short warm showers,
grumbling men whirled the heavy yards from side to side; they caught
hold of the soaked ropes with groans and sighs, while their officers,
sulky and dripping with rain water, unceasingly ordered them about in
wearied voices. During the short respites they looked with disgust
into the smarting palms of their stiff hands, and asked one another
bitterly:--"Who would be a sailor if he could be a farmer?" All the
tempers were spoilt, and no man cared what he said. One black night,
when the watch, panting in the heat and half-drowned with the rain,
had been through four mortal hours hunted from brace to brace, Belfast
declared that he would "chuck the sea for ever and go in a steamer."
This was excessive, no doubt. Captain Allistoun, with great
self-control, would mutter sadly to Mr. Baker:--"It is not so bad--not so
bad," when he had managed to shove, and dodge, and manoeuvre his smart
ship through sixty miles in twenty-four hours. From the doorstep of the
little cabin, Jimmy, chin in hand, watched our distasteful labours with
insolent and melancholy eyes. We spoke to him gently--and out of his
sight exchanged sour smiles.

Then, again, with a fair wind and under a clear sky, the ship went
on piling up the South Latitude. She passed outside Madagascar and
Mauritius without a glimpse of the land. Extra lashings were put on the
spare spars. Hatches were looked to. The steward in his leisure moments
and with a worried air tried to fit washboards to the cabin doors. Stout
canvas was bent with care. Anxious eyes looked to the westward, towards
the cape of storms. The ship began to dip into a southwest swell, and
the softly luminous sky of low latitudes took on a harder sheen from
day to day above our heads: it arched high above the ship vibrating and
pale, like an immense dome of steel, resonant with the deep voice of
freshening gales. The sunshine gleamed cold on the white curls of black
waves. Before the strong breath of westerly squalls the ship, with
reduced sail, lay slowly over, obstinate and yielding. She drove to and
fro in the unceasing endeavour to fight her way through the invisible
violence of the winds: she pitched headlong into dark smooth hollows;
she struggled upwards over the snowy ridges of great running seas; she
rolled, restless, from side to side, like a thing in pain. Enduring and
valiant, she answered to the call of men; and her slim spars waving for
ever in abrupt semicircles, seemed to beckon in vain for help towards
the stormy sky.

It was a bad winter off the Cape that year. The relieved helmsmen came
off flapping their arms, or ran stamping hard and blowing into swollen,
red fingers. The watch on deck dodged the sting of cold sprays or,
crouching in sheltered corners, watched dismally the high and merciless
seas boarding the ship time after time in unappeasable fury. Water
tumbled in cataracts over the forecastle doors. You had to dash through
a waterfall to get into your damp bed. The men turned in wet and turned
out stiff to face the redeeming and ruthless exactions of their glorious
and obscure fate. Far aft, and peering watchfully to windward, the
officers could be seen through the mist of squalls. They stood by the
weather-rail, holding on grimly, straight and glistening in their long
coats; and in the disordered plunges of the hard-driven ship, they
appeared high up, attentive, tossing violently above the grey line of a
clouded horizon in motionless attitudes.

They watched the weather and the ship as men on shore watch the
momentous chances of fortune. Captain Allistoun never left the deck,
as though he had been part of the ship's fittings. Now and then the
steward, shivering, but always in shirt sleeves, would struggle towards
him with some hot coffee, half of which the gale blew out of the cup
before it reached the master's lips. He drank what was left gravely in
one long gulp, while heavy sprays pattered loudly on his oilskin coat,
the seas swishing broke about his high boots; and he never took his eyes
off the ship. He kept his gaze riveted upon her as a loving man watches
the unselfish toil of a delicate woman upon the slender thread of whose
existence is hung the whole meaning and joy of the world. We all watched
her. She was beautiful and had a weakness. We loved her no less for
that. We admired her qualities aloud, we boasted of them to one another,
as though they had been our own, and the consciousness of her only fault
we kept buried in the silence of our profound affection. She was born
in the thundering peal of hammers beating upon iron, in black eddies of
smoke, under a grey sky, on the banks of the Clyde. The clamorous and
sombre stream gives birth to things of beauty that float away into the
sunshine of the world to be loved by men. The Narcissus was one of that
perfect brood. Less perfect than many perhaps, but she was ours, and,
consequently, incomparable. We were proud of her. In Bombay, ignorant
landlubbers alluded to her as that "pretty grey ship." Pretty! A scurvy
meed of commendation! We knew she was the most magnificent sea-boat ever
launched. We tried to forget that, like many good sea-boats, she was
at times rather crank. She was exacting. She wanted care in loading and
handling, and no one knew exactly how much care would be enough. Such
are the imperfections of mere men! The ship knew, and sometimes would
correct the presumptuous human ignorance by the wholesome discipline
of fear. We had heard ominous stories about past voyages. The cook
(technically a seaman, but in reality no sailor)--the cook, when unstrung
by some misfortune, such as the rolling over of a saucepan, would mutter
gloomily while he wiped the floor:--"There! Look at what she has done!
Some voy'ge she will drown all hands! You'll see if she won't." To which
the steward, snatching in the galley a moment to draw breath in the
hurry of his worried life, would remark philosophically:--"Those that see
won't tell, anyhow. I don't want to see it." We derided those fears. Our
hearts went out to the old man when he pressed her hard so as to make
her hold her own, hold to every inch gained to windward; when he made
her, under reefed sails, leap obliquely at enormous waves. The men,
knitted together aft into a ready group by the first sharp order of an
officer coming to take charge of the deck in bad weather:--"Keep handy
the watch," stood admiring her valiance. Their eyes blinked in the wind;
their dark faces were wet with drops of water more salt and bitter than
human tears; beards and moustaches, soaked, hung straight and dripping
like fine seaweed. They were fantastically misshapen; in high boots, in
hats like helmets, and swaying clumsily, stiff and bulky in glistening
oilskins, they resembled men strangely equipped for some fabulous
adventure. Whenever she rose easily to a towering green sea, elbows dug
ribs, faces brightened, lips murmured:--"Didn't she do it cleverly," and
all the heads turning like one watched with sardonic grins the foiled
wave go roaring to leeward, white with the foam of a monstrous rage.
But when she had not been quick enough and, struck heavily, lay over
trembling under the blow, we clutched at ropes, and looking up at the
narrow bands of drenched and strained sails waving desperately aloft, we
thought in our hearts:--"No wonder. Poor thing!"

The thirty-second day out of Bombay began inauspiciously. In the morning
a sea smashed one of the galley doors. We dashed in through lots of
steam and found the cook very wet and indignant with the ship:--"She's
getting worse every day. She's trying to drown me in front of my own
stove!" He was very angry. We pacified him, and the carpenter, though
washed away twice from there, managed to repair the door. Through that
accident our dinner was not ready till late, but it didn't matter in the
end because Knowles, who went to fetch it, got knocked down by a sea and
the dinner went over the side. Captain Allistoun, looking more hard and
thin-lipped than ever, hung on to full topsails and foresail, and would
not notice that the ship, asked to do too much, appeared to lose heart
altogether for the first time since we knew her. She refused to rise,
and bored her way sullenly through the seas. Twice running, as though
she had been blind or weary of life, she put her nose deliberately
into a big wave and swept the decks from end to end. As the boatswain
observed with marked annoyance, while we were splashing about in a body
to try and save a worthless wash-tub:--"Every blooming thing in the
ship is going overboard this afternoon." Venerable Singleton broke
his habitual silence and said with a glance aloft:--"The old man's in a
temper with the weather, but it's no good bein' angry with the winds
of heaven." Jimmy had shut his door, of course. We knew he was dry and
comfortable within his little cabin, and in our absurd way were pleased
one moment, exasperated the next, by that certitude. Donkin skulked
shamelessly, uneasy and miserable. He grumbled:--"I'm perishin' with cold
outside in bloomin' wet rags, an' that 'ere black sojer sits dry on a
blamed chest full of bloomin' clothes; blank his black soul!" We took no
notice of him; we hardly gave a thought to Jimmy and his bosom friend.
There was no leisure for idle probing of hearts. Sails blew adrift.
Things broke loose. Cold and wet, we were washed about the deck while
trying to repair damages. The ship tossed about, shaken furiously,
like a toy in the hand of a lunatic. Just at sunset there was a rush to
shorten sail before the menace of a sombre hail cloud. The hard gust
of wind came brutal like the blow of a fist. The ship relieved of her
canvas in time received it pluckily: she yielded reluctantly to the
violent onset; then coming up with a stately and irresistible motion,
brought her spars to windward in the teeth of the screeching squall. Out
of the abysmal darkness of the black cloud overhead white hail streamed
on her, rattled on the rigging, leaped in handfuls off the yards,
rebounded on the deck--round and gleaming in the murky turmoil like
a shower of pearls. It passed away. For a moment a livid sun shot
horizontally the last rays of sinister light between the hills of steep,
rolling waves. Then a wild night rushed in--stamped out in a great howl
that dismal remnant of a stormy day.

There was no sleep on board that night. Most seamen remember in their
life one or two such nights of a culminating gale. Nothing seems left
of the whole universe but darkness, clamour, fury--and the ship. And
like the last vestige of a shattered creation she drifts, bearing an
anguished remnant of sinful mankind, through the distress, tumult, and
pain of an avenging terror. No one slept in the forecastle. The tin
oil-lamp suspended on a long string, smoking, described wide circles;
wet clothing made dark heaps on the glistening floor; a thin layer of
water rushed to and fro. In the bed-places men lay booted, resting on
elbows and with open eyes. Hung-up suits of oilskin swung out and
in, lively and disquieting like reckless ghosts of decapitated seamen
dancing in a tempest. No one spoke and all listened. Outside the night
moaned and sobbed to the accompaniment of a continuous loud tremor as
of innumerable drums beating far off. Shrieks passed through the air.
Tremendous dull blows made the ship tremble while she rolled under the
weight of the seas toppling on her deck. At times she soared up swiftly
as if to leave this earth for ever, then during interminable moments
fell through a void with all the hearts on board of her standing still,
till a frightful shock, expected and sudden, started them off again with
a big thump. After every dislocating jerk of the ship, Wamibo, stretched
full length, his face on the pillow, groaned slightly with the pain of
his tormented universe. Now and then, for the fraction of an intolerable
second, the ship, in the fiercer burst of a terrible uproar, remained on
her side, vibrating and still, with a stillness more appalling than the
wildest motion. Then upon all those prone bodies a stir would pass, a
shiver of suspense. A man would protrude his anxious head and a pair
of eyes glistened in the sway of light glaring wildly. Some moved their
legs a little as if making ready to jump out. But several, motionless on
their backs and with one hand gripping hard the edge of the bunk, smoked
nervously with quick puffs, staring upwards; immobilised in a great
craving for peace.

At midnight, orders were given to furl the fore and mizen topsails. With
immense efforts men crawled aloft through a merciless buffeting, saved
the canvas and crawled down almost exhausted, to bear in panting silence
the cruel battering of the seas. Perhaps for the first time in the
history of the merchant service the watch, told to go below, did not
leave the deck, as if compelled to remain there by the fascination of a
venomous violence. At every heavy gust men, huddled together, whispered
to one another,"It can blow no harder," and presently the gale would
give them the lie with a piercing shriek, and drive their breath back
into their throats. A fierce squall seemed to burst asunder the thick
mass of sooty vapours; and above the wrack of torn clouds glimpses could
be caught of the high moon rushing backwards with frightful speed over
the sky, right into the wind's eye. Many hung their heads, muttering
that it "turned their inwards out" to look at it. Soon the clouds closed
up and the world again became a raging, blind darkness that howled,
flinging at the lonely ship salt sprays and sleet.

About half-past seven the pitchy obscurity round us turned a ghastly
grey, and we knew that the sun had risen. This unnatural and threatening
daylight, in which we could see one another's wild eyes and drawn faces,
was only an added tax on our endurance. The horizon seemed to have come
on all sides within arm's length of the ship. Into that narrowed circle
furious seas leaped in, struck, and leaped out. A rain of salt, heavy
drops flew aslant like mist. The main-topsail had to be goose-winged,
and with stolid resignation every one prepared to go aloft once more;
but the officers yelled, pushed back, and at last we understood that
no more men would be allowed to go on the yard than were absolutely
necessary for the work. As at any moment the masts were likely to be
jumped out or blown overboard, we concluded that the captain didn't want
to see all his crowd go over the side at once. That was reasonable.
The watch then on duty, led by Mr. Creighton, began to struggle up the
rigging. The wind flattened them against the ratlines; then, easing
a little, would let them ascend a couple of steps; and again, with a
sudden gust, pin all up the shrouds the whole crawling line in attitudes
of crucifixion. The other watch plunged down on the main deck to haul
up the sail. Men's heads bobbed up as the water flung them irresistibly
from side to side. Mr. Baker grunted encouragingly in our midst,
spluttering and blowing amongst the tangled ropes like an energetic
porpoise. Favoured by an ominous and untrustworthy lull, the work was
done without any one being lost either off the deck or from the yard.
For the moment the gale seemed to take off, and the ship, as if grateful
for our efforts, plucked up heart and made better weather of it.

At eight the men off duty, watching their chance, ran forward over the
flooded deck to get some rest. The other half of the crew remained aft
for their turn of "seeing her through her trouble," as they expressed
it. The two mates urged the master to go below. Mr. Baker grunted in his
ear:--"Ough! surely now... Ough!... confidence in us... nothing more to
do... she must lay it out or go.

"Ough! Ough!" Tall young Mr. Creighton smiled down at him
cheerfully:--"...She's as right as a trivet! Take a spell, sir." He
looked at them stonily with bloodshot, sleepless eyes. The rims of his
eyelids were scarlet, and he moved his jaws unceasingly with a slow
effort, as though he had been masticating a lump of india-rubber. He
shook his head. He repeated:--"Never mind me. I must see it out--I must
see it out," but he consented to sit down for a moment on the skylight,
with his hard face turned unflinchingly to windward. The sea spat at
it--and stoical, it streamed with water as though he had been weeping. On
the weather side of the poop the watch, hanging on to the mizen rigging
and to one another, tried to exchange encouraging words. Singleton, at
the wheel, yelled out:--"Look out for yourselves!" His voice reached them
in a warning whisper. They were startled.

A big, foaming sea came out of the mist; it made for the ship, roaring
wildly, and in its rush it looked as mischievous and discomposing as
a madman with an axe. One or two, shouting, scrambled up the rigging;
most, with a convulsive catch of the breath, held on where they stood.
Singleton dug his knees under the wheel-box, and carefully eased the
helm to the headlong pitch of the ship, but without taking his eyes
off the coming wave. It towered close-to and high, like a wall of green
glass topped with snow. The ship rose to it as though she had soared on
wings, and for a moment rested poised upon the foaming crest as if she
had been a great sea-bird. Before we could draw breath a heavy gust
struck her, another roller took her unfairly under the weather bow, she
gave a toppling lurch, and filled her decks. Captain Allistoun leaped
up, and fell; Archie rolled over him, screaming:--"She will rise!"

She gave another lurch to leeward; the lower deadeyes dipped heavily;
the men's feet flew from under them, and they hung kicking above the
slanting poop. They could see the ship putting her side in the water,
and shouted all together:--"She's going!" Forward the forecastle doors
flew open, and the watch below were seen leaping out one after another,
throwing their arms up; and, falling on hands and knees, scrambled aft
on all fours along the high side of the deck, sloping more than the
roof of a house. From leeward the seas rose, pursuing them; they looked
wretched in a hopeless struggle, like vermin fleeing before a flood;
they fought up the weather ladder of the poop one after another, half
naked and staring wildly; and as soon as they got up they shot to
leeward in clusters, with closed eyes, till they brought up heavily with
their ribs against the iron stanchions of the rail; then, groaning, they
rolled in a confused mass. The immense volume of water thrown forward
by the last scend of the ship had burst the lee door of the forecastle.
They could see their chests, pillows, blankets, clothing, come out
floating upon the sea. While they struggled back to windward they
looked in dismay. The straw beds swam high, the blankets, spread out,
undulated; while the chests, waterlogged and with a heavy list, pitched
heavily like dismasted hulks, before they sank; Archie's big coat passed
with outspread arms, resembling a drowned seaman floating with his head
under water. Men were slipping down while trying to dig their fingers
into the planks; others, jammed in corners, rolled enormous eyes. They
all yelled unceasingly:--"The masts! Cut! Cut!..." A black squall howled
low over the ship, that lay on her side with the weather yard-arms
pointing to the clouds; while the tall masts, inclined nearly to the
horizon, seemed to be of an immeasurable length. The carpenter let go
his hold, rolled against the skylight, and began to crawl to the cabin
entrance, where a big axe was kept ready for just such an emergency.
At that moment the topsail sheet parted, the end of the heavy chain
racketed aloft, and sparks of red fire streamed down through the flying
sprays. The sail flapped once with a jerk that seemed to tear our hearts
out through our teeth, and instantly changed into a bunch of fluttering
narrow ribbons that tied themselves into knots and became quiet along
the yard. Captain Allistoun struggled, managed to stand up with his
face near the deck, upon which men swung on the ends of ropes, like nest
robbers upon a cliff. One of his feet was on somebody's chest; his
face was purple; his lips moved. He yelled also; he yelled, bending
down:--"No! No!" Mr. Baker, one leg over the binnacle-stand, roared
out:--"Did you say no? Not cut?" He shook his head madly. "No! No!"
Between his legs the crawling carpenter heard, collapsed at once,
and lay full length in the angle of the skylight. Voices took up the
shout--"No! No!" Then all became still. They waited for the ship to turn
over altogether, and shake them out into the sea; and upon the terrific
noise of wind and sea not a murmur of remonstrance came out from those
men, who each would have given ever so many years of life to see "them
damned sticks go overboard!" They all believed it their only chance; but
a little hard-faced man shook his grey head and shouted "No!" without
giving them as much as a glance. They were silent, and gasped. They
gripped rails, they had wound ropes'-ends under their arms; they
clutched ringbolts, they crawled in heaps where there was foothold; they
held on with both arms, hooked themselves to anything to windward with
elbows, with chins, almost with their teeth: and some, unable to crawl
away from where they had been flung, felt the sea leap up, striking
against their backs as they struggled upwards. Singleton had stuck to
the wheel. His hair flew out in the wind; the gale seemed to take its
life-long adversary by the beard and shake his old head. He wouldn't let
go, and, with his knees forced between the spokes, flew up and down like
a man on a bough. As Death appeared unready, they began to look about.
Donkin, caught by one foot in a loop of some rope, hung, head down,
below us, and yelled, with his face to the deck:--"Cut! Cut!" Two men
lowered themselves cautiously to him; others hauled on the rope. They
caught him up, shoved him into a safer place, held him. He shouted
curses at the master, shook his fist at him with horrible blasphemies,
called upon us in filthy words to "Cut! Don't mind that murdering fool!
Cut, some of you!" One of his rescuers struck him a back-handed blow
over the mouth; his head banged on the deck, and he became suddenly very
quiet, with a white face, breathing hard, and with a few drops of blood
trickling from his cut lip. On the lee side another man could be seen
stretched out as if stunned; only the washboard prevented him from going
over the side. It was the steward. We had to sling him up like a bale,
for he was paralysed with fright. He had rushed up out of the pantry
when he felt the ship go over, and had rolled down helplessly, clutching
a china mug. It was not broken. With difficulty we tore it away from
him, and when he saw it in our hands he was amazed. "Where did you get
that thing?" he kept on asking us in a trembling voice. His shirt was
blown to shreds; the ripped sleeves flapped like wings. Two men made him
fast, and, doubled over the rope that held him, he resembled a bundle of
wet rags. Mr. Baker crawled along the line of men, asking:--"Are you
all there?" and looking them over. Some blinked vacantly, others
shook convulsively; Wamibo's head hung over his breast; and in painful
attitudes, cut by lashings, exhausted with clutching, screwed up in
corners, they breathed heavily. Their lips twitched, and at every
sickening heave of the overturned ship they opened them wide as if to
shout. The cook, embracing a wooden stanchion, unconsciously repeated a
prayer. In every short interval of the fiendish noises around he could
be heard there, without cap or slippers, imploring in that storm the
Master of our lives not to lead him into temptation. Soon he also became
silent. In all that crowd of cold and hungry men, waiting wearily for
a violent death, not a voice was heard; they were mute, and in sombre
thoughtfulness listened to the horrible imprecations of the gale.

Hours passed. They were sheltered by the heavy inclination of the ship
from the wind that rushed in one long unbroken moan above their heads,
but cold rain showers fell at times into the uneasy calm of their
refuge. Under the torment of that new infliction a pair of shoulders
would writhe a little. Teeth chattered. The sky was clearing, and bright
sunshine gleamed over the ship. After every burst of battering seas,
vivid and fleeting rainbows arched over the drifting hull in the flick
of sprays. The gale was ending in a clear blow, which gleamed and cut
like a knife. Between two bearded shellbacks Charley, fastened with
somebody's long muffler to a deck ring-bolt, wept quietly, with rare
tears wrung out by bewilderment, cold, hunger, and general misery. One
of his neighbours punched him in the ribs asking roughly:--"What's
the matter with your cheek? In fine weather there's no holding you,
youngster." Turning about with prudence he worked himself out of
his coat and threw it over the boy. The other man closed up,
muttering:--"'Twill make a bloomin' man of you, sonny." They flung their
arms over and pressed against him. Charley drew his feet up and his
eyelids dropped. Sighs were heard, as men, perceiving that they were not
to be "drowned in a hurry," tried easier positions. Mr. Creighton, who
had hurt his leg, lay amongst us with compressed lips. Some fellows
belonging to his watch set about securing him better. Without a word
or a glance he lifted his arms one after another to facilitate the
operation, and not a muscle moved in his stern, young face. They
asked him with solicitude:--"Easier now, sir?" He answered with a
curt:--"That'll do." He was a hard young officer, but many of his
watch used to say they liked him well enough because he had "such a
gentlemanly way of damning us up and down the deck." Others unable to
discern such fine shades of refinement, respected him for his smartness.
For the first time since the ship had gone on her beam ends Captain
Allistoun gave a short glance down at his men. He was almost upright--one
foot against the side of the skylight, one knee on the deck; and with
the end of the vang round his waist swung back and forth with his gaze
fixed ahead, watchful, like a man looking out for a sign. Before his
eyes the ship, with half her deck below water, rose and fell on heavy
seas that rushed from under her flashing in the cold sunshine. We began
to think she was wonderfully buoyant--considering. Confident voices were
heard shouting:--"She'll do, boys!" Belfast exclaimed with fervour:--"I
would giv' a month's pay for a draw at a pipe!" One or two, passing dry
tongues on their salt lips, muttered something about a "drink of water."
The cook, as if inspired, scrambled up with his breast against the poop
water-cask and looked in. There was a little at the bottom. He yelled,
waving his arms, and two men began to crawl backwards and forwards with
the mug. We had a good mouthful all round. The master shook his head
impatiently, refusing. When it came to Charley one of his neighbours
shouted:--"That bloom-in' boy's asleep." He slept as though he had been
dosed with narcotics. They let him be. Singleton held to the wheel with
one hand while he drank, bending down to shelter his lips from the wind.
Wamibo had to be poked and yelled at before he saw the mug held before
his eyes. Knowles said sagaciously:--"It's better'n a tot o' rum." Mr.
Baker grunted:--"Thank ye." Mr. Creighton drank and nodded. Donkin
gulped greedily, glaring over the rim. Belfast made us laugh when with
grimacing mouth he shouted:--"Pass it this way. We're all taytottlers
here." The master, presented with the mug again by a crouching man, who
screamed up at him:--"We all had a drink, captain," groped for it without
ceasing to look ahead, and handed it back stiffly as though he could not
spare half a glance away from the ship. Faces brightened. We shouted
to the cook:--"Well done, doctor!" He sat to leeward, propped by the
water-cask and yelled back abundantly, but the seas were breaking
in thunder just then, and we only caught snatches that sounded like:
"Providence" and "born again." He was at his old game of preaching. We
made friendly but derisive gestures at him, and from below he lifted
one arm, holding on with the other, moved his lips; he beamed up to us,
straining his voice--earnest, and ducking his head before the sprays.

Suddenly some one cried:--"Where's Jimmy?" and we were appalled once
more. On the end of the row the boatswain shouted hoarsely:--"Has any one
seed him come out?" Voices exclaimed dismally:--"Drowned--is he?... No!
In his cabin!... Good Lord!... Caught like a bloomin' rat in a trap....
Couldn't open his door... Aye! She went over too quick and the water
jammed it... Poor beggar!... No help for 'im.... Let's go and see..."
"Damn him, who could go?" screamed Donkin.--"Nobody expects you to,"
growled the man next to him: "you're only a thing."--"Is there half
a chance to get at 'im?" inquired two or three men together. Belfast
untied himself with blind impetuosity, and all at once shot down to
leeward quicker than a flash of lightning. We shouted all together with
dismay; but with his legs overboard he held and yelled for a rope. In
our extremity nothing could be terrible; so we judged him funny kicking
there, and with his scared face. Some one began to laugh, and, as if
hysterically infected with screaming merriment, all those haggard men
went off laughing, wild-eyed, like a lot of maniacs tied up on a wall.
Mr. Baker swung off the binnacle-stand and tendered him one leg. He
scrambled up rather scared, and consigning us with abominable words to
the "divvle." "You are.... Ough! You're a foul-mouthed beggar, Craik,"
grunted Mr. Baker. He answered, stuttering with indignation:--"Look at
'em, sorr. The bloomin dirty images! laughing at a chum going overboard.
Call themselves men, too." But from the break of the poop the boatswain
called out:--"Come along," and Belfast crawled away in a hurry to join
him. The five men, poised and gazing over the edge of the poop, looked
for the best way to get forward. They seemed to hesitate. The others,
twisting in their lashings, turning painfull, stared with open lips.
Captain Allistoun saw nothing; he seemed with his eyes to hold the ship
up in a superhuman concentration of effort. The wind screamed loud
in sunshine; columns of spray rose straight up; and in the glitter of
rainbows bursting over the trembling hull the men went over cautiously,
disappearing from sight with deliberate movements.

They went swinging from belaying pin to cleat above the seas that beat
the half-submerged deck. Their toes scraped the planks. Lumps of green
cold water toppled over the bulwark and on their heads. They hung for a
moment on strained arms, with the breath knocked out of them, and with
closed eyes--then, letting go with one hand, balanced with lolling heads,
trying to grab some rope or stanchion further forward. The long-armed
and athletic boatswain swung quickly, gripping things with a fist hard
as iron, and remembering suddenly snatches of the last letter from his
"old woman." Little Belfast scrambled in a rage spluttering "cursed
nigger." Wamibo's tongue hung out with excitement; and Archie, intrepid
and calm, watched his chance to move with intelligent coolness.

When above the side of the house, they let go one after another, and
falling heavily, sprawled, pressing their palms to the smooth teak wood.
Round them the backwash of waves seethed white and hissing. All the
doors had become trap-doors, of course. The first was the galley door.
The galley extended from side to side, and they could hear the sea
splashing with hollow noises in there. The next door was that of the
carpenter's shop. They lifted it, and looked down. The room seemed to
have been devastated by an earthquake. Everything in it had tumbled on
the bulkhead facing the door, and on the other side of that bulkhead
there was Jimmy dead or alive. The bench, a half-finished meat-safe,
saws, chisels, wire rods, axes, crowbars, lay in a heap besprinkled
with loose nails. A sharp adze stuck up with a shining edge that
gleamed dangerously down there like a wicked smile. The men clung to one
another, peering. A sickening, sly lurch of the ship nearly sent them
overboard in a body. Belfast howled "Here goes!" and leaped down. Archie
followed cannily, catching at shelves that gave way with him, and eased
himself in a great crash of ripped wood. There was hardly room for
three men to move. And in the sunshiny blue square of the door, the
boatswain's face, bearded and dark, Wamibo's face, wild and pale, hung
over--watching.

Together they shouted: "Jimmy! Jim!" From above the boatswain
contributed a deep growl: "You. Wait!" In a pause, Belfast entreated:
"Jimmy, darlin', are ye aloive?" The boatswain said: "Again! All
together, boys!" All yelled excitedly. Wamibo made noises resembling
loud barks. Belfast drummed on the side of the bulkhead with a piece of
iron. All ceased suddenly. The sound of screaming and hammering went
on thin and distinct--like a solo after a chorus. He was alive. He was
screaming and knocking below us with the hurry of a man prematurely
shut up in a coffin. We went to work. We attacked with desperation the
abominable heap of things heavy, of things sharp, of things clumsy to
handle. The boatswain crawled away to find somewhere a flying end of
a rope; and Wamibo, held back by shouts:--"Don't jump!... Don't come in
here, muddle-head!"--remained glaring above us--all shining eyes, gleaming
fangs, tumbled hair; resembling an amazed and half-witted fiend gloating
over the extraordinary agitation of the damned. The boatswain adjured
us to "bear a hand," and a rope descended. We made things fast to it and
they went up spinning, never to be seen by man again. A rage to fling
things overboard possessed us. We worked fiercely, cutting our hands and
speaking brutally to one another. Jimmy kept up a distracting row; he
screamed piercingly, without drawing breath, like a tortured woman; he
banged with hands and feet. The agony of his fear wrung our hearts so
terribly that we longed to abandon him, to get out of that place deep as
a well and swaying like a tree, to get out of his hearing, back on the
poop where we could wait passively for death in incomparable repose. We
shouted to him to "shut up, for God's sake." He redoubled his cries.
He must have fancied we could not hear him. Probably he heard his own
clamour but faintly. We could picture him crouching on the edge of the
upper berth, letting out with both fists at the wood, in the dark, and
with his mouth wide open for that unceasing cry. Those were loathsome
moments. A cloud driving across the sun would darken the doorway
menacingly. Every movement of the ship was pain. We scrambled about with
no room to breathe, and felt frightfully sick. The boatswain yelled down
at us:--"Bear a hand! Bear a hand! We two will be washed away from here
directly if you ain't quick!" Three times a sea leaped over the high
side and flung bucketfuls of water on our heads. Then Jimmy, startled
by the shock, would stop his noise for a moment--waiting for the ship to
sink, perhaps--and began again, distressingly loud, as if invigorated by
the gust of fear. At the bottom the nails lay in a layer several inches
thick. It was ghastly. Every nail in the world, not driven in firmly
somewhere, seemed to have found its way into that carpenter's shop.
There they were, of all kinds, the remnants of stores from seven
voyages. Tin-tacks, copper tacks (sharp as needles); pump nails with
big heads, like tiny iron mushrooms; nails without any heads (horrible);
French nails polished and slim. They lay in a solid mass more
inabordable than a hedgehog. We hesitated, yearning for a shovel, while
Jimmy below us yelled as though he had been flayed. Groaning, we dug our
fingers in, and very much hurt, shook our hands, scattering nails and
drops of blood. We passed up our hats full of assorted nails to the
boatswain, who, as if performing a mysterious and appeasing rite, cast
them wide upon a raging sea.

We got to the bulkhead at last. Those were stout planks. She was a ship,
well finished in every detail--the Narcissus was. They were the stoutest
planks ever put into a ship's bulkhead--we thought--and then we perceived
that, in our hurry, we had sent all the tools overboard. Absurd little
Belfast wanted to break it down with his own weight, and with both feet
leaped straight up like a springbok, cursing the Clyde shipwrights for
not scamping their work. Incidentally he reviled all North Britain,
the rest of the earth, the sea--and all his companions. He swore, as
he alighted heavily on his heels, that he would never, never any more
associate with any fool that "hadn't savee enough to know his knee from
his elbow." He managed by his thumping to scare the last remnant of wits
out of Jimmy. We could hear the object of our exasperated solicitude
darting to and fro under the planks. He had cracked his voice at last,
and could only squeak miserably. His back or else his head rubbed the
planks, now here, now there, in a puzzling manner. He squeaked as he
dodged the invisible blows. It was more heartrending even than his
yells. Suddenly Archie produced a crowbar. He had kept it back; also a
small hatchet. We howled with satisfaction. He struck a mighty blow and
small chips flew at our eyes. The boatswain above shouted:--"Look out!
Look out there. Don't kill the man. Easy does it!" Wamibo, maddened with
excitement, hung head down and insanely urged us:--"Hoo! Strook'im! Hoo!
Hoo!" We were afraid he would fall in and kill one of us and, hurriedly,
we entreated the boatswain to "shove the blamed Finn overboard." Then,
all together, we yelled down at the planks:--"Stand from under! Get
forward," and listened. We only heard the deep hum and moan of the
wind above us, the mingled roar and hiss of the seas. The ship, as if
overcome with despair, wallowed lifelessly, and our heads swam with that
unnatural motion. Belfast clamoured:--"For the love of God, Jimmy, where
are ye?... Knock! Jimmy darlint!... Knock! You bloody black beast!
Knock!" He was as quiet as a dead man inside a grave; and, like men
standing above a grave, we were on the verge of tears--but with vexation,
the strain, the fatigue; with the great longing to be done with it, to
get away, and lie down to rest somewhere where we could see our danger
and breathe. Archie shouted:--"Gi'e me room!" We crouched behind him,
guarding our heads, and he struck time after time in the joint of
planks. They cracked. Suddenly the crowbar went halfway in through a
splintered oblong hole. It must have missed Jimmy's head by less than an
inch. Archie withdrew it quickly, and that infamous nigger rushed at
the hole, put his lips to it, and whispered "Help" in an almost extinct
voice; he pressed his head to it, trying madly to get out through that
opening one inch wide and three inches long. In our disturbed state we
were absolutely paralysed by his incredible action. It seemed impossible
to drive him away. Even Archie at last lost his composure. "If ye don't
clear oot I'll drive the crowbar thro' your head," he shouted in a
determined voice. He meant what he said, and his earnestness seemed
to make an impression on Jimmy. He disappeared suddenly, and we set to
prising and tearing at the planks with the eagerness of men trying to
get at a mortal enemy, and spurred by the desire to tear him limb from
limb. The wood split, cracked, gave way. Belfast plunged in head and
shoulders and groped viciously. "I've got 'im! Got 'im," he shouted.
"Oh! There!... He's gone; I've got 'im!... Pull at my legs!... Pull!"
Wamibo hooted unceasingly. The boatswain shouted directions:--"Catch
hold of his hair, Belfast; pull straight up, you two!... Pull fair!"
We pulled fair. We pulled Belfast out with a jerk, and dropped him
with disgust. In a sitting posture, purple-faced, he sobbed
despairingly:--"How can I hold on to 'is blooming short wool?" Suddenly
Jimmy's head and shoulders appeared. He stuck halfway, and with rolling
eyes foamed at our feet. We flew at him with brutal impatience, we tore
the shirt off his back, we tugged at his ears, we panted over him; and
all at once he came away in our hands as though somebody had let go
his legs. With the same movement, without a pause, we swung him up. His
breath whistled, he kicked our upturned faces, he grasped two pairs of
arms above his head, and he squirmed up with such precipitation that he
seemed positively to escape from our hands like a bladder full of gas.
Streaming with perspiration, we swarmed up the rope, and, coming into
the blast of cold wind, gasped like men plunged into icy water. With
burning faces we shivered to the very marrow of our bones. Never before
had the gale seemed to us more furious, the sea more mad, the sunshine
more merciless and mocking, and the position of the ship more hopeless
and appalling. Every movement of her was ominous of the end of her agony
and of the beginning of ours. We staggered away from the door, and,
alarmed by a sudden roll, fell down in a bunch. It appeared to us that
the side of the house was more smooth than glass and more slippery
than ice. There was nothing to hang on to but a long brass hook used
sometimes to keep back an open door. Wamibo held on to it and we held on
to Wamibo, clutching our Jimmy. He had completely collapsed now. He did
not seem to have the strength to close his hand. We stuck to him blindly
in our fear. We were not afraid of Wamibo letting go (we remembered
that the brute was stronger than any three men in the ship), but we were
afraid of the hook giving way, and we also believed that the ship had
made up her mind to turn over at last. But she didn't. A sea swept over
us. The boatswain spluttered:--"Up and away. There's a lull. Away aft
with you, or we will all go to the devil here." We stood up surrounding
Jimmy. We begged him to hold up, to hold on, at least. He glared with
his bulging eyes, mute as a fish, and with all the stiffening knocked
out of him. He wouldn't stand; he wouldn't even as much as clutch at our
necks; he was only a cold black skin loosely stuffed with soft cotton
wool; his arms and legs swung jointless and pliable; his head rolled
about; the lower lip hung down, enormous and heavy. We pressed round
him, bothered and dismayed; sheltering him we swung here and there in
a body; and on the very brink of eternity we tottered all together with
concealing and absurd gestures, like a lot of drunken men embarrassed
with a stolen corpse.

Something had to be done. We had to get him aft. A rope was tied slack
under his armpits, and, reaching up at the risk of our lives, we
hung him on the fore-sheet cleet. He emitted no sound; he looked as
ridiculously lamentable as a doll that had lost half its sawdust, and we
started on our perilous journey over the main deck, dragging along
with care that pitiful, that limp, that hateful burden. He was not very
heavy, but had he weighed a ton he could not have been more awkward to
handle. We literally passed him from hand to hand. Now and then we had
to hang him up on a handy belaying-pin, to draw a breath and reform
the line. Had the pin broken he would have irretrievably gone into
the Southern Ocean, but he had to take his chance of that; and after a
little while, becoming apparently aware of it, he groaned slightly, and
with a great effort whispered a few words. We listened eagerly. He was
reproaching us with our carelessness in letting him run such risks:
"Now, after I got myself out from there," he breathed out weakly.
"There" was his cabin. And he got himself out. We had nothing to do with
it apparently!... No matter.... We went on and let him take his chances,
simply because we could not help it; for though at that time we hated
him more than ever--more than anything under heaven--we did not want to
lose him. We had so far saved him; and it had become a personal
matter between us and the sea. We meant to stick to him. Had we (by an
incredible hypothesis) undergone similar toil and trouble for an empty
cask, that cask would have become as precious to us as Jimmy was. More
precious, in fact, because we would have had no reason to hate the cask.
And we hated James Wait. We could not get rid of the monstrous suspicion
that this astounding black-man was shamming sick, had been malingering
heartlessly in the face of our toil, of our scorn, of our patience--and
now was malingering in the face of our devotion--in the face of death.
Our vague and imperfect morality rose with disgust at his unmanly lie.
But he stuck to it manfully--amazingly. No! It couldn't be. He was at all
extremity. His cantankerous temper was only the result of the provoking
invincible-ness of that death he felt by his side. Any man may be angry
with such a masterful chum. But, then, what kind of men were we--with
our thoughts! Indignation and doubt grappled within us in a scuffle that
trampled upon the finest of our feelings. And we hated him because of
the suspicion; we detested him because of the doubt. We could not scorn
him safely--neither could we pity him without risk to our dignity. So
we hated him and passed him carefully from hand to hand. We cried, "Got
him?"--"Yes. All right. Let go."

And he swung from one enemy to another, showing about as much life as an
old bolster would do. His eyes made two narrow white slits in the black
face. The air escaped through his lips with a noise like the sound
of bellows. We reached the poop ladder at last, and it being a
comparatively safe place, we lay for a moment in an exhausted heap to
rest a little. He began to mutter. We were always incurably anxious to
hear what he had to say. This time he mumbled peevishly, "It took you
some time to come! I began to think the whole smart lot of you had been
washed overboard. What kept you back? Hey? Funk?" We said nothing. With
sighs we started again to drag him up. The secret and ardent desire of
our hearts was the desire to beat him viciously with our fists about
the head; and we handled him as tenderly as though he had been made of
glass....

The return on the poop was like the return of wanderers after many years
amongst people marked by the desolation of time. Eyes were turned slowly
in their sockets, glancing at us. Faint murmurs were heard, "Have you
got 'im after all?" The well-known faces looked strange and familiar;
they seemed faded and grimy; they had a mingled expression of fatigue
and eagerness. They seemed to have become much thinner during our
absence, as if all these men had been starving for a long time in their
abandoned attitudes. The captain, with a round turn of a rope on his
wrist, and kneeling on one knee, swung with a face cold and stiff; but
with living eyes he was still holding the ship up, heeding no one, as
if lost in the unearthly effort of that endeavour. We fastened up James
Wait in a safe place. Mr. Baker scrambled along to lend a hand. Mr.
Creighton, on his back, and very pale, muttered, "Well done," and gave
us, Jimmy and the sky, a scornful glance, then closed his eyes slowly.
Here and there a man stirred a little, but most of them remained
apathetic, in cramped positions, muttering between shivers. The sun was
setting. A sun enormous, unclouded and red, declining low as if bending
down to look into their faces. The wind whistled across long sunbeams
that, resplendent and cold, struck full on the dilated pupils of staring
eyes without making them wink. The wisps of hair and the tangled beards
were grey with the salt of the sea. The faces were earthy, and the dark
patches under the eyes extended to the ears, smudged into the hollows of
sunken cheeks. The lips were livid and thin, and when they moved it
was with difficulty, as though they had been glued to the teeth. Some
grinned sadly in the sunlight, shaking with cold. Others were sad and
still. Charley, subdued by the sudden disclosure of the insignificance
of his youth, darted fearful glances. The two smooth-faced Norwegians
resembled decrepit children, staring stupidly. To leeward, on the edge
of the horizon, black seas leaped up towards the glowing sun. It sank
slowly, round and blazing, and the crests of waves splashed on the edge
of the luminous circle. One of the Norwegians appeared to catch sight
of it, and, after giving a violent start, began to speak. His voice,
startling the others, made them stir. They moved their heads stiffly, or
turning with difficulty, looked at him with surprise, with fear, or in
grave silence. He chattered at the setting sun, nodding his head, while
the big seas began to roll across the crimson disc; and over miles of
turbulent waters the shadows of high waves swept with a running darkness
the faces of men. A crested roller broke with a loud hissing roar, and
the sun, as if put out, disappeared. The chattering voice faltered, went
out together with the light. There were sighs. In the sudden lull that
follows the crash of a broken sea a man said wearily, "Here's that
blooming Dutchman gone off his chump." A seaman, lashed by the middle,
tapped the deck with his open hand with unceasing quick flaps. In the
gathering greyness of twilight a bulky form was seen rising aft, and
began marching on all fours with the movements of some big cautious
beast. It was Mr. Baker passing along the line of men. He grunted
encouragingly over every one, felt their fastenings. Some, with
half-open eyes, puffed like men oppressed by heat; others mechanically
and in dreamy voices answered him, "Aye! aye! sir!" He went from one to
another grunting, "Ough!... See her through it yet;" and unexpectedly,
with loud angry outbursts, blew up Knowles for cutting off a long
piece from the fall of the relieving tackle. "Ough!------Ashamed of
yourself------Relieving tackle------Don't you know better!------Ough!------Able
seaman! Ough!" The lame man was crushed. He muttered, "Get som'think for
a lashing for myself, sir."--"Ough! Lashing------yourself. Are you a tinker
or a sailor------What? Ough!------May want that tackle directly------Ough!------More
use to the ship than your lame carcass. Ough!------Keep it!------Keep it, now
you've done it."

He crawled away slowly, muttering to himself about some men being "worse
than children." It had been a comforting row. Low exclamations were
heard: "Hallo... Hallo."... Those who had been painfully dozing asked
with convulsive starts, "What's up?... What is it?" The answers came
with unexpected cheerfulness: "The mate is going bald-headed for lame
Jack about something or other." "No!".... "What 'as he done?" Some one
even chuckled. It was like a whiff of hope, like a reminder of safe
days. Donkin, who had been stupefied with fear, revived suddenly and
began to shout:--"'Ear 'im; that's the way they tawlk to us. Vy donch 'ee
'it 'im--one ov yer? 'It 'im. 'It 'im! Comin' the mate over us. We are
as good men as 'ee! We're all goin' to 'ell now. We 'ave been starved
in this rotten ship, an' now we're goin' to be drowned for them black
'earted bullies! 'It 'im!" He shrieked in the deepening gloom, he
blubbered and sobbed, screaming:--"'It 'im! 'It 'im!" The rage and fear
of his disregarded right to live tried the steadfastness of hearts
more than the menacing shadows of the night that advanced through the
unceasing clamour of the gale. From aft Mr. Baker was heard:--"Is one
of you men going to stop him--must I come along?" "Shut up!"... "Keep
quiet!" cried various voices, exasperated, trembling with cold.--"You'll
get one across the mug from me directly," said an invisible seaman, in
a weary tone, "I won't let the mate have the trouble." He ceased and lay
still with the silence of despair. On the black sky the stars, coming
out, gleamed over an inky sea that, speckled with foam, flashed back at
them the evanescent and pale light of a dazzling whiteness born from the
black turmoil of the waves. Remote in the eternal calm they glittered
hard and cold above the uproar of the earth; they surrounded the
vanquished and tormented ship on all sides: more pitiless than the eyes
of a triumphant mob, and as unapproachable as the hearts of men.

The icy south wind howled exultingly under the sombre splendour of the
sky. The cold shook the men with a resistless violence as though it had
tried to shake them to pieces. Short moans were swept unheard off the
stiff lips. Some complained in mutters of "not feeling themselves below
the waist;" while those who had closed their eyes, imagined they had a
block of ice on their chests. Others, alarmed at not feeling any pain
in their fingers, beat the deck feebly with their hands--obstinate and
exhausted. Wamibo stared vacant and dreamy. The Scandinavians kept on a
meaningless mutter through chattering teeth. The spare Scotchmen, with
determined efforts, kept their lower jaws still. The West-country men
lay big and stolid in an invulnerable surliness. A man yawned and swore
in turns. Another breathed with a rattle in his throat. Two elderly
hard-weather shellbacks, fast side by side, whispered dismally to one
another about the landlady of a boarding-house in Sunderland, whom they
both knew. They extolled her motherliness and her liberality; they
tried to talk about the joint of beef and the big fire in the downstairs
kitchen. The words dying faintly on their lips, ended in light sighs.
A sudden voice cried into the cold night, "O Lord!" No one changed
his position or took any notice of the cry. One or two passed, with a
repeated and vague gesture, their hand over their faces, but most of
them kept very still. In the benumbed immobility of their bodies they
were excessively wearied by their thoughts, which rushed with the
rapidity and vividness of dreams. Now and then, by an abrupt and
startling exclamation, they answered the weird hail of some illusion;
then, again, in silence contemplated the vision of known faces and
familiar things. They recalled the aspect of forgotten shipmates and
heard the voice of dead and gone skippers. They remembered the noise of
gaslit streets, the steamy heat of tap-rooms or the scorching sunshine
of calm days at sea.

Mr. Baker left his insecure place, and crawled, with stoppages, along
the poop. In the dark and on all fours he resembled some carnivorous
animal prowling amongst corpses. At the break, propped to windward of
a stanchion, he looked down on the main deck. It seemed to him that
the ship had a tendency to stand up a little more. The wind had eased
a little, he thought, but the sea ran as high as ever. The waves foamed
viciously, and the lee side of the deck disappeared under a hissing
whiteness as of boiling milk, while the rigging sang steadily with a
deep vibrating note, and, at every upward swing of the ship, the wind
rushed with a long-drawn clamour amongst the spars. Mr. Baker watched
very still. A man near him began to make a blabbing noise with his
lips, all at once and very loud, as though the cold had broken brutally
through him. He went on:--"Ba--ba--ba--brrr--brr--ba--ba."--"Stop that!" cried
Mr. Baker, groping in the dark. "Stop it!" He went on shaking the leg he
found under his hand.--"What is it, sir?" called out Belfast, in the tone
of a man awakened suddenly; "we are looking after that 'ere Jimmy."--"Are
you? Ough! Don't make that row then. Who's that near you?"--"It's me--the
boatswain, sir," growled the West-country man; "we are trying to keep
life in that poor devil."--"Aye, aye!" said Mr. Baker. "Do it quietly,
can't you?"--"He wants us to hold him up above the rail," went on the
boatswain, with irritation, "says he can't breathe here under our
jackets."--"If we lift 'im, we drop 'im overboard," said another voice,
"we can't feel our hands with cold."--"I don't care. I am choking!"
exclaimed James Wait in a clear tone.--"Oh, no, my son," said the
boatswain, desperately, "you don't go till we all go on this
fine night."--"You will see yet many a worse," said Mr. Baker,
cheerfully.--"It's no child's play, sir!" answered the boatswain. "Some
of us further aft, here, are in a pretty bad way."--"If the blamed sticks
had been cut out of her she would be running along on her bottom now
like any decent ship, an' giv' us all a chance," said some one, with a
sigh.--"The old man wouldn't have it... much he cares for us," whispered
another.--"Care for you!" exclaimed Mr. Baker, angrily. "Why should he
care for you? Are you a lot of women passengers to be taken care of?
We are here to take care of the ship--and some of you ain't up to that.
Ough!... What have you done so very smart to be taken care of?
Ough!... Some of you can't stand a bit of a breeze without crying over
it."--"Come, sorr. We ain't so bad," protested Belfast, in a voice shaken
by shivers; "we ain't... brr..."--"Again," shouted the mate, grabbing at
the shadowy form; "again!... Why, you're in your shirt! What have you
done?"--"I've put my oilskin and jacket over that half-dead nayggur--and
he says he chokes," said Belfast, complainingly.--"You wouldn't call
me nigger if I wasn't half dead, you Irish beggar!" boomed James Wait,
vigorously.--"You... brrr... You wouldn't be white if you were ever so
well... I will fight you... brrrr... in fine weather... brrr ... with
one hand tied behind my back... brrrrrr..."--"I don't want your rags--I
want air," gasped out the other faintly, as if suddenly exhausted.

The sprays swept over whistling and pattering. Men disturbed in their
peaceful torpor by the pain of quarrelsome shouts, moaned, muttering
curses. Mr. Baker crawled off a little way to leeward where a water-cask
loomed up big, with something white against it. "Is it you, Podmore?"
asked Mr. Baker, He had to repeat the question twice before the cook
turned, coughing feebly.--"Yes, sir. I've been praying in my mind for a
quick deliverance; for I am prepared for any call.... I------"--"Look here,
cook," interrupted Mr. Baker, "the men are perishing with cold."--"Cold!"
said the cook, mournfully; "they will be warm enough before
long."--"What?" asked Mr. Baker, looking along the deck into the faint
sheen of frothing water.--"They are a wicked lot," continued the cook
solemnly, but in an unsteady voice, "about as wicked as any ship's
company in this sinful world! Now, I"--he trembled so that he could
hardly speak; his was an exposed place, and in a cotton shirt, a thin
pair of trousers, and with his knees under his nose, he received,
quaking, the flicks of stinging, salt drops; his voice sounded
exhausted--"now. I--any time ... My eldest youngster, Mr. Baker.. a clever
boy... last Sunday on shore before this voyage he wouldn't go to church,
sir. Says I, 'You go and clean yourself, or I'll know the reason why!'
What does he do?... Pond, Mr. Baker--fell into the pond in his best rig,
sir!... Accident?... 'Nothing will save you, fine scholar though you
are!' says I.... Accident!... I whopped him, sir, till I couldn't lift
my arm...." His voice faltered. "I whopped 'im!" he repeated, rattling
his teeth; then, after a while, let out a mournful sound that was half
a groan, half a snore. Mr. Baker shook him by the shoulders. "Hey! Cook!
Hold up, Podmore! Tell me--is there any fresh water in the galley tank?
The ship is lying along less, I think; I would try to get forward. A
little water would do them good. Hallo! Look out! Look out!" The cook
struggled.--"Not you, sir--not you!" He began to scramble to windward.
"Galley!... my business!" he shouted.--"Cook's going crazy now," said
several voices. He yelled:--"Crazy, am I? I am more ready to die than any
of you, officers incloosive--there! As long as she swims I will cook! I
will get you coffee."--"Cook, ye are a gentleman!" cried Belfast. But the
cook was already going over the weather-ladder. He stopped for a moment
to shout back on the poop:--"As long as she swims I will cook!" and
disappeared as though he had gone overboard. The men who had heard sent
after him a cheer that sounded like a wail of sick children. An hour or
more afterwards some one said distinctly: "He's gone for good."--"Very
likely," assented the boatswain; "even in fine weather he was as smart
about the deck as a milch-cow on her first voyage. We ought to go and
see." Nobody moved. As the hours dragged slowly through the darkness
Mr. Baker crawled back and forth along the poop several times. Some men
fancied they had heard him exchange murmurs with the master, but at that
time the memories were incomparably more vivid than anything actual, and
they were not certain whether the murmurs were heard now or many years
ago. They did not try to find out. A mutter more or less did not matter.
It was too cold for curiosity, and almost for hope. They could not spare
a moment or a thought from the great mental occupation of wishing to
live. And the desire of life kept them alive, apathetic and enduring,
under the cruel persistence of wind and cold; while the bestarred black
dome of the sky revolved slowly above the ship, that drifted, bearing
their patience and their suffering, through the stormy solitude of the
sea.

Huddled close to one another, they fancied themselves utterly alone.
They heard sustained loud noises, and again bore the pain of existence
through long hours of profound silence. In the night they saw sunshine,
felt warmth, and suddenly, with a start, thought that the sun would
never rise upon a freezing world. Some heard laughter, listened to
songs; others, near the end of the poop, could hear loud human shrieks,
and opening their eyes, were surprised to hear them still, though very
faint, and far away. The boatswain said:--"Why, it's the cook, hailing
from forward, I think." He hardly believed his own words or recognised
his own voice. It was a long time before the man next to him gave a
sign of life. He punched hard his other neighbour and said:--"The cook's
shouting!" Many did not understand, others did not care; the majority
further aft did not believe. But the boatswain and another man had the
pluck to crawl away forward to see. They seemed to have been gone for
hours, and were very soon forgotten. Then suddenly men who had been
plunged in a hopeless resignation became as if possessed with a desire
to hurt. They belaboured one another with fists. In the darkness they
struck persistently anything soft they could feel near, and, with a
greater effort than for a shout, whispered excitedly:--"They've got some
hot coffee.... Boss'en got it...." "No!... Where?".... "It's coming!
Cook made it." James Wait moaned. Donkin scrambled viciously, caring not
where he kicked, and anxious that the officers should have none of it.
It came in a pot, and they drank in turns. It was hot, and while it
blistered the greedy palates, it seemed incredible. The men sighed out
parting with the mug:--"How 'as he done it?" Some cried weakly:--"Bully
for you, doctor!"

He had done it somehow. Afterwards Archie declared that the thing
was "meeraculous." For many days we wondered, and it was the one
ever-interesting subject of conversation to the end of the voyage.
We asked the cook, in fine weather, how he felt when he saw his stove
"reared up on end." We inquired, in the north-east trade and on serene
evenings, whether he had to stand on his head to put things right
somewhat. We suggested he had used his bread-board for a raft, and from
there comfortably had stoked his grate; and we did our best to conceal
our admiration under the wit of fine irony. He affirmed not to know
anything about it, rebuked our levity, declared himself, with solemn
animation, to have been the object of a special mercy for the saving of
our unholy lives. Fundamentally he was right, no doubt; but he need not
have been so offensively positive about it--he need not have hinted
so often that it would have gone hard with us had he not been there,
meritorious and pure, to receive the inspiration and the strength for
the work of grace. Had we been saved by his recklessness or his agility,
we could have at length become reconciled to the fact; but to admit our
obligation to anybody's virtue and holiness alone was as difficult
for us as for any other handful of mankind. Like many benefactors of
humanity, the cook took himself too seriously, and reaped the reward of
irreverence. We were not un-ungrateful, however. He remained heroic. His
saying--the saying of his life--became proverbial in the mouth of men as
are the sayings of conquerors or sages. Later, whenever one of us was
puzzled by a task and advised to relinquish it, he would express his
determination to persevere and to succeed by the words:--"As long as she
swims I will cook!"

The hot drink helped us through the bleak hours that precede the dawn.
The sky low by the horizon took on the delicate tints of pink and yellow
like the inside of a rare shell. And higher, where it glowed with a
pearly sheen, a small black cloud appeared, like a forgotten fragment of
the night set in a border of dazzling gold. The beams of light skipped
on the crests of waves. The eyes of men turned to the eastward. The
sunlight flooded their weary faces. They were giving themselves up to
fatigue as though they had done for ever with their work. On Singleton's
black oilskin coat the dried salt glistened like hoar frost. He hung
on by the wheel, with open and lifeless eyes. Captain Allistoun,
unblinking, faced the rising sun. His lips stirred, opened for the first
time in twenty-four hours, and with a fresh firm voice he cried, "Wear
ship!"

The commanding sharp tones made all these torpid men start like a sudden
flick of a whip. Then again, motionless where they lay, the force of
habit made some of them repeat the order in hardly audible murmurs.
Captain Allistoun glanced down at his crew, and several, with fumbling
fingers and hopeless movements, tried to cast themselves adrift. He
repeated impatiently, "Wear ship. Now then, Mr. Baker, get the men
along. What's the matter with them?"--"Wear ship. Do you hear there?--Wear
ship!" thundered out the boatswain suddenly. His voice seemed to
break through a deadly spell. Men began to stir and crawl.--"I want the
fore-top-mast staysail run up smartly," said the master, very loudly;
"if you can't manage it standing up you must do it lying down--that's
all. Bear a hand!"--"Come along! Let's give the old girl a chance," urged
the boatswain.--"Aye! aye! Wear ship!" exclaimed quavering voices. The
forecastle men, with reluctant faces, prepared to go forward. Mr. Baker
pushed ahead, grunting, on all fours to show the way, and they followed
him over the break. The others lay still with a vile hope in their
hearts of not being required to move till they got saved or drowned in
peace.

After some time they could be seen forward appearing on the forecastle
head, one by one in unsafe attitudes; hanging on to the rails,
clambering over the anchors; embracing the cross-head of the windlass
or hugging the fore-capstan. They were restless with strange exertions,
waved their arms, knelt, lay flat down, staggered up, seemed to strive
their hardest to go overboard. Suddenly a small white piece of canvas
fluttered amongst them, grew larger, beating. Its narrow head rose
in jerks--and at last it stood distended and triangular in the
sunshine.--"They have done it!" cried the voices aft. Captain Allistoun
let go the rope he had round his wrist and rolled to leeward headlong.
He could be seen casting the lee main braces off the pins while the
backwash of waves splashed over him.--"Square the main yard!" he shouted
up to us--who stared at him in wonder. We hesitated to stir. "The
main brace, men. Haul! haul anyhow! Lay on your backs and haul!" he
screeched, half drowned down there. We did not believe we could move the
main yard, but the strongest and the less discouraged tried to execute
the order. Others assisted half-heartedly. Singleton's eyes blazed
suddenly as he took a fresh grip of the spokes. Captain Allistoun fought
his way up to windward.--"Haul, men! Try to move it! Haul, and help the
ship." His hard face worked suffused and furious. "Is she going off,
Singleton?" he cried.--"Not a move yet, sir," croaked the old seaman in
a horribly hoarse voice.--"Watch the helm, Singleton," spluttered the
master. "Haul, men! Have you no more strength than rats? Haul, and earn
your salt." Mr. Creighton, on his back, with a swollen leg and a face as
white as a piece of paper, blinked his eyes; his bluish lips twitched.
In the wild scramble men grabbed at him, crawled over his hurt leg,
knelt on his chest. He kept perfectly still, setting his teeth without a
moan, without a sigh. The master's ardour, the cries of that silent man
inspired us. We hauled and hung in bunches on the rope. We heard him say
with violence to Donkin, who sprawled abjectly on his stomach,--"I will
brain you with this belaying pin if you don't catch hold of the brace,"
and that victim of men's injustice, cowardly and cheeky, whimpered:--"Are
you goin' to murder us now?" while with sudden desperation he gripped
the rope. Men sighed, shouted, hissed meaningless words, groaned. The
yards moved, came slowly square against the wind, that hummed loudly
on the yard-arms.--"Going off, sir," shouted Singleton, "she's just
started."--"Catch a turn with that brace. Catch a turn!" clamoured the
master. Mr. Creighton, nearly suffocated and unable to move, made a
mighty effort, and with his left hand managed to nip the rope.

--"All fast!" cried some one. He closed his eyes as if going off into
a swoon, while huddled together about the brace we watched with scared
looks what the ship would do now.

She went off slowly as though she had been weary and disheartened like
the men she carried. She paid off very gradually, making us hold our
breath till we choked, and as soon as she had brought the wind abaft the
beam she started to move, and fluttered our hearts. It was awful to see
her, nearly overturned, begin to gather way and drag her submerged side
through the water. The dead-eyes of the rigging churned the breaking
seas. The lower half of the deck was full of mad whirlpools and eddies;
and the long line of the lee rail could be seen showing black now and
then in the swirls of a field of foam as dazzling and white as a field
of snow. The wind sang shrilly amongst the spars; and at every slight
lurch we expected her to slip to the bottom sideways from under our
backs. When dead before it she made the first distinct attempt to stand
up, and we encouraged her with a feeble and discordant howl. A great sea
came running up aft and hung for a moment over us with a curling top;
then crashed down under the counter and spread out on both sides into
a great sheet of bursting froth. Above its fierce hiss we heard
Singleton's croak:--"She is steering!" He had both his feet now
planted firmly on the grating, and the wheel spun fast as he eased the
helm.--"Bring the wind on the port quarter and steady her!" called out
the master, staggering to his feet, the first man up from amongst our
prostrate heap. One or two screamed with excitement:--"She rises!" Far
away forward, Mr. Baker and three others were seen erect and black on
the clear sky, lifting their arms, and with open mouths as though they
had been shouting all together. The ship trembled, trying to lift her
side, lurched back, seemed to give up with a nerveless dip, and suddenly
with an unexpected jerk swung violently to windward, as though she had
torn herself out from a deadly grasp. The whole immense volume of water,
lifted by her deck, was thrown bodily across to starboard. Loud cracks
were heard. Iron ports breaking open thundered with ringing blows. The
water topped over the starboard rail with the rush of a river falling
over a dam. The sea on deck, and the seas on every side of her, mingled
together in a deafening roar. She rolled violently. We got up and were
helplessly run or flung about from side to side. Men, rolling over and
over, yelled,--"The house will go!"--"She clears herself!" Lifted by a
towering sea she ran along with it for a moment, spouting thick streams
of water through every opening of her wounded sides. The lee braces
having been carried away or washed off the pins, all the ponderous yards
on the fore swung from side to side and with appalling rapidity at every
roll. The men forward were seen crouching here and there with fearful
glances upwards at the enormous spars that whirled about over their
heads. The torn canvas and the ends of broken gear streamed in the
wind like wisps of hair. Through the clear sunshine, over the flashing
turmoil and uproar of the seas, the ship ran blindly, dishevelled
and headlong, as if fleeing for her life; and on the poop we spun, we
tottered about, distracted and noisy. We all spoke at once in a thin
babble; we had the aspect of invalids and the gestures of maniacs. Eyes
shone, large and haggard, in smiling, meagre faces that seemed to have
been dusted over with powdered chalk. We stamped, clapped our hands,
feeling ready to jump and do anything; but in reality hardly able to
keep on our feet.

Captain Allistoun, hard and slim, gesticulated madly from the poop at
Mr. Baker: "Steady these fore-yards! Steady them the best you can!" On
the main deck, men excited by his cries, splashed, dashing aimlessly,
here and there with the foam swirling up to their waists. Apart, far
aft, and alone by the helm, old Singleton had deliberately tucked his
white beard under the top button of his glistening coat. Swaying upon
the din and tumult of the seas, with the whole battered length of the
ship launched forward in a rolling rush before his steady old eyes, he
stood rigidly still, forgotten by all, and with an attentive face. In
front of his erect figure only the two arms moved crosswise with a swift
and sudden readiness, to check or urge again the rapid stir of circling
spokes. He steered with care.





CHAPTER FOUR

On men reprieved by its disdainful mercy, the immortal sea confers in
its justice the full privilege of desired unrest. Through the perfect
wisdom of its grace they are not permitted to meditate at ease upon
the complicated and acrid savour of existence. They must without pause
justify their life to the eternal pity that commands toil to be hard
and unceasing, from sunrise to sunset, from sunset to sunrise; till the
weary succession of nights and days tainted by the obstinate clamour of
sages, demanding bliss and an empty heaven, is redeemed at last by the
vast silence of pain and labour, by the dumb fear and the dumb courage
of men obscure, forgetful, and enduring.

The master and Mr. Baker coming face to face stared for a moment, with
the intense and amazed looks of men meeting unexpectedly after years of
trouble. Their voices were gone, and they whispered desperately at
one another.--"Any one missing?" asked Captain Allistoun.--"No. All
there."--"Anybody hurt?"--"Only the second mate."--"I will look after
him directly. We're lucky."--"Very," articulated Mr. Baker, faintly. He
gripped the rail and rolled bloodshot eyes. The little grey man made an
effort to raise his voice above a dull mutter, and fixed his chief mate
with a cold gaze, piercing like a dart.--"Get sail on the ship," he said,
speaking authoritatively and with an inflexible snap of his thin lips.
"Get sail on her as soon as you can. This is a fair wind. At once,
sir--Don't give the men time to feel themselves. They will get done up
and stiff, and we will never... We must get her along now"... He reeled
to a long heavy roll; the rail dipped into the glancing, hissing water.
He caught a shroud, swung helplessly against the mate... "now we have
a fair wind at last------Make------sail." His head rolled from shoulder to
shoulder. His eyelids began to beat rapidly. "And the pumps------pumps, Mr.
Baker." He peered as though the face within a foot of his eyes had been
half a mile off. "Keep the men on the move to------to get her along," he
mumbled in a drowsy tone, like a man going off into a doze. He pulled
himself together suddenly. "Mustn't stand. Won't do," he said with a
painful attempt at a smile. He let go his hold, and, propelled by the
dip of the ship, ran aft unwillingly, with small steps, till he brought
up against the binnacle stand. Hanging on there he looked up in an
aimless manner at Singleton, who, unheeding him, watched anxiously the
end of the jib-boom--"Steering gear works all right?" he asked. There
was a noise in the old seaman's throat, as though the words had been
rattling together before they could come out.--"Steers... like a little
boat," he said, at last, with hoarse tenderness, without giving the
master as much as half a glance--then, watchfully, spun the wheel down,
steadied, flung it back again. Captain Allistoun tore himself away from
the delight of leaning against the binnacle, and began to walk the poop,
swaying and reeling to preserve his balance....

The pump-rods, clanking, stamped in short jumps while the fly-wheels
turned smoothly, with great speed, at the foot of the mainmast, flinging
back and forth with a regular impetuosity two limp clusters of men
clinging to the handles. They abandoned themselves, swaying from the hip
with twitching faces and stony eyes. The carpenter, sounding from time
to time, exclaimed mechanically: "Shake her up! Keep her going!" Mr.
Baker could not speak, but found his voice to shout; and under the goad
of his objurgations, men looked to the lashings, dragged out new
sails; and thinking themselves unable to move, carried heavy blocks
aloft--overhauled the gear. They went up the rigging with faltering and
desperate efforts. Their heads swam as they shifted their hold, stepped
blindly on the yards like men in the dark; or trusted themselves to the
first rope at hand with the negligence of exhausted strength. The narrow
escapes from falls did not disturb the languid beat of their hearts; the
roar of the seas seething far below them sounded continuous and faint
like an indistinct noise from another world: the wind filled their eyes
with tears, and with heavy gusts tried to push them off from where they
swayed in insecure positions. With streaming faces and blowing hair
they flew up and down between sky and water, bestriding the ends of
yard-arms, crouching on foot-ropes, embracing lifts to have their hands
free, or standing up against chain ties. Their thoughts floated vaguely
between the desire of rest and the desire of life, while their stiffened
fingers cast off head-earrings, fumbled for knives, or held with
tenacious grip against the violent shocks of beating canvas. They glared
savagely at one another, made frantic signs with one hand while they
held their life in the other, looked down on the narrow strip of flooded
deck, shouted along to leeward: "Light-to!"... "Haul out!"... "Make
fast!" Their lips moved, their eyes started, furious and eager with the
desire to be understood, but the wind tossed their words unheard upon
the disturbed sea. In an unendurable and unending strain they worked
like men driven by a merciless dream to toil in an atmosphere of ice or
flame. They burnt and shivered in turns. Their eyeballs smarted as if
in the smoke of a conflagration; their heads were ready to' burst with
every shout. Hard fingers seemed to grip their throats. At every roll
they thought: Now I must let go. It will shake us all off--and thrown
about aloft they cried wildly: "Look out there--catch the end."...
"Reeve clear"... "Turn this block...." They nodded desperately; shook
infuriated faces, "No! No! From down up." They seemed to hate one
another with a deadly hate, The longing to be done with it all gnawed
their breasts, and the wish to do things well was a burning pain. They
cursed their fate, contemned their life, and wasted their breath in
deadly imprecations upon one another.' The sailmaker, with his bald head
bared, worked feverishly, forgetting his intimacy with so many admirals.
The boatswain, climbing up with marlinspikes and bunches of spunyarn
rovings, or kneeling on the yard and ready to take a turn with the
midship-stop, had acute and fleeting visions of his old woman and the
youngsters in a moorland village. Mr. Baker, feeling very weak, tottered
here and there, grunting and inflexible, like a man of iron. He waylaid
those who, coming from aloft, stood gasping for breath. He ordered,
encouraged, scolded. "Now then--to the main topsail now! Tally on to that
gantline. Don't stand about there!"--"Is there no rest for us?" muttered
voices. He spun round fiercely, with a sinking heart.--"No! No rest till
the work is done. Work till you drop. That's what you're here for." A
bowed seaman at his elbow gave a short laugh.--"Do or die," he croaked
bitterly, then spat into his broad palms, swung up his long arms, and
grasping the rope high above his head sent out a mournful, wailing cry
for a pull all together. A sea boarded the quarter-deck and sent the
whole lot sprawling to leeward. Caps, handspikes floated. Clenched
hands, kicking legs, with here and there a spluttering face, stuck out
of the white hiss of foaming water. Mr. Baker, knocked down with the
rest, screamed--"Don't let go that rope! Hold on to it! Hold!" And sorely
bruised by the brutal fling, they held on to it, as though it had
been the fortune of their life. The ship ran, rolling heavily, and the
topping crests glanced past port and starboard flashing their white
heads. Pumps were freed. Braces were rove. The three topsails and
foresail were set. She spurted faster over the water, outpacing the
swift rush of waves. The menacing thunder of distanced seas rose behind
her--filled the air with the tremendous vibrations of its voice. And
devastated, battered, and wounded she drove foaming to the northward, as
though inspired by the courage of a high endeavour....

The forecastle was a place of damp desolation. They looked at their
dwelling with dismay. It was slimy, dripping; it hummed hollow with the
wind, and was strewn with shapeless wreckage like a half-tide cavern in
a rocky and exposed coast. Many had lost all they had in the world, but
most of the starboard watch had preserved their chests; thin streams of
water trickled out of them, however. The beds were soaked; the blankets
spread out and saved by some nail squashed under foot. They dragged wet
rags from evil-smelling corners, and wringing the water out, recognised
their property. Some smiled stiffly. Others looked round blank and mute.
There were cries of joy over old waistcoats, and groans of sorrow over
shapeless things found among the splinters of smashed bed boards. One
lamp was discovered jammed under the bowsprit. Charley whimpered a
little. Knowles stumped here and there, sniffing, examining dark places
for salvage. He poured dirty water out of a boot, and was concerned
to find the owner. Those who, overwhelmed by their losses, sat on the
forepeak hatch, remained elbows on knees, and, with a fist against each
cheek, disdained to look up. He pushed it under their noses. "Here's a
good boot. Yours?" They snarled, "No--get out." One snapped at him, "Take
it to hell out of this." He seemed surprised. "Why? It's a good boot,"
but remembering suddenly that he had lost every stitch of his clothing,
he dropped his find and began to swear. In the dim light cursing voices
clashed. A man came in and, dropping his arms, stood still, repeating
from the doorstep, "Here's a bloomin' old go! Here's a bloomin' old
go!" A few rooted anxiously in flooded chests for tobacco. They breathed
hard, clamoured with heads down. "Look at that Jack!"... "Here! Sam!
Here's my shore-going rig spoilt for ever." One blasphemed tearfully,
holding up a pair of dripping trousers. No one looked at him. The cat
came out from somewhere. He had an ovation. They snatched him from hand
to hand, caressed him in a murmur of pet names. They wondered where he
had "weathered it out;" disputed about it. A squabbling argument began.
Two men brought in a bucket of fresh water, and all crowded round it;
but Tom, lean and mewing, came up with every hair astir and had the
first drink. A couple of hands went aft for oil and biscuits.

Then in the yellow light and in the intervals of mopping the deck they
crunched hard bread, arranging to "worry through somehow." Men chummed
as to beds. Turns were settled for wearing boots and having the use of
oilskin coats. They called one another "old man" and "sonny" in cheery
voices. Friendly slaps resounded. Jokes were shouted. One or two
stretched on the wet deck, slept with heads pillowed on their bent arms,
and several, sitting on the hatch, smoked. Their weary faces appeared
through a thin blue haze, pacified and with sparkling eyes. The
boatswain put his head through the door. "Relieve the wheel, one of
you"--he shouted inside--"it's six. Blamme if that old Singleton hasn't
been there more'n thirty hours. You are a fine lot." He slammed the door
again. "Mate's watch on deck," said some one. "Hey, Donkin, it's your
relief!" shouted three or four together. He had crawled into an empty
bunk and on wet planks lay still. "Donkin, your wheel." He made no
sound. "Donkin's dead," guffawed some one, "Sell 'is bloomin' clothes,"
shouted another. "Donkin, if ye don't go to the bloomin' wheel they will
sell your clothes--d'ye hear?" jeered a third. He groaned from his
dark hole. He complained about pains in all his bones, he whimpered
pitifully. "He won't go," exclaimed a contemptuous voice, "your turn,
Davis." The young seaman rose painfully, squaring his shoulders. Donkin
stuck his head out, and it appeared in the yellow light, fragile
and ghastly. "I will giv' yer a pound of tobaccer," he whined in a
conciliating voice, "so soon as I draw it from aft. I will--s'elp me..."
Davis swung his arm backhanded and the head vanished. "I'll go," he
said, "but you will pay for it." He walked unsteady but resolute to
the door. "So I will," yelped Donkin, popping out behind him. "So I
will--s'elp me... a pound... three bob they chawrge." Davis flung the
door open. "You will pay my price... in fine weather," he shouted over
his shoulder. One of the men unbuttoned his wet coat rapidly, threw it
at his head. "Here, Taffy--take that, you thief!" "Thank you!" he cried
from the darkness above the swish of rolling water. He could be
heard splashing; a sea came on board with a thump. "He's got his bath
already," remarked a grim shellback. "Aye, aye!" grunted others. Then,
after a long silence, Wamibo made strange noises. "Hallo, what's up with
you?" said some one grumpily. "He says he would have gone for Davy,"
explained Archie, who was the Finn's interpreter generally. "I believe
him!" cried voices.... "Never mind, Dutchy... You'll do, muddle-head....
Your turn will come soon enough... You don't know when ye're well off."
They ceased, and all together turned their faces to the door. Singleton
stepped in, advanced two paces, and stood swaying slightly. The sea
hissed, flowed roaring past the bows, and the forecastle trembled, full
of deep murmurs; the lamp flared, swinging like a pendulum. He looked
with a dreamy and puzzled stare, as though he could not distinguish
the still men from their restless shadows. There were awestruck
exclamations:--"Hallo, hallo"... "How does it look outside now,
Singleton?" Those who sat on the hatch lifted their eyes in silence, and
the next oldest seaman in the ship (those two understood one another,
though they hardly exchanged three words in a day) gazed up at his
friend attentively for a moment, then taking a short clay pipe out of
his mouth, offered it without a word. Singleton put out his arm towards
it, missed, staggered, and suddenly fell forward, crashing down, stiff
and headlong like an uprooted tree. There was a swift rush. Men pushed,
crying:--"He's done!"... "Turn him over!"... "Stand clear there!" Under
a crowd of startled faces bending over him he lay on his back, staring
upwards in a continuous and intolerable manner. In the breathless
silence of a general consternation, he said in a grating murmur:--"I am
all right," and clutched with his hands. They helped him up. He mumbled
despondently:--"I am getting old... old."--"Not you," cried Belfast, with
ready tact. Supported on all sides, he hung his head.--"Are you better?"
they asked. He glared at them from under his eyebrows with large black
eyes, spreading over his chest the bushy whiteness of a beard long and
thick.--"Old! old!" he repeated sternly. Helped along, he reached his
bunk. There was in it a slimy soft heap of something that smelt, as does
at dead low water a muddy foreshore. It was his soaked straw bed. With
a convulsive effort he pitched himself on it, and in the darkness of
the narrow place could be heard growling angrily, like an irritated and
savage animal uneasy in its den:--"Bit of breeze... small thing... can't
stand up... old!" He slept at last, high-booted, sou'wester on head, and
his oilskin clothes rustled, when with a deep sighing groan he turned
over. Men conversed about him in quiet, concerned whispers. "This will
break'im up"... "Strong as a horse"... "Aye. But he ain't what he used
to be." In sad murmurs they gave him up. Yet at midnight he turned out
to duty as if nothing had been the matter, and answered to his name with
a mournful "Here!" He brooded alone more than ever, in an impenetrable
silence and with a saddened face. For many years he had heard himself
called "Old Singleton," and had serenely accepted the qualification,
taking it as a tribute of respect due to a man who through half a
century had measured his strength against the favours and the rages
of the sea. He had never given a thought to his mortal self. He lived
unscathed, as though he had been indestructible, surrendering to all the
temptations, weathering many gales. He had panted in sunshine, shivered
in the cold; suffered hunger, thirst, debauch; passed through many
trials--known all the furies. Old! It seemed to him he was broken at
last. And like a man bound treacherously while he sleeps, he woke up
fettered by the long chain of disregarded years. He had to take up at
once the burden of all his existence, and found it almost too heavy for
his strength. Old! He moved his arms, shook his head, felt his limbs.
Getting old... and then? He looked upon the immortal sea with the
awakened and groping perception of its heartless might; he saw it
unchanged, black and foaming under the eternal scrutiny of the stars;
he heard its impatient voice calling for him out of a pitiless vastness
full of unrest, of turmoil, and of terror. He looked afar upon it,
and he saw an immensity tormented and blind, moaning and furious, that
claimed all the days of his tenacious life, and, when life was over,
would claim the worn-out body of its slave....

This was the last of the breeze. It veered quickly, changed to a black
south-easter, and blew itself out, giving the ship a famous shove to the
northward into the joyous sunshine of the trade. Rapid and white she ran
homewards in a straight path, under a blue sky and upon the plain of a
blue sea. She carried Singleton's completed wisdom, Donkin's delicate
susceptibilities, and the conceited folly of us all. The hours of
ineffective turmoil were forgotten; the fear and anguish of these dark
moments were never mentioned in the glowing peace of fine days. Yet from
that time our life seemed to start afresh as though we had died and had
been resuscitated. All the first part of the voyage, the Indian Ocean
on the other side of the Cape, all that was lost in a haze, like an
ineradicable suspicion of some previous existence. It had ended--then
there were blank hours: a livid blurr--and again we lived! Singleton was
possessed of sinister truth; Mr. Creighton of a damaged leg; the cook of
fame--and shamefully abused the opportunities of his distinction. Donkin
had an added grievance. He went about repeating with insistence:--"'E
said 'e would brain me--did yer 'ear? They are goin' to murder us now for
the least little thing." We began at last to think it was rather awful.
And we were conceited! We boasted of our pluck, of our capacity for
work, of our energy. We remembered honourable episodes: our devotion,
our indomitable perseverance--and were proud of them as though they had
been the outcome of our unaided impulses. We remembered our danger,
our toil--and conveniently forgot our horrible scare. We decried our
officers--who had done nothing--and listened to the fascinating Donkin.
His care for our rights, his disinterested concern for our dignity, were
not discouraged by the invariable contumely of our words, by the disdain
of our looks. Our contempt for him was unbounded--and we could not but
listen with interest to that consummate artist. He told us we were good
men--a "bloomin' condemned lot of good men." Who thanked us? Who took any
notice of our wrongs? Didn't we lead a "dorg's loife for two poun' ten a
month?" Did we think that miserable pay enough to compensate us for the
risk to our lives and for the loss of our clothes? "We've lost every
rag!" he cried. He made us forget that he, at any rate, had lost nothing
of his own. The younger men listened, thinking--this 'ere Donkin's a
long-headed chap, though no kind of man, anyhow. The Scandinavians were
frightened at his audacities; Wamibo did not understand; and the older
seamen thoughtfully nodded their heads making the thin gold earrings
glitter in the fleshy lobes of hairy ears. Severe, sunburnt faces were
propped meditatively on tattooed forearms. Veined, brown fists held
in their knotted grip the dirty white clay of smouldering pipes. They
listened, impenetrable, broad-backed, with bent shoulders, and in
grim silence. He talked with ardour, despised and irrefutable. His
picturesque and filthy loquacity flowed like a troubled stream from a
poisoned source. His beady little eyes danced, glancing right and left,
ever on the watch for the approach of an officer. Sometimes Mr. Baker
going forward to take a look at the head sheets would roll with his
uncouth gait through the sudden stillness of the men; or Mr. Creighton
limped along, smooth-faced, youthful, and more stern than ever, piercing
our short silence with a keen glance of his clear eyes. Behind his back
Donkin would begin again darting stealthy, sidelong looks.--"'Ere's one
of 'em. Some of yer 'as made 'im fast that day. Much thanks yer got for
it. Ain't 'ee a-drivin' yer wusse'n ever?... Let 'im slip overboard....
Vy not? It would 'ave been less trouble. Vy not?" He advanced
confidentially, backed away with great effect; he whispered, he
screamed, waved his miserable arms no thicker than pipe-stems--stretched
his lean neck--spluttered squinted. In the pauses of his impassioned
orations the wind sighed quietly aloft, the calm sea unheeded murmured
in a warning whisper along the ship's side. We abominated the creature
and could not deny the luminous truth of his contentions. It was all so
obvious. We were indubitably good men; our deserts were great and our
pay small. Through our exertions we had saved the ship and the skipper
would get the credit of it. What had he done? we wanted to know. Donkin
asked:--"What 'ee could do without hus?" and we could not answer. We were
oppressed by the injustice of the world, surprised to perceive how long
we had lived under its burden without realising our unfortunate state,
annoyed by the uneasy suspicion of our undiscerning stupidity. Donkin
assured us it was all our "good 'eartedness," but we would not be
consoled by such shallow sophistry. We were men enough to courageously
admit to ourselves our intellectual shortcomings; though from that time
we refrained from kicking him, tweaking his nose, or from accidentally
knocking him about, which last, after we had weathered the Cape, had
been rather a popular amusement. Davis ceased to talk at him provokingly
about black eyes and flattened noses. Charley, much subdued since the
gale, did not jeer at him. Knowles deferentially and with a crafty air
propounded questions such as:--"Could we all have the same grub as the
mates? Could we all stop ashore till we got it? What would be the next
thing to try for if we got that?" He answered readily with contemptuous
certitude; he strutted with assurance in clothes that were much too big
for him as though he had tried to disguise himself. These were Jimmy's
clothes mostly--though he would accept anything from anybody; but
nobody, except Jimmy, had anything to spare. His devotion to Jimmy was
unbounded. He was for ever dodging in the little cabin, ministering
to Jimmy's wants, humouring his whims, submitting to his exacting
peevishness, often laughing with him. Nothing could keep him away from
the pious work of visiting the sick, especially when there was some
heavy hauling to be done on deck. Mr. Baker had on two occasions jerked
him out from there by the scruff of the neck to our inexpressible
scandal. Was a sick chap to be left without attendance? Were we to be
ill-used for attending a shipmate?--"What?" growled Mr. Baker, turning
menacingly at the mutter, and the whole half-circle like one man stepped
back a pace. "Set the topmast stunsail. Away aloft, Donkin, overhaul
the gear," ordered the mate inflexibly. "Fetch the sail along; bend the
down-haul clear. Bear a hand." Then, the sail set, he would go slowly
aft and stand looking at the compass for a long time, careworn, pensive,
and breathing hard as if stifled by the taint of unaccountable ill-will
that pervaded the ship. "What's up amongst them?" he thought. "Can't
make out this hanging back and growling. A good crowd, too, as they go
nowadays." On deck the men exchanged bitter words, suggested by a silly
exasperation against something unjust and irremediable that would not be
denied, and would whisper into their ears long after Donkin had ceased
speaking. Our little world went on its curved and unswerving path
carrying a discontented and aspiring population. They found comfort of
a gloomy kind in an interminable and conscientious analysis of their
unappreciated worth; and inspired by Donkin's hopeful doctrines they
dreamed enthusiastically of the time when every lonely ship would travel
over a serene sea, manned by a wealthy and well-fed crew of satisfied
skippers.

It looked-as if it would be a long passage. The south-east trades, light
and unsteady, were left behind; and then, on the equator and under a
low grey sky, the ship, in close heat, floated upon a smooth sea that
resembled a sheet of ground glass. Thunder squalls hung on the horizon,
circled round the ship, far off and growling angrily, like a troop of
wild beasts afraid to charge home. The invisible sun, sweeping above the
upright masts, made on the clouds a blurred stain of rayless light, and
a similar patch of faded radiance kept pace with it from east to
west over the unglittering level of the waters. At night, through the
impenetrable darkness of earth and, heaven, broad sheets of flame waved
noiselessly; and for half a second the becalmed craft stood out with its
masts and rigging, with every sail and every rope distinct and black in
the centre of a fiery outburst, like a charred ship enclosed in a globe
of fire. And, again, for long hours she remained lost in a vast universe
of night and silence where gentle sighs wandering here and there like
forlorn souls, made the still sails flutter as in sudden fear, and the
ripple of a beshrouded ocean whisper its compassion afar--in a voice
mournful, immense, and faint....

When the lamp was put out, and through the door thrown wide open, Jimmy,
turning on his pillow, could see vanishing beyond the straight line of
top-gallant rail, the quick, repeated visions of a fabulous world made
up of leaping fire and sleeping water. The lightning gleamed in his
big sad eyes that seemed in a red flicker to burn themselves out in his
black face, and then he would lie blinded and invisible in the midst of
an intense darkness. He could hear on the quiet deck soft footfalls, the
breathing of some man lounging on the doorstep; the low creak of swaying
masts; or the calm voice of the watch-officer reverberating aloft, hard
and loud, amongst the unstirring sails. He listened with avidity, taking
a rest in the attentive perception of the slightest sound from the
fatiguing wanderings of his sleeplessness. He was cheered by the
rattling of blocks, reassured by the stir and murmur of the watch,
soothed by the slow yawn of some sleepy and weary seaman settling
himself deliberately for a snooze on the planks. Life seemed an
indestructible thing. It went on in darkness, in sunshine, in sleep;
tireless, it hovered affectionately round the imposture of his ready
death. It was bright, like the twisted flare of lightning, and more full
of surprises than the dark night. It made him safe, and the calm of
its overpowering darkness was as precious as its restless and dangerous
light.

But in the evening, in the dog-watches, and even far into the first
night-watch, a knot of men could always be seen congregated before
Jimmy's cabin. They leaned on each side of the door peacefully
interested and with crossed legs; they stood astride the doorstep
discoursing, or sat in silent couples on his sea-chest; while against
the bulwark along the spare topmast, three or four in a row stared
meditatively; with their simple faces lit up by the projected glare of
Jimmy's lamp. The little place, repainted white, had, in the night,
the brilliance of a silver shrine where a black idol, reclining stiffly
under a blanket, blinked its weary eyes and received our homage. Donkin
officiated. He had the air of a demonstrator showing a phenomenon, a
manifestation bizarre, simple, and meritorious that, to the beholders,
should be a profound and an everlasting lesson. "Just look at 'im, 'ee
knows what's what--never fear!" he exclaimed now and then, flourishing
a hand hard and fleshless like the claw of a snipe. Jimmy, on his back,
smiled with reserve and without moving a limb. He affected the languor
of extreme weakness, so as to make it manifest to us that our delay in
hauling him out from his horrible confinement, and then that night spent
on the poop among our selfish neglect of his needs, had "done for
him." He rather liked to talk about it, and of course we were always
interested. He spoke spasmodically, in fast rushes with long pauses
between, as a tipsy man walks.... "Cook had just given me a pannikin of
hot coffee.... Slapped it down there, on my chest--banged the door to....
I felt a heavy roll coming; tried to save my coffee, burnt my fingers...
and fell out of my bunk.... She went over so quick.... Water came
in through the ventilator.... I couldn't move the door... dark as a
grave... tried to scramble up into the upper berth.... Rats... a rat
bit my finger as I got up.... I could hear him swimming below me.... I
thought you would never come... I thought you were all gone overboard...
of course... Could hear nothing but the wind.... Then you came... to
look for the corpse, I suppose. A little more and..."

"Man! But ye made a rare lot of noise in here," observed Archie,
thoughtfully.

"You chaps kicked up such a confounded row above.... Enough to scare
any one.... I didn't know what you were up to.... Bash in the blamed
planks... my head.... Just what a silly, scary gang of fools would
do.... Not much good to me anyhow.... Just as well... drown.... Pah."

He groaned, snapped his big white teeth, and gazed with scorn. Belfast
lifted a pair of dolorous eyes, with a broken-hearted smile, clenched
his fists stealthily; blue-eyed Archie caressed his red whiskers with
a hesitating hand; the boatswain at the door stared a moment, and
brusquely went away with a loud guffaw. Wamibo dreamed.... Donkin
felt all over his sterile chin for the few rare hairs, and said,
triumphantly, with a sidelong glance at Jimmy:--"Look at 'im! Wish I
was 'arf has 'ealthy as 'ee is--I do." He jerked a short thumb over his
shoulder towards the after end of the ship. "That's the blooming way to
do 'em!" he yelped, with forced heartiness. Jimmy said:--"Don't be a dam'
fool," in a pleasant voice. Knowles, rubbing his shoulder against the
doorpost, remarked shrewdly:--"We can't all go an' be took sick--it would
be mutiny."--"Mutiny--gawn!" jeered Donkin, "there's no bloomin' law
against bein' sick."--"There's six weeks' hard for refoosing dooty,"
argued Knowles, "I mind I once seed in Cardiff the crew of an overloaded
ship--leastways she weren't overloaded, only a fatherly old gentleman
with a white beard and an umbreller came along the quay and talked to
the hands. Said as how it was crool hard to be drownded in winter just
for the sake of a few pounds more for the owner--he said. Nearly cried
over them--he did; and he had a square mainsail coat, and a gaff-topsail
hat too--all proper. So they chaps they said they wouldn't go to be
drownded in winter--depending upon that 'ere Plimsoll man to see 'em
through the court. They thought to have a bloomin' lark and two or
three days' spree. And the beak giv' 'em six weeks--coss the ship warn't
overloaded. Anyways they made it out in court that she wasn't. There
wasn't one overloaded ship in Penarth Dock at all. 'Pears that old coon
he was only on pay and allowance from some kind people, under orders
to look for overloaded ships, and he couldn't see no further than the
length of his umbreller. Some of us in the boarding-house, where I
live when I'm looking for a ship in Cardiff, stood by to duck that old
weeping spunger in the dock. We kept a good look-out, too--but he topped
his boom directly he was outside the court.... Yes. They got six weeks'
hard...."

They listened, full of curiosity, nodding in the pauses their rough
pensive faces. Donkin opened his mouth once or twice, but restrained
himself. Jimmy lay still with open eyes and not at all interested. A
seaman emitted the opinion that after a verdict of atrocious partiality
"the bloomin' beaks go an' drink at the skipper's expense." Others
assented. It was clear, of course. Donkin said:--"Well, six weeks ain't
much trouble. You sleep all night in, reg'lar, in chokey. Do it on my
'ead." "You are used to it ainch'ee, Donkin?" asked somebody. Jimmy
condescended to laugh. It cheered up every one wonderfully. Knowles,
with surprising mental agility, shifted his ground. "If we all went sick
what would become of the ship? eh?" He posed the problem and grinned
all round.--"Let 'er go to 'ell," sneered Donkin. "Damn 'er. She ain't
yourn."--"What? Just let her drift?" insisted Knowles in a tone of
unbelief.--"Aye! Drift, an' be blowed," affirmed Donkin with fine
recklessness. The other did not see it--meditated.--"The stores would run
out," he muttered, "and... never get anywhere... and what about payday?"
he added with greater assurance.--"Jack likes a good pay-day," exclaimed
a listener on the doorstep. "Aye, because then the girls put one arm
round his neck an' t'other in his pocket, and call him ducky. Don't
they, Jack?"--"Jack, you're a terror with the gals."--"He takes three of
'em in tow to once, like one of 'em Watkinses two-funnel tugs waddling
away with three schooners behind."--"Jack, you're a lame scamp."--"Jack,
tell us about that one with a blue eye and a black eye. Do."--"There's
plenty of girls with one black eye along the Highway by..."

--"No, that's a speshul one--come, Jack." Donkin looked severe and
disgusted; Jimmy very bored; a grey-haired sea-dog shook his head
slightly, smiling at the bowl of his pipe, discreetly amused.
Knowles turned about bewildered; stammered first at one, then at
another.--"No!... I never!... can't talk sensible sense midst you....
Always on the kid." He retired bashfully--muttering and pleased. They
laughed, hooting in the crude light, around Jimmy's bed, where on a
white pillow his hollowed black face moved to and fro restlessly. A puff
of wind came, made the flame of the lamp leap, and outside, high up,
the sails fluttered, while near by the block of the foresheet struck
a ringing blow on the iron bulwark. A voice far off cried, "Helm up!"
another, more faint, answered, "Hard-up, sir!" They became silent--waited
expectantly. The grey-haired seaman knocked his pipe on the doorstep and
stood up.' The ship leaned over gently and the sea seemed to wake up,
murmuring drowsily. "Here's a little wind comin'," said some one very
low. Jimmy turned over slowly to face the breeze. The voice in the night
cried loud and commanding:--"Haul the spanker out." The group before the
door vanished out of the light. They could be heard tramping aft while
they repeated with varied intonations:--"Spanker out!"... "Out spanker,
sir!" Donkin remained alone with Jimmy. There was a silence. Jimmy
opened and shut his lips several times as if swallowing draughts of
fresher air; Donkin moved the toes of his bare feet and looked at them
thoughtfully.

"Ain't you going to give them a hand with the sail?" asked Jimmy.

"No. If six ov 'em ain't 'nough beef to set that blamed, rotten spanker,
they ain't fit to live," answered Donkin in a bored, far-away voice, as
though he had been talking from the bottom of a hole. Jimmy considered
the conical, fowl-like profile with a queer kind of interest; he was
leaning out of his bunk with the calculating, uncertain expression of
a man who reflects how best to lay hold of some strange creature that
looks as though it could sting or bite. But he said only:--"The mate will
miss you--and there will be ructions."

Donkin got up to go. "I will do for 'im some dark night; see if I
don't," he said over his shoulder.

Jimmy went on quickly:--"You're like a poll-parrot, like a screechin'
poll-parrot." Donkin stopped and cocked his head attentively on one
side. His big ears stood out, transparent and veined, resembling the
thin wings of a bat.

"Yuss?" he said, with his back towards Jimmy.

"Yes! Chatter out all you know--like... like a dirty white cockatoo."

Donkin waited. He could hear the other's breathing, long and slow; the
breathing of a man with a hundredweight or so on the breastbone. Then he
asked calmly:--"What do I know?"

"What?... What I tell you... not much. What do you want... to talk about
my health so..."

"It's a blooming imposyshun. A bloomin', stinkin', first-class
imposyshun--but it don't tyke me in. Not it."

Jimmy kept still. Donkin put his hands in his pockets, and in one
slouching stride came up to the bunk.

"I talk--what's the odds. They ain't men 'ere--sheep they are. A driven
lot of sheep. I 'old you up... Vy not? You're well orf."

"I am... I don't say anything about that...."

"Well. Let 'em see it. Let 'em larn what a man can do. I am a man, I
know all about yer...." Jimmy threw himself further away on the pillow;
the other stretched out his skinny neck, jerked his bird face down at
him as though pecking at the eyes. "I am a man. I've seen the inside of
every chokey in the Colonies rather'n give up my rights...."

"You are a jail-prop," said Jimmy, weakly.

"I am... an' proud of it, too. You! You 'aven't the bloomin' nerve--so
you inventyd this 'ere dodge...." He paused; then with marked
afterthought accentuated slowly:--"Yer ain't sick--are yer?"

"No," said Jimmy, firmly. "Been out of sorts now and again this year,"
he mumbled with a sudden drop in his voice.

Donkin closed one eye, amicable and confidential. He whispered:--"Ye 'ave
done this afore'aven'tchee?" Jimmy smiled--then as if unable to hold back
he let himself go:--"Last ship--yes. I was out of sorts on the passage.
See? It was easy. They paid me off in Calcutta, and the skipper made no
bones about it either.... I got my money all right. Laid up fifty-eight
days! The fools! O Lord! The fools! Paid right off." He laughed
spasmodically. Donkin chimed in giggling. Then Jimmy coughed violently.
"I am as well as ever," he said, as soon as he could draw breath.

Donkin made a derisive gesture. "In course," he said, profoundly, "any
one can see that."--"They don't," said Jimmy, gasping like a fish.--"They
would swallow any yarn," affirmed Donkin.--"Don't you let on too
much," admonished Jimmy in an exhausted voice.--"Your little gyme? Eh?"
commented Donkin, jovially. Then with sudden disgust: "Yer all for
yerself, s'long as ye're right..."

So charged with egoism James Wait pulled the blanket up to his chin and
lay still for a while. His heavy lips protruded in an everlasting black
pout. "Why are you so hot on making trouble?" he asked without much
interest.

"'Cos it's a bloomin' shayme. We are put upon... bad food, bad pay... I
want us to kick up a bloomin' row; a blamed 'owling row that would make
'em remember! Knocking people about... brain us indeed! Ain't we men?"
His altruistic indignation blazed. Then he said calmly:--"I've been
airing yer clothes."--"All right," said Jimmy, languidly, "bring them
in."--"Giv' us the key of your chest, I'll put 'em away for yer," said
Donkin with friendly eagerness.--"Bring 'em in, I will put them away
myself," answered James Wait with severity. Donkin looked down,
muttering.... "What d'you say? What d'you say?" inquired Wait
anxiously.--"Nothink. The night's dry, let 'em 'ang out till the
morning," said Donkin, in a strangely trembling voice, as though
restraining laughter or rage. Jimmy seemed satisfied.--"Give me a little
water for the night in my mug--there," he said. Donkin took a stride over
the doorstep.--"Git it yerself," he replied in a surly tone. "You can do
it, unless you are sick."--"Of course I can do it," said Wait, "only...
"--"Well, then, do it," said Donkin, viciously, "if yer can look after
yer clothes, yer can look after yerself." He went on deck without a look
back.

Jimmy reached out for the mug. Not a drop. He put it back gently with
a faint sigh--and closed his eyes. He thought:--That lunatic Belfast will
bring me some water if I ask. Fool. I am very thirsty.... It was very
hot in the cabin, and it seemed to turn slowly round, detach itself from
the ship, and swing out smoothly into a luminous, arid space where
a black sun shone, spinning very fast. A place without any water! No
water! A policeman with the face of Donkin drank a glass of beer by the
side of an empty well, and flew away flapping vigorously. A ship
whose mastheads protruded through the sky and could not be seen, was
discharging grain, and the wind whirled the dry husks in spirals along
the quay of a dock with no water in it. He whirled along with the
husks--very tired and light. All his inside was gone. He felt lighter
than the husks--and more dry. He expanded his hollow chest. The air
streamed in, carrying away in its rush a lot of strange things that
resembled houses, trees, people, lamp-posts.... No more! There was no
more air--and he had not finished drawing his long breath. But he was
in jail! They were locking him up. A door slammed. They turned the key
twice, flung a bucket of water over him--Phoo! What for?

He opened his eyes, thinking the fall had been very heavy for an empty
man--empty--empty. He was in his cabin. Ah! All right! His face was
streaming with perspiration, his arms heavier than lead. He saw the
cook standing in the doorway, a brass key in one hand and a bright tin
hook-pot in the other.

"I have locked up the galley for the night," said the cook, beaming
benevolently. "Eight bells just gone. I brought you a pot of cold tea
for your night's drinking, Jimmy. I sweetened it with some white cabin
sugar, too. Well--it won't break the ship."

He came in, hung the pot on the edge of the bunk, asked perfunctorily,
"How goes it?" and sat down on the box.--"H'm," grunted Wait,
inhospitably. The cook wiped his face with a dirty cotton rag, which,
afterwards, he tied round his neck.--"That's how them firemen do in
steamboats," he said, serenely, and much pleased with himself. "My work
is as heavy as theirs--I'm thinking--and longer hours. Did you ever see
them down the stokehold? Like fiends they look--firing--firing--firing--down
there."

He pointed his forefinger at the deck. Some gloomy thought darkened his
shining face, fleeting, like the shadow of a travelling cloud over the
light of a peaceful sea. The relieved watch tramped noisily forward,
passing in a body across the sheen of the doorway. Some one cried,
"Good-night!" Belfast stopped for a moment and looked at Jimmy,
quivering and speechless with repressed emotion. He gave the cook a
glance charged with dismal foreboding, and vanished. The cook cleared
his throat. Jimmy stared upwards and kept as still as a man in hiding.

The night was clear, with a gentle breeze. Above the mastheads the
resplendent curve of the Milky Way spanned the sky like a triumphal
arch of eternal light, thrown over the dark pathway of the earth. On the
forecastle head a man whistled with loud precision a lively jig, while
another could be heard faintly, shuffling and stamping in time. There
came from forward a confused murmur of voices, laughter--snatches of
song. The cook shook his head, glanced obliquely at Jimmy, and began to
mutter. "Aye. Dance and sing. That's all they think of. I am surprised
that Providence don't get tired.... They forget the day that's sure to
come... but you...."

Jimmy drank a gulp of tea, hurriedly, as though he had stolen it, and
shrank under his blanket, edging away towards the bulkhead. The cook got
up, closed the door, then sat down again and said distinctly:--

"Whenever I poke my galley fire I think of you chaps--swearing, stealing,
lying, and worse--as if there was no such thing as another world.... Not
bad fellows, either, in a way," he conceded, slowly; then, after a pause
of regretful musing, he went on in a resigned tone:--"Well, well. They
will have a hot time of it. Hot! Did I say? The furnaces of one of them
White Star boats ain't nothing to it."

He kept very quiet for a while. There was a great stir in his brain; an
addled vision of bright outlines; an exciting row of rousing songs
and groans of pain. He suffered, enjoyed, admired, approved. He was
delighted, frightened, exalted--as on that evening (the only time in his
life--twenty-seven years ago; he loved to recall the number of
years) when as a young man he had--through keeping bad company--become
intoxicated in an East-end music-hall. A tide of sudden feeling swept
him clean out of his body. He soared. He contemplated the secret of the
hereafter. It commended itself to him. It was excellent; he loved it,
himself, all hands, and Jimmy. His heart overflowed with tenderness,
with comprehension, with the desire to meddle, with anxiety for the
soul of that black man, with the pride of possessed eternity, with the
feeling of might. Snatch him up in his arms and pitch him right into
the middle of salvation... The black soul--blacker--body--rot--Devil. No!
Talk-strength--Samson.... There was a great din as of cymbals in his
ears; he flashed through an ecstatic jumble of shining faces, lilies,
prayer-books, unearthly joy, white skirts, gold harps, black coats,
wings. He saw flowing garments, clean shaved faces, a sea of light--a
lake of pitch. There were sweet scent, a smell of sulphur--red tongues
of flame licking a white mist. An awesome voice thundered!... It lasted
three seconds.

"Jimmy!" he cried in an inspired tone. Then he hesitated. A spark
of human pity glimmered yet through the infernal fog of his supreme
conceit.

"What?" said James Wait, unwillingly. There was a silence. He turned his
head just the least bit, and stole a cautious glance. The cook's lips
moved without a sound; his face was rapt, his eyes turned up. He seemed
to be mentally imploring deck beams, the brass hook of the lamp, two
cockroaches.

"Look here," said Wait, "I want to go to sleep. I think I could."

"This is no time for sleep!" exclaimed the cook, very loud. He had
prayerfully divested himself of the last vestige of his humanity. He was
a voice--a fleshless and sublime thing, as on that memorable night--the
night when he went walking over the sea to make coffee for perishing
sinners. "This is no time for sleeping," he repeated with exaltation. "I
can't sleep."

"Don't care damn," said Wait, with factitious energy. "I can. Go an'
turn in."

"Swear... in the very jaws!... In the very jaws! Don't you see the
everlasting fire... don't you feel it? Blind, chockfull of sin! Repent,
repent! I can't bear to think of you. I hear the call to save you. Night
and day. Jimmy, let me save you!" The words of entreaty and menace
broke out of him in a roaring torrent. The cockroaches ran away. Jimmy
perspired, wriggling stealthily under his blanket. The cook yelled....
"Your days are numbered!... "--"Get out of this," boomed Wait,
courageously.--"Pray with me!... "--"I won't!..." The little cabin was
as hot as an oven. It contained an immensity of fear and pain; an
atmosphere of shrieks and moans; prayers vociferated like blasphemies
and whispered curses. Outside, the men called by Charley, who informed
them in tones of delight that there was a holy row going on in Jimmy's
place, crowded before the closed door, too startled to open it. All
hands were there. The watch below had jumped out on deck in their
shirts, as after a collision. Men running up, asked:--"What is it?"
Others said:--"Listen!" The muffled screaming went on:--"On your knees! On
your knees!"--"Shut up!"--"Never! You are delivered into my hands.... Your
life has been saved.... Purpose.... Mercy.... Repent."--"You are a
crazy fool!..."--"Account of you... you... Never sleep in this world,
if I..."--"Leave off."--"No!... stokehold... only think!..." Then an
impassioned screeching babble where words pattered like hail.--"No!"
shouted Wait.--"Yes. You are!... No help.... Everybody says so."--"You
lie!"--"I see you dying this minnyt... before my eyes... as good as dead
already."--"Help!" shouted Jimmy, piercingly.--"Not in this valley....
look upwards," howled the other.--"Go away! Murder! Help!" clamoured
Jimmy. His voice broke. There were moanings, low mutters, a few sobs.

"What's the matter now?" said a seldom-heard voice.--"Fall back,
men! Fall back, there!" repeated Mr. Creighton, sternly, pushing
through.--"Here's the old man," whispered some.--"The cook's in there,
sir," exclaimed several, backing away. The door clattered open; a broad
stream of light darted out on wondering faces; a warm whiff of vitiated
air passed. The two mates towered head and shoulders above the spare,
grey-haired man who stood revealed between them, in shabby clothes,
stiff and angular, like a small carved figure, and with a thin, composed
face. The cook got up from his knees. Jimmy sat high in the bunk,
clasping his drawn-up legs. The tassel of the blue night-cap almost
imperceptibly trembled over his knees. They gazed astonished at his
long, curved back, while the white corner of one eye gleamed blindly
at them. He was afraid to turn his head, he shrank within himself; and
there was an aspect astounding and animal-like in the perfection of his
expectant immobility. A thing of instinct--the unthinking stillness of a
scared brute. "What are you doing here?" asked Mr. Baker, sharply.--"My
duty," said the cook, with ardour.--"Your... what?" began the mate.
Captain Allistoun touched his arm lightly.--"I know his caper," he said,
in a low voice. "Come out of that, Podmore," he ordered, aloud.

The cook wrung his hands, shook his fists above his head, and his
arms dropped as if too heavy. For a moment he stood distracted and
speechless.--"Never," he stammered, "I... he I."--

"What--do--you--say?" pronounced Captain Allistoun. "Come out at
once--or..."--"I am going," said the cook, with a hasty and sombre
resignation. He strode over the doorstep firmly--hesitated--made a few
steps. They looked at him in silence.--"I make you responsible!" he
cried, desperately, turning half round. "That man is dying. I make you..
"--"You there yet?" called the master in a threatening tone.--"No, sir,"
he exclaimed, hurriedly, in a startled voice. The boatswain led him
away by the arm; some one laughed; Jimmy lifted his head for a stealthy
glance, and in one unexpected leap sprang out of his bunk; Mr. Baker
made a clever catch and felt him very limp in his arms; the group at
the door grunted with surprise.--"He lies," gasped Wait, "he talked about
black devils--he is a devil--a white devil--I am all right." He stiffened
himself, and Mr. Baker, experimentally, let him go. He staggered a pace
or two; Captain Allistoun watched him with a quiet and penetrating gaze;
Belfast ran to his support. He did not appear to be aware of any one
near him; he stood silent for a moment, battling single-handed with a
legion of nameless terrors, amidst the eager looks of excited men who
watched him far off, utterly alone in the impenetrable solitude of his
fear. The sea gurgled through the scuppers as the ship heeled over to a
short puff of wind.

"Keep him away from me," said James Wait at last in his fine baritone
voice, and leaning with all his weight on Belfast's neck. "I've been
better this last week:... I am well... I was going back to duty...
to-morrow--now if you like--Captain." Belfast hitched his shoulders to
keep him upright.

"No," said the master, looking at him, fixedly. Under Jimmy's armpit
Belfast's red face moved uneasily. A row of eyes gleaming stared on the
edge of light. They pushed one another with elbows, turned their heads,
whispered. Wait let his chin fall on his breast and, with lowered
eyelids, looked round in a suspicious manner.

"Why not?" cried a voice from the shadows, "the man's all right, sir."

"I am all right," said Wait, with eagerness. "Been sick... better...
turn-to now." He sighed.--"Howly Mother!" exclaimed Belfast with a heave
of the shoulders, "stand up, Jimmy."--"Keep away from me then," said
Wait, giving Belfast a petulant push, and reeling fetched against the
doorpost. His cheekbones glistened as though they had been varnished. He
snatched off his night-cap, wiped his perspiring face with it, flung it
on the deck. "I am coming out," he declared without stirring.

"No. You don't," said the master, curtly. Bare feet shuffled,
disapproving voices murmured all round; he went on as if he had not
heard:--"You have been skulking nearly all the passage and now you want
to come out. You think you are near enough to the pay-table now. Smell
the shore, hey?"

"I've been sick... now--better," mumbled Wait, glaring in the light.--"You
have been shamming sick," retorted Captain Allistoun with severity;
"Why..." he hesitated for less than half a second. "Why, anybody can see
that. There's nothing the matter with you, but you choose to lie-up to
please yourself--and now you shall lie-up to please me. Mr. Baker, my
orders are that this man is not to be allowed on deck to the end of the
passage."

There were exclamations of surprise, triumph, indignation. The dark
group of men swung across the light. "What for?" "Told you so..."
"Bloomin' shame..."--"We've got to say somethink about that," screeched
Donkin from the rear.--"Never mind, Jim--we will see you righted," cried
several together. An elderly seaman stepped to the front. "D'ye mean to
say, sir," he asked, ominously, "that a sick chap ain't allowed to get
well in this 'ere hooker?" Behind him Donkin whispered excitedly amongst
a staring crowd where no one spared him a glance, but Captain Allistoun
shook a forefinger at the angry bronzed face of the speaker.--"You--you
hold your tongue," he said, warningly.--"This isn't the way," clamoured
two or three younger men.--"Are we bloomin' masheens?" inquired Donkin
in a piercing tone, and dived under the elbows of the front rank.--"Soon
show 'im we ain't boys..."--"The man's a man if he is black."--"We
ain't goin' to work this bloomin' ship shorthanded if Snowball's all
right..."--"He says he is."--"Well then, strike, boys, strike!"--"That's
the bloomin' ticket." Captain Allistoun said sharply to the second mate:
"Keep quiet, Mr. Creighton," and stood composed in the tumult, listening
with profound attention to mixed growls and screeches, to every
exclamation and every curse of the sudden outbreak. Somebody slammed the
cabin door to with a kick; the darkness full of menacing mutters leaped
with a short clatter over the streak of light, and the men became
gesticulating shadows that growled, hissed, laughed excitedly. Mr. Baker
whispered:--"Get away from them, sir." The big shape of Mr. Creighton
hovered silently about the slight figure of the master.--"We have been
hymposed upon all this voyage," said a gruff voice, "but this 'ere fancy
takes the cake."--"That man is a shipmate."--"Are we bloomin' kids?"--"The
port watch will refuse duty." Charley carried away by his feeling
whistled shrilly, then yelped:--"Giv' us our Jimmy!" This seemed to cause
a variation in the disturbance. There was a fresh burst of squabbling
uproar. A lot of quarrels were set going at once.--"Yes."--"No."--"Never
been sick."--"Go for them to once."--"Shut yer mouth, youngster---this is
men's work."--"Is it?" muttered Captain Allistoun, bitterly. Mr. Baker
grunted: "Ough! They're gone silly. They've been simmering for the
last month."--"I did notice," said the master.--"They have started a row
amongst themselves now," said Mr. Creighton with disdain, "better get
aft, sir. We will soothe them.--"Keep your temper, Creighton," said the
master. And the three men began to move slowly towards the cabin door.

In the shadows of the fore rigging a dark mass stamped, eddied,
advanced, retreated. There were words of reproach, encouragement,
unbelief, execration. The elder seamen, bewildered and angry, growled
their determination to go through with something or other; but the
younger school of advanced thought exposed their and Jimmy's wrongs with
confused shouts, arguing amongst themselves. They clustered round that
moribund carcass, the fit emblem of their aspirations, and encouraging
one another they swayed, they tramped on one spot, shouting that they
would not be "put upon." Inside the cabin, Belfast, helping Jimmy into
his bunk, twitched all over in his desire not to miss all the row, and
with difficulty restrained the tears of his facile emotion. James Wait,
flat on his back under the blanket, gasped complaints.--"We will back you
up, never fear," assured Belfast, busy about his feet.--

"I'll come out to-morrow morning------take my chance-------you fellows
must------" mumbled Wait, "I come out to-morrow------skipper or no skipper."
He lifted one arm with great difficulty, passed the hand over his face;
"Don't you let that cook..." he breathed out.--"No, no," said Belfast,
turning his back on the bunk, "I will put a head on him if he comes near
you."--"I will smash his mug!" exclaimed faintly Wait, enraged and weak;
"I don't want to kill a man, but..." He panted fast like a dog after a
run in sunshine. Some one just outside the door shouted, "He's as fit
as any ov us!" Belfast put his hand on the door-handle.--"Here!" called
James Wait, hurriedly, and in such a clear voice that the other spun
round with a start. James Wait, stretched out black and deathlike in
the dazzling light, turned his head on the pillow. His eyes stared at
Belfast, appealing and impudent. "I am rather weak from lying-up so
long," he said, distinctly. Belfast nodded. "Getting quite well now,"
insisted Wait.--"Yes. I noticed you getting better this... last month,"
said Belfast, looking down. "Hallo! What's this?" he shouted and ran
out.

He was flattened directly against the side of the house by two men who
lurched against him. A lot of disputes seemed to be going on all round.
He got clear and saw three indistinct figures standing along in the
fainter darkness under the arched foot of the mainsail, that rose above
their heads like a convex wall of a high edifice. Donkin hissed:--"Go for
them... it's dark!" The crowd took a short run aft in a body--then there
was a check. Donkin, agile and thin, flitted past with his right
arm going like a windmill--and then stood still suddenly with his arm
pointing rigidly above his head. The hurtling flight of some heavy
object was heard; it passed between the heads of the two mates, bounded
heavily along the deck, struck the after hatch with a ponderous and
deadened blow. The bulky shape of Mr. Baker grew distinct. "Come to your
senses, men!" he cried, advancing at the arrested crowd. "Come back, Mr.
Baker!" called the master's quiet voice. He obeyed unwillingly. There
was a minute of silence, then a deafening hubbub arose. Above it Archie
was heard energetically:--"If ye do oot ageen I wull tell!" There were
shouts. "Don't!" "Drop it!"--"We ain't that kind!" The black cluster of
human forms reeled against the bulwark, back again towards the house.
Ringbolts rang under stumbling feet.--"Drop it!" "Let me!"--"No!"--"Curse
you... hah!" Then sounds as of some one's face being slapped; a piece
of iron fell on the deck; a short scuffle, and some one's shadowy body
scuttled rapidly across the main hatch before the shadow of a kick.
A raging voice sobbed out a torrent of filthy language...--"Throwing
things--good God!" grunted Mr. Baker in dismay.--"That was meant for me,"
said the master, quietly; "I felt the wind of that thing; what was it--an
iron belaying-pin?"--"By Jove!" muttered Mr. Creighton. The confused
voices of men talking amidships mingled with the wash of the sea,
ascended between the silent and distended sails-seemed to flow away
into the night, further than the horizon, higher than the sky. The stars
burned steadily over the inclined mastheads. Trails of light lay on
the water, broke before the advancing hull, and, after she had passed,
trembled for a long time as if in awe of the murmuring sea.

Meantime the helmsman, anxious to know what the row was about, had let
go the wheel, and, bent double, ran with long, stealthy footsteps to the
break of the poop. The Narcissus, left to herself, came up gently in to
the wind without any one being aware of it. She gave a slight roll, and
the sleeping sails woke suddenly, coming all together with a mighty
flap against the masts, then filled again one after another in a quick
succession of loud reports that ran down the lofty spars, till the
collapsed mainsail flew out last with a violent jerk. The ship trembled
from trucks to keel; the sails kept on rattling like a discharge of
musketry; the chain sheets and loose shackles jingled aloft in a thin
peal; the gin blocks groaned. It was as if an invisible hand had given
the ship an angry shake to recall the men that peopled her decks to
the sense of reality, vigilance, and duty.--"Helm up!" cried the master,
sharply. "Run aft, Mr. Creighton, and see what that fool there is up
to."--"Flatten in the head sheets. Stand by the weather fore-braces,"
growled Mr. Baker. Startled men ran swiftly repeating the orders. The
watch below, abandoned all at once by the watch on deck, drifted towards
the forecastle in twos and threes, arguing noisily as they went--"We
shall see to-morrow!" cried a loud voice, as if to cover with a menacing
hint an inglorious retreat. And then only orders were heard, the falling
of heavy coils of rope, the rattling of blocks. Singleton's white head
flitted here and there in the night, high above the deck, like the
ghost of a bird.--"Going off, sir!" shouted Mr. Creighton from aft.--"Full
again."--"All right... "--"Ease off the head sheets. That will do the
braces. Coil the ropes up," grunted Mr. Baker, bustling about.

Gradually the tramping noises, the confused sound of voices, died out,
and the officers, coming together on the poop, discussed the events. Mr.
Baker was bewildered and grunted; Mr. Creighton was calmly furious;
but Captain Allistoun was composed and thoughtful. He listened to Mr.
Baker's growling argumentation, to Creighton's interjected and severe
remarks, while looking down on the deck he weighed in his hand the iron
belayingpin--that a moment ago had just missed his head--as if it had been
the only tangible fact of the whole transaction. He was one of those
commanders who speak little, seem to hear nothing, look at no one--and
know everything, hear every whisper, see every fleeting shadow of their
ship's life. His two big officers towered above his lean, short figure;
they talked over his head; they were dismayed, surprised, and angry,
while between them the little quiet man seemed to have found his
taciturn serenity in the profound depths of a larger experience. Lights
were burning in the forecastle; now and then a loud gust of babbling
chatter came from forward, swept over the decks, and became faint, as if
the unconscious ship, gliding gently through the great peace of the sea,
had left behind and for ever the foolish noise of turbulent mankind. But
it was renewed again and again. Gesticulating arms, profiles of heads
with open mouths appeared for a moment in the illuminated squares of
doorways; black fists darted--withdrew... "Yes. It was most damnable to
have such an unprovoked row sprung on one," assented the master. ... A
tumult of yells rose in the light, abruptly ceased.... He didn't think
there would be any further trouble just then.... A bell was struck aft,
another, forward, answered in a deeper tone, and the clamour of ringing
metal spread round the ship in a circle of wide vibrations that ebbed
away into the immeasurable night of an empty sea.... Didn't he know
them! Didn't he! In past years. Better men, too. Real men to stand by
one in a tight place. Worse than devils too sometimes--downright, horned
devils. Pah! This--. nothing. A miss as good as a mile.... The wheel was
being relieved in the usual way.--"Full and by," said, very loud, the
man going off.--"Full and by," repeated the other, catching hold of the
spokes.--"This head wind is my trouble," exclaimed the master, stamping
his foot in sudden anger; "head wind! all the rest is nothing." He was
calm again in a moment. "Keep them on the move to-night, gentlemen; just
to let them feel we've got hold all the time--quietly, you know. Mind you
keep your hands off them, Creighton. To-morrow I will talk to them like
a Dutch Uncle. A crazy crowd of tinkers! Yes, tinkers! I could count the
real sailors amongst them on the fingers of one hand. Nothing will do
but a row--if--you--please." He paused. "Did you think I had gone wrong
there, Mr. Baker?" He tapped his forehead, laughed short. "When I saw
him standing there, three parts dead and so scared--black amongst that
gaping lot--no grit to face what's coming to us all--the notion came to me
all at once, before I could think. Sorry for him--like you would be for a
sick brute. If ever creature was in a mortal funk to die! ... I thought
I would let him go out in his own way. Kind of impulse. It never came
into my head, those fools.... H'm! Stand to it now--of course." He
stuck the belaying-pin in his pocket, seemed ashamed of himself, then
sharply:--"If you see Podmore at his tricks again tell him I will have
him put under the pump. Had to do it once before. The fellow breaks out
like that now and then. Good cook tho'." He walked away quickly, came
back to the companion. The two mates followed him through the starlight
with amazed eyes. He went down three steps, and changing his tone, spoke
with his head near the deck:--"I shan't turn in to-night, in case of
anything; just call out if... Did you see the eyes of that sick nigger,
Mr. Baker? I fancied he begged me for something. What? Past all help.
One lone black beggar amongst the lot of us, and he seemed to look
through me into the very hell. Fancy, this wretched Podmore! Well, let
him die in peace. I am master here after all. Let him be. He might
have been half a man once... Keep a good look-out." He disappeared down
below, leaving his mates facing one another, and more impressed than if
they had seen a stone image shed a miraculous tear of compassion over
the incertitudes of life and death....

In the blue mist spreading from twisted threads that stood upright in
the bowls of pipes, the forecastle appeared as vast as a hall. Between
the beams a heavy cloud stagnated; and the lamps surrounded by halos
burned each at the core of a purple glow in two lifeless flames without
rays. Wreaths drifted in denser wisps. Men sprawled about on the deck,
sat in negligent poses, or, bending a knee, drooped with one shoulder
against a bulkhead. Lips moved, eyes flashed, waving arms made sudden
eddies in the smoke. The murmur of voices seemed to pile itself higher
and higher as if unable to run out quick enough through the narrow
doors. The watch below in their shirts, and striding on long white legs,
resembled raving somnambulists; while now and then one of the watch on
deck would rush in, looking strangely over-dressed, listen a moment,
fling a rapid sentence into the noise and run out again; but a few
remained near the door, fascinated, and with one ear turned to the deck.
"Stick together, boys," roared Davis. Belfast tried to make himself
heard. Knowles grinned in a slow, dazed way. A short fellow with a
thick clipped beard kept on yelling periodically:--"Who's afeard? Who's
afeard?" Another one jumped up, excited, with blazing eyes, sent out
a string of unattached curses and sat down quietly. Two men discussed
familiarly, striking one another's breast in turn, to clinch arguments.
Three others, with their heads in a bunch, spoke all together with a
confidential air, and at the top of their voices. It was a stormy chaos
of speech where intelligible fragments tossing, struck the ear. One
could hear:--"In the last ship"--"Who cares? Try it on any one of us
if-------."

"Knock under"--"Not a hand's turn"--"He says he is all right"--"I always
thought"--"Never mind...." Donkin, crouching all in a heap against the
bowsprit, hunched his shoulderblades as high as his ears, and hanging
a peaked nose, resembled a sick vulture with ruffled plumes. Belfast,
straddling his legs, had a face red with yelling, and with arms thrown
up, figured a Maltese cross. The two Scandinavians, in a corner, had
the dumbfounded and distracted aspect of men gazing at a cataclysm. And,
beyond the light, Singleton stood in the smoke, monumental, indistinct,
with his head touching the beam; like a statue of heroic size in the
gloom of a crypt.

He stepped forward, impassive and big. The noise subsided like a broken
wave: but Belfast cried once more with uplifted arms:--"The man is
dying I tell ye!" then sat down suddenly on the hatch and took his head
between his hands. All looked at Singleton, gazing upwards from the
deck, staring out of dark corners, or turning their heads with curious
glances. They were expectant and appeased as if that old man, who looked
at no one, had possessed the secret of their uneasy indignations and
desires, a sharper vision, a clearer knowledge. And indeed standing
there amongst them, he had the uninterested appearance of one who had
seen multitudes of ships, had listened many times to voices such as
theirs, had already seen all that could happen on the wide seas. They
heard his voice rumble in his broad chest as though the words had been
rolling towards them out of a rugged past. "What do you want to do?" he
asked. No one answered. Only Knowles muttered--"Aye, aye," and somebody
said low:--"It's a bloomin' shame." He waited, made a contemptuous
gesture.--"I have seen rows aboard ship before some of you were born,"
he said, slowly, "for something or nothing; but never for such a
thing."--"The man is dying, I tell ye," repeated Belfast, woefully,
sitting at Singleton's feet.--"And a black fellow, too," went on the old
seaman, "I have seen them die like flies." He stopped, thoughtful, as
if trying to recollect gruesome things, details of horrors, hecatombs
of niggers. They looked at him fascinated. He was old enough to remember
slavers, bloody mutinies, pirates perhaps; who could tell through what
violences and terrors he had lived! What would he say? He said:--"You
can't help him; die he must." He made another pause. His moustache and
beard stirred. He chewed words, mumbled behind tangled white hairs;
incomprehensible and exciting, like an oracle behind a veil....--"Stop
ashore------sick.-------Instead------bringing all this head wind. Afraid. The
sea will have her own.------Die in sight of land. Always so. They know
it------long passage------more days, more dollars.------You----"

He seemed to wake up from a dream. "You can't help yourselves," he
said, austerely, "Skipper's no fool. He has something in his mind. Look
out--say! I know 'em!" With eyes fixed in front he turned his head from
right to left, from left to right, as if inspecting a long row of astute
skippers.--"'Ee said 'ee would brain me!" cried Donkin in a heartrending
tone. Singleton peered downwards with puzzled attention, as though
he couldn't find him.--"Damn you!" he said, vaguely, giving it up.
He radiated unspeakable wisdom, hard unconcern, the chilling air
of resignation. Round him all the listeners felt themselves somehow
completely enlightened by their disappointment, and mute, they lolled
about with the careless ease of men who can discern perfectly the
irremediable aspect of their existence. He, profound and unconscious,
waved his arm once, and strode out on deck without another word.

Belfast was lost in a round-eyed meditation. One or two vaulted heavily
into upper berths, and, once there, sighed; others dived head first
inside lower bunks--swift, and turning round instantly upon themselves,
like animals going into lairs. The grating of a knife scraping burnt
clay was heard. Knowles grinned no more. Davis said, in a tone of ardent
conviction: "Then our skipper's looney." Archie muttered: "My faith!
we haven't heard the last of it yet!" Four bells were struck.--"Half our
watch below gone!" cried Knowles in alarm, then reflected. "Well, two
hours' sleep is something towards a rest," he observed, consolingly.
Some already pretended to slumber; and Charley, sound asleep, suddenly
said a few slurred words in an arbitrary, blank voice.--"This blamed
boy has worrums!" commented Knowles from under a blanket, in a learned
manner. Belfast got up and approached Archie's berth.--"We pulled
him out," he whispered, sadly.--"What?" said the other, with sleepy
discontent.--"And now we will have to chuck him overboard," went on
Belfast, whose lower lip trembled.--"Chuck what?" asked Archie.--"Poor
Jimmy," breathed out Belfast.--"He be blowed!" said Archie with
untruthful brutality, and sat up in his bunk; "It's all through him.
If it hadn't been for me, there would have been murder on board this
ship!"--"'Tain't his fault, is it?" argued Belfast, in a murmur; "I've
put him to bed... an' he ain't no heavier than an empty beef-cask,"
he added, with tears in his eyes. Archie looked at him steadily, then
turned his nose to the ship's side with determination. Belfast wandered
about as though he had lost his way in the dim forecastle, and nearly
fell over Donkin. He contemplated him from on high for a while. "Ain't
ye going to turn in?" he asked. Donkin looked up hopelessly.--"That
black'earted Scotch son of a thief kicked me!" he whispered from the
floor, in a tone of utter desolation.--"And a good job, too!" said
Belfast, still very depressed; "You were as near hanging as damn-it
to-night, sonny. Don't you play any of your murthering games around my
Jimmy! You haven't pulled him out. You just mind! 'Cos if I start to
kick you"--he brightened up a bit--"if I start to kick you, it will be
Yankee fashion--to break something!" He tapped lightly with his knuckles
the top of the bowed head. "You moind that, my bhoy!" he concluded,
cheerily. Donkin let it pass.--"Will they split on me?" he asked, with
pained anxiety.--"Who--split?" hissed Belfast, coming back a step. "I
would split your nose this minyt if I hadn't Jimmy to look after! Who
d'ye think we are?" Donkin rose and watched Belfast's back lurch through
the doorway. On all sides invisible men slept, breathing calmly. He
seemed to draw courage and fury from the peace around him. Venomous and
thin-faced, he glared from the ample misfit of borrowed clothes as if
looking for something he could smash. His heart leaped wildly in his
narrow chest. They slept! He wanted to wring necks, gouge eyes, spit
on faces. He shook a dirty pair of meagre fists at the smoking lights.
"Ye're no men!" he cried, in a deadened tone. No one moved. "Yer 'aven't
the pluck of a mouse!" His voice rose to a husky screech. Wamibo darted
out a dishevelled head, and looked at him wildly. "Ye're sweepings
ov ships! I 'ope you will all rot before you die!" Wamibo blinked,
uncomprehending but interested. Donkin sat down heavily; he blew with
force through quivering nostrils, he ground and snapped his teeth, and,
with the chin pressed hard against the breast, he seemed busy gnawing
his way through it, as if to get at the heart within....

In the morning the ship, beginning another day of her wandering life,
had an aspect of sumptuous freshness, like the spring-time of the earth.
The washed decks glistened in a long clear stretch; the oblique sunlight
struck the yellow brasses in dazzling splashes, darted over the polished
rods in lines of gold, and the single drops of salt water forgotten here
and there along the rail were as limpid as drops of dew, and sparkled
more than scattered diamonds. The sails slept, hushed by a gentle
breeze. The sun, rising lonely and splendid in the blue sky, saw a
solitary ship gliding close-hauled on the blue sea.

The men pressed three deep abreast of the mainmast and opposite the
cabin-door. They shuffled, pushed, had an irresolute mien and stolid
faces. At every slight movement Knowles lurched heavily on his short
leg. Donkin glided behind backs, restless and anxious, like a man
looking for an ambush. Captain Allistoun came out on the quarter-deck
suddenly. He walked to and fro before the front. He was grey, slight,
alert, shabby in the sunshine, and as hard as adamant. He had his right
hand in the side-pocket of his jacket, and also something heavy in there
that made folds all down that side. One of the seamen cleared his throat
ominously.--"I haven't till now found fault with you men," said the
master, stopping short. He faced them with his worn, steely gaze, that
by a universal illusion looked straight into every individual pair of
the twenty pairs of eyes before his face. At his back Mr. Baker, gloomy
and bull-necked, grunted low; Mr. Creighton, fresh as paint, had rosy
cheeks and a ready, resolute bearing. "And I don't now," continued the
master; "but I am here to drive this ship and keep every man-jack aboard
of her up to the mark. If you knew your work as well as I do mine,
there would be no trouble. You've been braying in the dark about 'See
to-morrow morning!' Well, you see me now. What do you want?" He waited,
stepping quickly to and fro, giving them searching glances. What did
they want? They shifted from foot to foot, they balanced their bodies;
some, pushing back their caps, scratched their heads. What did they
want? Jimmy was forgotten; no one thought of him, alone forward in
his cabin, fighting great shadows, clinging to brazen lies, chuckling
painfully over his transparent deceptions. No, not Jimmy; he was more
forgotten than if he had been dead. They wanted great things. And
suddenly all the simple words they knew seemed to be lost for ever in
the immensity of their vague and burning desire. They knew what they
wanted, but they could not find anything worth saying. They stirred on
one spot, swinging, at the end of muscular arms, big tarry hands with
crooked fingers. A murmur died out.--"What is it--food?" asked the master,
"you know the stores have been spoiled off the Cape."--"We know that,
sir," said a bearded shell-back in the front rank.--"Work too hard--eh?
Too much for your strength?" he asked again. There was an offended
silence.--"We don't want to go shorthanded, sir," began at last Davis in
a wavering voice, "and this 'ere black...."--"Enough!" cried the master.
He stood scanning them for a moment, then walking a few steps this way
and that began to storm at them coldly, in gusts violent and cutting
like the gales of those icy seas that had known his youth.--"Tell you
what's the matter? Too big for your boots. Think yourselves damn good
men. Know half your work. Do half your duty. Think it too much. If you
did ten times as much it wouldn't be enough."--"We did our best by her,
sir," cried some one with shaky exasperation.--"Your best," stormed on
the master; "You hear a lot on shore, don't you? They don't tell you
there your best isn't much to boast of. I tell you--your best is no
better than bad."

"You can do no more? No, I know, and say nothing. But you stop your
caper or I will stop it for you. I am ready for you! Stop it!" He shook
a finger at the crowd. "As to that man," he raised his voice very much;
"as to that man, if he puts his nose out on deck without my leave I will
clap him in irons. There!" The cook heard him forward, ran out of the
galley lifting his arms, horrified, unbelieving, amazed, and ran in
again. There was a moment of profound silence during which a bow-legged
seaman, stepping aside, expectorated decorously into the scupper. "There
is another thing," said the master, calmly. He made a quick stride and
with a swing took an iron belaying-pin out of his pocket. "This!" His
movement was so unexpected and sudden that the crowd stepped back. He
gazed fixedly at their faces, and some at once put on a surprised air as
though they had never seen a belay-ing-pin before. He held it up. "This
is my affair. I don't ask you any questions, but you all know it; it has
got to go where it came from." His eyes became angry. The crowd stirred
uneasily. They looked away from the piece of iron, they appeared shy,
they were embarrassed and shocked as though it had been something
horrid, scandalous, or indelicate, that in common decency should not
have been flourished like this in broad daylight. The master watched
them attentively. "Donkin," he called out in a short, sharp tone.

Donkin dodged behind one, then behind another, but they looked over
their shoulders and moved aside. The ranks kept on opening before him,
closing behind, till at last he appeared alone before the master as
though he had come up through the deck. Captain Allistoun moved close to
him. They were much of a size, and at short range the master exchanged a
deadly glance with the beady eyes. They wavered.--"You know this?"
asked the master.--"No, I don't," answered the other, with cheeky
trepidation.--"You are a cur. Take it," ordered the master. Donkin's arms
seemed glued to his thighs; he stood, eyes front, as if drawn on parade.
"Take it," repeated the master, and stepped closer; they breathed on
one another. "Take it," said Captain Allistoun again, making a menacing
gesture. Donkin tore away one arm from his side.--"Vy are yer down
on me?" he mumbled with effort and as if his mouth had been full of
dough.--"If you don't..." began the master. Donkin snatched at the pin
as though his intention had been to run away with it, and remained stock
still holding it like a candle. "Put it back where you took it from,"
said Captain Allistoun, looking at him fiercely. Donkin stepped back
opening wide eyes. "Go, you blackguard, or I will make you," cried the
master, driving him slowly backwards by a menacing advance. He dodged,
and with the dangerous iron tried to guard his head from a threatening
fist. Mr. Baker ceased grunting for a moment.--"Good! By Jove," murmured
appreciatively Mr. Creighton in the tone of a connoisseur.--"Don't tech
me," snarled Donkin, backing away.--"Then go. Go faster."--"Don't yer 'it
me.... I will pull yer up afore the magistryt.... I'll show yer up."
Captain Allistoun made a long stride, and Donkin, turning his back
fairly, ran off a little, then stopped and over his shoulder showed
yellow teeth.--"Further on, fore-rigging," urged the master, pointing
with his arm.--"Are yer goin' to stand by and see me bullied?" screamed
Donkin at the silent crowd that watched him. Captain Allistoun walked
at him smartly. He started off again with a leap, dashed at the
fore-rigging, rammed the pin into its hole violently. "I'll be even
with yer yet," he screamed at the ship at large and vanished beyond
the foremast. Captain Allistoun spun round and walked back aft with a
composed face, as though he had already forgotten the scene. Men moved
out of his way. He looked at no one.--"That will do, Mr. Baker. Send the
watch below," he said, quietly. "And you men try to walk straight for
the future," he added in a calm voice. He looked pensively for a
while at the backs of the impressed and retreating crowd. "Breakfast,
steward," he called in a tone of relief through the cabin door.--"I
didn't like to see you--Ough!--give that pin to that chap, sir," observed
Mr. Baker; "he could have bust--Ough!--bust your head like an eggshell
with it."--"O! he!" muttered the master, absently. "Queer lot," he went
on in a low voice. "I suppose it's all right now. Can never tell tho'
nowadays, with such a... Years ago; I was a young master then--one China
voyage I had a mutiny; real mutiny, Baker. Different men tho'. I knew
what they wanted: they wanted to broach the cargo and get at the liquor.
Very simple.... We knocked them about for two days, and when they had
enough--gentle as lambs. Good crew. And a smart trip I made." He glanced
aloft at the yards braced sharp up. "Head wind day after day,"
he exclaimed, bitterly. "Shall we never get a decent slant this
passage?"--"Ready, sir," said the steward, appearing before them as if by
magic and with a stained napkin in his hand.--"Ah! All right. Come along,
Mr. Baker--it's late--with all this nonsense."





CHAPTER FIVE

A heavy atmosphere of oppressive quietude pervaded the ship. In the
afternoon men went about washing clothes and hanging them out to dry
in the unprosperous breeze with the meditative languor of disenchanted
philosophers. Very little was said. The problem of life seemed too
voluminous for the narrow limits of human speech, and by common consent
it was abandoned to the great sea that had from the beginning enfolded
it in its immense grip; to the sea that knew all, and would in time
infallibly unveil to each the wisdom hidden in all the errors, the
certitude that lurks in doubts, the realm of safety and peace beyond the
frontiers of sorrow and fear. And in the confused current of impotent
thoughts that set unceasingly this way and that through bodies of men,
Jimmy bobbed up upon the surface, compelling attention, like a black
buoy chained to the bottom of a muddy stream. Falsehood triumphed.
It triumphed through doubt, through stupidity, through pity, through
sentimentalism. We set ourselves to bolster it up from compassion,
from recklessness, from a sense of fun. Jimmy's steadfastness to
his untruthful attitude in the face of the inevitable truth had
the proportions of a colossal enigma--of a manifestation grand and
incomprehensible that at times inspired a wondering awe; and there was
also, to many, something exquisitely droll in fooling him thus to the
top of his bent. The latent egoism of tenderness to suffering
appeared in the developing anxiety not to see him die. His obstinate
non-recognition of the only certitude whose approach we could watch from
day to day was as disquieting as the failure of some law of nature. He
was so utterly wrong about himself that one could not but suspect him of
having access to some source of supernatural knowledge. He was absurd
to the point of inspiration. He was unique, and as fascinating as only
something inhuman could be; he seemed to shout his denials already from
beyond the awful border. He was becoming immaterial like an apparition;
his cheekbones rose, the forehead slanted more; the face was all
hollows, patches of shade; and the fleshless head resembled a
disinterred black skull, fitted with two restless globes of silver in
the sockets of eyes. He was demoralising. Through him we were becoming
highly humanised, tender, complex, excessively decadent: we understood
the subtlety of his fear, sympathised with all his repulsions,
shrinkings, evasions, delusions--as though we had been over-civilised,
and rotten, and without any knowledge of the meaning of life. We had the
air of being initiated in some infamous mysteries; we had the profound
grimaces of conspirators, exchanged meaning glances, significant short
words. We were inexpressibly vile and very much pleased with ourselves.
We lied to him with gravity, with emotion, with unction, as if
performing some moral trick with a view to an eternal reward. We made a
chorus of affirmation to his wildest assertions, as though he had been
a millionaire, a politician, or a reformer--and we a crowd of ambitious
lubbers. When we ventured to question his statements we did it after
the manner of obsequious sycophants, to the end that his glory should be
augmented by the flattery of our dissent. He influenced the moral tone
of our world as though he had it in his power to distribute honours,
treasures, or pain; and he could give us nothing but his contempt. It
was immense; it seemed to grow gradually larger, as his body day by
day shrank a little more, while we looked. It was the only thing about
him--of him--that gave the impression of durability and vigour. It lived
within him with an unquenchable life. It spoke through the eternal pout
of his black lips; it looked at us through the impertinent mournfulness
of his languid and enormous stare. We watched him intently. He seemed
unwilling to move, as if distrustful of his own solidity. The slightest
gesture must have disclosed to him (it could not surely be otherwise)
his bodily weakness, and caused a pang of mental suffering. He was chary
of movements. He lay stretched out, chin on blanket, in a kind of
sly, cautious immobility. Only his eyes roamed over faces: his eyes
disdainful, penetrating and sad.

It was at that time that Belfast's devotion--and also his
pugnacity--secured universal respect. He spent every moment of his spare
time in Jimmy's cabin. He tended him, talked to him; was as gentle as
a woman, as tenderly gay as an old philanthropist, as sentimentally
careful of his nigger as a model slave-owner. But outside he was
irritable, explosive as gunpowder, sombre, suspicious, and never more
brutal than when most sorrowful. With him it was a tear and a blow:
a tear for Jimmy, a blow for any one who did not seem to take a
scrupulously orthodox view of Jimmy's case. We talked about nothing
else. The two Scandinavians, even, discussed the situation--but it was
impossible to know in what spirit, because they quarrelled in their
own language. Belfast suspected one of them of irreverence, and in this
incertitude thought that there was no option but to fight them both.
They became very much terrified by his truculence, and henceforth
lived amongst us, dejected, like a pair of mutes. Wamibo never spoke
intelligibly, but he was as smileless as an animal--seemed to know much
less about it all than the cat--and consequently was safe. Moreover,
he had belonged to the chosen band of Jimmy's rescuers, and was above
suspicion. Archie was silent generally, but often spent an hour or so
talking to Jimmy quietly with an air of proprietorship. At any time of
the day and often through the night some man could be seen sitting
on Jimmy's box. In the evening, between six and eight, the cabin was
crowded, and there was an interested group at the door. Every one stared
at the nigger.

He basked in the warmth of our interest. His eye gleamed ironically, and
in a weak voice he reproached us with our cowardice. He would say, "If
you fellows had stuck out for me I would be now on deck." We hung our
heads. "Yes, but if you think I am going; to let them put me in irons
just to show you sport.... Well, no.... It ruins my health, this
lying-up, it does. You don't care." We were as abashed as if it had
been true. His superb impudence carried all before it. We would not have
dared to revolt. We didn't want to, really. We wanted to keep him alive
till home--to the end of the voyage.

Singleton as usual held aloof, appearing to scorn the insignificant
events of an ended life. Once only he came along, and unexpectedly
stopped in the doorway. He peered at Jimmy in profound silence, as if
desirous to add that black image to the crowd of Shades that peopled
his old memory. We kept very quiet, and for a long time Singleton stood
there as though he had come by appointment to call for some one, or to
see some important event. James Wait lay perfectly still, and apparently
not aware of the gaze scrutinising him with a steadiness full of
expectation. There was a sense of a contest in the air. We felt the
inward strain of men watching a wrestling bout. At last Jimmy with
perceptible apprehension turned his head on the pillow.--"Good evening,"
he said in a conciliating tone.--"H'm," answered the old seaman,
grumpily. For a moment longer he looked at Jimmy with severe fixity,
then suddenly went away. It was a long time before any one spoke in
the little cabin, though we all breathed more freely as men do after an
escape from some dangerous situation. We all knew the old man's ideas
about Jimmy, and nobody dared to combat them. They were unsettling, they
caused pain; and, what was worse, they might have been true for all
we knew. Only once did he condescend to explain them fully, but the
impression was lasting. He said that Jimmy was the cause of head winds.
Mortally sick men--he maintained--linger till the first sight of land, and
then die; and Jimmy knew that the very first land would draw his life
from him. It is so in every ship. Didn't we know it? He asked us with
austere contempt: what did we know? What would we doubt next? Jimmy's
desire encouraged by us and aided by Wamibo's (he was a Finn--wasn't he?
Very well!) by Wamibo's spells delayed the ship in the open sea. Only
lubberly fools couldn't see it. Whoever heard of such a run of calms and
head winds? It wasn't natural.... We could not deny that it was strange.
We felt uneasy. The common saying, "More days, more dollars," did not
give the usual comfort because the stores were running short. Much had
been spoiled off the Cape, and we were on half allowance of biscuit.
Peas, sugar and tea had been finished long ago. Salt meat was giving
out. We had plenty of coffee but very little water to make it with.
We took up another hole in our belts and went on scraping, polishing,
painting the ship from morning to night. And soon she looked as though
she had come out of a band-box; but hunger lived on board of her. Not
dead starvation, but steady, living hunger that stalked about the decks,
slept in the forecastle; the tormentor of waking moments, the disturber
of dreams. We looked to windward for signs of change. Every few hours of
night and day we put her round with the hope that she would come up
on that tack at last! She didn't. She seemed to have forgotten the way
home; she rushed to and fro, heading northwest, heading east; she ran
backwards and forwards, distracted, like a timid creature at the foot of
a wall. Sometimes, as if tired to death, she would wallow languidly for
a day in the smooth swell of an unruffled sea. All up the swinging masts
the sails thrashed furiously through the hot stillness of the calm. We
were weary, hungry, thirsty; we commenced to believe Singleton, but
with unshaken fidelity dissembled to Jimmy. We spoke to him with jocose
allusiveness, like cheerful accomplices in a clever plot; but we looked
to the westward over the rail with longing eyes for a sign of hope, for
a sign of fair wind; even if its first breath should bring death to our
reluctant Jimmy. In vain! The universe conspired with James Wait. Light
airs from the northward sprang up again; the sky remained clear; and
round our weariness the glittering sea, touched by the breeze, basked
voluptuously in the great sunshine, as though it had forgotten our life
and trouble.

Donkin looked out for a fair wind along with the rest. No one knew the
venom of his thoughts now. He was silent, and appeared thinner, as if
consumed slowly by an inward rage at the injustice of men and of fate.
He was ignored by all and spoke to no one, but his hate for every man
dwelt in his furtive eyes. He talked with the cook only, having somehow
persuaded the good man that he--Donkin--was a much calumniated and
persecuted person. Together they bewailed the immorality of the ship's
company. There could be no greater criminals than we, who by our lies
conspired to send the unprepared soul of a poor ignorant black man
to everlasting perdition. Podmore cooked what there was to cook,
remorsefully, and felt all the time that by preparing the food of such
sinners he imperilled his own salvation. As to the Captain--he had sailed
with him for seven years, now, he said, and would not have believed it
possible that such a man... "Well. Well... There it was... Can't get out
of it. Judgment capsized all in a minute... Struck in all his pride...
More like a sudden visitation than anything else." Donkin, perched
sullenly on the coal-locker, swung his legs and concurred. He paid in
the coin of spurious assent for the privilege to sit in the galley; he
was disheartened and scandalised; he agreed with the cook; could find
no words severe enough to criticise our conduct; and when in the heat of
reprobation he swore at us, Podmore, who would have liked to swear also
if it hadn't been for his principles, pretended not to hear. So Donkin,
unrebuked, cursed enough for two, cadged for matches, borrowed tobacco,
and loafed for hours, very much at home, before the stove. From there he
could hear us on the other side of the bulkhead, talking to Jimmy.
The cook knocked the saucepans about, slammed the oven door, muttered
prophesies of damnation for all the ship's company; and Donkin, who did
not admit of any hereafter (except for purposes of blasphemy) listened,
concentrated and angry, gloating fiercely over a called-up image of
infinite torment--as men gloat over the accursed images of cruelty and
revenge, of greed, and of power....

On clear evenings the silent ship, under the cold sheen of the dead
moon, took on a false aspect of passionless repose resembling the winter
of the earth. Under her a long band of gold barred the black disc of
the sea. Footsteps echoed on her quiet decks. The moonlight clung to her
like a frosted mist, and the white sails stood out in dazzling cones
as of stainless snow. In the magnificence of the phantom rays the ship
appeared pure like a vision of ideal beauty, illusive like a tender
dream of serene peace. And nothing in her was real, nothing was distinct
and solid but the heavy shadows that filled her decks with their
unceasing and noiseless stir: the shadows darker than the night and more
restless than the thoughts of men.

Donkin prowled spiteful and alone amongst the shadows, thinking that
Jimmy too long delayed to die. That evening land had been reported from
aloft, and the master, while adjusting the tubes of the long glass, had
observed with quiet bitterness to Mr. Baker that, after fighting our way
inch by inch to the Western Islands, there was nothing to expect now
but a spell of calm. The sky was clear and the barometer high. The light
breeze dropped with the sun, and an enormous stillness, forerunner of
a night without wind, descended upon the heated waters of the ocean.
As long as daylight lasted, the hands collected on the forecastle-head
watched on the eastern sky the island of Flores, that rose above the
level expanse of the sea with irregular and broken outlines like a
sombre ruin upon a vast and deserted plain. It was the first land seen
for nearly four months. Charley was excited, and in the midst of general
indulgence took liberties with his betters. Men strangely elated without
knowing why, talked in groups, and pointed with bared arms. For the
first time that voyage Jimmy's sham existence seemed for a moment
forgotten in the face of a solid reality. We had got so far anyhow.
Belfast discoursed, quoting imaginary examples of short homeward runs
from the Islands. "Them smart fruit schooners do it in five days,"
he affirmed. "What do you want?--only a good little breeze." Archie
maintained that seven days was the record passage, and they disputed
amicably with insulting words. Knowles declared he could already smell
home from there, and with a heavy list on his short leg laughed fit to
split his sides. A group of grizzled sea-dogs looked out for a time in
silence and with grim absorbed faces. One said suddenly--"'Tain't far
to London now."--"My first night ashore, blamme if I haven't steak and
onions for supper... and a pint of bitter," said another.--"A barrel ye
mean," shouted someone.--"Ham an' eggs three times a day. That's the way
I live!" cried an excited voice. There was a stir, appreciative murmurs;
eyes began to shine; jaws champed; short, nervous laughs were heard.
Archie smiled with reserve all to himself. Singleton came up, gave a
careless glance, and went down again without saying a word, indifferent,
like a man who had seen Flores an incalculable number of times. The
night travelling from the East blotted out of the limpid sky the purple
stain of the high land. "Dead calm," said somebody quietly. The murmur
of lively talk suddenly wavered, died out; the clusters broke up; men
began to drift away one by one, descending the ladders slowly and with
serious faces as if sobered by that reminder of their dependence upon
the invisible. And when the big yellow moon ascended gently above
the sharp rim of the clear horizon it found the ship wrapped up in a
breathless silence; a fearless ship that seemed to sleep profoundly,
dreamlessly on the bosom of the sleeping and terrible sea.

Donkin chafed at the peace--at the ship--at the sea that stretching away
on all sides merged into the illimitable silence of all creation. He
felt himself pulled up sharp by unrecognised grievances. He had been
physically cowed, but his injured dignity remained indomitable, and
nothing could heal his lacerated feelings. Here was land already--home
very soon--a bad pay-day--no clothes--more hard work. How offensive all
this was. Land. The land that draws away life from sick sailors. That
nigger there had money--clothes--easy times; and would not die. Land draws
life away.... He felt tempted to go and see whether it did. Perhaps
already.. It would be a bit of luck. There was money in the beggar's
chest. He stepped briskly out of the shadows into the moonlight, and,
instantly, his craving, hungry face from sallow became livid. He opened
the door of the cabin and had a shock. Sure enough, Jimmy was dead! He
moved no more than a recumbent figure with clasped hands, carved on the
lid of a stone coffin. Donkin glared with avidity. Then Jimmy, without
stirring, blinked his eyelids, and Donkin had another shock. Those eyes
were rather startling. He shut the door behind his back with gentle
care, looking intently the while at James Wait as though he had come
in there at a great risk to tell some secret of startling im-portance.
Jimmy did not move but glanced languidly out of the corners of his
eyes.--"Calm?" he asked.--"Yuss," said Donkin, very disappointed, and sat
down on the box.

Jimmy was used to such visits at all times of night of day. Men
succeeded one another. They spoke in clear voices, pronounced cheerful
words, repeated old jokes, listened to him; and each, going out, seemed
to leave behind a little of his own vitality, surrender some of his own
strength, renew the assurance of life--the indestructible thing! He did
not like to be alone in his cabin, because, when he was alone, it seemed
to him as if he hadn't been there at all. There was nothing. No pain.
Not now. Perfectly right--but he couldn't enjoy his healthful repose
unless some one was by to see it. This man would do as well as anybody.
Donkin watched him stealthily:--"Soon home now," observed Wait.--"Vy d'yer
whisper?" asked Donkin with interest, "can't yer speak up?" Jimmy looked
annoyed and said nothing for a while; then in a lifeless, unringing
voice:--"Why should I shout? You ain't deaf that I know."--"Oh! I can 'ear
right enough," answered Donkin in a low tone, and looked down. He was
thinking sadly of going out when Jimmy spoke again.--"Time we did get
home... to get something decent to eat... I am always hungry." Donkin
felt angry all of a sudden.--"What about me," he hissed, "I am 'ungry too
an' got ter work. You, 'ungry!"--"Your work won't kill you," commented
Wait, feebly; "there's a couple of biscuits in the lower bunk there--you
may have one. I can't eat them." Donkin dived in, groped in the corner
and when he came up again his mouth was full. He munched with ardour.
Jimmy seemed to doze with open eyes. Donkin finished his hard bread and
got up.--"You're not going?" asked Jimmy, staring at the ceiling.--"No,"
said Donkin, impulsively, and instead of going out leaned his back
against the closed door. He looked at James Wait, and saw him long,
lean, dried up, as though all his flesh had shrivelled on his bones
in the heat of a white furnace; the meagre fingers of one hand moved
lightly upon the edge of the bunk playing an endless tune. To look at
him was irritating and fatiguing; he could last like this for days; he
was outrageous--belonging wholly neither to death nor life, and perfectly
invulnerable in his apparent ignorance of both. Donkin felt tempted to
enlighten him.--"What are yer thinkin' of?" he asked, surlily. James Wait
had a grimacing smile that passed over the deathlike impassiveness of
his bony face, incredible and frightful as would, in a dream, have been
the sudden smile of a corpse.

"There is a girl," whispered Wait.... "Canton Street girl.------She chucked
a third engineer of a Rennie boat------for me. Cooks oysters just as I
like... She says------she would chuck------any toff------louder."

Donkin could hardly believe his ears. He was scandalised--"Would she? Yer
wouldn't be any good to 'er," he said with unrestrained disgust. Wait
was not there to hear him. He was swaggering up the East India
Dock Road; saying kindly, "Come along for a treat," pushing glass
swing-doors, posing with superb assurance in the gaslight above a
mahogany counter.--"D'yer think yer will ever get ashore?" asked Donkin,
angrily. Wait came back with a start.--"Ten days," he said, promptly, and
returned at once to the regions of memory that know nothing of time. He
felt untired, calm, and safely withdrawn within himself beyond the reach
of every grave incertitude. There was something of the immutable quality
of eternity in the slow moments of his complete restfulness. He was very
quiet and easy amongst his vivid reminiscences which he mistook joyfully
for images of an undoubted future. He cared for no one. Donkin felt this
vaguely like a blind man feeling in his darkness the fatal antagonism
of all the surrounding existences, that to him shall for ever remain
irrealisable, unseen and enviable. He had a desire to assert his
importance, to break, to crush; to be even with everybody for
everything; to tear the veil, unmask, expose, leave no refuge--a
perfidious desire of truthfulness! He laughed in a mocking splutter and
said:

"Ten days. Strike me blind if ever!... You will be dead by this time
to-morrow p'r'aps. Ten days!" He waited for a while. "D'ye 'ear me?
Blamme if yer don't look dead already."

Wait must have been collecting his strength, for he said almost
aloud--"You're a stinking, cadging liar. Every one knows you." And
sitting up, against all probability, startled his visitor horribly. But
very soon Donkin recovered himself. He blustered, "What? What? Who's a
liar? You are--the crowd are--the skipper--everybody. I ain't! Putting on
airs! Who's yer?" He nearly choked himself with indignation. "Who's
yer to put on airs," he repeated, trembling. "'Ave one--'ave one, says
'ee--an' cawn't eat 'em 'isself. Now I'll 'ave both. By Gawd--I will! Yer
nobody!"

He plunged into the lower bunk, rooted in there and brought to light
another dusty biscuit. He held it up before Jimmy--then took a bite
defiantly.

"What now?" he asked with feverish impudence. "Yer may take one--says
yer. Why not giv' me both? No. I'm a mangy dorg. One fur a mangy dorg.
I'll tyke both. Can yer stop me? Try. Come on. Try."

Jimmy was clasping his legs and hiding his face on the knees. His shirt
clung to him. Every rib was visible. His emaciated back was shaken in
repeated jerks by the panting catches of his breath.

"Yer won't? Yer can't! What did I say?" went on Donkin, fiercely. He
swallowed another dry mouthful with a hasty effort. The other's silent
helplessness, his weakness, his shrinking attitude exasperated him.
"Ye're done!" he cried. "Who's yer to be lied to; to be waited on 'and
an' foot like a bloomin' ymperor. Yer nobody. Yer no one at all!" he
spluttered with such a strength of unerring conviction that it shook him
from head to foot in coming out, and left him vibrating like a released
string.

James Wait rallied again. He lifted his head and turned bravely at
Donkin, who saw a strange face, an unknown face, a fantastic and
grimacing mask of despair and fury. Its lips moved rapidly; and hollow,
moaning, whistling sounds filled the cabin with a vague mutter full of
menace, complaint and desolation, like the far-off murmur of a
rising wind. Wait shook his head; rolled his eyes; he denied, cursed,
threatened--and not a word had the strength to pass beyond the sorrowful
pout of those black lips. It was incomprehensible and disturbing;
a gibberish of emotions, a frantic dumb show of speech pleading for
impossible things, promising a shadowy vengeance. It sobered Donkin into
a scrutinising watchfulness.

"Yer can't oller. See? What did I tell yer?" he said, slowly, after a
moment of attentive examination. The other kept on headlong and unheard,
nodding passionately, grinning with grotesque and appalling flashes
of big white teeth. Donkin, as if fascinated by the dumb eloquence and
anger of that black phantom, approached, stretching his neck out with
distrustful curiosity; and it seemed to him suddenly that he was looking
only at the shadow of a man crouching high in the bunk on the level with
his eyes.--"What? What?" he said. He seemed to catch the shape of some
words in the continuous panting hiss. "Yer will tell Belfast! Will yer?
Are yer a bloomin' kid?" He trembled with alarm and rage, "Tell yer
gran'mother! Yer afeard! Who's yer ter be afeard more'n any one?" His
passionate sense of his own importance ran away with a last remnant of
caution. "Tell an' be damned! Tell, if yer can!" he cried. "I've been
treated worser'n a dorg by your blooming back-lickers. They 'as set me
on, only to turn aginst me. I am the only man 'ere. They clouted me,
kicked me--an' yer laffed--yer black, rotten incumbrance, you! You will
pay fur it. They giv' yer their grub, their water--yer will pay fur it
to me, by Gawd! Who axed me ter 'ave a drink of water? They put their
bloomin' rags on yer that night, an' what did they giv' ter me--a clout
on the bloomin' mouth--blast their... S'elp me!... Yer will pay fur it
with yer money. I'm goin' ter 'ave it in a minyte; as soon has ye're
dead, yer bloomin' useless fraud. That's the man I am. An' ye're a
thing--a bloody thing. Yah--you corpse!" He flung at Jimmy's head the
biscuit he had been all the time clutching hard, but it only grazed, and
striking with a loud crack the bulkhead beyond burst like a hand-grenade
into flying pieces. James Wait, as if wounded mortally, fell back on the
pillow. His lips ceased to move and the rolling eyes became quiet
and stared upwards with an intense and steady persistence. Donkin was
surprised; he sat suddenly on the chest, and looked down, exhausted
and gloomy. After a moment, he began to mutter to himself, "Die, you
beggar--die. Somebody'll come in... I wish I was drunk... Ten days...
oysters..." He looked up and spoke louder. "No... No more for yer... no
more bloomin' gals that cook oysters... Who's yer? It's my turn now... I
wish I was drunk; I would soon giv' you a leg up. That's where yer bound
to go. Feet fust, through a port... Splash! Never see yer any more.
Overboard! Good 'nuff fur yer." Jimmy's head moved slightly and he
turned his eyes to Donkin's face; a gaze unbelieving, desolated and
appealing, of a child frightened by the menace of being shut up alone
in the dark. Donkin observed him from the chest with hopeful eyes; then,
without rising, tried the lid. Locked. "I wish I was drunk," he muttered
and getting up listened anxiously to the distant sound of footsteps
on the deck. They approached--ceased. Some one yawned interminably just
outside the door, and the footsteps went away shuffling lazily. Donkin's
fluttering heart eased its pace, and when he looked towards the bunk
again Jimmy was staring as before at the white beam.--"'Ow d'yer feel
now?" he asked.--"Bad," breathed out Jimmy.

Donkin sat down patient and purposeful. Every half-hour the bells spoke
to one another ringing along the whole length of the ship. Jimmy's
respiration was so rapid that it couldn't be counted, so faint that it
couldn't be heard. His eyes were terrified as though he had been looking
at unspeakable horrors; and by his face one could see that he was
thinking of abominable things. Suddenly with an incredibly strong and
heartbreaking voice he sobbed out:

"Overboard!... I!... My God!" Donkin writhed a little on the box.
He looked unwillingly. James Wait was mute. His two long bony hands
smoothed the blanket upwards, as though he had wished to gather it all
up under his chin. A tear, a big solitary tear, escaped from the corner
of his eye and, without touching the hollow cheek, fell on the pillow.
His throat rattled faintly.

And Donkin, watching the end of that hateful nigger, felt the anguishing
grasp of a great sorrow on his heart at the thought that he himself,
some day, would have to go through it all--just like this--perhaps! His
eyes became moist. "Poor beggar," he murmured. The night seemed to go
by in a flash; it seemed to him he could hear the irremediable rush of
precious minutes. How long would this blooming affair last? Too long
surely. No luck. He could not restrain himself. He got up and approached
the bunk. Wait did not stir. Only his eyes appeared alive and his
hands continued their smoothing movement with a horrible and tireless
industry. Donkin bent over.

"Jimmy," he called low. There was no answer, but the rattle stopped.
"D'yer see me?" he asked, trembling. Jimmy's chest heaved. Donkin,
looking away, bent his ear to Jimmy's lips, and heard a sound like the
rustle of a single dry leaf driven along the smooth sand of a beach. It
shaped itself.

"Light... the lamp... and... go," breathed out Wait.

Donkin, instinctively, glanced over his shoulder at the brilliant flame;
then, still looking away, felt under the pillow for a key. He got it
at once and for the next few minutes remained on his knees shakily but
swiftly busy inside the box. When he got up, his face--for the first time
in his life--had a pink flush--perhaps of triumph.

He slipped the key under the pillow again, avoiding to glance at Jimmy,
who had not moved. He turned his back squarely from the bunk, and
started to the door as though he were going to walk a mile. At his
second stride he had his nose against it. He clutched the handle
cautiously, but at that moment he received the irresistible impression
of something happening behind his back. He spun round as though he had
been tapped on the shoulder. He was just in time to see Wait's eyes
blaze up and go out at once, like two lamps overturned together by a
sweeping blow. Something resembling a scarlet thread hung down his chin
out of the corner of his lips--and he had ceased to breathe.

Donkin closed the door behind him gently but firmly. Sleeping men,
huddled under jackets, made on the lighted deck shapeless dark mounds
that had the appearance of neglected graves. Nothing had been done all
through the night and he hadn't been missed. He stood motionless and
perfectly astounded to find the world outside as he had left it; there
was the sea, the ship--sleeping men; and he wondered absurdly at it, as
though he had expected to find the men dead, familiar things gone for
ever: as though, like a wanderer returning after many years, he had
expected to see bewildering changes. He shuddered a little in the
penetrating freshness of the air, and hugged himself forlornly. The
declining moon drooped sadly in the western board as if withered by
the cold touch of a pale dawn. The ship slept. And the immortal
sea stretched away immense and hazy, like the image of life, with a
glittering surface and lightless depths. Donkin gave it a defiant
glance and slunk off noiselessly as if judged and cast out by the august
silence of its might.

Jimmy's death, after all, came as a tremendous surprise. We did not know
till then how much faith we had put in his delusions. We had taken his
chances of life so much at his own valuation that his death, like the
death of an old belief, shook the foundations of our society. A
common bond was gone; the strong, effective and respectable bond of a
sentimental lie. All that day we mooned at our work, with suspicious
looks and a disabused air. In our hearts we thought that in the matter
of his departure Jimmy had acted in a perverse and unfriendly manner.
He didn't back us up, as a shipmate should. In going he took away with
himself the gloomy and solemn shadow in which our folly had posed, with
humane satisfaction, as a tender arbiter of fate. And now we saw it was
no such thing. It was just common foolishness; a silly and ineffectual
meddling with issues of majestic import--that is, if Podmore was right.
Perhaps he was? Doubt survived Jimmy; and, like a community of banded
criminals disintegrated by a touch of grace, we were profoundly
scandalised with each other. Men spoke unkindly to their best chums.
Others refused to speak at all. Singleton only was not surprised.
"Dead--is he? Of course," he said, pointing at the island right abeam:
for the calm still held the ship spell-bound within sight of Flores.
Dead--of course. He wasn't surprised. Here was the land, and there, on
the fore-hatch and waiting for the sailmaker--there was that corpse.
Cause and effect. And for the first time that voyage, the old seaman
became quite cheery and garrulous, explaining and illustrating from the
stores of experience how, in sickness, the sight of an island (even a
very small one) is generally more fatal than the view of a continent.
But he couldn't explain why.

Jimmy was to be buried at five, and it was a long day till then--a day of
mental disquiet and even of physical disturbance. We took no interest in
our work and, very properly, were rebuked for it. This, in our constant
state of hungry irritation, was exasperating. Donkin worked with his
brow bound in a dirty rag, and looked so ghastly that Mr. Baker was
touched with compassion at the sight of this plucky suffering.--"Ough!
You, Donkin! Put down your work and go lay-up this watch. You look
ill."--"I am bad, sir--in my 'ead," he said in a subdued voice, and
vanished speedily. This annoyed many, and they thought the mate
"bloomin' soft to-day." Captain Allistoun could be seen on the poop
watching the sky to the southwest, and it soon got to be known about
the decks that the barometer had begun to fall in the night, and that a
breeze might be expected before long. This, by a subtle association
of ideas, led to violent quarrelling as to the exact moment of Jimmy's
death. Was it before or after "that 'ere glass started down?" It was
impossible to know, and it caused much contemptuous growling at one
another. All of a sudden there was a great tumult forward. Pacific
Knowles and good-tempered Davis had come to blows over it. The watch
below interfered with spirit, and for ten minutes there was a noisy
scrimmage round the hatch, where, in the balancing shade of the sails,
Jimmy's body, wrapped up in a white blanket, was watched over by the
sorrowful Belfast, who, in his desolation, disdained the fray. When the
noise had ceased, and the passions had calmed into surly silence, he
stood up at the head of the swathed body, lifting both arms on
high, cried with pained indignation:--"You ought to be ashamed of
yourselves!..." We were.

Belfast took his bereavement very hard. He gave proofs of
unextinguishable devotion. It was he, and no other man, who would help
the sailmaker to prepare what was left of Jimmy for a solemn surrender
to the insatiable sea. He arranged the weights carefully at the feet:
two holystones, an old anchor-shackle without its pin, some broken links
of a worn-out stream cable. He arranged them this way, then that. "Bless
my soul! you aren't afraid he will chafe his heel?" said the sailmaker,
who hated the job. He pushed the needle, purring furiously, with his
head in a cloud of tobacco smoke; he turned the flaps over, pulled at
the stitches, stretched at the canvas.--"Lift his shoulders.... Pull to
you a bit.... So--o--o. Steady." Belfast obeyed, pulled, lifted, overcome
with sorrow, dropping tears on the tarred twine.--. "Don't you drag
the canvas too taut over his poor face, Sails," he entreated,
tearfully.--"What are you fashing yourself for? He will be comfortable
enough," assured the sailmaker, cutting the thread after the last
stitch, which came about the middle of Jimmy's forehead. He rolled up
the remaining canvas, put away the needles. "What makes you take on so?"
he asked. Belfast looked down at the long package of grey sailcloth.--"I
pulled him out," he whispered, "and he did not want to go. If I had sat
up with him last night he would have kept alive for me... but something
made me tired." The sailmaker took vigorous draws at his pipe and
mumbled:--"When I... West India Station... In the Blanche frigate...
Yellow Jack... sewed in twenty men a week... Portsmouth-Devon-port
men--townies--knew their fathers, mothers, sisters--the whole boiling of
'em. Thought nothing of it. And these niggers like this one--you don't
know where it comes from. Got nobody. No use to nobody. Who will miss
him?"--"I do--I pulled him out," mourned Belfast dismally.

On two planks nailed together and apparently resigned and still under
the folds of the Union Jack with a white border, James Wait, carried
aft by four men, was deposited slowly, with his feet pointing at an open
port. A swell had set in from the westward, and following on the roll of
the ship, the red ensign, at half-mast, darted out and collapsed again
on the grey sky, like a tongue of flickering fire; Charley tolled the
bell; and at every swing to starboard the whole vast semi-circle of
steely waters visible on that side seemed to come up with a rush to the
edge of the port, as if impatient to get at our Jimmy. Every one was
there but Donkin, who was too ill to come; the Captain and Mr. Creighton
stood bareheaded on the break of the poop; Mr. Baker, directed by the
master, who had said to him gravely:--"You know more about the prayer
book than I do," came out of the cabin door quickly and a little
embarrassed. All the caps went off. He began to read in a low tone, and
with his usual harmlessly menacing utterance, as though he had been for
the last time reproving confidentially that dead seaman at his feet. The
men listened in scattered groups; they leaned on the fife rail, gazing
on the deck; they held their chins in their hands thoughtfully, or, with
crossed arms and one knee slightly bent, hung their heads in an attitude
of upright meditation. Wamibo dreamed. Mr. Baker read on, grunting
reverently at the turn of every page. The words, missing the unsteady
hearts of men, rolled out to wander without a home upon the heartless
sea; and James Wait, silenced for ever, lay uncritical and passive under
the hoarse murmur of despair and hopes.

Two men made ready and waited for those words that send so many of our
brothers to their last plunge. Mr. Baker began the passage. "Stand by,"
muttered the boatswain. Mr. Baker read out: "To the deep," and paused.
The men lifted the inboard end of the planks, the boatswain snatched
off the Union Jack, and James Wait did not move.--"Higher," muttered
the boatswain angrily. All the heads were raised; every man stirred
uneasily, but James Wait gave no sign of going. In death and swathed up
for all eternity, he yet seemed to cling to the ship with the grip of
an undying fear. "Higher! Lift!" whispered the boatswain, fiercely.--"He
won't go," stammered one of the men, shakily, and both appeared ready
to drop everything. Mr. Baker waited, burying his face in the book, and
shuffling his feet nervously. All the men looked profoundly disturbed;
from their midst a faint humming noise spread out--growing louder....
"Jimmy!" cried Belfast in a wailing tone, and there was a second of
shuddering dismay.

"Jimmy, be a man!" he shrieked, passionately. Every mouth was wide open,
not an eyelid winked. He stared wildly, twitching all over; he bent
his body forward like a man peering at an horror. "Go!" he shouted, and
sprang out of the crowd with his arm extended. "Go, Jimmy!--Jimmy, go!
Go!" His fingers touched the head of the body, and the grey package
started reluctantly to whizz off the lifted planks all at once, with the
suddenness of a flash of lightning. The crowd stepped forward like one
man; a deep Ah--h--h! came out vibrating from the broad chests. The ship
rolled as if relieved of an unfair burden; the sails flapped. Belfast,
supported by Archie, gasped hysterically; and Charley, who anxious to
see Jimmy's last dive, leaped headlong on the rail, was too late to see
anything but the faint circle of a vanishing ripple.

Mr. Baker, perspiring abundantly, read out the last prayer in a deep
rumour of excited men and fluttering sails. "Amen!" he said in an
unsteady growl, and closed the book.

"Square the yards!" thundered a voice above his head. All hands gave a
jump; one or two dropped their caps; Mr. Baker looked up surprised.
The master, standing on the break of the poop, pointed to the westward.
"Breeze coming," he said, "Man the weather braces." Mr. Baker crammed
the book hurriedly into his pocket. "Forward, there--let go the
foretack!" he hailed joyfully, bareheaded and brisk; "Square the
foreyard, you port-watch!"--"Fair wind--fair wind," muttered the men going
to the braces.--"What did I tell you?" mumbled old Singleton, flinging
down coil after coil with hasty energy; "I knowed it--he's gone, and here
it comes."

It came with the sound of a lofty and powerful sigh. The sails filled,
the ship gathered way, and the waking sea began to murmur sleepily of
home to the ears of men.

That night, while the ship rushed foaming to the Northward before a
freshening gale, the boatswain unbosomed himself to the petty officers'
berth:--"The chap was nothing but trouble," he said, "from the moment he
came aboard--d'ye remember--that night in Bombay? Been bullying all
that softy crowd--cheeked the old man--we had to go fooling all over a
half-drowned ship to save him. Dam' nigh a mutiny all for him--and now
the mate abused me like a pickpocket for forgetting to dab a lump of
grease on them planks. So I did, but you ought to have known better,
too, than to leave a nail sticking up--hey, Chips?"

"And you ought to have known better than to chuck all my tools overboard
for 'im, like a skeary greenhorn," retorted the morose carpenter.
"Well--he's gone after 'em now," he added in an unforgiving tone.--"On the
China Station, I remember once, the Admiral he says to me..." began the
sailmaker.

A week afterwards the Narcissus entered the chops of the Channel.

Under white wings she skimmed low over the blue sea like a great tired
bird speeding to its nest. The clouds raced with her mastheads; they
rose astern enormous and white, soared to the zenith, flew past, and
falling down the wide curve of the sky, seemed to dash headlong into the
sea--the clouds swifter than the ship, more free, but without a home. The
coast to welcome her stepped out of space into the sunshine. The lofty
headlands trod masterfully into the sea; the wide bays smiled in the
light; the shadows of homeless clouds ran along the sunny plains, leaped
over valleys, without a check darted up the hills, rolled down
the slopes; and the sunshine pursued them with patches of running
brightness. On the brows of dark cliffs white lighthouses shone in
pillars of light. The Channel glittered like a blue mantle shot with
gold and starred by the silver of the capping seas. The Narcissus rushed
past the headlands and the bays. Outward-bound vessels crossed her
track, lying over, and with their masts stripped for a slogging fight
with the hard sou'wester. And, inshore, a string of smoking steamboats
waddled, hugging the coast, like migrating and amphibious monsters,
distrustful of the restless waves.

At night the headlands retreated, the bays advanced into one unbroken
line of gloom. The lights of the earth mingled with the lights of
heaven; and above the tossing lanterns of a trawling fleet a great
lighthouse shone steadily, like an enormous riding light burning above
a vessel of fabulous dimensions. Below its steady glow, the coast,
stretching away straight and black, resembled the high side of an
indestructible craft riding motionless upon the immortal and unresting
sea. The dark land lay alone in the midst of waters, like a mighty ship
bestarred with vigilant lights--a ship carrying the burden of millions
of lives--a ship freighted with dross and with jewels, with gold and with
steel. She towered up immense and strong, guarding priceless
traditions and untold suffering, sheltering glorious memories and base
forgetfulness, ignoble virtues and splendid transgressions. A great
ship! For ages had the ocean battered in vain her enduring sides; she
was there when the world was vaster and darker, when the sea was great
and mysterious, and ready to surrender the prize of fame to audacious
men. A ship mother of fleets and nations! The great flagship of the
race; stronger than the storms! and anchored in the open sea.

The Narcissus, heeling over to off-shore gusts, rounded the South
Foreland, passed through the Downs, and, in tow, entered the river.
Shorn of the glory of her white wings, she wound obediently after the
tug through the maze of invisible channels. As she passed them the
red-painted light-vessels, swung at their moorings, seemed for an
instant to sail with great speed in the rush of tide, and the next
moment were left hopelessly behind. The big buoys on the tails of banks
slipped past her sides very low, and, dropping in her wake, tugged at
their chains like fierce watchdogs. The reach narrowed; from both sides
the land approached the ship. She went steadily up the river. On the
riverside slopes the houses appeared in groups--seemed to stream down
the declivities at a run to see her pass, and, checked by the mud of the
foreshore, crowded on the banks. Further on, the tall factory chimneys
appeared in insolent bands and watched her go by, like a straggling
crowd of slim giants, swaggering and upright under the black plummets
of smoke, cavalierly aslant. She swept round the bends; an impure breeze
shrieked a welcome between her stripped spars; and the land, closing in,
stepped between the ship and the sea.

A low cloud hung before her--a great opalescent and tremulous cloud, that
seemed to rise from the steaming brows of millions of men. Long drifts
of smoky vapours soiled it with livid trails; it throbbed to the beat
of millions of hearts, and from it came an immense and lamentable
murmur--the murmur of millions of lips praying, cursing, sighing,
jeering--the undying murmur of folly, regret, and hope exhaled by the
crowds of the anxious earth. The Narcissus entered the cloud; the
shadows deepened; on all sides there was the clang of iron, the sound
of mighty blows, shrieks, yells. Black barges drifted stealthily on the
murky stream. A mad jumble of begrimed walls loomed up vaguely in the
smoke, bewildering and mournful, like a vision of disaster. The
tugs backed and filled in the stream, to hold the ship steady at the
dock-gates; from her bows two lines went through the air whistling, and
struck at the land viciously, like a pair of snakes. A bridge broke in
two before her, as if by enchantment; big hydraulic capstans began to
turn all by themselves, as though animated by a mysterious and unholy
spell. She moved through a narrow lane of water between two low walls
of granite, and men with check-ropes in their hands kept pace with her,
walking on the broad flagstones. A group waited impatiently on each side
of the vanished bridge: rough heavy men in caps; sallow-faced men in
high hats; two bareheaded women; ragged children, fascinated, and with
wide eyes. A cart coming at a jerky trot pulled up sharply. One of the
women screamed at the silent ship--"Hallo, Jack!" without looking at
any one in particular, and all hands looked at her from the forecastle
head.--"Stand clear! Stand clear of that rope!" cried the dockmen,
bending over stone posts. The crowd murmured, stamped where they
stood.--"Let go your quarter-checks! Let go!" sang out a ruddy-faced old
man on the quay. The ropes splashed heavily falling in the water, and
the Narcissus entered the dock.

The stony shores ran away right and left in straight lines, enclosing
a sombre and rectangular pool. Brick walls rose high above the
water!--soulless walls, staring through hundreds of windows as troubled
and dull as the eyes of over-fed brutes. At their base monstrous iron
cranes crouched, with chains hanging from their long necks, balancing
cruel-looking hooks over the decks of lifeless ships. A noise of wheels
rolling over stones, the thump of heavy things falling, the racket of
feverish winches, the grinding of strained chains, floated on the air.
Between high buildings the dust of all the continents soared in short
flights; and a penetrating smell of perfumes and dirt, of spices and
hides, of things costly and of things filthy, pervaded the space, made
for it an atmosphere precious and disgusting. The Narcissus came gently
into her berth; the shadows of soulless walls fell upon her, the dust
of all the continents leaped upon her deck, and a swarm of strange
men, clambering up her sides, took possession of her in the name of the
sordid earth. She had ceased to live.

A toff in a black coat and high hat scrambled with agility, came up to
the second mate, shook hands, and said:--"Hallo, Herbert." It was his
brother. A lady appeared suddenly. A real lady, in a black dress and
with a parasol. She looked extremely elegant in the midst of us, and as
strange as if she had fallen there from the sky. Mr. Baker touched his
cap to her. It was the master's wife. And very soon the Captain, dressed
very smartly and in a white shirt, went with her over the side. We
didn't recognise him at all till, turning on the quay, he called to Mr.
Baker:--"Don't forget to wind up the chronometers to-morrow morning." An
underhand lot of seedy-looking chaps with shifty eyes wandered in and
out of the forecastle looking for a job--they said.--"More likely for
something to steal," commented Knowles, cheerfully. Poor beggars. Who
cared? Weren't we home! But Mr. Baker went for one of them who had given
him some cheek, and we were delighted. Everything was delightful.--"I've
finished aft, sir," called out Mr. Creighton.--"No water in the well,
sir," reported for the last time the carpenter, sounding-rod in hand.
Mr. Baker glanced along the decks at the expectant group of sailors,
glanced aloft at the yards.--"Ough! That will do, men," he grunted. The
group broke up. The voyage was ended.

Rolled-up beds went flying over the rail; lashed chests went sliding
down the gangway--mighty few of both at that. "The rest is having a
cruise off the Cape," explained Knowles enigmatically to a dock-loafer
with whom he had struck a sudden friendship. Men ran, calling to one
another, hailing utter strangers to "lend a hand with the dunnage,"
then with sudden decorum approached the mate to shake hands before
going ashore.--"Good-bye, sir," they repeated in various tones. Mr. Baker
grasped hard palms, grunted in a friendly manner at every one, his eyes
twinkled.--"Take care of your money, Knowles. Ough! Soon get a nice wife
if you do." The lame man was delighted.--"Good-bye, sir," said Belfast,
with emotion, wringing the mate's hand, and looked up with swimming
eyes. "I thought I would take 'im ashore with me," he went on,
plaintively. Mr. Baker did not understand, but said kindly:--"Take
care of yourself, Craik," and the bereaved Belfast went over the rail
mourning and alone.

Mr. Baker, in the sudden peace of the ship, moved about solitary and
grunting, trying door-handles, peering into dark places, never done--a
model chief mate! No one waited for him ashore. Mother dead; father and
two brothers, Yarmouth fishermen, drowned together on the Dogger Bank;
sister married and unfriendly. Quite a lady. Married to the leading
tailor of a little town, and its leading politician, who did not think
his sailor brother-in-law quite respectable enough for him. Quite a
lady, quite a lady, he thought, sitting down for a moment's rest on the
quarter-hatch. Time enough to go ashore and get a bite and sup, and a
bed somewhere. He didn't like to part with a ship. No one to think about
then. The darkness of a misty evening fell, cold and damp, upon the
deserted deck; and Mr. Baker sat smoking, thinking of all the successive
ships to whom through many long years he had given the best of a
seaman's care. And never a command in sight. Not once!--"I haven't
somehow the cut of a skipper about me," he meditated, placidly, while
the shipkeeper (who had taken possession of the galley), a wizened
old man with bleared eyes, cursed him in whispers for "hanging about
so."--"Now, Creighton," he pursued the unenvious train of thought, "quite
a gentleman... swell friends... will get on. Fine young fellow... a
little more experience." He got up and shook himself. "I'll be back
first thing to-morrow morning for the hatches. Don't you let them touch
anything before I come, shipkeeper," he called out. Then, at last, he
also went ashore--a model chief mate!

The men scattered by the dissolving contact of the land came together
once more in the shipping office.---"The Narcissus pays off," shouted
outside a glazed door a brass-bound old fellow with a crown and the
capitals B. T. on his cap. A lot trooped in at once but many were late.
The room was large, white-washed, and bare; a counter surmounted by a
brass-wire grating fenced off a third of the dusty space, and behind the
grating a pasty-faced clerk, with his hair parted in the middle, had
the quick, glittering eyes and the vivacious, jerky movements of a caged
bird. Poor Captain Allistoun also in there, and sitting before a little
table with piles of gold and notes on it, appeared subdued by his
captivity. Another Board of Trade bird was perching on a high stool near
the door: an old bird that did not mind the chaff of elated sailors. The
crew of the Narcissus, broken up into knots, pushed in the corners. They
had new shore togs, smart jackets that looked as if they had been shaped
with an axe, glossy trousers that seemed made of crumpled sheet-iron,
collarless flannel shirts, shiny new boots. They tapped on shoulders,
button-holed one another, asked:--> "Where did you sleep last night?"
whispered gaily, slapped their thighs with bursts of subdued laughter.
Most had clean, radiant faces; only one or two turned up dishevelled
and sad; the two-young Norwegians looked tidy, meek, and altogether of
a promising material for the kind ladies who patronise the Scandinavian
Home. Wamibo, still in his working clothes, dreamed, upright and burly
in the middle of the room, and, when Archie came in, woke up for a
smile. But the wide-awake clerk called out a name, and the paying-off
business began.

One by one they came up to the pay-table to get the wages of their
glorious and obscure toil. They swept the money with care into broad
palms, rammed it trustfully into trousers' pockets, or, turning their
backs on the table, reckoned with difficulty in the hollow of their
stiff hands.--"Money right? Sign the release. There--there," repeated
the clerk, impatiently. "How stupid those sailors are!" he thought.
Singleton came up, venerable--and uncertain as to daylight; brown
drops of tobacco juice hung in his white beard; his hands, that never
hesitated in the great light of the open sea, could hardly find the
small pile of gold in the profound darkness of the shore. "Can't write?"
said the clerk, shocked. "Make a mark, then." Singleton painfully
sketched in a heavy cross, blotted the page. "What a disgusting old
brute," muttered the clerk. Somebody opened the door for him, and the
patriarchal seaman passed through unsteadily, without as much as a
glance at any of us.

Archie displayed a pocket-book. He was chaffed. Belfast, who looked
wild, as though he had already luffed up through a public-house or two,
gave signs of emotion and wanted to speak to the Captain privately. The
master was surprised. They spoke through the wires, and we could hear
the Captain saying:--"I've given it up to the Board of Trade." "I should
've liked to get something of his," mumbled Belfast. "But you can't,
my man. It's given up, locked and sealed, to the Marine Office,"
expostulated the master; and Belfast stood back, with drooping mouth and
troubled eyes. In a pause of the business we heard the master and the
clerk talking. We caught: "James Wait--deceased--found no papers of any
kind--no relations--no trace--the Office must hold his wages then." Donkin
entered. He seemed out of breath, was grave, full of business. He went
straight to the desk, talked with animation to the clerk, who thought
him an intelligent man. They discussed the account, dropping h's against
one another as if for a wager--very friendly. Captain Allistoun paid. "I
give you a bad discharge," he said, quietly. Donkin raised his voice:--"I
don't want your bloomin' discharge--keep it. I'm goin' ter 'ave a job
ashore." He turned to us. "No more bloomin' sea fur me," he said, aloud.
All looked at him. He had better clothes, had an easy air, appeared more
at home than any of us; he stared with assurance, enjoying the effect of
his declaration. "Yuss. I 'ave friends well off. That's more'n you got.
But I am a man. Yer shipmates for all that. Who's comin fur a drink?"

No one moved. There was a silence; a silence of blank faces and stony
looks. He waited a moment, smiled bitterly, and went to the door. There
he faced round once more. "You won't? You bloomin' lot of yrpocrits. No?
What 'ave I done to yer? Did I bully yer? Did I 'urt yer? Did I?... You
won't drink?... No!... Then may ye die of thirst, every mother's son
of yer! Not one of yer 'as the sperrit of a bug. Ye're the scum of the
world. Work and starve!"

He went out, and slammed the door with such violence that the old Board
of Trade bird nearly fell off his perch.

"He's mad," declared Archie. "No! No! He's drunk," insisted Belfast,
lurching about, and in a maudlin tone. Captain Allistoun sat smiling
thoughtfully at the cleared pay-table.

Outside, on Tower Hill, they blinked, hesitated clumsily, as if blinded
by the strange quality of the hazy light, as if discomposed by the view
of so many men; and they who could hear one another in the howl of gales
seemed deafened and distracted by the dull roar of the busy earth.--"To
the Black Horse! To the Black Horse!" cried some. "Let us have a
drink together before we part." They crossed the road, clinging to one
another. Only Charley and Belfast wandered off alone. As I came up I saw
a red-faced, blowsy woman, in a grey shawl, and with dusty, fluffy hair,
fall on Charley's neck. It was his mother. She slobbered over him:--"O,
my boy! My boy!"--"Leggo of me," said Charley, "Leggo, mother!" I was
passing him at the time, and over the untidy head of the blubbering
woman he gave me a humorous smile and a glance ironic, courageous, and
profound, that seemed to put all my knowledge of life to shame. I nodded
and passed on, but heard him say again, good-naturedly:--"If you leggo
of me this minyt--ye shall 'ave a bob for a drink out of my pay." In
the next few steps I came upon Belfast. He caught my arm with tremulous
enthusiasm.--"I couldn't go wi' 'em," he stammered, indicating by a nod
our noisy crowd, that drifted slowly along the other sidewalk. "When
I think of Jimmy... Poor Jim! When I think of him I have no heart for
drink. You were his chum, too... but I pulled him out... didn't I? Short
wool he had.... Yes. And I stole the blooming pie.... He wouldn't
go.... He wouldn't go for nobody." He burst into tears. "I never touched
him--never--never!" he sobbed. "He went for me like... like ... a lamb."

I disengaged myself gently. Belfast's crying fits generally ended in
a fight with some one, and I wasn't anxious to stand the brunt of
his inconsolable sorrow. Moreover, two bulky policemen stood near by,
looking at us with a disapproving and incorruptible gaze.--"So long!" I
said, and went on my way.

But at the corner I stopped to take my last look at the crew of
the Narcissus. They were swaying irresolute and noisy on the broad
flagstones before the Mint. They were bound for the Black Horse, where
men, in fur caps with brutal faces and in shirt sleeves, dispense out
of varnished barrels the illusions of strength, mirth, happiness; the
illusion of splendour and poetry of life, to the paid-off crews of
southern-going ships. From afar I saw them discoursing, with jovial eyes
and clumsy gestures, while the sea of life thundered into their ears
ceaseless and unheeded. And swaying about there on the white stones,
surrounded by the hurry and clamour of men, they appeared to be
creatures of another kind--lost, alone, forgetful, and doomed; they were
like castaways, like reckless and joyous castaways, like mad castaways
making merry in the storm and upon an insecure ledge of a treacherous
rock. The roar of the town resembled the roar of topping breakers,
merciless and strong, with a loud voice and cruel purpose; but overhead
the clouds broke; a flood of sunshine streamed down the walls of grimy
houses. The dark knot of seamen drifted in sunshine. To the left of them
the trees in Tower Gardens sighed, the stones of the Tower gleaming,
seemed to stir in the play of light, as if remembering suddenly all the
great joys and sorrows of the past, the fighting prototypes of these
men; press-gangs; mutinous cries; the wailing of women by the riverside,
and the shouts of men welcoming victories. The sunshine of heaven fell
like a gift of grace on the mud of the earth, on the remembering and
mute stones, on greed, selfishness; on the anxious faces of forgetful
men. And to the right of the dark group the stained front of the Mint,
cleansed by the flood of light, stood out for a moment dazzling and
white like a marble palace in a fairy tale. The crew of the Narcissus
drifted out of sight.

I never saw them again. The sea took some, the steamers took others,
the graveyards of the earth will account for the rest. Singleton has
no doubt taken with him the long record of his faithful work into the
peaceful depths of an hospitable sea. And Donkin, who never did a decent
day's work in his life, no doubt earns his living by discoursing with
filthy eloquence upon the right of labour to live. So be it! Let the
earth and the sea each have its own.

A gone shipmate, like any other man, is gone for ever; and I never met
one of them again. But at times the spring-flood of memory sets with
force up the dark River of the Nine Bends. Then on the waters of the
forlorn stream drifts a ship--a shadowy ship manned by a crew of Shades.
They pass and make a sign, in a shadowy hail. Haven't we, together
and upon the immortal sea, wrung out a meaning from our sinful lives?
Good-bye, brothers! You were a good crowd. As good a crowd as ever
fisted with wild cries the beating canvas of a heavy foresail; or
tossing aloft, invisible in the night, gave back yell for yell to a
westerly gale.

THE END



THE POINT OF HONOR

BY

A MILITARY TALE

BY

JOSEPH CONRAD



ILLUSTRATIONS BY DAN SAYRE GROESBECK


NEW YORK

THE MCCLURE COMPANY

MCMVIII

Copyright, 1908, by The McClure Company

Copyright, 1907, 1908, by Joseph Conrad



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"You will fight no more duels now" Frontispiece

"Bowing before a sylph-like form reclining on a couch"

"The angry clash of arms filled that prim garden"

"You take the nearest brute, Colonel D'Hubert"




I

Napoleon the First, whose career had the quality of a duel against the
whole of Europe, disliked duelling between the officers of his army. The
great military emperor was not a swashbuckler, and had little respect
for tradition.

Nevertheless, a story of duelling which became a legend in the army runs
through the epic of imperial wars. To the surprise and admiration of
their fellows, two officers, like insane artists trying to gild refined
gold or paint the lily, pursued their private contest through the
years of universal carnage. They were officers of cavalry, and their
connection with the high-spirited but fanciful animal which carries men
into battle seems particularly appropriate. It would be difficult to
imagine for heroes of this legend two officers of infantry of the line,
for example, whose fantasy is tamed by much walking exercise and whose
valour necessarily must be of a more plodding kind. As to artillery,
or engineers whose heads are kept cool on a diet of mathematics, it is
simply unthinkable.

The names of the two officers were Feraud and D'Hubert, and they were
both lieutenants in a regiment of hussars, but not in the same regiment.

Feraud was doing regimental work, but Lieutenant D'Hubert had the good
fortune to be attached to the person of the general commanding the
division, as _officier d'ordonnance_. It was in Strasbourg, and in this
agreeable and important garrison, they were enjoying greatly a short
interval of peace. They were enjoying it, though both intensely warlike,
because it was a sword-sharpening, firelock-cleaning peace dear to a
military heart and undamaging to military prestige inasmuch that no one
believed in its sincerity or duration.

Under those historical circumstances so favourable to the proper
appreciation of military leisure Lieutenant D'Hubert could have been
seen one fine afternoon making his way along the street of a cheerful
suburb towards Lieutenant Feraud's quarters, which were in a private
house with a garden at the back, belonging to an old maiden lady.

His knock at the door was answered instantly by a young maid in Alsatian
costume. Her fresh complexion and her long eyelashes, which she lowered
modestly at the sight of the tall officer, caused Lieutenant D'Hubert,
who was accessible to esthetic impressions, to relax the cold, on-duty
expression of his face. At the same time he observed that the girl had
over her arm a pair of hussar's breeches, red with a blue stripe.

"Lieutenant Feraud at home?" he inquired benevolently.

"Oh, no, sir. He went out at six this morning."

And the little maid tried to close the door, but Lieutenant D'Hubert,
opposing this move with gentle firmness, stepped into the anteroom
jingling his spurs.

"Come, my dear. You don't mean to say he has not been home since six
o'clock this morning?"

Saying these words, Lieutenant D'Hubert opened without ceremony the
door of a room so comfortable and neatly ordered that only from internal
evidence in the shape of boots, uniforms and military accoutrements, did
he acquire the conviction that it was Lieutenant Feraud's room. And he
saw also that Lieutenant Feraud was not at home. The truthful maid had
followed him and looked up inquisitively.

"H'm," said Lieutenant D'Hubert, greatly disappointed, for he had
already visited all the haunts where a lieutenant of hussars could be
found of a fine afternoon. "And do you happen to know, my dear, why he
went out at six this morning?"

"No," she answered readily. "He came home late at night and snored. I
heard him when I got up at five. Then he dressed himself in his oldest
uniform and went out. Service, I suppose."

"Service? Not a bit of it!" cried Lieutenant D'Hubert. "Learn, my child,
that he went out so early to fight a duel with a civilian."

She heard the news without a quiver of her dark eyelashes. It was very
obvious that the actions of Lieutenant Feraud were generally above
criticism. She only looked up for a moment in mute surprise, and
Lieutenant D'Hubert concluded from this absence of emotion that she
must have seen Lieutenant Feraud since the morning. He looked around the
room.

"Come," he insisted, with confidential familiarity. "He's perhaps
somewhere in the house now?"

She shook her head.

"So much the worse for him," continued Lieutenant D'Hubert, in a tone of
anxious conviction. "But he has been home this morning?"

This time the pretty maid nodded slightly.

"He has!" cried Lieutenant D'Hubert. "And went out again? What for?
Couldn't he keep quietly indoors? What a lunatic! My dear child...."

Lieutenant D'Hubert's natural kindness of disposition and strong sense
of comradeship helped his powers of observation, which generally were
not remarkable. He changed his tone to a most insinuating softness; and
gazing at the hussar's breeches hanging over the arm of the girl, he
appealed to the interest she took in Lieutenant Feraud's comfort and
happiness. He was pressing and persuasive. He used his eyes, which were
large and fine, with excellent effect. His anxiety to get hold at
once of Lieutenant Feraud, for Lieutenant Feraud's own good, seemed so
genuine that at last it overcame the girl's discretion. Unluckily she
had not much to tell. Lieutenant Feraud had returned home shortly before
ten; had walked straight into his room and had thrown himself on his
bed to resume his slumbers. She had heard him snore rather louder than
before far into the afternoon. Then he got up, put on his best uniform
and went out. That was all she knew.

She raised her candid eyes up to Lieutenant D'Hubert, who stared at her
incredulously.

"It's incredible. Gone parading the town in his best uniform! My dear
child, don't you know that he ran that civilian through this morning?
Clean through as you spit a hare."

She accepted this gruesome intelligence without any signs of distress.
But she pressed her lips together thoughtfully.

"He isn't parading the town," she remarked, in a low tone. "Far from
it."

"The civilian's family is making an awful row," continued Lieutenant
D'Hubert, pursuing his train of thought. "And the general is very angry.
It's one of the best families in the town. Feraud ought to have kept
close at least...."

"What will the general do to him?" inquired the girl anxiously.

"He won't have his head cut off, to be sure," answered Lieutenant
D'Hubert. "But his conduct is positively indecent. He's making no end of
trouble for himself by this sort of bravado."

"But he isn't parading the town," the maid murmured again.

"Why, yes! Now I think of it. I haven't seen him anywhere. What on earth
has he done with himself?"

"He's gone to pay a call," suggested the maid, after a moment of
silence.

Lieutenant D'Hubert was surprised. "A call! Do you mean a call on a
lady? The cheek of the man. But how do you know this?"

Without concealing her woman's scorn for the denseness of the masculine
mind, the pretty maid reminded him that Lieutenant Feraud had arrayed
himself in his best uniform before going out. He had also put on his
newest dolman, she added in a tone as if this conversation were getting
on her nerves and turned away brusquely. Lieutenant D'Hubert, without
questioning the accuracy of the implied deduction, did not see that it
advanced him much on his official quest. For his quest after Lieutenant
Feraud had an official character. He did not know any of the women this
fellow who had run a man through in the morning was likely to call on in
the afternoon. The two officers knew each other but slightly. He bit his
gloved finger in perplexity.

"Call!" he exclaimed. "Call on the devil." The girl, with her back to
him and folding the hussar's breeches on a chair, said with a vexed
little laugh:

"Oh, no! On Madame de Lionne." Lieutenant D'Hubert whistled softly.
Madame de Lionne, the wife of a high official, had a well-known salon
and some pretensions to sensibility and elegance. The husband was a
civilian and old, but the society of the salon was young and military
for the greater part. Lieutenant D'Hubert had whistled, not because the
idea of pursuing Lieutenant Feraud into that very salon was in the least
distasteful to him, but because having but lately arrived in Strasbourg
he had not the time as yet to get an introduction to Madame de Lionne.
And what was that swashbuckler Feraud doing there? He did not seem the
sort of man who...

"Are you certain of what you say?" asked Lieutenant D'Hubert.

The girl was perfectly certain. Without turning round to look at him
she explained that the coachman of their next-door neighbours knew
the _maitre-d'hôtel_ of Madame de Lionne. In this way she got her
information. And she was perfectly certain. In giving this assurance she
sighed. Lieutenant Feraud called there nearly every afternoon.

"Ah, bah!" exclaimed D'Hubert ironically. His opinion of Madame de
Lionne went down several degrees. Lieutenant Feraud did not seem to him
specially worthy of attention on the part of a woman with a reputation
for sensibility and elegance. But there was no saying. At bottom they
were all alike--very practical rather than idealistic. Lieutenant
D'Hubert, however, did not allow his mind to dwell on these
considerations. "By thunder!" he reflected aloud. "The general goes
there sometimes. If he happens to find the fellow making eyes at
the lady there will be the devil to pay. Our general is not a very
accommodating person, I can tell you."

"Go quickly then. Don't stand here now I've told you where he is," cried
the girl, colouring to the eyes.

"Thanks, my dear. I don't know what I would have done without you."

After manifesting his gratitude in an aggressive way which at first was
repulsed violently and then submitted to with a sudden and still more
repellent indifference, Lieutenant D'Hubert took his departure.

He clanked and jingled along the streets with a martial swagger. To
run a comrade to earth in a drawing-room where he was not known did not
trouble him in the least. A uniform is a social passport. His position
as _officier d'ordonnance_ of the general added to his assurance.
Moreover, now he knew where to find Lieutenant Feraud, he had no option.
It was a service matter.

Madame de Lionne's house had an excellent appearance. A man in livery
opening the door of a large drawing-room with a waxed floor, shouted his
name and stood aside to let him pass. It was a reception day. The
ladies wearing hats surcharged with a profusion of feathers, sheathed in
clinging white gowns from their armpits to the tips of their low satin
shoes, looked sylphlike and cool in a great display of bare necks
and arms. The men who talked with them, on the contrary, were arrayed
heavily in ample, coloured garments with stiff collars up to their
ears and thick sashes round their waists. Lieutenant D'Hubert made his
unabashed way across the room, and bowing low before a sylphlike form
reclining on a couch, offered his apologies for this intrusion, which
nothing could excuse but the extreme urgency of the service order he
had to communicate to his comrade Feraud. He proposed to himself to come
presently in a more regular manner and beg forgiveness for interrupting
this interesting conversation....

A bare arm was extended to him with gracious condescension even before
he had finished speaking. He pressed the hand respectfully to his lips
and made the mental remark that it was bony. Madame de Lionne was a
blonde with too fine a skin and a long face.

"_C'est ça!_" she said, with an ethereal smile, disclosing a set of
large teeth. "Come this evening to plead for your forgiveness."

"I will not fail, madame."

Meantime Lieutenant Feraud, splendid in his new dolman and the extremely
polished boots of his calling, sat on a chair within a foot of the couch
and, one hand propped on his thigh, with the other twirled his moustache
to a point without uttering a sound. At a significant glance from
D'Hubert he rose without alacrity and followed him into the recess of a
window.

"What is it you want with me?" he asked in a tone of annoyance, which
astonished not a little the other. Lieutenant D'Hubert could not imagine
that in the innocence of his heart and simplicity of his conscience
Lieutenant Feraud took a view of his duel in which neither remorse
nor yet a rational apprehension of consequences had any place. Though
Lieutenant Feraud had no clear recollection how the quarrel had
originated (it was begun in an establishment where beer and wine are
drunk late at night), he had not the slightest doubt of being himself
the outraged party. He had secured two experienced friends or his
seconds. Everything had been done according to the rules governing that
sort of adventure. And a duel is obviously fought for the purpose of
someone being at least hurt if not killed outright. The civilian got
hurt. That also was in order. Lieutenant Feraud was perfectly tranquil.
But Lieutenant D'Hubert mistook this simple attitude for affectation and
spoke with some heat.

"I am directed by the general to give you the order to go at once to
your quarters and remain there under close arrest."

It was now the turn of Lieutenant Feraud to be astonished.

"What the devil are you telling me there?" he murmured faintly, and fell
into such profound wonder that he could only follow mechanically the
motions of Lieutenant D'Hubert. The two officers--one tall, with an
interesting face and a moustache the colour of ripe corn, the other
short and sturdy, with a hooked nose and a thick crop of black, curly
hair--approached the mistress of the house to take their leave. Madame
de Lionne, a woman of eclectic taste, smiled upon these armed young men
with impartial sensibility and an equal share of interest. Madame de
Lionne took her delight in the infinite variety of the human species.
All the eyes in the drawing-room followed the departing officers, one
strutting, the other striding, with curiosity. When the door had closed
after them one or two men who had already heard of the duel imparted the
information to the sylphlike ladies, who received it with little shrieks
of humane concern.

Meantime the two hussars walked side by side, Lieutenant Feraud trying
to fathom the hidden reason of things which in this instance eluded the
grasp of his intellect; Lieutenant D'Hubert feeling bored by the part he
had to play; because the general's instructions were that he should see
personally that Lieutenant Feraud carried out his orders to the letter
and at once.

"The chief seems to know this animal," he thought, eyeing his companion,
whose round face, the round eyes and even the twisted-up jet black
little moustache seemed animated by his mental exasperation before
the incomprehensible. And aloud he observed rather reproachfully, "The
general is in a devilish fury with you."

Lieutenant Feraud stopped short on the edge of the pavement and cried
in the accents of unmistakable sincerity: "What on earth for?" The
innocence of the fiery Gascon soul was depicted in the manner in which
he seized his head in both his hands as if to prevent it bursting with
perplexity.

"For the duel," said Lieutenant D'Hubert curtly. He was annoyed greatly
by this sort of perverse fooling.

"The duel! The..."

Lieutenant Feraud passed from one paroxysm of astonishment into another.
He dropped his hands and walked on slowly trying to reconcile this
information with the state of his own feelings. It was impossible. He
burst out indignantly:

"Was I to let that sauerkraut-eating civilian wipe his boots on the
uniform of the Seventh Hussars?"

Lieutenant D'Hubert could not be altogether unsympathetic toward that
sentiment. This little fellow is a lunatic, he thought to himself, but
there is something in what he says.

"Of course, I don't know how far you were justified," he said
soothingly. "And the general himself may not be exactly informed. A lot
of people have been deafening him with their lamentations."

"Ah, he is not exactly informed," mumbled Lieutenant Feraud, walking
faster and faster as his choler at the injustice of his fate began to
rise. "He is not exactly.... And he orders me under close arrest with
God knows what afterward."

"Don't excite yourself like this," remonstrated the other. "That young
man's people are very influential, you know, and it looks bad enough
on the face of it. The general had to take notice of their complaint at
once. I don't think he means to be over-severe with you. It is best for
you to be kept out of sight for a while."

"I am very much obliged to the general," muttered Lieutenant Feraud
through his teeth.

"And perhaps you would say I ought to be grateful to you too for the
trouble you have taken to hunt me up in the drawing-room of a lady
who..."

"Frankly," interrupted Lieutenant D'Hubert, with an innocent laugh, "I
think you ought to be. I had no end of trouble to find out where you
were. It wasn't exactly the place for you to disport yourself in under
the circumstances. If the general had caught you there making eyes at
the goddess of the temple.... Oh, my word!... He hates to be bothered
with complaints against his officers, you know. And it looked uncommonly
like sheer bravado."

The two officers had arrived now at the street door of Lieutenant
Feraud's lodgings. The latter turned toward his companion. "Lieutenant
D'Hubert," he said, "I have something to say to you which can't be said
very well in the street. You can't refuse to come in."

The pretty maid had opened the door. Lieutenant Feraud brushed past
her brusquely and she raised her scared, questioning eyes to Lieutenant
D'Hubert, who could do nothing but shrug his shoulders slightly as he
followed with marked reluctance.

In his room Lieutenant Feraud unhooked the clasp, flung his new dolman
on the bed, and folding his arms across his chest, turned to the other
hussar.

"Do you imagine I am a man to submit tamely to injustice?" he inquired
in a boisterous voice.

"Oh, do be reasonable," remonstrated Lieutenant D'Hubert.

"I am reasonable. I am perfectly reasonable," retorted the other,
ominously lowering his voice. "I can't call the general to account for
his behaviour, but you are going to answer to me for yours."

"I can't listen to this nonsense," murmured Lieutenant D'Hubert, making
a slightly contemptuous grimace.

"You call that nonsense. It seems to me perfectly clear. Unless you
don't understand French."

"What on earth do you mean?"

"I mean," screamed suddenly Lieutenant Feraud, "to cut off your ears to
teach you not to disturb me, orders or no orders, when I am talking to a
lady."

A profound silence followed this mad declaration--and through the open
window Lieutenant D'Hubert heard the little birds singing sanely in the
garden. He said coldly:

"Why! If you take that tone, of course I will hold myself at your
disposal whenever you are at liberty to attend to this affair. But I
don't think you will cut off my ears."

"I am going to attend to it at once," declared Lieutenant Feraud, with
extreme truculence. "If you are thinking of displaying your airs and
graces to-night in Madame de Lionne's salon you are very much mistaken."

"Really," said Lieutenant D'Hubert, who was beginning to feel irritated,
"you are an impracticable sort of fellow. The general's orders to
me were to put you under arrest, not to carve you into small pieces.
Good-morning." Turning his back on the little Gascon who, always sober
in his potations, was as though born intoxicated, with the sunshine
of his wine-ripening country, the northman, who could drink hard on
occasion, but was born sober under the watery skies of Picardy, made
calmly for the door. Hearing, however, the unmistakable sound, behind
his back, of a sword drawn from the scabbard, he had no option but to
stop.

"Devil take this mad Southerner," he thought, spinning round and
surveying with composure the warlike posture of Lieutenant Feraud with
the unsheathed sword in his hand.

"At once. At once," stuttered Feraud, beside himself.

"You had my answer," said the other, keeping his temper very well.

At first he had been only vexed and somewhat amused. But now his face
got clouded. He was asking himself seriously how he could manage to get
away. Obviously it was impossible to run from a man with a sword, and as
to fighting him, it seemed completely out of the question.

He waited awhile, then said exactly what was in his heart:

"Drop this; I won't fight you now. I won't be made ridiculous."

"Ah, you won't!" hissed the Gascon. "I suppose you prefer to be made
infamous. Do you hear what I say?... Infamous! Infamous! Infamous!" he
shrieked, raising and falling on his toes and getting very red in the
face. Lieutenant D'Hubert, on the contrary, became very pale at the
sound of the unsavoury word, then flushed pink to the roots of his fair
hair.

"But you can't go out to fight; you are under arrest, you lunatic," he
objected, with angry scorn.

"There's the garden. It's big enough to lay out your long carcass in,"
spluttered out Lieutenant Feraud with such ardour that somehow the anger
of the cooler man subsided.

"This is perfectly absurd," he said, glad enough to think he had found a
way out of it for the moment. "We will never get any of our comrades to
serve as seconds. It's preposterous."

"Seconds! Damn the seconds! We don't want any seconds. Don't you worry
about any seconds. I will send word to your friends to come and bury
you when I am done. This is no time for ceremonies. And if you want
any witnesses, I'll send word to the old girl to put her head out of a
window at the back. Stay! There's the gardener. He'll do. He's as deaf
as a post, but he has two eyes in his head. Come along. I will teach
you, my staff officer, that the carrying about of a general's orders is
not always child's play."

While thus discoursing he had unbuckled his empty scabbard. He sent it
flying under the bed, and, lowering the point of the sword, brushed past
the perplexed Lieutenant D'Hubert, crying: "Follow me." Directly he had
flung open the door a faint shriek was heard, and the pretty maid, who
had been listening at the keyhole, staggered backward, putting the backs
of her hands over her eyes. He didn't seem to see her, but as he was
crossing the anteroom she ran after him and seized his left arm. He
shook her off and then she rushed upon Lieutenant D'Hubert and clawed at
the sleeve of his uniform.

"Wretched man," she sobbed despairingly. "Is this what you wanted to
find him for?"

"Let me go," entreated Lieutenant D'Hubert, trying to disengage himself
gently. "It's like being in a madhouse," he protested with exasperation.
"Do let me go, I won't do him any harm."

A fiendish laugh from Lieutenant Feraud commented that assurance. "Come
along," he cried impatiently, with a stamp of his foot.

And Lieutenant D'Hubert did follow. He could do nothing else. But in
vindication of his sanity it must be recorded that as he passed out
of the anteroom the notion of opening the street door and bolting out
presented itself to this brave youth, only, of course, to be instantly
dismissed: for he felt sure that the other would pursue him without
shame or compunction. And the prospect of an officer of hussars being
chased along the street by another officer of hussars with a naked sword
could not be for a moment entertained. Therefore he followed into the
garden. Behind them the girl tottered out too. With ashy lips and wild,
scared eyes, she surrendered to a dreadful curiosity. She had also
a vague notion of rushing, if need be, between Lieutenant Feraud and
death.

The deaf gardener, utterly unconscious of approaching footsteps, went
on watering his flowers till Lieutenant Feraud thumped him on the back.
Beholding suddenly an infuriated man, flourishing a big sabre, the old
chap, trembling in all his limbs, dropped the watering pot. At once
Lieutenant Feraud kicked it away with great animosity; then seizing the
gardener by the throat, backed him against a tree and held him there
shouting in his ear:

"Stay here and look on. You understand you've got to look on. Don't dare
budge from the spot."

Lieutenant D'Hubert, coming slowly down the walk, unclasped his dolman
with undisguised reluctance. Even then, with his hand already on his
sword, he hesitated to draw, till a roar "_En garde, fichtre!_ What do
you think you came here for?" and the rush of his adversary forced him
to put himself as quickly as possible in a posture of defence.

The angry clash of arms filled that prim garden, which hitherto had
known no more warlike sound than the click of clipping shears; and
presently the upper part of an old lady's body was projected out of
a window upstairs. She flung her arms above her white cap, and began
scolding in a thin, cracked voice. The gardener remained glued to the
tree looking on, his toothless mouth open in idiotic astonishment, and
a little farther up the walk the pretty girl, as if held by a spell,
ran to and fro on a small grass plot, wringing her hands and muttering
crazily. She did not rush between the combatants. The onslaughts of
Lieutenant Feraud were so fierce that her heart failed her.

Lieutenant D'Hubert, his faculties concentrated upon defence, needed all
his skill and science of the sword to stop the rushes of his adversary.
Twice already he had had to break ground.

[Illustration: 028.jpg "The angry clash of arms filled that prim
garden"]

It bothered him to feel his foothold made insecure by the round dry
gravel of the path rolling under the hard soles of his boots. This was
most unsuitable ground, he thought, keeping a watchful, narrowed
gaze shaded by long eyelashes upon the fiery staring eyeballs of his
thick-set adversary. This absurd affair would ruin his reputation of a
sensible, steady, promising young officer. It would damage, at any rate,
his immediate prospects and lose him the good will of his general. These
worldly preoccupations were no doubt misplaced in view of the solemnity
of the moment. For a duel whether regarded as a ceremony in the cult of
honour or even when regrettably casual and reduced in its moral essence
to a distinguished form of manly sport, demands perfect singleness of
intention, a homicidal austerity of mood. On the other hand, this vivid
concern for the future in a man occupied in keeping sudden death at
sword's length from his breast, had not a bad effect, inasmuch as it
began to rouse the slow anger of Lieutenant D'Hubert. Some seventy
seconds had elapsed since they had crossed steel and Lieutenant D'Hubert
had to break ground again in order to avoid impaling his reckless
adversary like a beetle for a cabinet of specimens. The result was that,
misapprehending the motive, Lieutenant Feraud, giving vent to triumphant
snarls, pressed his attack with renewed vigour.

This enraged animal, thought D'Hubert, will have me against the wall
directly. He imagined himself much closer to the house than he was; and
he dared not turn his head, such an act under the circumstances being
equivalent to deliberate suicide. It seemed to him that he was
keeping his adversary off with his eyes much more than with his point.
Lieutenant Feraud crouched and bounded with a tigerish, ferocious
agility--enough to trouble the stoutest heart. But what was more
appalling than the fury of a wild beast accomplishing in all innocence
of heart a natural function, was the fixity of savage purpose man
alone is capable of displaying. Lieutenant D'Hubert in the midst of
his worldly preoccupations perceived it at last. It was an absurd and
damaging affair to be drawn into. But whatever silly intention the
fellow had started with, it was clear that by this time he meant to
kill--nothing else. He meant it with an intensity of will utterly beyond
the inferior faculties of a tiger.

As is the case with constitutionally brave men, the full view of the
danger interested Lieutenant D'Hubert. And directly he got properly
interested, the length of his arm and the coolness of his head told in
his favour. It was the turn of Lieutenant Feraud to recoil. He did this
with a blood-curdling grunt of baffled rage. He made a swift feint and
then rushed straight forward.

"Ah! you would, would you?" Lieutenant D'Hubert exclaimed mentally to
himself. The combat had lasted nearly two minutes, time enough for any
man to get embittered, apart from the merits of the quarrel. And all at
once it was over. Trying to close breast to breast under his adversary's
guard, Lieutenant Feraud received a slash on his shortened arm. He did
not feel it in the least, but it checked his rush, and his feet slipping
on the gravel, he fell backward with great violence. The shock
jarred his boiling brain into the perfect quietude of insensibility.
Simultaneously with his fall the pretty servant girl shrieked
piercingly; but the old maiden lady at the window ceased her scolding
and with great presence of mind began to cross herself.

In the first moment, seeing his adversary lying perfectly still, his
face to the sky and his toes turned up, Lieutenant D'Hubert thought he
had killed him outright. The impression of having slashed hard enough
to cut his man clean in two abode with him for awhile in an exaggerated
impression of the right good will he had put into the blow. He went down
on his knees by the side of the prostrate body. Discovering that not
even the arm was severed, a slight sense of disappointment mingled with
the feeling of relief. But, indeed, he did not want the death of that
sinner. The affair was ugly enough as it stood. Lieutenant D'Hubert
addressed himself at once to the task of stopping the bleeding. In this
task it was his fate to be ridiculously impeded by the pretty maid. The
girl, filling the garden with cries for help, flung herself upon his
defenceless back and, twining her fingers in his hair, tugged at his
head. Why she should choose to hinder him at this precise moment he
could not in the least understand. He did not try. It was all like
a very wicked and harassing dream. Twice, to save himself from being
pulled over, he had to rise and throw her off. He did this stoically,
without a word, kneeling down again at once to go on with his work. But
when the work was done he seized both her arms and held them down. Her
cap was half off, her face was red, her eyes glared with crazy boldness.
He looked mildly into them while she called him a wretch, a traitor and
a murderer many times in succession. This did not annoy him so much as
the conviction that in her scurries she had managed to scratch his face
abundantly. Ridicule would be added to the scandal of the story. He
imagined it making its way through the garrison, through the whole army,
with every possible distortion of motive and sentiment and circumstance,
spreading a doubt upon the sanity of his conduct and the distinction of
his taste even into the very bosom of his honourable family. It was all
very well for that fellow Feraud, who had no connections, no family
to speak of, and no quality but courage which, anyhow, was a matter
of course, and possessed by every single trooper in the whole mass of
French cavalry. Still holding the wrists of the girl in a strong grip,
Lieutenant D'Hubert looked over his shoulder. Lieutenant Feraud had
opened his eyes. He did not move. Like a man just waking from a deep
sleep he stared with a drowsy expression at the evening sky.

Lieutenant D'Hubert's urgent shouts to the old gardener produced no
effect--not so much as to make him shut his toothless mouth. Then
he remembered that the man was stone deaf. All that time the girl,
attempting to free her wrists, struggled, not with maidenly coyness but
like a sort of pretty dumb fury, not even refraining from kicking
his shins now and then. He continued to hold her as if in a vice, his
instinct telling him that were he to let her go she would fly at his
eyes. But he was greatly humiliated by his position. At last she gave
up, more exhausted than appeased, he feared. Nevertheless he attempted
to get out of this wicked dream by way of negotiation.

"Listen to me," he said as calmly as he could. "Will you promise to run
for a surgeon if I let you go?"

He was profoundly afflicted when, panting, sobbing, and choking, she
made it clear that she would do nothing of the kind. On the contrary,
her incoherent intentions were to remain in the garden and fight with
her nails and her teeth for the protection of the prostrate man. This
was horrible.

"My dear child," he cried in despair, "is it possible that you think me
capable of murdering a wounded adversary? Is it.... Be quiet, you little
wildcat, you," he added.

She struggled. A thick sleepy voice said behind him:

"What are you up to with that girl?"

Lieutenant Feraud had raised himself on his good arm. He was looking
sleepily at his other arm, at the mess of blood on his uniform, at a
small red pool on the ground, at his sabre lying a foot away on the
path. Then he laid himself down gently again to think it all out as far
as a thundering headache would permit of mental operations.

Lieutenant D'Hubert released the girl's wrists. She flew away down the
path and crouched wildly by the side of the vanquished warrior. The
shades of night were falling on the little trim garden with this
touching group whence proceeded low murmurs of sorrow and compassion
with other feeble sounds of a different character as if an imperfectly
awake invalid were trying to swear. Lieutenant D'Hubert went away, too
exasperated to care what would happen.

He passed through the silent house and congratulated himself upon the
dusk concealing his gory hands and scratched face from the passers-by.
But this story could by no means be concealed. He dreaded the discredit
and ridicule above everything, and was painfully aware of sneaking
through the back streets to his quarters. In one of these quiet side
streets the sounds of a flute coming out of the open window of a lighted
upstairs room in a modest house interrupted his dismal reflections. It
was being played with a deliberate, persevering virtuosity, and through
the _fioritures_ of the tune one could even hear the thump of the foot
beating time on the floor.

Lieutenant D'Hubert shouted a name which was that of an army surgeon
whom he knew fairly well. The sounds of the flute ceased and the
musician appeared at the window, his instrument still in his hand,
peering into the street.

"Who calls? You, D'Hubert! What brings you this way?"

He did not like to be disturbed when he was playing the flute. He was a
man whose hair had turned gray already in the thankless task of tying up
wounds on battlefields where others reaped advancement and glory.

"I want you to go at once and see Feraud. You know Lieutenant Feraud? He
lives down the second street. It's but a step from here."

"What's the matter with him?"

"Wounded."

"Are you sure?"

"Sure!" cried D'Hubert. "I come from there."

"That's amusing," said the elderly surgeon. Amusing was his favourite
word; but the expression of his face when he pronounced it never
corresponded. He was a stolid man. "Come in," he added. "I'll get ready
in a moment."

"Thanks. I will. I want to wash my hands in your room."

Lieutenant D'Hubert found the surgeon occupied in unscrewing his flute
and packing the pieces methodically in a velvet-lined case. He turned
his head.

"Water there--in the corner. Your hands do want washing."

"I've stopped the bleeding," said Lieutenant D'Hubert. "But you had
better make haste. It's rather more than ten minutes ago, you know."

The surgeon did not hurry his movements.

"What's the matter? Dressing came off? That's amusing. I've been busy
in the hospital all day, but somebody has told me that he hadn't a
scratch."

"Not the same duel probably," growled moodily Lieutenant D'Hubert,
wiping his hands on a coarse towel.

"Not the same.... What? Another? It would take the very devil to make
me go out twice in one day." He looked narrowly at Lieutenant
D'Hubert. "How did you come by that scratched face? Both sides too--and
symmetrical. It's amusing."

"Very," snarled Lieutenant D'Hubert. "And you will find his slashed arm
amusing too. It will keep both of you amused for quite a long time."

The doctor was mystified and impressed by the brusque bitterness of
Lieutenant D'Hubert's tone. They left the house together, and in the
street he was still more mystified by his conduct.

"Aren't you coming with me?" he asked.

"No," said Lieutenant D'Hubert. "You can find the house by yourself. The
front door will be open very likely."

"All right. Where's his room?"

"Ground floor. But you had better go right through and look in the
garden first."

This astonishing piece of information made the surgeon go off without
further parley. Lieutenant D'Hubert regained his quarters nursing a hot
and uneasy indignation. He dreaded the chaff of his comrades almost
as much as the anger of his superiors. He felt as though he had been
entrapped into a damaging exposure. The truth was confoundedly grotesque
and embarrassing to justify; putting aside the irregularity of the
combat itself which made it come dangerously near a criminal offence.
Like all men without much imagination, which is such a help in the
processes of reflective thought, Lieutenant D'Hubert became frightfully
harassed by the obvious aspects of his predicament. He was certainly
glad that he had not killed Lieutenant Feraud outside all rules and
without the regular witnesses proper to such a transaction. Uncommonly
glad. At the same time he felt as though he would have liked to wring
his neck for him without ceremony.

He was still under the sway of these contradictory sentiments when the
surgeon amateur of the flute came to see him. More than three days had
elapsed. Lieutenant D'Hubert was no longer _officier d'ordonnance_
to the general commanding the division. He had been sent back to his
regiment. And he was resuming his connection with the soldiers' military
family, by being shut up in close confinement not at his own quarters
in town, but in a room in the barracks. Owing to the gravity of the
incident, he was allowed to see no one. He did not know what had
happened, what was being said or what was being thought. The arrival
of the surgeon was a most unexpected event to the worried captive. The
amateur of the flute began by explaining that he was there only by a
special favour of the colonel who had thought fit to relax the general
isolation order for this one occasion.

"I represented to him that it would be only fair to give you authentic
news of your adversary," he continued. "You'll be glad to hear he's
getting better fast."

Lieutenant D'Hubert's face exhibited no conventional signs of gladness.
He continued to walk the floor of the dusty bare room.

"Take this chair, doctor," he mumbled.

The doctor sat down.

"This affair is variously appreciated in town and in the army. In fact
the diversity of opinions is amusing."

"Is it?" mumbled Lieutenant D'Hubert, tramping steadily from wall to
wall. But within himself he marvelled that there could be two opinions
on the matter. The surgeon continued:

"Of course as the real facts are not known--"

"I should have thought," interrupted D'Hubert, "that the fellow would
have put you in possession of the facts."

"He did say something," admitted the other, "the first time I saw him.
And, by-the-bye, I did find him in the garden. The thump on the back of
his head had made him a little incoherent then. Afterwards he was rather
reticent than otherwise."

"Didn't think he would have the grace to be ashamed," grunted D'Hubert,
who had stood still for a moment. He resumed his pacing while the doctor
murmured.

"It's very amusing. Ashamed? Shame was not exactly his frame of mind.
However, you may look at the matter otherwise----"

"What are you talking about? What matter?" asked D'Hubert with a
sidelong look at the heavy-faced, gray-haired figure seated on a wooden
chair.

"Whatever it is," said the surgeon, "I wouldn't pronounce an opinion on
your conduct...."

"By heavens, you had better not," burst out D'Hubert.

"There! There! Don't be so quick in flourishing the sword. It doesn't
pay in the long run. Understand once for all that I would not carve any
of you youngsters except with the tools of my trade. But my advice is
good. Moderate your temper. If you go on like this you will make for
yourself an ugly reputation."

"Go on like what?" demanded Lieutenant D'Hubert, stopping short,
quite startled. "I! I! make for myself a reputation.... What do you
imagine----"

"I told you I don't wish to judge of the rights and wrongs of this
incident. It's not my business. Nevertheless...."

"What on earth has he been telling you?" interrupted Lieutenant D'Hubert
in a sort of awed scare.

"I told, you already that at first when I picked him up in the garden
he was incoherent. Afterwards he was naturally reticent. But I gather at
least that he could not help himself...."

"He couldn't?" shouted Lieutenant D'Hubert. Then lowering his voice,
"And what about me? Could I help myself?"

The surgeon rose. His thoughts were running upon the flute, his constant
companion, with a consoling voice. In the vicinity of field ambulances,
after twenty-four hours' hard work, he had been known to trouble with
its sweet sounds the horrible stillness of battlefields given over
to silence and the dead. The solacing hour of his daily life was
approaching and in peace time he held on to the minutes as a miser to
his hoard.

"Of course! Of course!" he said perfunctorily. "You would think so. It's
amusing. However, being perfectly neutral and friendly to you both,
I have consented to deliver his message. Say that I am humouring an
invalid if you like. He says that this affair is by no means at an
end. He intends to send you his seconds directly he has regained his
strength--providing, of course, the army is not in the field at that
time."

"He intends--does he? Why certainly," spluttered Lieutenant D'Hubert
passionately. The secret of this exasperation was not apparent to the
visitor; but this passion confirmed him in the belief which was gaining
ground outside that some very serious difference had arisen between
these two young men. Something serious enough to wear an air of mystery.
Some fact of the utmost gravity. To settle their urgent difference
those two young men had risked being broken and disgraced at the outset,
almost, of their career. And he feared that the forthcoming inquiry
would fail to satisfy the public curiosity. They would not take the
public into their confidence as to that something which had passed
between them of a nature so outrageous as to make them face a charge of
murder--neither more nor less. But what could it be?

The surgeon was not very curious by temperament; but that question,
haunting his mind, caused him twice that evening to hold the instrument
off his lips and sit silent for a whole minute--right in the middle of a
tune--trying to form a plausible conjecture.




II

He succeeded in this object no better than the rest of the garrison and
the whole of society. The two young officers, of no especial consequence
till then, became distinguished by the universal curiosity as to the
origin of their quarrel. Madame de Lionne's salon was the centre of
ingenious surmises; that lady herself was for a time assailed with
inquiries as the last person known to have spoken to these unhappy and
reckless young men before they went out together from her house to
a savage encounter with swords, at dusk, in a private garden. She
protested she had noticed nothing unusual in their demeanour. Lieutenant
Feraud had been visibly annoyed at being called away. That was natural
enough; no man likes to be disturbed in a conversation with a lady
famed for her elegance and sensibility» But, in truth, the subject
bored Madame de Lionne since her personality could by no stretch of
imagination be connected with this affair. And it irritated her to hear
it advanced that there might have been some woman in the case. This
irritation arose, not from her elegance or sensibility, but from a more
instinctive side of her nature. It became so great at last that she
peremptorily forbade the subject to be mentioned under her roof. Near
her couch the prohibition was obeyed, but farther off in the salon
the pall of the imposed silence continued to be lifted more or less. A
diplomatic personage with a long pale face resembling the countenance
of a sheep, opined, shaking his head, that it was a quarrel of long
standing envenomed by time. It was objected to him that the men
themselves were too young for such a theory to fit their proceedings.
They belonged also to different and distant parts of France. A
subcommissary of the Intendence, an agreeable and cultivated bachelor
in keysermere breeches, Hessian boots and a blue coat embroidered with
silver lace, who affected to believe in the transmigration of souls,
suggested that the two had met perhaps in some previous existence.
The feud was in the forgotten past. It might have been something quite
inconceivable in the present state of their being; but their souls
remembered the animosity and manifested an instinctive antagonism. He
developed his theme jocularly. Yet the affair was so absurd from the
worldly, the military, the honourable, or the prudential point of view,
that this weird explanation seemed rather more reasonable than any
other.

The two officers had confided nothing definite to any one. Resentment,
humiliation at having been worsted arms in hand, and an uneasy feeling
of having been involved into a scrape by the injustice of fate, kept
Lieutenant Feraud savagely dumb. He mistrusted the sympathy of mankind.
That would of course go to that dandified staff officer. Lying in bed he
raved to himself in his mind or aloud to the pretty maid who ministered
to his needs with devotion and listened to his horrible imprecations
with alarm. That Lieutenant D'Hubert should be made to "pay for it,"
whatever it was, seemed to her just and natural. Her principal concern
was that Lieutenant Feraud should not excite himself. He appeared so
wholly admirable and fascinating to the humility of her heart that her
only concern was to see him get well quickly even if it were only to
resume his visits to Madame de Lionne's salon.

Lieutenant D'Hubert kept silent for the immediate reason that there was
no one except a stupid young soldier servant to speak to. But he was not
anxious for the opportunities of which his severe arrest deprived him.
He would have been uncommunicative from dread of ridicule. He was aware
that the episode, so grave professionally, had its comic side. When
reflecting upon it he still felt that he would like to wring Lieutenant
Feraud's neck for him. But this formula was figurative rather than
precise, and expressed more a state of mind than an actual physical
impulse. At the same time there was in that young man a feeling of
comradeship and kindness which made him unwilling to make the position
of Lieutenant Feraud worse than it was.

He did not want to talk at large about this wretched affair. At the
inquiry he would have, of course, to speak the truth in self-defence.
This prospect vexed him.

But no inquiry took place. The army took the field instead. Lieutenant
D'Hubert, liberated without remark, returned to his regimental duties,
and Lieutenant Feraud, his arm still in a sling, rode unquestioned with
his squadron to complete his convalescence in the smoke of battlefields
and the fresh air of night bivouacs. This bracing treatment suited his
case so well that at the first rumour of an armistice being signed he
could turn without misgivings to the prosecution of his private warfare.

This time it was to be regular warfare. He dispatched two friends to
Lieutenant D'Hubert, whose regiment was stationed only a few miles away.
Those friends had asked no questions of their principal. "I must pay him
off, that pretty staff officer," he had said grimly, and they went
away quite contentedly on their mission. Lieutenant D'Hubert had no
difficulty in finding two friends equally discreet and devoted to their
principal. "There's a sort of crazy fellow to whom I must give another
lesson," he had curtly declared, and they asked for no better reasons.

On these grounds an encounter with duelling swords was arranged one
early morning in a convenient field. At the third set-to, Lieutenant
D'Hubert found himself lying on his back on the dewy grass, with a hole
in his side. A serene sun, rising over a German landscape of meadows
and wooded hills, hung on his left. A surgeon--not the flute-player but
another--was bending over him, feeling around the wound.

"Narrow squeak. But it will be nothing," he pronounced.

Lieutenant D'Hubert heard these words with pleasure. One of his
seconds--the one who, sitting on the wet grass, was sustaining his head
on his lap-said:

"The fortune of war, _mon pauvre vieux_. What will you have? You had
better make it up, like two good fellows. Do!"

"You don't know what you ask," murmured Lieutenant D'Hubert in a feeble
voice. "However, if he..."

In another part of the meadow the seconds of Lieutenant Feraud were
urging him to go over and shake hands with his adversary.

"You have paid him off now--_que diable_. It's the proper thing to do.
This D'Hubert is a decent fellow."

"I know the decency of these generals' pets," muttered Lieutenant Feraud
through his teeth for all answer. The sombre expression of his face
discouraged further efforts at reconciliation. The seconds, bowing from
a distance, took their men off the field. In the afternoon, Lieutenant
D'Hubert, very popular as a good comrade uniting great bravery with
a frank and equable temper, had many visitors. It was remarked that
Lieutenant Feraud did not, as customary, show himself much abroad to
receive the felicitations of his friends. They would not have failed
him, because he, too, was liked for the exuberance of his southern
nature and the simplicity of his character. In all the places where
officers were in the habit of assembling at the end of the day the
duel of the morning was talked over from every point of view. Though
Lieutenant D'Hubert had got worsted this time, his sword-play was
commended. No one could deny that it was very close, very scientific.
If he got touched, some said, it was because he wished to spare his
adversary. But by many the vigour and dash of Lieutenant Feraud's attack
were pronounced irresistible.

The merits of the two officers as combatants were frankly discussed; but
their attitude to each other after the duel was criticised lightly and
with caution. It was irreconcilable, and that was to be regretted. After
all, they knew best what the care of their honour dictated. It was not a
matter for their comrades to pry into overmuch. As to the origin of the
quarrel, the general impression was that it dated from the time they
were holding garrison in Strasburg. Only the musical surgeon shook his
head at that. It went much farther back, he hinted discreetly.

"Why! You must know the whole story," cried several voices, eager with
curiosity. "You were there! What was it?"

He raised his eyes from his glass deliberately and said:

"Even if I knew ever so well, you can't expect me to tell you, since
both the principals choose to say nothing."

He got up and went out, leaving the sense of mystery behind him. He
could not stay longer because the witching hour of flute-playing was
drawing near. After he had gone a very young officer observed solemnly:

"Obviously! His lips are sealed."

Nobody questioned the high propriety of that remark. Somehow it added
to the impressiveness of the affair. Several older officers of both
regiments, prompted by nothing but sheer kindness and love of harmony,
proposed to form a Court of Honour to which the two officers would
leave the task of their reconciliation. Unfortunately, they began by
approaching Lieutenant Feraud. The assumption was, that having just
scored heavily, he would be found placable and disposed to moderation.

The reasoning was sound enough; nevertheless, the move turned out
unfortunate. In that relaxation of moral fibre which is brought about
by the ease of soothed vanity, Lieutenant Feraud had condescended in
the secret of his heart to review the case, and even to doubt not the
justice of his cause, but the absolute sagacity of his conduct. This
being so, he was disinclined to talk about it. The suggestion of the
regimental wise men put him in a difficult position. He was disgusted,
and this disgust by a sort of paradoxical logic reawakened his animosity
against Lieutenant D'Hubert. Was he to be pestered with this fellow
for ever--the fellow who had an infernal knack of getting round people
somehow? On the other hand, it was difficult to refuse point-blank that
sort of mediation sanctioned by the code of honour.

Lieutenant Feraud met the difficulty by an attitude of fierce reserve.
He twisted his moustache and used vague words. His case was perfectly
clear. He was not ashamed to present it, neither was he afraid to defend
it personally. He did not see any reason to jump at the suggestion
before ascertaining how his adversary was likely to take it.

Later in the day, his exasperation growing upon him, he was heard in
a public place saying sardonically "that it would be the very luckiest
thing for Lieutenant D'Hubert, since next time of meeting he need not
hope to get off with a mere trifle of three weeks in bed."

This boastful phrase might have been prompted by the most profound
Machiavelism. Southern natures often hide under the outward
impulsiveness of action and speech a certain amount of astuteness.

Lieutenant Feraud, mistrusting the justice of men, by no means desired
a Court of Honour. And these words, according so well with his
temperament, had also the merit of serving his turn. Whether meant for
that purpose or not, they found their way in less than four-and-twenty
hours into Lieutenant D'Hubert's bedroom. In consequence, Lieutenant
D'Hubert, sitting propped up with pillows, received the overtures made
to him next day by the statement that the affair was of a nature which
could not bear discussion.

The pale face of the wounded officer, his weak voice which he had yet
to use cautiously, and the courteous dignity of his tone, had a great
effect on his hearers. Reported outside, all this did more for deepening
the mystery than the vapourings of Lieutenant Feraud. This last was
greatly relieved at the issue. He began to enjoy the state of general
wonder, and was pleased to add to it by assuming an attitude of moody
reserve.

The colonel of Lieutenant D'Hubert's regiment was a gray-haired,
weather-beaten warrior who took a simple view of his responsibilities.
"I can't"--he thought to himself--"let the best of my subalterns get
damaged like this for nothing. I must get to the bottom of this affair
privately. He must speak out, if the devil were in it. The colonel
should be more than a father to these youngsters." And, indeed, he loved
all his men with as much affection as a father of a large family can
feel for every individual member of it. If human beings by an oversight
of Providence came into the world in the state of civilians, they were
born again into a regiment as infants are born into a family, and it was
that military birth alone which really counted.

At the sight of Lieutenant D'Hubert standing before him bleached and
hollow-eyed, the heart of the old warrior was touched with genuine
compassion. All his affection for the regiment--that body of men which
he held in his hand to launch forward and draw back, who had given him
his rank, ministered to his pride and commanded his thoughts--seemed
centred for a moment on the person of the most promising subaltern. He
cleared his throat in a threatening manner and frowned terribly.

"You must understand," he began, "that I don't care a rap for the life
of a single man in the regiment. You know that I would send the 748
of you men and horses galloping into the pit of perdition with no more
compunction than I would kill a fly."

"Yes, colonel. You would be riding at our head," said Lieutenant
D'Hubert with a wan smile.

The colonel, who felt the need of being very diplomatic, fairly roared
at this.

"I want you to know, Lieutenant D'Hubert, that I could stand aside and
see you all riding to Hades, if need be. I am a man to do even that, if
the good of the service and my duty to my country required it from me.
But that's unthinkable, so don't you even hint at such a thing."

He glared awfully, but his voice became gentle. "There's some milk yet
about that moustache of yours, my boy. You don't know what a man like
me is capable of. I would hide behind a haystack if... Don't grin at me,
sir. How dare you? If this were not a private conversation, I would...
Look here. I am responsible for the proper expenditure of lives under my
command for the glory of our country and the honour of the regiment. Do
you understand that? Well, then, what the devil do you mean by letting
yourself be spitted like this by that fellow of the Seventh Hussars?
It's simply disgraceful!"

Lieutenant D'Hubert, who expected another sort of conclusion, felt vexed
beyond measure. His shoulders moved slightly. He made no other answer.
He could not ignore his responsibility. The colonel softened his glance
and lowered his voice.

"It's deplorable," he murmured. And again he changed his tone. "Come,"
he went on persuasively, but with that note of authority which dwells
in the throat of a good leader of men, "this affair must be settled. I
desire to be told plainly what it is all about. I demand, as your best
friend, to know."

The compelling power of authority, the softening influence of the
kindness affected deeply a man just risen from a bed of sickness.
Lieutenant D'Hubert's hand, which grasped the knob of a stick, trembled
slightly. But his northern temperament, sentimental but cautious and
clear-sighted, too, in its idealistic way, predominated over his impulse
to make a clean breast of the whole deadly absurdity. According to the
precept of transcendental wisdom, he turned his tongue seven times in
his mouth before he spoke. He made then only a speech of thanks, nothing
more. The colonel listened interested at first, then looked mystified.
At last he frowned.

"You hesitate--_mille tonerres!_ Haven't I told you that I will
condescend to argue with you--as a friend?"

"Yes, colonel," answered Lieutenant D'Hubert softly, "but I am afraid
that after you have heard me out as a friend, you will take action as my
superior officer."

The attentive colonel snapped his jaws.

"Well, what of that?" he said frankly. "Is it so damnably disgraceful?"

"It is not," negatived Lieutenant D'Hubert in a faint but resolute
voice.

"Of course I shall act for the good of the service--nothing can prevent
me doing that. What do you think I want to be told for?"

"I know it is not from idle curiosity," tested Lieutenant D'Hubert. "I
know you will act wisely. But what about the good fame of the regiment?"

"It cannot be affected by any youthful folly of a lieutenant," the
colonel said severely.

"No, it cannot be; but it can be by evil tongues. It will be said that
a lieutenant of the Fourth Hussars, afraid of meeting his adversary, is
hiding behind his colonel. And that would be worse than hiding behind
a haystack--for the good of the service. I cannot afford to do that,
colonel."

"Nobody would dare to say anything of the kind," the colonel, beginning
very fiercely, ended on an uncertain note. The bravery of Lieutenant
D'Hubert was well known; but the colonel was well aware that the
duelling courage, the single combat courage, is, rightly or wrongly,
supposed to be courage of a special sort; and it was eminently
necessary that an officer of his regiment should possess every kind
of courage--and prove it, too. The colonel stuck out his lower lip and
looked far away with a peculiar glazed stare. This was the expression of
his perplexity, an expression practically unknown to his regiment, for
perplexity is a sentiment which is incompatible with the rank of colonel
of cavalry. The colonel himself was overcome by the unpleasant
novelty of the sensation. As he was not accustomed to think except on
professional matters connected with the welfare of men and horses and
the proper use thereof on the field of glory, his intellectual efforts
degenerated into mere mental repetitions of profane language. "_Mille
tonerres!... Sacré nom de nom..._" he thought.

Lieutenant D'Hubert coughed painfully and went on, in a weary voice:

"There will be plenty of evil tongues to say that I've been cowed. And
I am sure you will not expect me to pass that sort of thing over. I may
find myself suddenly with a dozen duels on my hands instead of this one
affair."

The direct simplicity of this argument came home to the colonel's
understanding. He looked at his subordinate fixedly.

"Sit down, lieutenant," he said gruffly. "This is the very devil of a...
sit down."

"_Mon colonel_" D'Hubert began again. "I am not afraid of evil tongues.
There's a way of silencing them. But there's my peace of mind too. I
wouldn't be able to shake off the notion that I've ruined a brother
officer. Whatever action you take it is bound to go further. The
inquiry has been dropped--let it rest now. It would have been the end of
Feraud."

"Hey? What? Did he behave so badly?"

"Yes, it was pretty bad," muttered Lieutenant D'Hubert. Being still very
weak, he felt a disposition to cry.

As the other man did not belong to his own regiment the colonel had no
difficulty in believing this. He began to pace up and down the room.
He was a good chief and a man capable of discreet sympathy. But he was
human in other ways, too, and they were apparent because he was not
capable of artifice.

"The very devil, lieutenant!" he blurted out in the innocence of his
heart, "is that I have declared my intention to get to the bottom of
this affair. And when a colonel says something... you see..."

Lieutenant D'Hubert broke in earnestly.

"Let me entreat you, colonel, to be satisfied with taking my word of
honour that I was put into a damnable position where I had no option.
I had no choice whatever consistent with my dignity as a man and an
officer.... After all, colonel, this fact is the very bottom of this
affair. Here you've got it. The rest is a mere detail...."

The colonel stopped short. The reputation of Lieutenant D'Hubert for
good sense and good temper weighed in the balance. A cool head, a warm
heart, open as the day. Always correct in his behaviour. One had to
trust him. The colonel repressed manfully an immense curiosity.

"H'm! You affirm that as a man and an officer.... No option? Eh?"

"As an officer, an officer of the Fourth Hussars, too," repeated
Lieutenant D'Hubert, "I had not. And that is the bottom of the affair,
colonel."

"Yes. But still I don't see why to one's colonel... A colonel is a
father--_que diable_."

Lieutenant D'Hubert ought not to have been allowed out as yet. He
was becoming aware of his physical insufficiency with humiliation and
despair--but the morbid obstinacy of an invalid possessed him--and at
the same time he felt, with dismay, his eyes filling with water. This
trouble seemed too big to handle. A tear fell down the thin, pale cheek
of Lieutenant D'Hubert. The colonel turned his back on him hastily. You
could have heard a pin drop.

"This is some silly woman story--is it not?"

The chief spun round to seize the truth, which is not a beautiful shape
living in a well but a shy bird best caught by stratagem. This was
the last move of the colonel's diplomacy, and he saw the truth shining
unmistakably in the gesture of Lieutenant D'Hubert, raising his weak
arms and his eyes to heaven in supreme protest.

"Not a woman affair--eh?" growled the colonel, staring hard. "I don't
ask you who or where. All I want to know is whether there is a woman in
it?"

Lieutenant D'Hubert's arms dropped and his weak voice was pathetically
broken.

"Nothing of the kind, mon colonel."

"On your honour?" insisted the old warrior.

"On my honour."

"Very well," said the colonel thoughtfully, and bit his lip. The
arguments of Lieutenant D'Hubert, helped by his liking for the person,
had convinced him. Yet it was highly improper that his intervention, of
which he had made no secret, should produce no visible effect. He kept
Lieutenant D'Hubert a little longer and dismissed him kindly.

"Take a few days more in bed, lieutenant. What the devil does the
surgeon mean by reporting you fit for duty?"

On coming out of the colonel's quarters, Lieutenant D'Hubert said
nothing to the friend who was waiting outside to take him home. He said
nothing to anybody. Lieutenant D'Hubert made no confidences. But in the
evening of that day the colonel, strolling under the elms growing near
his quarters in the company of his second in command opened his lips.

"I've got to the bottom of this affair," he remarked.

The lieutenant-colonel, a dry brown chip of a man with short
side-whiskers, pricked up his ears without letting a sound of curiosity
escape him.

"It's no trifle," added the colonel oracularly. The other waited for a
long while before he murmured:

"Indeed, sir!"

"No trifle," repeated the colonel, looking straight before him. "I've,
however, forbidden D'Hubert either to send to or receive a challenge
from Feraud for the next twelve months."

He had imagined this prohibition to save the prestige a colonel should
have. The result of it was to give an official seal to the mystery
surrounding this deadly quarrel. Lieutenant D'Hubert repelled by an
impassive silence all attempts to worm the truth out of him. Lieutenant
Feraud, secretly uneasy at first, regained his assurance as time went
on. He disguised his ignorance of the meaning of the imposed truce by
little sardonic laughs as though he were amused by what he intended to
keep to himself. "But what will you do?" his chums used to ask him. He
contented himself by replying, "_Qui vivra verra_," with a truculent
air. And everybody admired his discretion.

Before the end of the truce, Lieutenant D'Hubert got his promotion. It
was well earned, but somehow no one seemed to expect the event. When
Lieutenant Feraud heard of it at a gathering of officers, he muttered
through his teeth, "Is that so?" Unhooking his sword from a peg near the
door, he buckled it on carefully and left the company without another
word. He walked home with measured steps, struck a light with his flint
and steel, and lit his tallow candle. Then, snatching an unlucky glass
tumbler off the mantelpiece, he dashed it violently on the floor.

Now that D'Hubert was an officer of a rank superior to his own, there
could be no question of a duel. Neither could send nor receive a
challenge without rendering himself amenable to a court-martial. It
was not to be thought of. Lieutenant Feraud, who for many days now had
experienced no real desire to meet Lieutenant D'Hubert arms in hand,
chafed at the systematic injustice of fate. "Does he think he will
escape me in that way?" he thought indignantly. He saw in it an
intrigue, a conspiracy, a cowardly manoeuvre. That colonel knew what he
was doing. He had hastened to recommend his pet for promotion. It was
outrageous that a man should be able to avoid the consequences of his
acts in such a dark and tortuous manner.

Of a happy-go-lucky disposition, of a temperament more pugnacious than
military, Lieutenant Feraud had been content to give and receive blows
for sheer love of armed strife and without much thought of advancement.
But after this disgusting experience an urgent desire of promotion
sprang up in his breast. This fighter by vocation resolved in his mind
to seize showy occasions and to court the favourable opinion of his
chiefs like a mere worldling. He knew he was as brave as any one
and never doubted his personal charm. It would be easy, he thought.
Nevertheless, neither the bravery nor the charm seemed to work very
swiftly. Lieutenant Feraud's engaging, careless truculence of a "_beau
sabreur_" underwent a change. He began to make bitter allusions to
"clever fellows who stick at nothing to get on." The army was full of
them, he would say, you had only to look round. And all the time he had
in view one person only, his adversary D'Hubert. Once he confided to an
appreciative friend: "You see I don't know how to fawn on the right sort
of people. It isn't in me."

He did not get his step till a week after Austerlitz. The light cavalry
of the _Grande Armée_ had its hands very full of interesting work for a
little while. But directly the pressure of professional occupation had
been eased by the armistice, Captain Feraud took measures to arrange a
meeting without loss of time. "I know his tricks," he observed grimly.
"If I don't look sharp he will take care to get himself promoted over
the heads of a dozen better men than himself. He's got the knack of that
sort of thing." This duel was fought in Silesia. If not fought out to
a finish, it was at any rate fought to a standstill. The weapon was
the cavalry sabre, and the skill, the science, the vigour, and the
determination displayed by the adversaries compelled the outspoken
admiration of the beholders. It became the subject of talk on both
shores of the Danube, and as far south as the garrisons of Gratz
and Laybach. They crossed blades seven times. Both had many slight
cuts--mere scratches which bled profusely. Both refused to have the
combat stopped, time after time, with what appeared the most deadly
animosity. This appearance was caused on the part of Captain D'Hubert by
a rational desire to be done once for all with this worry; on the part
of Feraud by a tremendous exaltation of his pugnacious instincts and
the rage of wounded vanity. At last, dishevelled, their shirts in rags,
covered with gore and hardly able to stand, they were carried forcibly
off the field by their marvelling and horrified seconds. Later on,
besieged by comrades avid of details, these gentlemen declared that they
could not have allowed that sort of hacking to go on. Asked whether the
quarrel was settled this time, they gave it out as their conviction that
it was a difference which could only be settled by one of the parties
remaining lifeless on the ground. The sensation spread from army to army
corps, and penetrated at last to the smallest detachments of the troops
cantoned between the Rhine and the Save. In the cafés in Vienna where
the masters of Europe took their ease it was generally estimated from
details to hand that the adversaries would be able to meet again in
three weeks' time, on the outside. Something really transcendental in
the way of duelling was expected.

These expectations were brought to naught by the necessities of the
service which separated the two officers. No official notice had been
taken of their quarrel. It was now the property of the army, and not
to be meddled with lightly. But the story of the duel, or rather their
duelling propensities, must have stood somewhat in the way of their
advancement, because they were still captains when they came together
again during the war with Prussia. Detached north after Jena with
the army commanded by Marshal Bernadotte, Prince of Ponte-Corvo, they
entered Lubeck together. It was only after the occupation of that town
that Captain Feraud had leisure to consider his future conduct in view
of the fact that Captain D'Hubert had been given the position of third
aide-de-camp to the marshal. He considered it a great part of a night,
and in the morning summoned two sympathetic friends.

"I've been thinking it over calmly," he said, gazing at them with
bloodshot, tired eyes. "I see that I must get rid of that intriguing
personage. Here he's managed to sneak onto the personal staff of the
marshal. It's a direct provocation to me. I can't tolerate a situation
in which I am exposed any day to receive an order through him, and God
knows what order, too! That sort of thing has happened once before--and
that's once too often. He understands this perfectly, never fear. I
can't tell you more than this. Now go. You know what it is you have to
do."

This encounter took place outside the town of Lubeck, on very open
ground selected with special care in deference to the general sense of
the cavalry division belonging to the army corps, that this time the two
officers should meet on horseback. After all, this duel was a cavalry
affair, and to persist in fighting on foot would look like a slight
on one's own arm of the service. The seconds, startled by the unusual
nature of the suggestion, hastened to refer to their principals. Captain
Feraud jumped at it with savage alacrity. For some obscure reason,
depending, no doubt, on his psychology, he imagined himself invincible
on horseback. All alone within the four walls of his room he rubbed his
hands exultingly. "Aha! my staff officer, I've got you now!"

Captain D'Hubert, on his side, after staring hard for a considerable
time at his bothered seconds, shrugged his shoulders slightly. This
affair had hopelessly and unreasonably complicated his existence for
him. One absurdity more or less in the development did not matter. All
absurdity was distasteful to him; but, urbane as ever, he produced a
faintly ironic smile and said in his calm voice:

"It certainly will do away to some extent with the monotony of the
thing."

But, left to himself, he sat down at a table and took his head into
his hands. He had not spared himself of late, and the marshal had been
working his aides-de-camp particularly hard. The last three weeks of
campaigning in horrible weather had affected his health. When overtired
he suffered from a stitch in his wounded side, and that uncomfortable
sensation always depressed him. "It's that brute's doing," he thought
bitterly.

The day before he had received a letter from home, announcing that his
only sister was going to be married. He reflected that from the time she
was sixteen, when he went away to garrison life in Strasburg, he had
had but two short glimpses of her. They had been great friends and
confidants; and now they were going to give her away to a man whom he
did not know--a very worthy fellow, no doubt, but not half good enough
for her. He would never see his old Léonie again. She had a capable
little head and plenty of tact; she would know how to manage the fellow,
to be sure. He was easy about her happiness, but he felt ousted from
the first place in her affection which had been his ever since the
girl could speak. And a melancholy regret of the days of his childhood
settled upon Captain D'Hubert, third aide-de-camp to the Prince of
Ponte-Corvo.

He pushed aside the letter of congratulation he had begun to write, as
in duty bound but without pleasure. He took a fresh sheet of paper
and wrote: "This is my last will and testament." And, looking at these
words, he gave himself up to unpleasant reflection; a presentiment
that he would never see the scenes of his childhood overcame Captain
D'Hubert. He jumped up, pushing his chair back, yawned leisurely, which
demonstrated to himself that he didn't care anything for presentiments,
and, throwing himself on the bed, went to sleep. During the night he
shivered from time to time without waking up. In the morning he rode
out of town between his two seconds, talking of indifferent things and
looking right and left with apparent detachment into the heavy morning
mists, shrouding the flat green fields bordered by hedges. He leaped a
ditch, and saw the forms of many mounted men moving in the low fog. "We
are to fight before a gallery," he muttered bitterly.

His seconds were rather concerned at the state of the atmosphere,
but presently a pale and sympathetic sun struggled above the vapours.
Captain D'Hubert made out in the distance three horsemen riding a little
apart; it was his adversary and his seconds. He drew his sabre and
assured himself that it was properly fastened to his wrist. And now the
seconds, who had been standing in a close group with the heads of their
horses together, separated at an easy canter, leaving a large, clear
field between him and his adversary. Captain D'Hubert looked at the pale
sun, at the dismal landscape, and the imbecility of the impending
fight filled him with desolation. From a distant part of the field
a stentorian voice shouted commands at proper intervals: _Au pas--Au
trot--Chargez!_ Presentiments of death don't come to a man for nothing
he thought at the moment he put spurs to his horse.

And therefore nobody was more surprised than himself when, at the very
first set-to, Captain Feraud laid himself open to a cut extending over
the forehead, blinding him with blood, and ending the combat almost
before it had fairly begun. The surprise of Captain Feraud might have
been even greater. Captain D'Hubert, leaving him swearing horribly and
reeling in the saddle between his two appalled friends, leaped the ditch
again and trotted home with his two seconds, who seemed rather awestruck
at the speedy issue of that encounter. In the evening, Captain D'Hubert
finished the congratulatory letter on his sister's marriage.

He finished it late. It was a long letter. Captain D'Hubert gave reins
to his fancy. He told his sister he would feel rather lonely after this
great change in her life. But, he continued, "the day will come for me,
too, to get married. In fact, I am thinking already of the time when
there will be no one left to fight in Europe, and the epoch of wars
will be over. I shall expect then to be within measurable distance of a
marshal's baton and you will be an experienced married woman. You shall
look out a nice wife for me. I will be moderately bald by then, and a
little blasé; I will require a young girl--pretty, of course, and with
a large fortune, you know, to help me close my glorious career with the
splendour befitting my exalted rank." He ended with the information
that he had just given a lesson to a worrying, quarrelsome fellow, who
imagined he had a grievance against him. "But if you, in the depth of
your province," he continued, "ever hear it said that your brother is of
a quarrelsome disposition, don't you believe it on any account. There
is no saying what gossip from the army may reach your innocent ears;
whatever you hear, you may assure our father that your ever loving
brother is not a duellist." Then Captain D'Hubert crumpled up the sheet
of paper with the words, "This is my last will and testament," and threw
it in the fire with a great laugh at himself. He didn't care a snap
for what that lunatic fellow could do. He had suddenly acquired the
conviction that this man was utterly powerless to affect his life in any
sort of way, except, perhaps, in the way of putting a certain special
excitement into the delightful gay intervals between the campaigns.

From this on there were, however, to be no peaceful intervals in the
career of Captain D'Hubert. He saw the fields of Eylau and Friedland,
marched and countermarched in the snow, the mud, and the dust of Polish
plains, picking up distinction and advancement on all the roads of
northeastern Europe. Meantime, Captain Feraud, despatched southward with
his regiment, made unsatisfactory war in Spain. It was only when the
preparations for the Russian campaign began that he was ordered north
again. He left the country of mantillas and oranges without regret.

The first signs of a not unbecoming baldness added to the lofty aspect
of Colonel D'Hubert's forehead. This feature was no longer white and
smooth as in the days of his youth, and the kindly open glance of his
blue eyes had grown a little hard, as if from much peering through the
smoke of battles. The ebony crop on Colonel Feraud's head, coarse and
crinkly like a cap of horsehair, showed many silver threads about the
temples. A detestable warfare of ambushes and inglorious surprises had
not improved his temper. The beaklike curve of his nose was unpleasantly
set off by deep folds on each side of his mouth. The round orbits of his
eyes radiated fine wrinkles. More than ever he recalled an irritable
and staring fowl--something like a cross between a parrot and an owl.
He still manifested an outspoken dislike for "intriguing fellows." He
seized every opportunity to state that he did not pick up his rank in
the anterooms of marshals.

The unlucky persons, civil or military, who, with an intention of being
pleasant, begged Colonel Feraud to tell them how he came by that very
apparent scar on the forehead, were astonished to find themselves
snubbed in various ways, some of which were simply rude and others
mysteriously sardonic. Young officers were warned kindly by their more
experienced comrades not to stare openly at the colonel's scar. But,
indeed, an officer need have been very young in his profession not
to have heard the legendary tale of that duel originating in some
mysterious, unforgivable offence.




III

The retreat from Moscow submerged all private feelings in a sea of
disaster and misery. Colonels without regiments, D'Hubert and Feraud
carried the musket in the ranks of the sacred battalion--a battalion
recruited from officers of all arms who had no longer any troops to
lead.

In that battalion promoted colonels did duty as sergeants; the generals
captained the companies; a marshal of France, Prince of the Empire,
commanded the whole. All had provided themselves with muskets picked
up on the road, and cartridges taken from the dead. In the general
destruction of the bonds of discipline and duty holding together the
companies, the battalions, the regiments, the brigades and divisions
of an armed host, this body of men put their pride in preserving some
semblance of order and formation. The only stragglers were those who
fell out to give up to the frost their exhausted souls. They plodded on
doggedly, stumbling over the corpses of men, the carcasses of horses,
the fragments of gun-carriages, covered by the white winding-sheet of
the great disaster. Their passage did not disturb the mortal silence of
the plains, shining with a livid light under a sky the colour of ashes.
Whirlwinds of snow ran along the fields, broke against the dark column,
rose in a turmoil of flying icicles, and subsided, disclosing it
creeping on without the swing and rhythm of the military pace. They
struggled onward, exchanging neither words nor looks--whole ranks
marched, touching elbows, day after day, and never raising their eyes,
as if lost in despairing reflections. On calm days, in the dumb black
forests of pines the cracking of overloaded branches was the only sound.
Often from daybreak to dusk no one spoke in the whole column. It was
like a _macabre_ march of struggling corpses towards a distant grave.
Only an alarm of Cossacks could restore to their lack-lustre eyes a
semblance of martial resolution. The battalion deployed, facing about,
or formed square under the endless fluttering of snowflakes. A cloud of
horsemen with fur caps on their heads, levelled long lances and yelled
"Hurrah! Hurrah!" around their menacing immobility, whence, with muffled
detonations, hundreds of dark-red flames darted through the air thick
with falling snow. In a very few moments the horsemen would disappear,
as if carried off yelling in the gale, and the battalion, standing
still, alone in the blizzard, heard only the wind searching their very
hearts. Then, with a cry or two of "_Vive l'Empereur!_" it would resume
its march, leaving behind a few lifeless bodies lying huddled up, tiny
dark specks on the white ground.

Though often marching in the ranks or skirmishing in the woods side
by side, the two officers ignored each other; this not so much from
inimical intention as from a very real indifference. All their store of
moral energy was expended in resisting the terrific enmity of Nature and
the crushing sense of irretrievable disaster.

Neither of them allowed himself to be crushed. To the last they counted
among the most active, the least demoralised of the battalion; their
vigorous vitality invested them both with the appearance of an heroic
pair in the eyes of their comrades. And they never exchanged more than
a casual word or two, except one day when, skirmishing in front of the
battalion against a worrying attack of cavalry, they found themselves
cut off by a small party of Cossacks. A score of wild-looking, hairy
horsemen rode to and fro, brandishing their lances in ominous silence.
The two officers had no mind to lay down their arms, and Colonel Feraud
suddenly spoke up in a hoarse, growling voice, bringing his firelock to
the shoulder:

"You take the nearest brute, Colonel D'Hubert; I'll settle the next one.
I am a better shot than you are."

Colonel D'Hubert only nodded over his levelled musket. Their shoulders
were pressed against the trunk of a large tree; in front, deep
snowdrifts protected them from a direct charge.

[Illustration: 088.jpg "You take the nearest brute, Colonel D'Hubert"]

Two carefully aimed shots rang out in the frosty air, two Cossacks
reeled in their saddles. The rest, not thinking the game good enough,
closed round their wounded comrades and galloped away out of range. The
two officers managed to rejoin their battalion, halted for the night.
During that afternoon they had leaned upon each other more than once,
and towards the last Colonel D'Hubert, whose long legs gave him an
advantage in walking through soft snow, peremptorily took the musket
from Colonel Feraud and carried it on his shoulder, using his own as a
staff.

On the outskirts of a village, half-buried in the snow, an old wooden
barn burned with a clear and immense flame. The sacred battalion of
skeletons muffled in rags crowded greedily the windward side, stretching
hundreds of numbed, bony hands to the blaze. Nobody had noted their
approach. Before entering the circle of light playing on the multitude
of sunken, glassy-eyed, starved faces, Colonel D'Hubert spoke in his
turn:

"Here's your firelock, Colonel Feraud. I can walk better than you."

Colonel Feraud nodded, and pushed on towards the warmth of the fierce
flames. Colonel D'Hubert was more deliberate, but not the less bent
on getting a place in the front rank. Those they pushed aside tried
to greet with a faint cheer the reappearance of the two indomitable
companions in activity and endurance. Those manly qualities had never,
perhaps, received a higher tribute than this feeble acclamation.

This is the faithful record of speeches exchanged during the retreat
from Moscow by Colonels Feraud and D'Hubert. Colonel Feraud's
taciturnity was the outcome of concentrated rage. Short, hairy,
black-faced with layers of grime, and a thick sprouting of a wiry beard,
a frost-bitten hand, wrapped in filthy rags, carried in a sling, he
accused fate bitterly of unparalleled perfidy towards the sublime Man of
Destiny. Colonel D'Hubert, his long moustache pendent in icicles on each
side of his cracked blue lips, his eyelids inflamed with the glare of
snows, the principal part of his costume consisting of a sheepskin coat
looted with difficulty from the frozen corpse of a camp follower
found in an abandoned cart, took a more thoughtful view of events. His
regularly handsome features now reduced to mere bony fines and fleshless
hollows, looked out of a woman's black velvet hood, over which was
rammed forcibly a cocked hat picked up under the wheels of an empty army
fourgon which must have contained at one time some general officer's
luggage. The sheepskin coat being short for a man of his inches, ended
very high up his elegant person, and the skin of his legs, blue with the
cold, showed through the tatters of his nether garments. This, under
the circumstances, provoked neither jeers nor pity. No one cared how the
next man felt or looked. Colonel D'Hubert himself hardened to exposure,
suffered mainly in his self-respect from the lamentable indecency of
his costume. A thoughtless person may think that with a whole host of
inanimate bodies bestrewing the path of retreat there could not have
been much difficulty in supplying the deficiency. But the great majority
of these bodies lay buried under the falls of snow, others had been
already despoiled; and besides, to loot a pair of breeches from a frozen
corpse is not so easy as it may appear to a mere theorist. It requires
time. You must remain behind while your companions march on. And Colonel
D'Hubert had his scruples as to falling out. They arose from a point of
honour, and also a little from dread. Once he stepped aside he could not
be sure of ever rejoining his battalion. And the enterprise demanded a
physical effort from which his starved body shrank. The ghastly intimacy
of a wrestling match with the frozen dead opposing the unyielding
rigidity of iron to your violence was repugnant to the inborn delicacy
of his feelings.

Luckily, one day grubbing in a mound of snow between the huts of a
village in the hope of finding there a frozen potato or some vegetable
garbage he could put between his long and shaky teeth, Colonel D'Hubert
uncovered a couple of mats of the sort Russian peasants use to line the
sides of their carts. These, shaken free of frozen snow, bent about his
person and fastened solidly round his waist, made a bell-shaped nether
garment, a sort of stiff petticoat, rendering Colonel D'Hubert a
perfectly decent but a much more noticeable figure than before.

Thus accoutred he continued to retreat, never doubting of his personal
escape but full of other misgivings. The early buoyancy of his belief
in the future was destroyed. If the road of glory led through such
unforeseen passages--he asked himself, for he was reflective, whether
the guide was altogether trustworthy. And a patriotic sadness not
unmingled with some personal concern, altogether unlike the unreasoning
indignation against men and things nursed by Colonel Feraud, oppressed
the equable spirits of Colonel D'Hubert. Recruiting his strength in a
little German town for three weeks, he was surprised to discover within
himself a love of repose. His returning vigour was strangely pacific in
its aspirations. He meditated silently upon that bizarre change of
mood. No doubt many of his brother officers of field rank had the same
personal experience. But these were not the times to talk of it. In one
of his letters home Colonel D'Hubert wrote: "All your plans, my dear
Leonie, of marrying me to the charming girl you have discovered in your
neighbourhood, seem farther off than ever. Peace is not yet. Europe
wants another lesson. It will be a hard task for us, but it will be done
well, because the emperor is invincible."

Thus wrote Colonel D'Hubert from Pomerania to his married sister Léonie,
settled in the south of France. And so far the sentiments expressed
would not have been disowned by Colonel Feraud who wrote no letters to
anybody; whose father had been in life an illiterate blacksmith; who had
no sister or brother, and whom no one desired ardently to pair off for a
life of peace with a charming young girl. But Colonel D'Hubert's letter
contained also some philosophical generalities upon the uncertainty of
all personal hopes if bound up entirely with the prestigious fortune of
one incomparably great, it is true, yet still remaining but a man in
his greatness. This sentiment would have appeared rank heresy to
Colonel Feraud. Some melancholy forebodings of a military kind expressed
cautiously would have been pronounced as nothing short of high treason
by Colonel Feraud. But Léonie, the sister of Colonel D'Hubert, read them
with positive satisfaction, and folding the letter thoughtfully remarked
to herself that "Armand was likely to prove eventually a sensible
fellow." Since her marriage into a Southern family she had become a
convinced believer in the return of the legitimate king. Hopeful and
anxious she offered prayers night and morning, and burned candles in
churches for the safety and prosperity of her brother.

She had every reason to suppose that her prayers were heard. Colonel
D'Hubert passed through Lutzen, Bautzen, and Leipsic, losing no limbs
and acquiring additional reputation. Adapting his conduct to the needs
of that desperate time, he had never voiced his misgivings. He concealed
them under a cheerful courtesy of such pleasant character that people
were inclined to ask themselves with wonder whether Colonel D'Hubert
was aware of any disasters. Not only his manners but even his glances
remained untroubled. The steady amenity of his blue eyes disconcerted
all grumblers, silenced doleful remarks, and made even despair pause.

This bearing was remarked at last by the emperor himself, for Colonel
D'Hubert, attached now to the Major-General's staff, came on several
occasions under the imperial eye. But it exasperated the higher strung
nature of Colonel Feraud. Passing through Magdeburg on service this last
allowed himself, while seated gloomily at dinner with the _Commandant
de Place_, to say of his lifelong adversary: "This man does not love
the emperor,"--and as his words were received in profound silence Colonel
Feraud, troubled in his conscience at the atrocity of the aspersion,
felt the need to back it up by a good argument. "I ought to know him,"
he said, adding some oaths. "One studies one's adversary. I have met him
on the ground half a dozen times, as all the army knows. What more do
you want? If that isn't opportunity enough for any fool to size up his
man, may the devil take me if I can tell what is." And he looked around
the table with sombre obstinacy.

Later on, in Paris, while feverishly busy reorganising his regiment,
Colonel Feraud learned that Colonel D'Hubert had been made a general. He
glared at his informant incredulously, then folded his arms and turned
away muttering:

"Nothing surprises me on the part of that man."

And aloud he added, speaking over his shoulder: "You would greatly
oblige me by telling General D'Hubert at the first opportunity that his
advancement saves him for a time from a pretty hot encounter. I was only
waiting for him to turn up here."

The other officer remonstrated.

"Could you think of it, Colonel Feraud! At this time when every life
should be consecrated to the glory and safety of France!"

But the strain of unhappiness caused by military reverses had spoiled
Colonel Feraud's character. Like many other men he was rendered wicked
by misfortune.

"I cannot consider General D'Hubert's person of any account either
for the glory or safety of France," he snapped viciously. "You don't
pretend, perhaps, to know him better than I do--who have been with him
half a dozen times on the ground--do you?"

His interlocutor, a young man, was silenced. Colonel Feraud walked up
and down the room.

"This is not a time to mince matters," he said. "I can't believe that
that man ever loved the emperor. He picked up his general's stars under
the boots of Marshal Berthier. Very well. I'll get mine in another
fashion, and then we shall settle this business which has been dragging
on too long."

General D'Hubert, informed indirectly of Colonel Feraud's attitude, made
a gesture as if to put aside an importunate person. His thoughts were
solicited by graver cares. He had had no time to go and see his family.
His sister, whose royalist hopes were rising higher every day, though
proud of her brother, regretted his recent advancement in a measure,
because it put on him a prominent mark of the usurper's favour which
later on could have an adverse influence upon his career. He wrote
to her that no one but an inveterate enemy could say he had got his
promotion by favour. As to his career he assured her that he looked no
farther forward into the future than the next battlefield.

Beginning the campaign of France in that state of mind, General D'Hubert
was wounded on the second day of the battle under Laon. While being
carried off the field he heard that Colonel Feraud, promoted that moment
to general, had been sent to replace him in the command of his brigade.
He cursed his luck impulsively, not being able, at the first glance,
to discern all the advantages of a nasty wound. And yet it was by this
heroic method that Providence was shaping his future. Travelling slowly
south to his sister's country house, under the care of a trusty old
servant, General D'Hubert was spared the humiliating contacts and the
perplexities of conduct which assailed the men of the Napoleonic empire
at the moment of its downfall. Lying in his bed with the windows of his
room open wide to the sunshine of Provence, he perceived at last the
undisguised aspect of the blessing conveyed by that jagged fragment of
a Prussian shell which, killing his horse and ripping open his thigh,
saved him from an active conflict with his conscience. After fourteen
years spent sword in hand in the saddle and strong in the sense of his
duty done to the end, General D'Hubert found resignation an easy virtue.
His sister was delighted with his reasonableness. "I leave myself
altogether in your hands, my dear Léonie," he had said.

He was still laid up when, the credit of his brother-in-law's family
being exerted on his behalf, he received from the Royal Government not
only the confirmation of his rank but the assurance of being retained on
the active list. To this was added an unlimited convalescent leave.
The unfavourable opinion entertained of him in the more irreconcilable
Bonapartist circles, though it rested on nothing more solid than the
unsupported pronouncement of General Feraud, was directly responsible
for General D'Hubert's retention on the active list. As to General
Feraud, his rank was confirmed, too. It was more than he dared to
expect, but Marshal Soult, then Minister of War to the restored king,
was partial to officers who had served in Spain. Only not even the
marshal's protection could secure for him active employment. He remained
irreconcilable, idle and sinister, seeking in obscure restaurants the
company of other half-pay officers, who cherished dingy but glorious
old tricolour cockades in their breast pockets, and buttoned with the
forbidden eagle buttons their shabby uniform, declaring themselves too
poor to afford the expense of the prescribed change.

The triumphant return of the emperor, a historical fact as marvellous
and incredible as the exploits of some mythological demi-god, found
General D'Hubert still quite unable to sit a horse. Neither could he
walk very well. These disabilities, which his sister thought most lucky,
helped her immensely to keep her brother out of all possible mischief.
His frame of mind at that time, she noted with dismay, became very far
from reasonable. That general officer, still menaced by the loss of a
limb, was discovered one night in the stables of the château by a groom
who, seeing a light, raised an alarm of thieves. His crutch was lying
half buried in the straw of the litter, and he himself was hopping on
one leg in a loose box around a snorting horse he was trying to
saddle. Such were the effects of imperial magic upon an unenthusiastic
temperament and a pondered mind. Beset, in the light of stable lanterns,
by the tears, entreaties, indignation, remonstrances and reproaches of
his family, he got out of the difficult situation by fainting away there
and then in the arms of his nearest relatives, and was carried off to
bed. Before he got out of it again the second reign of Napoleon, the
Hundred Days of feverish agitation and supreme effort passed away like a
terrifying dream. The tragic year 1815, begun in the trouble and unrest
of consciences, was ending in vengeful proscriptions.

How General Feraud escaped the clutches of the Special Commission and
the last offices of a firing squad, he never knew himself. It was partly
due to the subordinate position he was assigned during the Hundred Days.
He was not given active command but was kept busy at the cavalry depot
in Paris, mounting and despatching hastily drilled troopers into the
field. Considering this task as unworthy of his abilities, he discharged
it with no offensively noticeable zeal. But for the greater part he
was saved from the excesses of royalist reaction by the interference of
General D'Hubert.

This last, still on convalescent leave but able now to travel, had been
despatched by his sister to Paris to present himself to his legitimate
sovereign. As no one in the capital could possibly know anything of the
episode in the stable, he was received there with distinction. Military
to the very bottom of his soul, the prospect of rising in his profession
consoled him from finding himself the butt of Bonapartist malevolence
which pursued him with a persistence he could not account for. All the
rancour of that embittered and persecuted party pointed to him as the
man who had _never_ loved the emperor--a sort of monster essentially
worse than a mere betrayer.

General D'Hubert shrugged his shoulders without anger at this ferocious
prejudice. Rejected by his old friends and mistrusting profoundly the
advances of royalist society, the young and handsome general (he was
barely forty) adopted a manner of punctilious and cold courtesy which
at the merest shadow of an intended slight passed easily into harsh
haughtiness. Thus prepared, General D'Hubert went about his affairs in
Paris feeling inwardly very happy with the peculiar uplifting happiness
of a man very much in love. The charming girl looked out by his sister
had come upon the scene and had conquered him in the thorough manner in
which a young girl, by merely existing in his sight, can make a man of
forty her own. They were going to be married as soon as General D'Hubert
had obtained his official nomination to a promised command.

One afternoon, sitting on the _terrasse_ of the Café Tortoni, General
D'Hubert learned from the conversation of two strangers occupying
a table near his own that General Feraud, included in the batch of
superior officers arrested after the second return of the king, was in
danger of passing before the Special Commission. Living all his spare
moments, as is frequently the case with expectant lovers a day
in advance of reality, as it were, and in a state of bestarred
hallucination, it required nothing less than the name of his perpetual
antagonist pronounced in a loud voice to call the youngest of Napoleon's
generals away from the mental contemplation of his betrothed. He looked
round. The strangers wore civilian clothes. Lean and weather-beaten,
lolling back in their chairs, they looked at people with moody and
defiant abstraction from under their hats pulled low over their eyes. It
was not difficult to recognise them for two of the compulsorily retired
officers of the Old Guard. As from bravado or carelessness they chose to
speak in loud tones, General D'Hubert, who saw no reason why he should
change his seat, heard every word. They did not seem to be the personal
friends of General Feraud. His name came up with some others; and
hearing it repeated General D'Hubert's tender anticipations of a
domestic future adorned by a woman's grace were traversed by the harsh
regret of that warlike past, of that one long, intoxicating clash of
arms, unique in the magnitude of its glory and disaster--the marvellous
work and the special possession of his own generation. He felt an
irrational tenderness toward his old adversary, and appreciated
emotionally the murderous absurdity their encounter had introduced into
his life. It was like an additional pinch of spice in a hot dish. He
remembered the flavour with sudden melancholy. He would never taste
it again. It was all over.... "I fancy it was being left lying in the
garden that had exasperated him so against me," he thought indulgently.

The two strangers at the next table had fallen silent upon the third
mention of General Feraud's name. Presently, the oldest of the two,
speaking in a bitter tone, affirmed that General Feraud's account was
settled. And why? Simply because he was not like some big-wigs who loved
only themselves. The royalists knew that they could never make anything
of him. He loved the Other too well.

The Other was the man of St. Helena. The two officers nodded and touched
glasses before they drank to an impossible return. Then the same who had
spoken before remarked with a sardonic little laugh:

"His adversary showed more cleverness."

"What adversary?" asked the younger as if puzzled.

"Don't you know? They were two Hussars. At each promotion they fought a
duel. Haven't you heard of the duel that is going on since 1801?"

His friend had heard of the duel, of course. Now he understood the
allusion. General Baron D'Hubert would be able now to enjoy his fat
king's favour in peace.

"Much good may it do to him," mumbled the elder. "They were both
brave men. I never saw this D'Hubert--a sort of intriguing dandy, I
understand. But I can well believe what I've heard Feraud say once of
him--that he never loved the emperor."

They rose and went away.

General D'Hubert experienced the horror of a somnambulist who wakes
up from a complacent dream of activity to find himself walking on a
quagmire. A profound disgust of the ground on which he was making his
way overcame him. Even the image of the charming girl was swept from
his view in the flood of moral distress. Everything he had ever been
or hoped to be would be lost in ignominy unless he could manage to save
General Feraud from the fate which threatened so many braves. Under
the impulse of this almost morbid need to attend to the safety of his
adversary General D'Hubert worked so well with hands and feet (as the
French saying is) that in less than twenty-four hours he found means of
obtaining an extraordinary private audience from the Minister of Police.

General Baron D'Hubert was shown in suddenly without preliminaries. In
the dusk of the minister's cabinet, behind the shadowy forms of writing
desk, chairs, and tables, between two bunches of wax candles blazing in
sconces, he beheld a figure in a splendid coat posturing before a tall
mirror. The old _Conventional_ Fouché, ex-senator of the empire, traitor
to every man, every principle and motive of human conduct, Duke of
Otranto, and the wily artisan of the Second Restoration, was trying the
fit of a court suit, in which his young and accomplished _fiancée_ had
declared her wish to have his portrait painted on porcelain. It was a
caprice, a charming fancy which the Minister of Police of the Second
Restoration was anxious to gratify. For that man, often compared in
wiliness of intellect to a fox but whose ethical side could be worthily
symbolised by nothing less emphatic than a skunk, was as much possessed
by his love as General D'Hubert himself.

Startled to be discovered thus by the blunder of a servant, he met this
little vexation with the characteristic effrontery which had served
his turn so well in the endless intrigues of his self-seeking career.
Without altering his attitude a hair's breadth, one leg in a silk
stocking advanced, his head twisted over his left shoulder, he called
out calmly:

"This way, general. Pray approach. Well? I am all attention."

While General D'Hubert, as ill at ease as if one of his own little
weaknesses had been exposed, presented his request as shortly as
possible, the minister went on feeling the fit of his collar, settling
the lappels before the glass or buckling his back in his efforts to
behold the set of the gold-embroidered coat skirts behind. His still
face, his attentive eyes, could not have expressed a more complete
interest in those matters if he had been alone.

"Exclude from the operations of the Special Commission a certain Feraud,
Gabriel Florian, General of Brigade of the promotion of 1814?" he
repeated in a slightly wondering tone and then turned away from the
glass. "Why exclude him precisely?"

"I am surprised that your Excellency, so competent in the valuation of
men of his time, should have thought it worth while to have that name
put down on the list."

"A rabid Bonapartist."

"So is every grenadier and every trooper of the army, as your Excellency
well knows. And the individuality of General Feraud can have no more
weight than that of any casual grenadier. He is a man of no mental
grasp, of no capacity whatever. It is inconceivable that he should ever
have any influence."

"He has a well-hung tongue though," interjected Fouché.

"Noisy, I admit, but not dangerous."

"I will not dispute with you. I know next to nothing of him. Hardly his
name in fact."

"And yet your Excellency had the presidency of the commission charged by
the king to point out those who were to be tried," said General D'Hubert
with an emphasis which did not miss the minister's ear.

"Yes, general," he said, walking away into the dark part of the vast
room and throwing himself into a high-backed armchair whose overshadowed
depth swallowed him up, all but the gleam of gold embroideries on the
coat and the pallid patch of the face. "Yes, general. Take that chair
there."

General D'Hubert sat down.

"Yes, general," continued the arch-master in the arts of intrigue
and betrayal, whose duplicity as if at times intolerable to his
self-knowledge worked itself off in bursts of cynical openness. "I
did hurry on the formation of the proscribing commission and took its
presidency. And do you know why? Simply from fear that if I did not
take it quickly into my hands my own name would head the list of the
proscribed. Such are the times in which we live. But I am minister of
the king as yet, and I ask you plainly why I should take the name of
this obscure Feraud off the list? You wonder how his name got there. Is
it possible that you know men so little? My dear general, at the very
first sitting of the commission names poured on us like rain off the
tiles of the Tuileries. Names! We had our choice of thousands. How do
you know that the name of this Feraud, whose life or death don't matter
to France, does not keep out some other name?..."

The voice out of the armchair stopped. General D'Hubert sat still,
shadowy, and silent. Only his sabre clinked slightly. The voice in the
armchair began again. "And we must try to satisfy the exigencies of the
allied sovereigns. The Prince de Talleyrand told me only yesterday that
Nesselrode had informed him officially that his Majesty, the Emperor
Alexander, was very disappointed at the small number of examples the
government of the king intends to make--especially amongst military men.
I tell you this confidentially."

"Upon my word," broke out General D'Hubert, speaking through his teeth,
"if your Excellency deigns to favour me with any more confidential
information I don't know what I will do. It's enough to make one break
one's sword over one's knee and fling the pieces..."

"What government do you imagine yourself to be serving?" interrupted the
minister sharply. After a short pause the crestfallen voice of General
D'Hubert answered:

"The government of France."

"That's paying your conscience off with mere words, general. The truth
is that you are serving a government of returned exiles, of men who have
been without country for twenty years. Of men also who have just got
over a very bad and humiliating fright.... Have no illusions on that
score."

The Duke of Otranto ceased. He had relieved himself, and had attained
his object of stripping some self-respect off that man who had
inconveniently discovered him posturing in a gold-embroidered court
costume before a mirror. But they were a hot-headed lot in the army,
and it occurred to him that it would be inconvenient if a well-disposed
general officer, received by him on the recommendation of one of the
princes, were to go and do something rashly scandalous directly after
a private interview with the minister. In a changed voice he put a
question to the point:

"Your relation--this Feraud?"

"No. No relation at all."

"Intimate friend?"

"Intimate... yes. There is between us an intimate connection of a nature
which makes it a point of honour with me to try..."

The minister rang a bell without waiting for the end of the phrase.
When the servant had gone, after bringing in a pair of heavy silver
candelabra for the writing desk, the Duke of Otranto stood up, his
breast glistening all over with gold in the strong light, and taking a
piece of paper out of a drawer held it in his hand ostentatiously while
he said with persuasive gentleness:

"You must not talk of breaking your sword across your knee, general.
Perhaps you would never get another. The emperor shall not return this
time.... _Diable d'homme!_ There was just a moment here in Paris, soon
after Waterloo, when he frightened me. It looked as though he were going
to begin again. Luckily one never does begin again really. You must not
think of breaking your sword, general."

General D'Hubert, his eyes fixed on the ground, made with his hand a
hopeless gesture of renunciation. The Minister of Police turned his
eyes away from him and began to scan deliberately the paper he had been
holding up all the time.

"There are only twenty general officers to be brought before the Special
Commission. Twenty. A round number. And let's see, Feraud. Ah, he's
there! Gabriel Florian. _Parfaitement_. That's your man. Well, there
will be only nineteen examples made now."

General D'Hubert stood up feeling as though he had gone through an
infectious illness.

"I must beg your Excellency to keep my interference a profound secret. I
attach the greatest importance to his never knowing..."

"Who is going to inform him I should like to know," said Fouché, raising
his eyes curiously to General D'Hubert's white face. "Take one of these
pens and run it through the name yourself. This is the only list in
existence. If you are careful to take up enough ink no one will be able
to tell even what was the name thus struck out. But, _par example_, I am
not responsible for what Clarke will do with him. If he persist in
being rabid he will be ordered by the Minster of War to reside in some
provincial town under the supervision of the police."

A few days later General D'Hubert was saying to his sister after the
first greetings had been got over:

"Ah, my dear Léonie! It seemed to me I couldn't get away from Paris
quick enough."

"Effect of love," she suggested with a malicious smile.

"And horror," added General D'Hubert with profound seriousness. "I have
nearly died there of... of nausea."

His face was contracted with disgust. And as his sister looked at him
attentively he continued:

"I have had to see Fouché. I have had an audience. I have been in his
cabinet. There remains with one, after the misfortune of having to
breathe the air of the same room with that man, a sense of diminished
dignity, the uneasy feeling of being not so clean after all as one hoped
one was.... But you can't understand."

She nodded quickly several times. She understood very well on the
contrary. She knew her brother thoroughly and liked him as he was.
Moreover, the scorn and loathing of mankind were the lot of the Jacobin
Fouché, who, exploiting for his own advantage every weakness, every
virtue, every generous illusion of mankind, made dupes of his whole
generation and died obscurely as Duke of Otranto.

"My dear Armand," she said compassionately, "what could you want from
that man?"

"Nothing less than a life," answered General D'Hubert. "And I've got
it. It had to be done. But I feel yet as if I could never forgive the
necessity to the man I had to save."

General Feraud, totally unable as is the case with most men to
comprehend what was happening to him, received the Minister of War's
order to proceed at once to a small town of Central France with feelings
whose natural expression consisted in a fierce rolling of the eye and
savage grinding of the teeth. But he went. The bewilderment and awe at
the passing away of the state of war--the only condition of society he
had ever known--the prospect of a world at peace frightened him. He went
away to his little town firmly persuaded that this could not last. There
he was informed of his retirement from the army, and that his pension
(calculated on the scale of a colonel's half-pay) was made dependent on
the circumspection of his conduct and on the good reports of the police.
No longer in the army! He felt suddenly a stranger to the earth like a
disembodied spirit. It was impossible to exist. But at first he reacted
from sheer incredulity. This could not be. It could not last. The
heavens would fall presently. He called upon thunder, earthquakes,
natural cataclysms. But nothing happened. The leaden weight of an
irremediable idleness descended upon General Feraud, who, having no
resources within himself, sank into a state of awe-inspiring hebetude.
He haunted the streets of the little town gazing before him with
lack-lustre eyes, disregarding the hats raised on his passage; and the
people, nudging each other as he went by, said: "That's poor General
Feraud. His heart is broken. Behold how he loved the emperor!"

The other living wreckage of Napoleonic tempest to be found in that
quiet nook of France clustered round him infinitely respectful of
that sorrow. He himself imagined his soul to be crushed by grief. He
experienced quickly succeeding impulses to weep, to howl, to bite his
fists till blood came, to lie for days on his bed with his head thrust
under the pillow; but they arose from sheer _ennui_, from the anguish
of an immense, indescribable, inconceivable boredom. Only his mental
inability to grasp the hopeless nature of his case as a whole saved him
from suicide. He never even thought of it once. He thought of nothing;
but his appetite abandoned him, and the difficulty of expressing the
overwhelming horror of his feelings (the most furious swearing could do
no justice to it) induced gradually a habit of silence:--a sort of death
to a Southern temperament.

Great therefore was the emotion amongst the _anciens militaires_
frequenting a certain little café full of flies when one stuffy
afternoon "that poor General Feraud" let out suddenly a volley of
formidable curses.

He had been sitting quietly in his own privileged corner looking through
the Paris gazettes with about as much interest as a condemned man on
the eve of execution could be expected to show in the news of the day.
A cluster of martial, bronzed faces, including one lacking an eye and
another lacking the tip of a nose frost-bitten in Russia, surrounded him
anxiously.

"What's the matter, general?"

General Feraud sat erect, holding the newspaper at arm's length in order
to make out the small print better. He was reading very low to himself
over again fragments of the intelligence which had caused what may be
called his resurrection.

"We are informed... till now on sick leave... is to be called to the
command of the 5th Cavalry Brigade in..."

He dropped the paper stonily, mumbled once more... "Called to the
command"... and suddenly gave his forehead a mighty slap.

"I had almost forgotten him," he cried in a conscience-stricken tone.

A deep-chested veteran shouted across the café:

"Some new villainy of the government, general?"

"The villainies of these scoundrels," thundered General Feraud, "are
innumerable. One more, one less!..." He lowered his tone. "But I will
set good order to one of them at least."

He looked all round the faces. "There's a pomaded curled staff officer,
the darling of some of the marshals who sold their father for a handful
of English gold. He will find out presently that I am alive yet," he
declared in a dogmatic tone.... "However, this is a private affair.
An old affair of honour. Bah! Our honour does not matter. Here we are
driven off with a split ear like a lot of cast troop horses--good only
for a knacker's yard. Who cares for our honour now? But it would be
like striking a blow for the emperor.... _Messieurs_, I require the
assistance of two of you."

Every man moved forward. General Feraud, deeply touched by this
demonstration, called with visible emotion upon the one-eyed veteran
cuirassier and the officer of the _Chasseurs à cheval_, who had left the
tip of his nose in Russia. He excused his choice to the others.

"A cavalry affair this--you know."

He was answered with a varied chorus of "_Parfaitement mon Général...
C'est juste... Parbleu c'est connu..._" Everybody was satisfied. The
three left the café together, followed by cries of "_Bonne chance_."

Outside they linked arms, the general in the middle. The three rusty
cocked hats worn _en bataille_, with a sinister forward slant, barred
the narrow street nearly right across. The overheated little town of
gray stones and red tiles was drowsing away its provincial afternoon
under a blue sky. Far off the loud blows of some coopers hooping a cask,
reverberated regularly between the houses. The general dragged his left
foot a little in the shade of the walls.

"That damned winter of 1813 got into my bones for good. Never mind. We
must take pistols, that's all. A little lumbago. We must have pistols.
He's sure game for my bag. My eyes are as keen as ever. Always were. You
should have seen me picking off the dodging Cossacks with a beastly old
infantry musket. I have a natural gift for firearms."

In this strain General Feraud ran on, holding up his head with owlish
eyes and rapacious beak. A mere fighter all his life, a cavalry man, a
_sabreur_, he conceived war with the utmost simplicity as in the main a
massed lot of personal contests, a sort of gregarious duelling. And here
he had on hand a war of his own. He revived. The shadow of peace had
passed away from him like the shadow of death. It was a marvellous
resurrection of the named Feraud, Gabriel Florian, _engagé volontaire_
of 1793, general of 1814, buried without ceremony by means of a service
order signed by the War Minister of the Second Restoration.




IV

No man succeeds in everything he undertakes. In that sense we are all
failures. The great point is not to fail in ordering and sustaining the
effort of our life. In this matter vanity is what leads us astray. It is
our vanity which hurries us into situations from which we must come out
damaged. Whereas pride is our safeguard by the reserve it imposes on
the choice of our endeavour, as much as by the virtue of its sustaining
power.

General D'Hubert was proud and reserved. He had not been damaged by
casual love affairs successful or otherwise. In his war-scarred body
his heart at forty remained unscratched. Entering with reserve into his
sister's matrimonial plans, he felt himself falling irremediably in love
as one falls off a roof. He was too proud to be frightened. Indeed, the
sensation was too delightful to be alarming.

The inexperience of a man of forty is a much more serious thing than
the inexperience of a youth of twenty, for it is not helped out by the
rashness of hot blood. The girl was mysterious, as all young girls
are, by the mere effect of their guarded ingenuity; and to him the
mysteriousness of that young girl appeared exceptional and fascinating.
But there was nothing mysterious about the arrangements of the match
which Madame Léonie had arranged. There was nothing peculiar, either. It
was a very appropriate match, commending itself extremely to the young
lady's mother (her father was dead) and tolerable to the young lady's
uncle--an old _émigré_, lately returned from Germany, and pervading cane
in hand like a lean ghost of the _ancien régime_ in a long-skirted brown
coat and powdered hair, the garden walks of the young lady's ancestral
home.

General D'Hubert was not the man to be satisfied merely with the girl
and the fortune--when it came to the point. His pride--and pride aims
always at true success--would be satisfied with nothing short of love.
But as pride excludes vanity, he could not imagine any reason why this
mysterious creature, with deep and candid eyes of a violet colour,
should have any feeling for him warmer than indifference. The young lady
(her name was Adèle) baffled every attempt at a clear understanding on
that point. It is true that the attempts were clumsy and timidly made,
because by then General D'Hubert had become acutely aware of the number
of his years, of his wounds, of his many moral imperfections, of his
secret unworthiness--and had incidentally learned by experience the
meaning of the word funk. As far as he could make it out she seemed
to imply that with a perfect confidence in her mother's affection and
sagacity she had no pronounced antipathy for the person of General
D'Hubert; and that this was quite sufficient for a well-brought-up
dutiful young lady to begin married life upon. This view hurt and
tormented the pride of General D'Hubert. And yet, he asked himself with
a sort of sweet despair, What more could he expect? She had a quiet and
luminous forehead; her violet eyes laughed while the lines of her lips
and chin remained composed in an admirable gravity. All this was set off
by such a glorious mass of fair hair, by a complexion so marvellous, by
such a grace of expression, that General D'Hubert really never found the
opportunity to examine, with sufficient detachment, the lofty exigencies
of his pride. In fact, he became shy of that line of inquiry, since it
had led once or twice to a crisis of solitary passion in which it was
borne upon him that he loved her enough to kill her rather than lose
her. From such passages, not unknown to men of forty, he would come out
broken, exhausted, remorseful, a little dismayed. He derived, however,
considerable comfort from the quietist practice of sitting up now and
then half the night by an open window, and meditating upon the wonder of
her existence, like a believer lost in the mystic contemplation of his
faith.

It must not be supposed that all these variations of his inward state
were made manifest to the world. General D'Hubert found no difficulty
in appearing wreathed in smiles: because, in fact, he was very happy.
He followed the established rules of his condition, sending over flowers
(from his sister's garden and hothouses) early every morning, and a
little later following himself to have lunch with his intended, her
mother, and her _émigré_ uncle. The middle of the day was spent in
strolling or sitting in the shade. A watchful deferential gallantry
trembling on the verge of tenderness, was the note of their intercourse
on his side--with a playful turn of the phrase concealing the profound
trouble of his whole being caused by her inaccessible nearness. Late in
the afternoon General D'Hubert walked home between the fields of vines,
sometimes intensely miserable, sometimes supremely happy, sometimes
pensively sad, but always feeling a special intensity of existence: that
elation common to artists, poets, and lovers, to men haunted by a great
passion, by a noble thought or a new vision of plastic beauty.

The outward world at that time did not exist with any special
distinctness for General D'Hubert. One evening, however, crossing a
ridge from which he could see both houses, General D'Hubert became aware
of two figures far down the road. The day had been divine. The festal
decoration of the inflamed sky cast a gentle glow on the sober tints
of the southern land. The gray rocks, the brown fields, the purple
undulating distances harmonised in luminous accord, exhaled already
the scents of the evening. The two figures down the road presented
themselves like two rigid and wooden silhouettes all black on the ribbon
of white dust. General D'Hubert made out the long, straight-cut military
_capotes_, buttoned closely right up to the black stocks, the cocked
hats, the lean carven brown countenances--old soldiers--_vieilles
moustaches!_ The taller of the two had a black patch over one eye;
the other's hard, dry countenance presented some bizarre disquieting
peculiarity which, on nearer approach, proved to be the absence of the
tip of the nose. Lifting their hands with one movement to salute the
slightly lame civilian walking with a thick stick, they inquired for the
house where the General Baron D'Hubert lived and what was the best way
to get speech with him quietly.

"If you think this quiet enough," said General D'Hubert, looking round
at the ripening vine-fields framed in purple lines and dominated by the
nest of gray and drab walls of a village clustering around the top of a
steep, conical hill, so that the blunt church tower seemed but the shape
of a crowning rock--"if you think this quiet enough you can speak to
him at once. And I beg you, comrades, to speak openly with perfect
confidence."

They stepped back at this and raised again their hands to their hats
with marked ceremoniousness. Then the one with the chipped nose,
speaking for both, remarked that the matter was confidential enough and
to be arranged discreetly. Their general quarters were in that village
over there where the infernal clodhoppers--damn their false royalist
hearts--looked remarkably cross-eyed at three unassuming military men.
For the present he should only ask for the name of General D'Hubert's
friends.

"What friends?" said the astonished General D'Hubert, completely off the
track. "I am staying with my brother-in-law over there."

"Well, he will do for one," suggested the chipped veteran.

"We're the friends of General Feraud," interjected the other, who had
kept silent till then, only glowering with his one eye at the man who
had never loved the emperor. That was something to look at. For even
the gold-laced Judases who had sold him to the English, the marshals and
princes, had loved him at some time or other. But this man had _never_
loved the emperor. General Feraud had said so distinctly.

General D'Hubert felt a sort of inward blow in his chest. For an
infinitesimal fraction of a second it was as if the spinning of the
earth had become perceptible with an awful, slight rustle in the eternal
stillness of space. But that was the noise of the blood in his ears and
passed off at once. Involuntarily he murmured:

"Feraud! I had forgotten his existence."

"He's existing at present, very uncomfortably it is true, in the
infamous inn of that nest of savages up there," said the one-eyed
cuirassier drily. "We arrived in your parts an hour ago on post horses.
He's awaiting our return with impatience. There is hurry, you know. The
general has broken the ministerial order of sojourn to obtain from you
the satisfaction he's entitled to by the laws of honour, and naturally
he's anxious to have it all over before the _gendarmerie_ gets the
scent."

The other elucidated the idea a little further.

"Get back on the quiet--you understand? Phitt! No one the wiser. We
have broken out, too. Your friend the king would be glad to cut off our
scurvy pittances at the first chance. It's a risk. But honour before
everything."

General D'Hubert had recovered his power of speech.

"So you come like this along the road to invite me to a throat-cutting
match with that--that..." A laughing sort of rage took possession of
him.

"Ha! ha! ha! ha!"

His fists on his hips, he roared without restraint while they stood
before him lank and straight, as unexpected as though they had been shot
up with a snap through a trapdoor in the ground. Only four-and-twenty
months ago the masters of Europe, they had already the air of antique
ghosts, they seemed less substantial in their faded coats than their own
narrow shadows falling so black across the white road--the military and
grotesque shadows of twenty years of war and conquests. They had the
outlandish appearance of two imperturbable bronzes of the religion of
the sword. And General D'Hubert, also one of the ex-masters of Europe,
laughed at these serious phantoms standing in his way.

Said one, indicating the laughing general with a jerk of the head:

"A merry companion that."

"There are some of us that haven't smiled from the day the Other went
away," said his comrade.

A violent impulse to set upon and beat these unsubstantial wraiths to
the ground frightened General D'Hubert. He ceased laughing suddenly.
His urgent desire now was to get rid of them, to get them away from his
sight quickly before he lost control of himself. He wondered at this
fury he felt rising in his breast. But he had no time to look into that
peculiarity just then.

"I understand your wish to be done with me as quickly as possible. Then
why waste time in empty ceremonies. Do you see that wood there at the
foot of that slope? Yes, the wood of pines. Let us meet there to-morrow
at sunrise. I will bring with me my sword or my pistols or both if you
like."

The seconds of General Feraud looked at each other.

"Pistols, general," said the cuirassier.

"So be it. _Au revoir_--to-morrow morning. Till then let me advise you
to keep close if you don't want the _gendarmerie_ making inquiries about
you before dark. Strangers are rare in this part of the country."

They saluted in silence. General D'Hubert, turning his back on their
retreating figures, stood still in the middle of the road for a long
time, biting his lower lip and looking on the ground. Then he began to
walk straight before him, thus retracing his steps till he found himself
before the park gate of his intended's home. Motionless he stared
through the bars at the front of the house gleaming clear beyond the
thickets and trees. Footsteps were heard on the gravel, and presently a
tall stooping shape emerged from the lateral alley following the inner
side of the park wall.

Le Chevalier de Valmassigue, uncle of the adorable Adèle, ex-brigadier
in the army of the princes, bookbinder in Altona, afterwards shoemaker
(with a great reputation for elegance in the fit of ladies' shoes) in
another small German town, wore silk stockings on his lean shanks, low
shoes with silver buckles, a brocaded waistcoat. A long-skirted coat _à
la Française_ covered loosely his bowed back. A small three-cornered hat
rested on a lot of powdered hair tied behind in a queue.

"_Monsieur le Chevalier_," called General D'Hubert softly.

"What? You again here, _mon ami_? Have you forgotten something?"

"By heavens! That's just it. I have forgotten something. I am come to
tell you of it. No--outside. Behind this wall. It's too ghastly a thing
to be let in at all where she lives."

The Chevalier came out at once with that benevolent resignation some
old people display towards the fugue of youth. Older by a quarter of a
century than General D'Hubert, he looked upon him in the secret of
his heart as a rather troublesome youngster in love. He had heard his
enigmatical words very well, but attached no undue importance to what a
mere man of forty so hard hit was likely to do or say. The turn of mind
of the generation of Frenchmen grown up during the years of his exile
was almost unintelligible to him. Their sentiments appeared to him
unduly violent, lacking fineness and measure, their language needlessly
exaggerated. He joined the general on the road, and they made a few
steps in silence, the general trying to master his agitation and get
proper control of his voice.

"Chevalier, it is perfectly true. I forgot something. I forgot till
half an hour ago that I had an urgent affair of honour on my hands. It's
incredible but so it is!"

All was still for a moment. Then in the profound evening silence of the
countryside the thin, aged voice of the Chevalier was heard trembling
slightly.

"Monsieur! That's an indignity."

It was his first thought. The girl born during his exile, the posthumous
daughter of his poor brother, murdered by a band of Jacobins, had grown
since his return very dear to his old heart, which had been starving on
mere memories of affection for so many years.

"It is an inconceivable thing--I say. A man settles such affairs before
he thinks of asking for a young girl's hand. Why! If you had forgotten
for ten days longer you would have been married before your memory
returned to you. In my time men did not forget such things--nor yet
what's due to the feelings of an innocent young woman. If I did not
respect them myself I would qualify your conduct in a way which you
would not like."

General D'Hubert relieved himself frankly by a groan.

"Don't let that consideration prevent you. You run no risk of offending
her mortally."

But the old man paid no attention to this lover's nonsense. It's
doubtful whether he even heard.

"What is it?" he asked. "What's the nature of..."

"Call it a youthful folly, _Monsieur le Chevalier_. An inconceivable,
incredible result of..."

He stopped short. "He will never believe the story," he thought. "He
will only think I am taking him for a fool and get offended." General
D'Hubert spoke up again. "Yes, originating in youthful folly it has
become..."

The Chevalier interrupted. "Well then it must be arranged."

"Arranged."

"Yes. No matter what it may cost your _amour propre_. You should have
remembered you were engaged. You forgot that, too, I suppose. And then
you go and forget your quarrel. It's the most revolting exhibition of
levity I ever heard of."

"Good heavens, Chevalier! You don't imagine I have been picking up that
quarrel last time I was in Paris or anything of the sort. Do you?"

"Eh? What matters the precise date of your insane conduct!" exclaimed
the Chevalier testily. "The principal thing is to arrange it..."

Noticing General D'Hubert getting restive and trying to place a word,
the old _émigré_ raised his arm and added with dignity:

"I've been a soldier, too. I would never dare to suggest a doubtful
step to the man whose name my niece is to bear. I tell you that _entre
gallants hommes_ an affair can be always arranged."

"But, _saperlotte, Monsieur le Chevalier_, it's fifteen or sixteen years
ago. I was a lieutenant of Hussars then."

The old Chevalier seemed confounded by the vehemently despairing tone of
this information.

"You were a lieutenant of Hussars sixteen years ago?" he mumbled in a
dazed manner.

"Why, yes! You did not suppose I was made a general in my cradle like a
royal prince."

In the deepening purple twilight of the fields, spread with vine leaves,
backed by a low band of sombre crimson in the west, the voice of the old
ex-officer in the army of the princes sounded collected, punctiliously
civil.

"Do I dream? Is this a pleasantry? Or do you mean me to understand that
you have been hatching an affair of honour for sixteen years?"

"It has clung to me for that length of time. That is my precise meaning.
The quarrel itself is not to be explained easily. We have been on the
ground several times during that time of course."

"What manners! What horrible perversion of manliness! Nothing can
account for such inhumanity but the sanguinary madness of the Revolution
which has tainted a whole generation," mused the returned _émigré_ in a
low tone. "Who is your adversary?" he asked a little louder.

"What? My adversary! His name is Feraud." Shadowy in his_ tricorne_ and
old-fashioned clothes like a bowed thin ghost of the _ancien régime_ the
Chevalier voiced a ghostly memory.

"I can remember the feud about little Sophie Derval between Monsieur de
Brissac, captain in the Bodyguards and d'Anjorrant. Not the pockmarked
one. The other. The Beau d'Anjorrant as they called him. They met three
times in eighteen months in a most gallant manner. It was the fault of
that little Sophie, too, who _would_ keep on playing..."

"This is nothing of the kind," interrupted General D'Hubert. He laughed
a little sardonically. "Not at all so simple," he added. "Nor yet half
so reasonable," he finished inaudibly between his teeth and ground them
with rage.

After this sound nothing troubled the silence for a long time till the
Chevalier asked without animation:

"What is he--this Feraud?"

"Lieutenant of Hussars, too--I mean he's a general. A Gascon. Son of a
blacksmith, I believe."

"There! I thought so. That Bonaparte had a special predilection for
the _canaille_. I don't mean this for you, D'Hubert. You are one of us,
though you have served this usurper who..."

"Let's leave him out of this," broke in General D'Hubert.

The Chevalier shrugged his peaked shoulders.

"A Feraud of sorts. Offspring of a blacksmith and some village troll....
See what comes of mixing yourself up with that sort of people."

"You have made shoes yourself, Chevalier."

"Yes. But I am not the son of a shoemaker. Neither are you, Monsieur
D'Hubert. You and I have something that your Bonaparte's, princes,
dukes, and marshals have not because there's no power on earth that
could give it to them," retorted the _émigré_, with the rising animation
of a man who has got hold of a hopeful argument. "Those people don't
exist--all these Ferauds. Feraud! What is Feraud? A _va-nu-pieds_
disguised into a general by a Corsican adventurer masquerading as an
emperor. There is no earthly reason for a D'Hubert to _s'encanailler_
by a duel with a person of that sort. You can make your excuses to him
perfectly well. And if the _manant_ takes it into his head to decline
them you may simply refuse to meet him." "You say I may do that?" "Yes.
With the clearest conscience." "_Monsieur le Chevalier!_ To what do you
think you have returned from your emigration?"

This was said in such a startling tone that the old exile raised sharply
his bowed head, glimmering silvery white under the points of the little
_tricorne_. For a long time he made no sound.

"God knows!" he said at last, pointing with a slow and grave gesture
at a tall roadside cross mounted on a block of stone and stretching its
arms of forged stone all black against the darkening red band in the
sky. "God knows! If it were not for this emblem, which I remember seeing
in this spot as a child, I would wonder to what we, who have remained
faithful to our God and our king, have returned. The very voices of the
people have changed."

"Yes, it is a changed France," said General D'Hubert. He had regained
his calm. His tone was slightly ironic. "Therefore, I cannot take your
advice. Besides, how is one to refuse to be bitten by a dog that means
to bite? It's impracticable. Take my word for it. He isn't a man to be
stopped by apologies or refusals. But there are other ways. I could, for
instance, send a mounted messenger with a word to the brigadier of the
_gendarmerie_ in Senlac. These fellows are liable to arrest on my simple
order. It would make some talk in the army, both the organised and the
disbanded. Especially the disbanded. All _canaille_. All my comrades
once--the companions in arms of Armand D'Hubert. But what need a
D'Hubert care what people who don't exist may think? Or better still,
I might get my brother-in-law to send for the mayor of the village and
give him a hint. No more would be needed to get the three 'brigands'
set upon with flails and pitchforks and hunted into some nice deep wet
ditch. And nobody the wiser! It has been done only ten miles from here
to three poor devils of the disbanded Red Lancers of the Guard going
to their homes. What says your conscience, Chevalier? Can a D'Hubert do
that thing to three men who do not exist?"

A few stars had come out on the blue obscurity, clear as crystal, of the
sky. The dry, thin voice of the Chevalier spoke harshly.

"Why are you telling me all this?"

The general seized a withered, frail old hand with a strong grip.

"Because I owe you my fullest confidence. Who could tell Adèle but you?
You understand why I dare not trust my brother-in-law nor yet my own
sister. Chevalier! I have been so near doing these things that I tremble
yet. You don't know how terrible this duel appears to me. And there's no
escape from it."

He murmured after a pause, "It's a fatality," dropped the Chevalier's
passive hand, and said in his ordinary conversational voice:

"I shall have to go without seconds. If it is my lot to remain on
the ground, you at least will know all that can be made known of this
affair."

The shadowy ghost of the _ancien régime_ seemed to have become more
bowed during the conversation.

"How am I to keep an indifferent face this evening before those two
women?" he groaned. "General! I find it very difficult to forgive you."

General D'Hubert made no answer.

"Is your cause good at least?"

"I am innocent."

This time he seized the Chevalier's ghostly arm above the elbow, gave it
a mighty squeeze.

"I must kill him," he hissed, and opening his hand strode away down the
road.

The delicate attentions of his adoring sister had secured for the
general perfect liberty of movement in the house where he was a guest.
He had even his own entrance through a small door in one corner of
the orangery. Thus he was not exposed that evening to the necessity
of dissembling his agitation before the calm ignorance of the other
inmates. He was glad of it. It seemed to him that if he had to open
his lips, he would break out into horrible imprecation, start breaking
furniture, smashing china and glasses. From the moment he opened the
private door, and while ascending the twenty-eight steps of winding
staircase, giving access to the corridor on which his room opened, he
went through a horrible and humiliating scene in which an infuriated
madman, with bloodshot eyes and a foaming mouth, played inconceivable
havoc with everything inanimate that may be found in a well-appointed
dining room. When he opened the door of his apartment the fit was over,
and his bodily fatigue was so great that he had to catch at the backs
of the chairs as he crossed the room to reach a low and broad divan
on which he let himself fall heavily. His moral prostration was still
greater. That brutality of feeling, which he had known only when
charging sabre in hand, amazed this man of forty, who did not recognise
in it the instinctive fury of his menaced passion. It was the revolt of
jeopardised desire. In his mental and bodily exhaustion it got cleared,
fined down, purified into a sentiment of melancholy despair at having,
perhaps, to die before he had taught this beautiful girl to love him.

On that night General D'Hubert, either stretched on his back with his
hands over his eyes or lying on his breast, with his face buried in a
cushion, made the full pilgrimage of emotions. Nauseating disgust at
the absurdity of the situation, dread of the fate that could play such
a vile trick on a man, awe at the remote consequences of an apparently
insignificant and ridiculous event in his past, doubt of his own fitness
to conduct his existence and mistrust of his best sentiments--for what
the devil did he want to go to Fouché for?--he knew them all in turn.
"I am an idiot, neither more nor less," he thought. "A sensitive idiot.
Because I overheard two men talk in a café... I am an idiot afraid of
lies--whereas in life it is only truth that matters."

Several times he got up, and walking about in his socks, so as not to
be heard by anybody downstairs, drank all the water he could find in
the dark. And he tasted the torments of jealousy, too. She would marry
somebody else. His very soul writhed. The tenacity of that Feraud, the
awful persistence of that imbecile brute came to him with the tremendous
force of a relentless fatality. General D'Hubert trembled as he put down
the empty water ewer. "He will have me," he thought. General D'Hubert
was tasting every emotion that life has to give. He had in his dry mouth
the faint, sickly flavour of fear, not the honourable fear of a
young girl's candid and amused glance, but the fear of death and the
honourable man's fear of cowardice.

But if true courage consists in going out to meet an odious danger from
which our body, soul and heart recoil together General D'Hubert had
the opportunity to practise it for the first time in his life. He had
charged exultingly at batteries and infantry squares and ridden with
messages through a hail of bullets without thinking anything about
it. His business now was to sneak out unheard, at break of day, to
an obscure and revolting death. General D'Hubert never hesitated. He
carried two pistols in a leather bag which he slung over his shoulder.
Before he had crossed the garden his mouth was dry again. He picked two
oranges. It was only after shutting the gate after him that he felt a
slight faintness.

He stepped out disregarding it, and after going a few yards regained
the command of his legs. He sucked an orange as he walked. It was a
colourless and pellucid dawn. The wood of pines detached its columns of
brown trunks and its dark-green canopy very clearly against the rocks
of the gray hillside behind. He kept his eyes fixed on it steadily. That
temperamental, good-humoured coolness in the face of danger, which made
him an officer liked by his men and appreciated by his superiors, was
gradually asserting itself. It was like going into battle. Arriving at
the edge of the wood he sat down on a boulder, holding the other orange
in his hand, and thought that he had come ridiculously early on the
ground. Before very long, however, he heard the swishing of bushes,
footsteps on the hard ground, and the sounds of a disjointed loud
conversation. A voice somewhere behind him said boastfully, "He's game
for my bag."

He thought to himself, "Here they are. What's this about game? Are they
talking of me?" And becoming aware of the orange in his hand he thought
further, "These are very good oranges. Leonie's own tree. I may just as
well eat this orange instead of flinging it away."

Emerging from a tangle of rocks and bushes, General Feraud and his
seconds discovered General D'Hubert engaged in peeling the orange. They
stood still waiting till he looked up. Then the seconds raised their
hats, and General Feraud, putting his hands behind his back, walked
aside a little way.

"I am compelled to ask one of you, messieurs, to act for me. I have
brought no friends. Will you?"

The one-eyed cuirassier said judicially:

"That cannot be refused."

The other veteran remarked:

"It's awkward all the same."

"Owing to the state of the people's minds in this part of the country
there was no one I could trust with the object of your presence here,"
explained General D'Hubert urbanely. They saluted, looked round, and
remarked both together:

"Poor ground."

"It's unfit."

"Why bother about ground, measurements, and so on. Let us simplify
matters. Load the two pairs of pistols. I will take those of General
Feraud and let him take mine. Or, better still, let us take a mixed
pair. One of each pair. Then we will go into the wood while you remain
outside. We did not come here for ceremonies, but for war. War to the
death. Any ground is good enough for that. If I fall you must leave me
where I lie and clear out. It wouldn't be healthy for you to be found
hanging about here after that."

It appeared after a short parley that General Feraud was willing to
accept these conditions. While the seconds were loading the pistols he
could be heard whistling, and was seen to rub his hands with an air of
perfect contentment. He flung off his coat briskly, and General D'Hubert
took off his own and folded it carefully on a stone.

"Suppose you take your principal to the other side of the wood and let
him enter exactly in ten minutes from now," suggested General D'Hubert
calmly, but feeling as if he were giving directions for his own
execution. This, however, was his last moment of weakness.

"Wait! Let us compare watches first."

He pulled out his own. The officer with the chipped nose went over to
borrow the watch of General Feraud. They bent their heads over them for
a time.

"That's it. At four minutes to five by yours. Seven to, by mine."

It was the cuirassier who remained by the side of General D'Hubert,
keeping his one eye fixed immovably on the white face of the watch he
held in the palm of his hand. He opened his mouth wide, waiting for the
beat of the last second, long before he snapped out the word:

"_Avancez!_"

General D'Hubert moved on, passing from the glaring sunshine of the
Provençal morning into the cool and aromatic shade of the pines. The
ground was clear between the reddish trunks, whose multitude, leaning at
slightly different angles, confused his eye at first. It was like going
into battle. The commanding quality of confidence in himself woke up in
his breast. He was all to his affair. The problem was how to kill his
adversary. Nothing short of that would free him from this imbecile
nightmare. "It's no use wounding that brute," he thought. He was known
as a resourceful officer. His comrades, years ago, used to call him "the
strategist." And it was a fact that he could think in the presence of
the enemy, whereas Feraud had been always a mere fighter. But a dead
shot, unluckily.

"I must draw his fire at the greatest possible range," said General
D'Hubert to himself.

At that moment he saw something white moving far off between the trees.
The shirt of his adversary. He stepped out at once between the trunks
exposing himself freely, then quick as lightning leaped back. It had
been a risky move, but it succeeded in its object. Almost simultaneously
with the pop of a shot a small piece of bark chipped off by the bullet
stung his ear painfully.

And now General Feraud, with one shot expended, was getting cautious.
Peeping round his sheltering tree, General D'Hubert could not see him
at all. This ignorance of his adversary's whereabouts carried with it a
sense of insecurity. General D'Hubert felt himself exposed on his flanks
and rear. Again something white fluttered in his sight. Ha! The enemy
was still on his front then. He had feared a turning movement. But,
apparently, General Feraud was not thinking of it. General D'Hubert saw
him pass without special haste from one tree to another in the straight
line of approach. With great firmness of mind General D'Hubert stayed
his hand. Too far yet. He knew he was no marksman. His must be a waiting
game--to kill.

He sank down to the ground wishing to take advantage of the greater
thickness of the trunk. Extended at full length, head on to his enemy,
he kept his person completely protected. Exposing himself would not
do now because the other was too near by this time. A conviction that
Feraud would presently do something rash was like balm to General
D'Hubert's soul. But to keep his chin raised off the ground was irksome,
and not much use either. He peeped round, exposing a fraction of his
head, with dread but really with little risk. His enemy, as a matter of
fact, did not expect to see anything of him so low down as that. General
D'Hubert caught a fleeting view of General Feraud shifting trees again
with deliberate caution. "He despises my shooting," he thought, with
that insight into the mind of his antagonist which is of such great help
in winning battles. It confirmed him in his tactics of immobility. "Ah!
if I only could watch my rear as well as my front!" he thought, longing
for the impossible.

It required some fortitude to lay his pistols down. But on a sudden
impulse General D'Hubert did this very gently--one on each side. He had
been always looked upon as a bit of a dandy, because he used to shave
and put on a clean shirt on the days of battle. As a matter of fact he
had been always very careful of his personal appearance. In a man of
nearly forty, in love with a young and charming girl, this praiseworthy
self-respect may run to such little weaknesses as, for instance, being
provided with an elegant leather folding case containing a small ivory
comb and fitted with a piece of looking-glass on the outside. General
D'Hubert, his hands being free, felt in his breeches pockets for that
implement of innocent vanity, excusable in the possessor of long silky
moustaches. He drew it out, and then, with the utmost coolness and
promptitude, turned himself over on his back. In this new attitude, his
head raised a little, holding the looking-glass in one hand just clear
of his tree, he squinted into it with one eye while the other kept a
direct watch on the rear of his position. Thus was proved Napoleon's
saying, that for a French soldier the word impossible does not exist. He
had the right tree nearly filling the field of his little mirror.

"If he moves from there," he said to himself exultingly, "I am bound to
see his legs. And in any case he can't come upon me unawares."

And sure enough he saw the boots of General Feraud flash in and out,
eclipsing for an instant everything else reflected in the little mirror.
He shifted its position accordingly. But having to form his judgment of
the change from that indirect view, he did not realise that his own
feet and a portion of his legs were now in plain and startling view of
General Feraud.

General Feraud had been getting gradually impressed by the amazing
closeness with which his enemy had been keeping cover. He had spotted
the right tree with bloodthirsty precision. He was absolutely certain of
it. And yet he had not been able to sight as much as the tip of an ear.
As he had been looking for it at the level of about five feet ten inches
it was no great wonder--but it seemed very wonderful to General Feraud.

The first view of these feet and legs determined a rush of blood to his
head. He literally staggered behind his tree, and had to steady himself
with his hand. The other was lying on the ground--on the ground!
Perfectly still, too! Exposed! What did it mean?... The notion that he
had knocked his adversary over at the first shot then entered General
Feraud's head. Once there, it grew with every second of
attentive gazing, overshadowing every other
supposition--irresistible--triumphant--ferocious.

"What an ass I was to think I could have missed him!" he said to
himself. "He was exposed _en plein_--the fool--for quite a couple of
seconds."

And the general gazed at the motionless limbs, the last vestiges of
surprise fading before an unbounded admiration of his skill.

"Turned up his toes! By the god of war that was a shot!" he continued
mentally. "Got it through the head just where I aimed, staggered behind
that tree, rolled over on his back and died."

And he stared. He stared, forgetting to move, almost awed, almost sorry.
But for nothing in the world would he have had it undone. Such a shot!
Such a shot! Rolled over on his back, and died!

For it was this helpless position, lying on the back, that shouted its
sinister evidence at General Feraud. He could not possibly imagine
that it might have been deliberately assumed by a living man. It was
inconceivable. It was beyond the range of sane supposition. There was no
possibility to guess the reason for it. And it must be said that
General D'Hubert's turned-up feet looked thoroughly dead. General Feraud
expanded his lungs for a stentorian shout to his seconds, but from what
he felt to be an excessive scrupulousness, refrained for a while.

"I will just go and see first whether he breathes yet," he mumbled
to himself, stepping out from behind his tree. This was immediately
perceived by the resourceful General D'Hubert. He concluded it to be
another shift. When he lost the boots out of the field of the mirror, he
became uneasy. General Feraud had only stepped a little out of the line,
but his adversary could not possibly have supposed him walking up with
perfect unconcern. General D'Hubert, beginning to wonder where the other
had dodged to, was come upon so suddenly that the first warning he had
of his danger consisted in the long, early-morning shadow of his
enemy falling aslant on his outstretched legs. He had not even heard a
footfall on the soft ground between the trees!

It was too much even for his coolness. He jumped up instinctively,
leaving the pistols on the ground. The irresistible instinct of most
people (unless totally paralysed by discomfiture) would have been
to stoop--exposing themselves to the risk of being shot down in
that position. Instinct, of course, is irreflective. It is its very
definition. But it may be an inquiry worth pursuing, whether in
reflective mankind the mechanical promptings of instinct are not
affected by the customary mode of thought. Years ago, in his young
days, Armand D'Hubert, the reflective promising officer, had emitted the
opinion that in warfare one should "never cast back on the lines of
a mistake." This idea afterward restated, defended, developed in many
discussions, had settled into one of the stock notions of his brain,
became a part of his mental individuality. And whether it had gone so
inconceivably deep as to affect the dictates of his instinct, or simply
because, as he himself declared, he was "too scared to remember the
confounded pistols," the fact is that General D'Hubert never attempted
to stoop for them. Instead of going back on his mistake, he seized
the rough trunk with both hands and swung himself behind it with such
impetuosity that going right round in the very flash and report of a
pistol shot, he reappeared on the other side of the tree face to face
with General Feraud, who, completely unstrung by such a show of agility
on the part of a dead man, was trembling yet. A very faint mist of smoke
hung before his face which had an extraordinary aspect as if the lower
jaw had come unhinged.

"Not missed!" he croaked hoarsely from the depths of a dry throat.

This sinister sound loosened the spell which had fallen on General
D'Hubert's senses.

"Yes, missed--a _bout portant_" he heard himself saying exultingly
almost before he had recovered the full command of his faculties.
The revulsion of feeling was accompanied by a gust of homicidal fury
resuming in its violence the accumulated resentment of a lifetime.
For years General D'Hubert had been exasperated and humiliated by an
atrocious absurdity imposed upon him by that man's savage caprice.
Besides, General D'Hubert had been in this last instance too unwilling
to confront death for the reaction of his anguish not to take the shape
of a desire to kill.

"And I have my two shots to fire yet," he added pitilessly.

General Feraud snapped his teeth, and his face assumed an irate,
undaunted expression.

"Go on," he growled.

These would have been his last words on earth if General D'Hubert had
been holding the pistols in his hand. But the pistols were lying on the
ground at the foot of a tall pine. General D'Hubert had the second's
leisure necessary to remember that he had dreaded death not as a man but
as a lover, not as a danger but as a rival--not as a foe to life but
as an obstacle to marriage. And, behold, there was the rival defeated!
Miserably defeated-crushed--done for!

He picked up the weapons mechanically, and instead of firing them into
General Feraud's breast, gave expression to the thought uppermost in his
mind.

"You will fight no more duels now."

[Illustration: frontispiece166.jpg "You will fight no more duels now."]

His tone of leisurely, ineffable satisfaction was too much for General
Feraud's stoicism.

"Don't dawdle then, damn you for a coldblooded staff-coxcomb!" he roared
out suddenly out of an impassive face held erect on a rigid body.

General D'Hubert uncocked the pistols carefully. This proceeding was
observed with a sort of gloomy astonishment by the other general.

"You missed me twice," he began coolly, shifting both pistols to one
hand. "The last time within a foot or so. By every rule of single combat
your life belongs to me. That does not mean that I want to take it now."

"I have no use for your forbearance," muttered General Feraud savagely.

"Allow me to point out that this is no concern of mine," said General
D'Hubert, whose every word was dictated by a consummate delicacy of
feeling. In anger, he could have killed that man, but in cold blood, he
recoiled from humiliating this unreasonable being--a fellow soldier
of the Grand Armée, his companion in the wonders and terrors of the
military epic. "You don't set up the pretension of dictating to me what
I am to do with what is my own."

General Feraud looked startled. And the other continued:

"You've forced me on a point of honour to keep my life at your disposal,
as it were, for fifteen years. Very well. Now that the matter is decided
to my advantage, I am going to do what I like with your life on the same
principle. You shall keep it at my disposal as long as I choose. Neither
more nor less. You are on your honour."

"I am! But _sacrebleu!_ This is an absurd position for a general of
the empire to be placed in," cried General Feraud, in the accents of
profound and dismayed conviction. "It means for me to be sitting all the
rest of my life with a loaded pistol in a drawer waiting for your word.
It's... it's idiotic. I shall be an object of... of... derision."

"Absurd?... Idiotic? Do you think so?" queried argumentatively General
D'Hubert with sly gravity. "Perhaps. But I don't see how that can be
helped. However, I am not likely to talk at large of this adventure.
Nobody need ever know anything about it. Just as no one to this day, I
believe, knows the origin of our quarrel.... Not a word more," he added
hastily. "I can't really discuss this question with a man who, as far as
I am concerned, does not exist."

When the duellists came out into the open, General Feraud walking a
little behind and rather with the air of walking in a trance, the two
seconds hurried towards them each from his station at the edge of the
wood. General D'Hubert addressed them, speaking loud and distinctly:

"Messieurs! I make it a point of declaring to you solemnly in the
presence of General Feraud that our difference is at last settled for
good. You may inform all the world of that fact."

"A reconciliation after all!" they exclaimed together.

"Reconciliation? Not that exactly. It is something much more binding. Is
it not so, general?"

General Feraud only lowered his head in sign of assent. The two veterans
looked at each other. Later in the day when they found themselves alone,
out of their moody friend's earshot, the cuirassier remarked suddenly:

"Generally speaking, I can see with my one eye as far or even a little
farther than most people. But this beats me. He won't say anything."

"In this affair of honour I understand there has been from first to last
always something that no one in the army could quite make out," declared
the chasseur with the imperfect nose. "In mystery it began, in mystery
it went on, and in mystery it is to end apparently...."

General D'Hubert walked home with long, hasty strides, by no means
uplifted by a sense of triumph. He had conquered, but it did not seem
to him he had gained very much by his conquest. The night before he had
grudged the risk of his life which appeared to him magnificent, worthy
of preservation as an opportunity to win a girl's love. He had even
moments when by a marvellous illusion this love seemed to him already
his and his threatened life a still more magnificent opportunity of
devotion. Now that his life was safe it had suddenly lost it special
magnificence. It wore instead a specially alarming aspect as a snare for
the exposure of unworthiness. As to the marvellous illusion of conquered
love that had visited him for a moment in the agitated watches of the
night which might have been his last on earth, he comprehended now its
true nature. It had been merely a paroxysm of delirious conceit. Thus to
this man sobered by the victorious issue of a duel, life appeared robbed
of much of its charm simply because it was no longer menaced.

Approaching the house from the back through the orchard and the kitchen
gardens, he could not notice the agitation which reigned in front. He
never met a single soul. Only upstairs, while walking softly along the
corridor, he became aware that the house was awake and much more noisy
than usual. Names of servants were being called out down below in a
confused noise of coming and going. He noticed with some concern that
the door of his own room stood ajar, though the shutters had not been
opened yet. He had hoped that his early excursion would have passed
unperceived. He expected to find some servant just gone in; but the
sunshine filtering through the usual cracks enabled him to see lying
on the low divan something bulky which had the appearance of two women
clasped in each other's arms. Tearful and consolatory murmurs issued
mysteriously from that appearance. General D'Hubert pulled open the
nearest pair of shutters violently. One of the women then jumped up. It
was his sister. She stood for a moment with her hair hanging down and
her arms raised straight up above her head, and then flung herself with
a stifled cry into his arms. He returned her embrace, trying at the same
time to disengage himself from it. The other woman had not risen. She
seemed, on the contrary, to cling closer to the divan, hiding her face
in the cushions. Her hair was also loose; it was admirably fair. General
D'Hubert recognised it with staggering emotion. Mlle. de Valmassigue!
Adèle! In distress!

He became greatly alarmed and got rid of his sister's hug definitely.
Madame Léonie then extended her shapely bare arm out of her peignoir,
pointing dramatically at the divan:

"This poor terrified child has rushed here two miles from home on
foot--running all the way."

"What on earth has happened?" asked General D'Hubert in a low, agitated
voice. But Madame Léonie was speaking loudly.

"She rang the great bell at the gate and roused all the household--we
were all asleep yet. You may imagine what a terrible shock.... Adèle, my
dear child, sit up."

General D'Hubert's expression was not that of a man who imagines
with facility. He did, however, fish out of chaos the notion that his
prospective mother-in-law had died suddenly, but only to dismiss it at
once. He could not conceive the nature of the event, of the catastrophe
which could induce Mlle, de Valmassigue living in a house full of
servants, to bring the news over the fields herself, two miles, running
all the way.

"But why are you in this room?" he whispered, full of awe.

"Of course I ran up to see and this child... I did not notice it--she
followed me. It's that absurd Chevalier," went on Madame Léonie, looking
towards the divan.... "Her hair's come down. You may imagine she did not
stop to call her maid to dress it before she started.... Adèle, my
dear, sit up.... He blurted it all out to her at half-past four in the
morning. She woke up early, and opened her shutters, to breathe the
fresh air, and saw him sitting collapsed on a garden bench at the end of
the great alley. At that hour--you may imagine! And the evening before
he had declared himself indisposed. She just hurried on some clothes and
flew down to him. One would be anxious for less. He loves her, but not
very intelligently. He had been up all night, fully dressed, the poor
old man, perfectly exhausted! He wasn't in a state to invent a plausible
story.... What a confidant you chose there!... My husband was furious!
He said: 'We can't interfere now.' So we sat down to wait. It was awful.
And this poor child running over here publicly with her hair loose.
She has been seen by people in the fields. She has roused the whole
household, too. It's awkward for her. Luckily you are to be married next
week.... Adèle, sit up. He has come home on his own legs, thank God....
We expected you to come back on a stretcher perhaps--what do I know? Go
and see if the carriage is ready. I must take this child to her mother
at once. It isn't proper for her to stay here a minute longer."

General D'Hubert did not move. It was as though he had heard nothing.
Madame Léonie changed her mind.

"I will go and see to it myself," she said. "I want also to get my
cloak... Adèle..." she began, but did not say "sit up." She went out
saying in a loud, cheerful tone: "I leave the door open."

General D'Hubert made a movement towards the divan, but then Adèle
sat up and that checked him dead. He thought, "I haven't washed this
morning. I must look like an old tramp. There's earth on the back of
my coat, and pine needles in my hair." It occurred to him that the
situation required a good deal of circumspection on his part.

"I am greatly concerned, mademoiselle," he began timidly, and abandoned
that line. She was sitting up on the divan with her cheeks
unusually pink, and her hair brilliantly fair, falling all over her
shoulders--which was a very novel sight to the general. He walked away
up the room and, looking out of the window for safety, said: "I fear you
must think I behaved like a madman," in accents of sincere despair....
Then he spun round and noticed that she had followed him with her eyes.
They were not cast down on meeting his glance. And the expression of her
face was novel to him also. It was, one might have said, reversed. Her
eyes looked at him with grave thoughtfulness, while the exquisite lines
of her mouth seemed to suggest a restrained smile. This change made her
transcendental beauty much less mysterious, much more accessible to a
man's comprehension. An amazing ease of mind came to the general--and
even some ease of manner. He walked down the room with as much
pleasurable excitement as he would have found in walking up to a battery
vomiting death, fire, and smoke, then stood looking down with smiling
eyes at the girl whose marriage with him (next week) had been so
carefully arranged by the wise, the good, the admirable Léonie.

"Ah, mademoiselle," he said in a tone of courtly deference. "If I could
be certain that you did not come here this morning only from a sense of
duty to your mother!"

He waited for an answer, imperturbable but inwardly elated. It came in a
demure murmur, eyelashes lowered with fascinating effect.

"You mustn't be _méchant_ as well as mad."

And then General D'Hubert made an aggressive movement towards the divan
which nothing could check. This piece of furniture was not exactly in
the line of the open door. But Madame Léonie, coming back wrapped up in
a light cloak and carrying a lace shawl on her arm for Adèle to hide
her incriminating hair under, had a vague impression of her brother
getting-up from his knees.

"Come along, my dear child," she cried from the doorway.

The general, now himself again in the fullest sense, showed the
readiness of a resourceful cavalry officer and the peremptoriness of a
leader of men.

"You don't expect her to walk to the carriage," he protested. "She isn't
fit. I will carry her downstairs."

This he did slowly, followed by his awed and respectful sister. But he
rushed back like a whirlwind to wash away all the signs of the night of
anguish and the morning of war, and to put on the festive garments of a
conqueror before hurrying over to the other house. Had it not been for
that, General D'Hubert felt capable of mounting a horse and pursuing his
late adversary in order simply to embrace him from excess of happiness.
"I owe this piece of luck to that stupid brute," he thought. "This duel
has made plain in one morning what might have taken me years to find
out--for I am a timid fool. No self-confidence whatever. Perfect coward.
And the Chevalier! Dear old man!" General D'Hubert longed to embrace
him, too.

The Chevalier was in bed. For several days he was much indisposed. The
men of the empire, and the post-revolution young ladies, were too much
for him. He got up the day before the wedding, and being curious by
nature, took his niece aside for a quiet talk. He advised her to find
out from her husband the true story of the affair of honour, whose claim
so imperative and so persistent had led her to within an ace of tragedy.
"It is very proper that his wife should know. And next month or so
will be your time to learn from him anything you ought to know, my dear
child."

Later on when the married couple came on a visit to the mother of the
bride, Madame la Générale D'Hubert made no difficulty in communicating
to her beloved old uncle what she had learned without any difficulty
from her husband. The Chevalier listened with profound attention to the
end, then took a pinch of snuff, shook the grains of tobacco off the
frilled front of his shirt, and said calmly: "And that's all what it
was."

"Yes, uncle," said Madame la Générale, opening her pretty eyes very
wide. "Isn't it funny? _C'est insensé_--to think what men are capable
of."

"H'm," commented the old _émigré_. "It depends what sort of men. That
Bonaparte's soldiers were savages. As a wife, my dear, it is proper for
you to believe implicitly what your husband says."

But to Léonie's husband the Chevalier confided his true opinion.
"If that's the tale the fellow made up for his wife, and during the
honeymoon, too, you may depend on it no one will ever know the secret of
this affair."

Considerably later still, General D'Hubert judged the time come, and the
opportunity propitious to write a conciliatory letter to General Feraud.
"I have never," protested the General Baron D'Hubert, "wished for your
death during all the time of our deplorable quarrel. Allow me to give
you back in all form your forfeited life. We two, who have been partners
in so much military glory, should be friendly to each other publicly."

The same letter contained also an item of domestic information. It was
alluding to this last that General Feraud answered from a little village
on the banks of the Garonne:

"If one of your boy's names had been Napoleon, or Joseph, or even
Joachim, I could congratulate you with a better heart. As you have
thought proper to name him Charles Henri Armand I am confirmed in my
conviction that you never loved the emperor. The thought of that sublime
hero chained to a rock in the middle of a savage ocean makes life of so
little value that I would receive with positive joy your instructions to
blow my brains out. From suicide I consider myself in honour debarred.
But I keep a loaded pistol in my drawer."

Madame la Générale D'Hubert lifted up her hands in horror after perusing
that letter.

"You see? He won't be reconciled," said her husband. "We must take care
that he never, by any chance, learns where the money he lives on comes
from. It would be simply appalling."

"You are a _brave homme_, Armand," said Madame la Générale
appreciatively.

"My dear, I had the right to blow his brains out--strictly speaking.
But as I did not we can't let him starve. He has been deprived of his
pension for 'breach of military discipline' when he broke bounds to
fight his last duel with me. He's crippled with rheumatism. We are
bound to take care of him to the end of his days. And, after all, I
am indebted to him for the radiant discovery that you loved me a
little--you sly person. Ha! Ha! Two miles, running all the way!... It is
extraordinary how all through this affair that man has managed to engage
my deeper feelings."

THE END




THE RESCUE

A ROMANCE OF THE SHALLOWS


By Joseph Conrad


'Allas!' quod she, 'that ever this sholde happe! For wende I never,
by possibilitee, That swich a monstre or merveille mighte be!'--THE
FRANKELEYN'S TALE


TO FREDERIC COURTLAND PENFIELD LAST AMBASSADOR OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA TO THE LATE AUSTRIAN EMPIRE, THIS OLD TIME TALE IS GRATEFULLY
INSCRIBED IN MEMORY OF THE RESCUE OF CERTAIN DISTRESSED TRAVELLERS
EFFECTED BY HIM IN THE WORLD'S GREAT STORM OF THE YEAR 1914




AUTHOR'S NOTE

Of the three long novels of mine which suffered an interruption, "The
Rescue" was the one that had to wait the longest for the good pleasure
of the Fates. I am betraying no secret when I state here that it had
to wait precisely for twenty years. I laid it aside at the end of the
summer of 1898 and it was about the end of the summer of 1918 that I
took it up again with the firm determination to see the end of it and
helped by the sudden feeling that I might be equal to the task.

This does not mean that I turned to it with elation. I was well aware
and perhaps even too much aware of the dangers of such an adventure.
The amazingly sympathetic kindness which men of various temperaments,
diverse views and different literary tastes have been for years
displaying towards my work has done much for me, has done all--except
giving me that over-weening self-confidence which may assist an
adventurer sometimes but in the long run ends by leading him to the
gallows.

As the characteristic I want most to impress upon these short Author's
Notes prepared for my first Collected Edition is that of absolute
frankness, I hasten to declare that I founded my hopes not on my
supposed merits but on the continued goodwill of my readers. I may say
at once that my hopes have been justified out of all proportion to my
deserts. I met with the most considerate, most delicately expressed
criticism free from all antagonism and in its conclusions showing
an insight which in itself could not fail to move me deeply, but was
associated also with enough commendation to make me feel rich beyond the
dreams of avarice--I mean an artist's avarice which seeks its treasure
in the hearts of men and women.

No! Whatever the preliminary anxieties might have been this adventure
was not to end in sorrow. Once more Fortune favoured audacity; and yet
I have never forgotten the jocular translation of _Audaces fortuna juvat_
offered to me by my tutor when I was a small boy: "The Audacious get
bitten." However he took care to mention that there were various kinds
of audacity. Oh, there are, there are! . . . There is, for instance, the
kind of audacity almost indistinguishable from impudence. . . . I
must believe that in this case I have not been impudent for I am not
conscious of having been bitten.

The truth is that when "The Rescue" was laid aside it was not laid aside
in despair. Several reasons contributed to this abandonment and, no
doubt, the first of them was the growing sense of general difficulty in
the handling of the subject. The contents and the course of the story I
had clearly in my mind. But as to the way of presenting the facts, and
perhaps in a certain measure as to the nature of the facts themselves,
I had many doubts. I mean the telling, representative facts, helpful
to carry on the idea, and, at the same time, of such a nature as not to
demand an elaborate creation of the atmosphere to the detriment of
the action. I did not see how I could avoid becoming wearisome in the
presentation of detail and in the pursuit of clearness. I saw the action
plainly enough. What I had lost for the moment was the sense of the
proper formula of expression, the only formula that would suit. This,
of course, weakened my confidence in the intrinsic worth and in the
possible interest of the story--that is in my invention. But I suspect
that all the trouble was, in reality, the doubt of my prose, the doubt
of its adequacy, of its power to master both the colours and the shades.

It is difficult to describe, exactly as I remember it, the complex state
of my feelings; but those of my readers who take an interest in artistic
perplexities will understand me best when I point out that I dropped
"The Rescue" not to give myself up to idleness, regrets, or dreaming,
but to begin "The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'" and to go on with it
without hesitation and without a pause. A comparison of any page of
"The Rescue" with any page of "The Nigger" will furnish an ocular
demonstration of the nature and the inward meaning of this first crisis
of my writing life. For it was a crisis undoubtedly. The laying aside of
a work so far advanced was a very awful decision to take. It was
wrung from me by a sudden conviction that _there_ only was the road of
salvation, the clear way out for an uneasy conscience. The finishing
of "The Nigger" brought to my troubled mind the comforting sense of
an accomplished task, and the first consciousness of a certain sort
of mastery which could accomplish something with the aid of propitious
stars. Why I did not return to "The Rescue" at once then, was not for
the reason that I had grown afraid of it. Being able now to assume a
firm attitude I said to myself deliberately: "That thing can wait." At
the same time I was just as certain in my mind that "Youth," a story
which I had then, so to speak, on the tip of my pen, could _not_ wait.
Neither could "Heart of Darkness" be put off; for the practical reason
that Mr. Wm. Blackwood having requested me to write something for the
No. M of his magazine I had to stir up at once the subject of that tale
which had been long lying quiescent in my mind, because, obviously, the
venerable Maga at her patriarchal age of 1000 numbers could not be kept
waiting. Then "Lord Jim," with about seventeen pages already written at
odd times, put in his claim which was irresistible. Thus every stroke
of the pen was taking me further away from the abandoned "Rescue," not
without some compunction on my part but with a gradually diminishing
resistance; till at last I let myself go as if recognising a superior
influence against which it was useless to contend.

The years passed and the pages grew in number, and the long reveries of
which they were the outcome stretched wide between me and the deserted
"Rescue" like the smooth hazy spaces of a dreamy sea. Yet I never
actually lost sight of that dark speck in the misty distance. It
had grown very small but it asserted itself with the appeal of old
associations. It seemed to me that it would be a base thing for me to
slip out of the world leaving it out there all alone, waiting for its
fate--that would never come?

Sentiment, pure sentiment as you see, prompted me in the last instance
to face the pains and hazards of that return. As I moved slowly towards
the abandoned body of the tale it loomed up big amongst the glittering
shallows of the coast, lonely but not forbidding. There was nothing
about it of a grim derelict. It had an air of expectant life. One after
another I made out the familiar faces watching my approach with faint
smiles of amused recognition. They had known well enough that I was
bound to come back to them. But their eyes met mine seriously as was
only to be expected since I, myself, felt very serious as I stood
amongst them again after years of absence. At once, without wasting
words, we went to work together on our renewed life; and every moment
I felt more strongly that They Who had Waited bore no grudge to the man
who however widely he may have wandered at times had played truant only
once in his life.

1920. J. C.




CONTENTS

PART I.   THE MAN AND THE BRIG

PART II.  THE SHORE OF REFUGE

PART III. THE CAPTURE

PART IV.  THE GIFT OF THE SHALLOWS

PART V.   THE POINT OF HONOUR AND THE POINT OF PASSION

PART VI.  THE CLAIM OF LIFE AND THE TOLL OF DEATH




PART I. THE MAN AND THE BRIG

The shallow sea that foams and murmurs on the shores of the thousand
islands, big and little, which make up the Malay Archipelago has been
for centuries the scene of adventurous undertakings. The vices and the
virtues of four nations have been displayed in the conquest of that
region that even to this day has not been robbed of all the mystery
and romance of its past--and the race of men who had fought against
the Portuguese, the Spaniards, the Dutch and the English, has not been
changed by the unavoidable defeat. They have kept to this day their
love of liberty, their fanatical devotion to their chiefs, their
blind fidelity in friendship and hate--all their lawful and unlawful
instincts. Their country of land and water--for the sea was as much
their country as the earth of their islands--has fallen a prey to the
western race--the reward of superior strength if not of superior virtue.
To-morrow the advancing civilization will obliterate the marks of a long
struggle in the accomplishment of its inevitable victory.

The adventurers who began that struggle have left no descendants. The
ideas of the world changed too quickly for that. But even far into the
present century they have had successors. Almost in our own day we have
seen one of them--a true adventurer in his devotion to his impulse--a
man of high mind and of pure heart, lay the foundation of a flourishing
state on the ideas of pity and justice. He recognized chivalrously the
claims of the conquered; he was a disinterested adventurer, and the
reward of his noble instincts is in the veneration with which a strange
and faithful race cherish his memory.

Misunderstood and traduced in life, the glory of his achievement has
vindicated the purity of his motives. He belongs to history. But there
were others--obscure adventurers who had not his advantages of birth,
position, and intelligence; who had only his sympathy with the people of
forests and sea he understood and loved so well. They can not be said
to be forgotten since they have not been known at all. They were lost
in the common crowd of seamen-traders of the Archipelago, and if
they emerged from their obscurity it was only to be condemned as
law-breakers. Their lives were thrown away for a cause that had no right
to exist in the face of an irresistible and orderly progress--their
thoughtless lives guided by a simple feeling.

But the wasted lives, for the few who know, have tinged with romance the
region of shallow waters and forest-clad islands, that lies far east,
and still mysterious between the deep waters of two oceans.


I

Out of the level blue of a shallow sea Carimata raises a lofty
barrenness of grey and yellow tints, the drab eminence of its arid
heights. Separated by a narrow strip of water, Suroeton, to the west,
shows a curved and ridged outline resembling the backbone of a stooping
giant. And to the eastward a troop of insignificant islets stand
effaced, indistinct, with vague features that seem to melt into the
gathering shadows. The night following from the eastward the retreat of
the setting sun advanced slowly, swallowing the land and the sea; the
land broken, tormented and abrupt; the sea smooth and inviting with its
easy polish of continuous surface to wanderings facile and endless.

There was no wind, and a small brig that had lain all the afternoon a
few miles to the northward and westward of Carimata had hardly altered
its position half a mile during all these hours. The calm was absolute,
a dead, flat calm, the stillness of a dead sea and of a dead atmosphere.
As far as the eye could reach there was nothing but an impressive
immobility. Nothing moved on earth, on the waters, and above them in the
unbroken lustre of the sky. On the unruffled surface of the straits the
brig floated tranquil and upright as if bolted solidly, keel to keel,
with its own image reflected in the unframed and immense mirror of
the sea. To the south and east the double islands watched silently the
double ship that seemed fixed amongst them forever, a hopeless captive
of the calm, a helpless prisoner of the shallow sea.

Since midday, when the light and capricious airs of these seas had
abandoned the little brig to its lingering fate, her head had swung
slowly to the westward and the end of her slender and polished jib-boom,
projecting boldly beyond the graceful curve of the bow, pointed at the
setting sun, like a spear poised high in the hand of an enemy. Right
aft by the wheel the Malay quartermaster stood with his bare, brown feet
firmly planted on the wheel-grating, and holding the spokes at right
angles, in a solid grasp, as though the ship had been running before a
gale. He stood there perfectly motionless, as if petrified but ready
to tend the helm as soon as fate would permit the brig to gather way
through the oily sea.

The only other human being then visible on the brig's deck was the
person in charge: a white man of low stature, thick-set, with shaven
cheeks, a grizzled moustache, and a face tinted a scarlet hue by the
burning suns and by the sharp salt breezes of the seas. He had thrown
off his light jacket, and clad only in white trousers and a thin cotton
singlet, with his stout arms crossed on his breast--upon which they
showed like two thick lumps of raw flesh--he prowled about from side to
side of the half-poop. On his bare feet he wore a pair of straw sandals,
and his head was protected by an enormous pith hat--once white but now
very dirty--which gave to the whole man the aspect of a phenomenal
and animated mushroom. At times he would interrupt his uneasy shuffle
athwart the break of the poop, and stand motionless with a vague gaze
fixed on the image of the brig in the calm water. He could also see down
there his own head and shoulders leaning out over the rail and he would
stand long, as if interested by his own features, and mutter vague
curses on the calm which lay upon the ship like an immovable burden,
immense and burning.

At last, he sighed profoundly, nerved himself for a great effort, and
making a start away from the rail managed to drag his slippers as far
as the binnacle. There he stopped again, exhausted and bored. From under
the lifted glass panes of the cabin skylight near by came the feeble
chirp of a canary, which appeared to give him some satisfaction. He
listened, smiled faintly muttered "Dicky, poor Dick--" and fell back
into the immense silence of the world. His eyes closed, his head hung
low over the hot brass of the binnacle top. Suddenly he stood up with a
jerk and said sharply in a hoarse voice:

"You've been sleeping--you. Shift the helm. She has got stern way on
her."

The Malay, without the least flinch of feature or pose, as if he had
been an inanimate object called suddenly into life by some hidden magic
of the words, spun the wheel rapidly, letting the spokes pass through
his hands; and when the motion had stopped with a grinding noise, caught
hold again and held on grimly. After a while, however, he turned his
head slowly over his shoulder, glanced at the sea, and said in an
obstinate tone:

"No catch wind--no get way."

"No catch--no catch--that's all you know about it," growled the
red-faced seaman. "By and by catch Ali--" he went on with sudden
condescension. "By and by catch, and then the helm will be the right
way. See?"

The stolid seacannie appeared to see, and for that matter to hear,
nothing. The white man looked at the impassive Malay with disgust,
then glanced around the horizon--then again at the helmsman and ordered
curtly:

"Shift the helm back again. Don't you feel the air from aft? You are
like a dummy standing there."

The Malay revolved the spokes again with disdainful obedience, and the
red-faced man was moving forward grunting to himself, when through the
open skylight the hail "On deck there!" arrested him short, attentive,
and with a sudden change to amiability in the expression of his face.

"Yes, sir," he said, bending his ear toward the opening. "What's the
matter up there?" asked a deep voice from below.

The red-faced man in a tone of surprise said:

"Sir?"

"I hear that rudder grinding hard up and hard down. What are you up to,
Shaw? Any wind?"

"Ye-es," drawled Shaw, putting his head down the skylight and speaking
into the gloom of the cabin. "I thought there was a light air, and--but
it's gone now. Not a breath anywhere under the heavens."

He withdrew his head and waited a while by the skylight, but heard
only the chirping of the indefatigable canary, a feeble twittering that
seemed to ooze through the drooping red blossoms of geraniums growing in
flower-pots under the glass panes. He strolled away a step or two before
the voice from down below called hurriedly:

"Hey, Shaw? Are you there?"

"Yes, Captain Lingard," he answered, stepping back. "Have we drifted
anything this afternoon?"

"Not an inch, sir, not an inch. We might as well have been at anchor."

"It's always so," said the invisible Lingard. His voice changed its tone
as he moved in the cabin, and directly afterward burst out with a
clear intonation while his head appeared above the slide of the cabin
entrance:

"Always so! The currents don't begin till it's dark, when a man can't
see against what confounded thing he is being drifted, and then the
breeze will come. Dead on end, too, I don't doubt."

Shaw moved his shoulders slightly. The Malay at the wheel, after making
a dive to see the time by the cabin clock through the skylight, rang a
double stroke on the small bell aft. Directly forward, on the main deck,
a shrill whistle arose long drawn, modulated, dying away softly. The
master of the brig stepped out of the companion upon the deck of his
vessel, glanced aloft at the yards laid dead square; then, from the
door-step, took a long, lingering look round the horizon.

He was about thirty-five, erect and supple. He moved freely, more like
a man accustomed to stride over plains and hills, than like one who from
his earliest youth had been used to counteract by sudden swayings of his
body the rise and roll of cramped decks of small craft, tossed by the
caprice of angry or playful seas.

He wore a grey flannel shirt, and his white trousers were held by a blue
silk scarf wound tightly round his narrow waist. He had come up only for
a moment, but finding the poop shaded by the main-topsail he remained
on deck bareheaded. The light chestnut hair curled close about his
well-shaped head, and the clipped beard glinted vividly when he passed
across a narrow strip of sunlight, as if every hair in it had been
a wavy and attenuated gold wire. His mouth was lost in the heavy
moustache; his nose was straight, short, slightly blunted at the end;
a broad band of deeper red stretched under the eyes, clung to the cheek
bones. The eyes gave the face its remarkable expression. The eyebrows,
darker than the hair, pencilled a straight line below the wide and
unwrinkled brow much whiter than the sunburnt face. The eyes, as if
glowing with the light of a hidden fire, had a red glint in their
greyness that gave a scrutinizing ardour to the steadiness of their
gaze.

That man, once so well known, and now so completely forgotten amongst
the charming and heartless shores of the shallow sea, had amongst his
fellows the nickname of "Red-Eyed Tom." He was proud of his luck but not
of his good sense. He was proud of his brig, of the speed of his craft,
which was reckoned the swiftest country vessel in those seas, and proud
of what she represented.

She represented a run of luck on the Victorian goldfields; his sagacious
moderation; long days of planning, of loving care in building; the
great joy of his youth, the incomparable freedom of the seas; a perfect
because a wandering home; his independence, his love--and his anxiety.
He had often heard men say that Tom Lingard cared for nothing on earth
but for his brig--and in his thoughts he would smilingly correct the
statement by adding that he cared for nothing _living_ but the brig.

To him she was as full of life as the great world. He felt her live in
every motion, in every roll, in every sway of her tapering masts,
of those masts whose painted trucks move forever, to a seaman's
eye, against the clouds or against the stars. To him she was always
precious--like old love; always desirable--like a strange woman; always
tender--like a mother; always faithful--like the favourite daughter of a
man's heart.

For hours he would stand elbow on rail, his head in his hand and
listen--and listen in dreamy stillness to the cajoling and promising
whisper of the sea, that slipped past in vanishing bubbles along the
smooth black-painted sides of his craft. What passed in such moments
of thoughtful solitude through the mind of that child of generations of
fishermen from the coast of Devon, who like most of his class was
dead to the subtle voices, and blind to the mysterious aspects of the
world--the man ready for the obvious, no matter how startling, how
terrible or menacing, yet defenceless as a child before the shadowy
impulses of his own heart; what could have been the thoughts of such a
man, when once surrendered to a dreamy mood, it is difficult to say.

No doubt he, like most of us, would be uplifted at times by the awakened
lyrism of his heart into regions charming, empty, and dangerous. But
also, like most of us, he was unaware of his barren journeys above the
interesting cares of this earth. Yet from these, no doubt absurd and
wasted moments, there remained on the man's daily life a tinge as that
of a glowing and serene half-light. It softened the outlines of his
rugged nature; and these moments kept close the bond between him and his
brig.

He was aware that his little vessel could give him something not to be
had from anybody or anything in the world; something specially his own.
The dependence of that solid man of bone and muscle on that obedient
thing of wood and iron, acquired from that feeling the mysterious
dignity of love. She--the craft--had all the qualities of a living
thing: speed, obedience, trustworthiness, endurance, beauty, capacity
to do and to suffer--all but life. He--the man--was the inspirer of that
thing that to him seemed the most perfect of its kind. His will was
its will, his thought was its impulse, his breath was the breath of
its existence. He felt all this confusedly, without ever shaping this
feeling into the soundless formulas of thought. To him she was unique
and dear, this brig of three hundred and fourteen tons register--a
kingdom!

And now, bareheaded and burly, he walked the deck of his kingdom with a
regular stride. He stepped out from the hip, swinging his arms with
the free motion of a man starting out for a fifteen-mile walk into open
country; yet at every twelfth stride he had to turn about sharply and
pace back the distance to the taffrail.

Shaw, with his hands stuck in his waistband, had hooked himself with
both elbows to the rail, and gazed apparently at the deck between his
feet. In reality he was contemplating a little house with a tiny front
garden, lost in a maze of riverside streets in the east end of London.
The circumstance that he had not, as yet, been able to make the
acquaintance of his son--now aged eighteen months--worried him slightly,
and was the cause of that flight of his fancy into the murky atmosphere
of his home. But it was a placid flight followed by a quick return.
In less than two minutes he was back in the brig. "All there," as his
saying was. He was proud of being always "all there."

He was abrupt in manner and grumpy in speech with the seamen. To his
successive captains, he was outwardly as deferential as he knew how, and
as a rule inwardly hostile--so very few seemed to him of the "all there"
kind. Of Lingard, with whom he had only been a short time--having been
picked up in Madras Roads out of a home ship, which he had to leave
after a thumping row with the master--he generally approved, although he
recognized with regret that this man, like most others, had some absurd
fads; he defined them as "bottom-upwards notions."

He was a man--as there were many--of no particular value to anybody but
himself, and of no account but as the chief mate of the brig, and the
only white man on board of her besides the captain. He felt himself
immeasurably superior to the Malay seamen whom he had to handle, and
treated them with lofty toleration, notwithstanding his opinion that at
a pinch those chaps would be found emphatically "not there."

As soon as his mind came back from his home leave, he detached himself
from the rail and, walking forward, stood by the break of the poop,
looking along the port side of the main deck. Lingard on his own side
stopped in his walk and also gazed absentmindedly before him. In the
waist of the brig, in the narrow spars that were lashed on each side of
the hatchway, he could see a group of men squatting in a circle around a
wooden tray piled up with rice, which stood on the just swept deck.
The dark-faced, soft-eyed silent men, squatting on their hams, fed
decorously with an earnestness that did not exclude reserve.

Of the lot, only one or two wore sarongs, the others having
submitted--at least at sea--to the indignity of European trousers. Only
two sat on the spars. One, a man with a childlike, light yellow face,
smiling with fatuous imbecility under the wisps of straight coarse hair
dyed a mahogany tint, was the tindal of the crew--a kind of boatswain's
or serang's mate. The other, sitting beside him on the booms, was a
man nearly black, not much bigger than a large ape, and wearing on
his wrinkled face that look of comical truculence which is often
characteristic of men from the southwestern coast of Sumatra.

This was the kassab or store-keeper, the holder of a position of dignity
and ease. The kassab was the only one of the crew taking their evening
meal who noticed the presence on deck of their commander. He muttered
something to the tindal who directly cocked his old hat on one
side, which senseless action invested him with an altogether foolish
appearance. The others heard, but went on somnolently feeding with
spidery movements of their lean arms.

The sun was no more than a degree or so above the horizon, and from the
heated surface of the waters a slight low mist began to rise; a mist
thin, invisible to the human eye; yet strong enough to change the sun
into a mere glowing red disc, a disc vertical and hot, rolling down to
the edge of the horizontal and cold-looking disc of the shining sea.
Then the edges touched and the circular expanse of water took on
suddenly a tint, sombre, like a frown; deep, like the brooding
meditation of evil.

The falling sun seemed to be arrested for a moment in his descent by the
sleeping waters, while from it, to the motionless brig, shot out on
the polished and dark surface of the sea a track of light, straight and
shining, resplendent and direct; a path of gold and crimson and purple,
a path that seemed to lead dazzling and terrible from the earth straight
into heaven through the portals of a glorious death. It faded slowly.
The sea vanquished the light. At last only a vestige of the sun
remained, far off, like a red spark floating on the water. It lingered,
and all at once--without warning--went out as if extinguished by a
treacherous hand.

"Gone," cried Lingard, who had watched intently yet missed the last
moment. "Gone! Look at the cabin clock, Shaw!"

"Nearly right, I think, sir. Three minutes past six."

The helmsman struck four bells sharply. Another barefooted seacannie
glided on the far side of the poop to relieve the wheel, and the serang
of the brig came up the ladder to take charge of the deck from Shaw. He
came up to the compass, and stood waiting silently.

"The course is south by east when you get the wind, serang," said Shaw,
distinctly.

"Sou' by eas'," repeated the elderly Malay with grave earnestness.

"Let me know when she begins to steer," added Lingard.

"Ya, Tuan," answered the man, glancing rapidly at the sky. "Wind
coming," he muttered.

"I think so, too," whispered Lingard as if to himself.

The shadows were gathering rapidly round the brig. A mulatto put his
head out of the companion and called out:

"Ready, sir."

"Let's get a mouthful of something to eat, Shaw," said Lingard. "I say,
just take a look around before coming below. It will be dark when we
come up again."

"Certainly, sir," said Shaw, taking up a long glass and putting it to
his eyes. "Blessed thing," he went on in snatches while he worked the
tubes in and out, "I can't--never somehow--Ah! I've got it right at
last!"

He revolved slowly on his heels, keeping the end of the tube on the
sky-line. Then he shut the instrument with a click, and said decisively:

"Nothing in sight, sir."

He followed his captain down below rubbing his hands cheerfully.

For a good while there was no sound on the poop of the brig. Then the
seacannie at the wheel spoke dreamily:

"Did the malim say there was no one on the sea?"

"Yes," grunted the serang without looking at the man behind him.

"Between the islands there was a boat," pronounced the man very softly.

The serang, his hands behind his back, his feet slightly apart, stood
very straight and stiff by the side of the compass stand. His face, now
hardly visible, was as inexpressive as the door of a safe.

"Now, listen to me," insisted the helmsman in a gentle tone.

The man in authority did not budge a hair's breadth. The seacannie bent
down a little from the height of the wheel grating.

"I saw a boat," he murmured with something of the tender obstinacy of
a lover begging for a favour. "I saw a boat, O Haji Wasub! Ya! Haji
Wasub!"

The serang had been twice a pilgrim, and was not insensible to the sound
of his rightful title. There was a grim smile on his face.

"You saw a floating tree, O Sali," he said, ironically.

"I am Sali, and my eyes are better than the bewitched brass thing that
pulls out to a great length," said the pertinacious helmsman. "There was
a boat, just clear of the easternmost island. There was a boat, and
they in her could see the ship on the light of the west--unless they are
blind men lost on the sea. I have seen her. Have you seen her, too, O
Haji Wasub?"

"Am I a fat white man?" snapped the serang. "I was a man of the sea
before you were born, O Sali! The order is to keep silence and mind the
rudder, lest evil befall the ship."

After these words he resumed his rigid aloofness. He stood, his legs
slightly apart, very stiff and straight, a little on one side of the
compass stand. His eyes travelled incessantly from the illuminated card
to the shadowy sails of the brig and back again, while his body was
motionless as if made of wood and built into the ship's frame. Thus,
with a forced and tense watchfulness, Haji Wasub, serang of the brig
Lightning, kept the captain's watch unwearied and wakeful, a slave to
duty.

In half an hour after sunset the darkness had taken complete possession
of earth and heavens. The islands had melted into the night. And on the
smooth water of the Straits, the little brig lying so still, seemed
to sleep profoundly, wrapped up in a scented mantle of star light and
silence.



II

It was half-past eight o'clock before Lingard came on deck again.
Shaw--now with a coat on--trotted up and down the poop leaving behind
him a smell of tobacco smoke. An irregularly glowing spark seemed to run
by itself in the darkness before the rounded form of his head. Above the
masts of the brig the dome of the clear heaven was full of lights that
flickered, as if some mighty breathings high up there had been swaying
about the flame of the stars. There was no sound along the brig's decks,
and the heavy shadows that lay on it had the aspect, in that silence,
of secret places concealing crouching forms that waited in perfect
stillness for some decisive event. Lingard struck a match to light his
cheroot, and his powerful face with narrowed eyes stood out for a moment
in the night and vanished suddenly. Then two shadowy forms and two red
sparks moved backward and forward on the poop. A larger, but a paler
and oval patch of light from the compass lamps lay on the brasses of
the wheel and on the breast of the Malay standing by the helm. Lingard's
voice, as if unable altogether to master the enormous silence of the
sea, sounded muffled, very calm--without the usual deep ring in it.

"Not much change, Shaw," he said.

"No, sir, not much. I can just see the island--the big one--still in
the same place. It strikes me, sir, that, for calms, this here sea is a
devil of locality."

He cut "locality" in two with an emphatic pause. It was a good word. He
was pleased with himself for thinking of it. He went on again:

"Now--since noon, this big island--"

"Carimata, Shaw," interrupted Lingard.

"Aye, sir; Carimata--I mean. I must say--being a stranger hereabouts--I
haven't got the run of those--"

He was going to say "names" but checked himself and said,
"appellations," instead, sounding every syllable lovingly.

"Having for these last fifteen years," he continued, "sailed regularly
from London in East-Indiamen, I am more at home over there--in the Bay."

He pointed into the night toward the northwest and stared as if he could
see from where he stood that Bay of Bengal where--as he affirmed--he
would be so much more at home.

"You'll soon get used--" muttered Lingard, swinging in his rapid walk
past his mate. Then he turned round, came back, and asked sharply.

"You said there was nothing afloat in sight before dark? Hey?"

"Not that I could see, sir. When I took the deck again at eight, I asked
that serang whether there was anything about; and I understood him to
say there was no more as when I went below at six. This is a lonely sea
at times--ain't it, sir? Now, one would think at this time of the year
the homeward-bounders from China would be pretty thick here."

"Yes," said Lingard, "we have met very few ships since we left Pedra
Branca over the stern. Yes; it has been a lonely sea. But for all that,
Shaw, this sea, if lonely, is not blind. Every island in it is an eye.
And now, since our squadron has left for the China waters--"

He did not finish his sentence. Shaw put his hands in his pockets, and
propped his back against the sky-light, comfortably.

"They say there is going to be a war with China," he said in a gossiping
tone, "and the French are going along with us as they did in the Crimea
five years ago. It seems to me we're getting mighty good friends with
the French. I've not much of an opinion about that. What do you think,
Captain Lingard?"

"I have met their men-of-war in the Pacific," said Lingard, slowly. "The
ships were fine and the fellows in them were civil enough to me--and
very curious about my business," he added with a laugh. "However, I
wasn't there to make war on them. I had a rotten old cutter then, for
trade, Shaw," he went on with animation.

"Had you, sir?" said Shaw without any enthusiasm. "Now give me a big
ship--a ship, I say, that one may--"

"And later on, some years ago," interrupted Lingard, "I chummed with
a French skipper in Ampanam--being the only two white men in the whole
place. He was a good fellow, and free with his red wine. His English
was difficult to understand, but he could sing songs in his own language
about ah-moor--Ah-moor means love, in French--Shaw."

"So it does, sir--so it does. When I was second mate of a Sunderland
barque, in forty-one, in the Mediterranean, I could pay out their lingo
as easy as you would a five-inch warp over a ship's side--"

"Yes, he was a proper man," pursued Lingard, meditatively, as if for
himself only. "You could not find a better fellow for company ashore. He
had an affair with a Bali girl, who one evening threw a red blossom at
him from within a doorway, as we were going together to pay our respects
to the Rajah's nephew. He was a good-looking Frenchman, he was--but the
girl belonged to the Rajah's nephew, and it was a serious matter. The
old Rajah got angry and said the girl must die. I don't think the nephew
cared particularly to have her krissed; but the old fellow made a great
fuss and sent one of his own chief men to see the thing done--and the
girl had enemies--her own relations approved! We could do nothing. Mind,
Shaw, there was absolutely nothing else between them but that unlucky
flower which the Frenchman pinned to his coat--and afterward, when the
girl was dead, wore under his shirt, hung round his neck in a small box.
I suppose he had nothing else to put it into."

"Would those savages kill a woman for that?" asked Shaw, incredulously.

"Aye! They are pretty moral there. That was the first time in my life
I nearly went to war on my own account, Shaw. We couldn't talk those
fellows over. We couldn't bribe them, though the Frenchman offered the
best he had, and I was ready to back him to the last dollar, to the last
rag of cotton, Shaw! No use--they were that blamed respectable. So, says
the Frenchman to me: 'My friend, if they won't take our gunpowder for a
gift let us burn it to give them lead.' I was armed as you see now;
six eight-pounders on the main deck and a long eighteen on the
forecastle--and I wanted to try 'em. You may believe me! However, the
Frenchman had nothing but a few old muskets; and the beggars got to
windward of us by fair words, till one morning a boat's crew from the
Frenchman's ship found the girl lying dead on the beach. That put an end
to our plans. She was out of her trouble anyhow, and no reasonable man
will fight for a dead woman. I was never vengeful, Shaw, and--after
all--she didn't throw that flower at me. But it broke the Frenchman up
altogether. He began to mope, did no business, and shortly afterward
sailed away. I cleared a good many pence out of that trip, I remember."

With these words he seemed to come to the end of his memories of that
trip. Shaw stifled a yawn.

"Women are the cause of a lot of trouble," he said, dispassionately.
"In the Morayshire, I remember, we had once a passenger--an old
gentleman--who was telling us a yarn about them old-time Greeks fighting
for ten years about some woman. The Turks kidnapped her, or something.
Anyway, they fought in Turkey; which I may well believe. Them Greeks and
Turks were always fighting. My father was master's mate on board one of
the three-deckers at the battle of Navarino--and that was when we went
to help those Greeks. But this affair about a woman was long before that
time."

"I should think so," muttered Lingard, hanging over the rail, and
watching the fleeting gleams that passed deep down in the water, along
the ship's bottom.

"Yes. Times are changed. They were unenlightened in those old days. My
grandfather was a preacher and, though my father served in the navy, I
don't hold with war. Sinful the old gentleman called it--and I think so,
too. Unless with Chinamen, or niggers, or such people as must be kept in
order and won't listen to reason; having not sense enough to know
what's good for them, when it's explained to them by their
betters--missionaries, and such like au-tho-ri-ties. But to fight ten
years. And for a woman!"

"I have read the tale in a book," said Lingard, speaking down over the
side as if setting his words gently afloat upon the sea. "I have read
the tale. She was very beautiful."

"That only makes it worse, sir--if anything. You may depend on it she
was no good. Those pagan times will never come back, thank God. Ten
years of murder and unrighteousness! And for a woman! Would anybody do
it now? Would you do it, sir? Would you--"

The sound of a bell struck sharply interrupted Shaw's discourse. High
aloft, some dry block sent out a screech, short and lamentable, like a
cry of pain. It pierced the quietness of the night to the very core, and
seemed to destroy the reserve which it had imposed upon the tones of the
two men, who spoke now loudly.

"Throw the cover over the binnacle," said Lingard in his duty voice.
"The thing shines like a full moon. We mustn't show more lights than we
can help, when becalmed at night so near the land. No use in being seen
if you can't see yourself--is there? Bear that in mind, Mr. Shaw. There
may be some vagabonds prying about--"

"I thought all this was over and done for," said Shaw, busying himself
with the cover, "since Sir Thomas Cochrane swept along the Borneo coast
with his squadron some years ago. He did a rare lot of fighting--didn't
he? We heard about it from the chaps of the sloop Diana that was
refitting in Calcutta when I was there in the Warwick Castle. They took
some king's town up a river hereabouts. The chaps were full of it."

"Sir Thomas did good work," answered Lingard, "but it will be a long
time before these seas are as safe as the English Channel is in peace
time. I spoke about that light more to get you in the way of things to
be attended to in these seas than for anything else. Did you notice how
few native craft we've sighted for all these days we have been drifting
about--one may say--in this sea?"

"I can't say I have attached any significance to the fact, sir."

"It's a sign that something is up. Once set a rumour afloat in these
waters, and it will make its way from island to island, without any
breeze to drive it along."

"Being myself a deep-water man sailing steadily out of home ports nearly
all my life," said Shaw with great deliberation, "I cannot pretend to
see through the peculiarities of them out-of-the-way parts. But I can
keep a lookout in an ordinary way, and I have noticed that craft of any
kind seemed scarce, for the last few days: considering that we had land
aboard of us--one side or another--nearly every day."

"You will get to know the peculiarities, as you call them, if you remain
any time with me," remarked Lingard, negligently.

"I hope I shall give satisfaction, whether the time be long or short!"
said Shaw, accentuating the meaning of his words by the distinctness
of his utterance. "A man who has spent thirty-two years of his life on
saltwater can say no more. If being an officer of home ships for the
last fifteen years I don't understand the heathen ways of them there
savages, in matters of seamanship and duty, you will find me all there,
Captain Lingard."

"Except, judging from what you said a little while ago--except in the
matter of fighting," said Lingard, with a short laugh.

"Fighting! I am not aware that anybody wants to fight me. I am a
peaceable man, Captain Lingard, but when put to it, I could fight as
well as any of them flat-nosed chaps we have to make shift with, instead
of a proper crew of decent Christians. Fighting!" he went on with
unexpected pugnacity of tone, "Fighting! If anybody comes to fight me,
he will find me all there, I swear!"

"That's all right. That's all right," said Lingard, stretching his arms
above his head and wriggling his shoulders. "My word! I do wish a breeze
would come to let us get away from here. I am rather in a hurry, Shaw."

"Indeed, sir! Well, I never yet met a thorough seafaring man who was not
in a hurry when a con-demned spell of calm had him by the heels. When a
breeze comes . . . just listen to this, sir!"

"I hear it," said Lingard. "Tide-rip, Shaw."

"So I presume, sir. But what a fuss it makes. Seldom heard such a--"

On the sea, upon the furthest limits of vision, appeared an advancing
streak of seething foam, resembling a narrow white ribbon, drawn rapidly
along the level surface of the water by its two ends, which were lost in
the darkness. It reached the brig, passed under, stretching out on each
side; and on each side the water became noisy, breaking into numerous
and tiny wavelets, a mimicry of an immense agitation. Yet the vessel in
the midst of this sudden and loud disturbance remained as motionless and
steady as if she had been securely moored between the stone walls of a
safe dock. In a few moments the line of foam and ripple running swiftly
north passed at once beyond sight and earshot, leaving no trace on the
unconquerable calm.

"Now this is very curious--" began Shaw.

Lingard made a gesture to command silence. He seemed to listen yet, as
if the wash of the ripple could have had an echo which he expected to
hear. And a man's voice that was heard forward had something of the
impersonal ring of voices thrown back from hard and lofty cliffs upon
the empty distances of the sea. It spoke in Malay--faintly.

"What?" hailed Shaw. "What is it?"

Lingard put a restraining hand for a moment on his chief officer's
shoulder, and moved forward smartly. Shaw followed, puzzled. The rapid
exchange of incomprehensible words thrown backward and forward through
the shadows of the brig's main deck from his captain to the lookout man
and back again, made him feel sadly out of it, somehow.

Lingard had called out sharply--"What do you see?" The answer direct and
quick was--"I hear, Tuan. I hear oars."

"Whereabouts?"

"The night is all around us. I hear them near."

"Port or starboard?"

There was a short delay in answer this time. On the quarter-deck,
under the poop, bare feet shuffled. Somebody coughed. At last the voice
forward said doubtfully:

"Kanan."

"Call the serang, Mr. Shaw," said Lingard, calmly, "and have the hands
turned up. They are all lying about the decks. Look sharp now. There's
something near us. It's annoying to be caught like this," he added in a
vexed tone.

He crossed over to the starboard side, and stood listening, one hand
grasping the royal back-stay, his ear turned to the sea, but he could
hear nothing from there. The quarter-deck was filled with subdued
sounds. Suddenly, a long, shrill whistle soared, reverberated loudly
amongst the flat surfaces of motionless sails, and gradually grew faint
as if the sound had escaped and gone away, running upon the water. Haji
Wasub was on deck and ready to carry out the white man's commands. Then
silence fell again on the brig, until Shaw spoke quietly.

"I am going forward now, sir, with the tindal. We're all at stations."

"Aye, Mr. Shaw. Very good. Mind they don't board you--but I can hear
nothing. Not a sound. It can't be much."

"The fellow has been dreaming, no doubt. I have good ears, too, and--"

He went forward and the end of his sentence was lost in an indistinct
growl. Lingard stood attentive. One by one the three seacannies off duty
appeared on the poop and busied themselves around a big chest that stood
by the side of the cabin companion. A rattle and clink of steel weapons
turned out on the deck was heard, but the men did not even whisper.
Lingard peered steadily into the night, then shook his head.

"Serang!" he called, half aloud.

The spare old man ran up the ladder so smartly that his bony feet did
not seem to touch the steps. He stood by his commander, his hands behind
his back; a figure indistinct but straight as an arrow.

"Who was looking out?" asked Lingard.

"Badroon, the Bugis," said Wasub, in his crisp, jerky manner.

"I can hear nothing. Badroon heard the noise in his mind."

"The night hides the boat."

"Have you seen it?"

"Yes, Tuan. Small boat. Before sunset. By the land. Now coming
here--near. Badroon heard him."

"Why didn't you report it, then?" asked Lingard, sharply.

"Malim spoke. He said: 'Nothing there,' while I could see. How could I
know what was in his mind or yours, Tuan?"

"Do you hear anything now?"

"No. They stopped now. Perhaps lost the ship--who knows? Perhaps
afraid--"

"Well!" muttered Lingard, moving his feet uneasily. "I believe you lie.
What kind of boat?"

"White men's boat. A four-men boat, I think. Small. Tuan, I hear him
now! There!"

He stretched his arm straight out, pointing abeam for a time, then his
arm fell slowly.

"Coming this way," he added with decision.

From forward Shaw called out in a startled tone:

"Something on the water, sir! Broad on this bow!"

"All right!" called back Lingard.

A lump of blacker darkness floated into his view. From it came over the
water English words--deliberate, reaching him one by one; as if each had
made its own difficult way through the profound stillness of the night.

"What--ship--is--that--pray?"

"English brig," answered Lingard, after a short moment of hesitation.

"A brig! I thought you were something bigger," went on the voice from
the sea with a tinge of disappointment in its deliberate tone. "I am
coming alongside--if--you--please."

"No! you don't!" called Lingard back, sharply. The leisurely drawl of
the invisible speaker seemed to him offensive, and woke up a hostile
feeling. "No! you don't if you care for your boat. Where do you spring
from? Who are you--anyhow? How many of you are there in that boat?"

After these emphatic questions there was an interval of silence. During
that time the shape of the boat became a little more distinct. She must
have carried some way on her yet, for she loomed up bigger and nearly
abreast of where Lingard stood, before the self-possessed voice was
heard again:

"I will show you."

Then, after another short pause, the voice said, less loud but very
plain:

"Strike on the gunwale. Strike hard, John!" and suddenly a blue light
blazed out, illuminating with a livid flame a round patch in the
night. In the smoke and splutter of that ghastly halo appeared a white,
four-oared gig with five men sitting in her in a row. Their heads were
turned toward the brig with a strong expression of curiosity on their
faces, which, in this glare, brilliant and sinister, took on a deathlike
aspect and resembled the faces of interested corpses. Then the bowman
dropped into the water the light he held above his head and the
darkness, rushing back at the boat, swallowed it with a loud and angry
hiss.

"Five of us," said the composed voice out of the night that seemed now
darker than before. "Four hands and myself. We belong to a yacht--a
British yacht--"

"Come on board!" shouted Lingard. "Why didn't you speak at once? I
thought you might have been some masquerading Dutchmen from a dodging
gunboat."

"Do I speak like a blamed Dutchman? Pull a stroke, boys--oars! Tend bow,
John."

The boat came alongside with a gentle knock, and a man's shape began to
climb at once up the brig's side with a kind of ponderous agility. It
poised itself for a moment on the rail to say down into the boat--"Sheer
off a little, boys," then jumped on deck with a thud, and said to Shaw
who was coming aft: "Good evening . . . Captain, sir?"

"No. On the poop!" growled Shaw.

"Come up here. Come up," called Lingard, impatiently.

The Malays had left their stations and stood clustered by the mainmast
in a silent group. Not a word was spoken on the brig's decks, while the
stranger made his way to the waiting captain. Lingard saw approaching
him a short, dapper man, who touched his cap and repeated his greeting
in a cool drawl:

"Good evening. . . Captain, sir?"

"Yes, I am the master--what's the matter? Adrift from your ship? Or
what?"

"Adrift? No! We left her four days ago, and have been pulling that gig
in a calm, nearly ever since. My men are done. So is the water. Lucky
thing I sighted you."

"You sighted me!" exclaimed Lingard. "When? What time?"

"Not in the dark, you may be sure. We've been knocking about amongst
some islands to the southward, breaking our hearts tugging at the oars
in one channel, then in another--trying to get clear. We got round an
islet--a barren thing, in shape like a loaf of sugar--and I caught sight
of a vessel a long way off. I took her bearing in a hurry and we buckled
to; but another of them currents must have had hold of us, for it was a
long time before we managed to clear that islet. I steered by the
stars, and, by the Lord Harry, I began to think I had missed you
somehow--because it must have been you I saw."

"Yes, it must have been. We had nothing in sight all day," assented
Lingard. "Where's your vessel?" he asked, eagerly.

"Hard and fast on middling soft mud--I should think about sixty miles
from here. We are the second boat sent off for assistance. We parted
company with the other on Tuesday. She must have passed to the northward
of you to-day. The chief officer is in her with orders to make for
Singapore. I am second, and was sent off toward the Straits here on the
chance of falling in with some ship. I have a letter from the owner. Our
gentry are tired of being stuck in the mud and wish for assistance."

"What assistance did you expect to find down here?"

"The letter will tell you that. May I ask, Captain, for a little water
for the chaps in my boat? And I myself would thank you for a drink.
We haven't had a mouthful since this afternoon. Our breaker leaked out
somehow."

"See to it, Mr. Shaw," said Lingard. "Come down the cabin, Mr.--"

"Carter is my name."

"Ah! Mr. Carter. Come down, come down," went on Lingard, leading the way
down the cabin stairs.

The steward had lighted the swinging lamp, and had put a decanter and
bottles on the table. The cuddy looked cheerful, painted white, with
gold mouldings round the panels. Opposite the curtained recess of the
stern windows there was a sideboard with a marble top, and, above it,
a looking-glass in a gilt frame. The semicircular couch round the stern
had cushions of crimson plush. The table was covered with a black
Indian tablecloth embroidered in vivid colours. Between the beams of the
poop-deck were fitted racks for muskets, the barrels of which glinted
in the light. There were twenty-four of them between the four beams. As
many sword-bayonets of an old pattern encircled the polished teakwood of
the rudder-casing with a double belt of brass and steel. All the doors
of the state-rooms had been taken off the hinges and only curtains
closed the doorways. They seemed to be made of yellow Chinese silk, and
fluttered all together, the four of them, as the two men entered the
cuddy.

Carter took in all at a glance, but his eyes were arrested by a circular
shield hung slanting above the brass hilts of the bayonets. On its
red field, in relief and brightly gilt, was represented a sheaf of
conventional thunderbolts darting down the middle between the two
capitals T. L. Lingard examined his guest curiously. He saw a young
man, but looking still more youthful, with a boyish smooth face much
sunburnt, twinkling blue eyes, fair hair and a slight moustache. He
noticed his arrested gaze.

"Ah, you're looking at that thing. It's a present from the builder of
this brig. The best man that ever launched a craft. It's supposed to be
the ship's name between my initials--flash of lightning--d'you see? The
brig's name is Lightning and mine is Lingard."

"Very pretty thing that: shows the cabin off well," murmured Carter,
politely.

They drank, nodding at each other, and sat down.

"Now for the letter," said Lingard.

Carter passed it over the table and looked about, while Lingard took
the letter out of an open envelope, addressed to the commander of any
British ship in the Java Sea. The paper was thick, had an embossed
heading: "Schooner-yacht Hermit" and was dated four days before. The
message said that on a hazy night the yacht had gone ashore upon some
outlying shoals off the coast of Borneo. The land was low. The opinion
of the sailing-master was that the vessel had gone ashore at the top
of high water, spring tides. The coast was completely deserted to all
appearance. During the four days they had been stranded there they
had sighted in the distance two small native vessels, which did
not approach. The owner concluded by asking any commander of a
homeward-bound ship to report the yacht's position in Anjer on his way
through Sunda Straits--or to any British or Dutch man-of-war he might
meet. The letter ended by anticipatory thanks, the offer to pay any
expenses in connection with the sending of messages from Anjer, and the
usual polite expressions.

Folding the paper slowly in the old creases, Lingard said--"I am not
going to Anjer--nor anywhere near."

"Any place will do, I fancy," said Carter.

"Not the place where I am bound to," answered Lingard, opening the
letter again and glancing at it uneasily. "He does not describe very
well the coast, and his latitude is very uncertain," he went on. "I
am not clear in my mind where exactly you are stranded. And yet I know
every inch of that land--over there."

Carter cleared his throat and began to talk in his slow drawl. He seemed
to dole out facts, to disclose with sparing words the features of the
coast, but every word showed the minuteness of his observation, the
clear vision of a seaman able to master quickly the aspect of a strange
land and of a strange sea. He presented, with concise lucidity, the
picture of the tangle of reefs and sandbanks, through which the yacht
had miraculously blundered in the dark before she took the ground.

"The weather seems clear enough at sea," he observed, finally, and
stopped to drink a long draught. Lingard, bending over the table, had
been listening with eager attention. Carter went on in his curt and
deliberate manner:

"I noticed some high trees on what I take to be the mainland to the
south--and whoever has business in that bight was smart enough to
whitewash two of them: one on the point, and another farther in.
Landmarks, I guess. . . . What's the matter, Captain?"

Lingard had jumped to his feet, but Carter's exclamation caused him to
sit down again.

"Nothing, nothing . . . Tell me, how many men have you in that yacht?"

"Twenty-three, besides the gentry, the owner, his wife and a Spanish
gentleman--a friend they picked up in Manila."

"So you were coming from Manila?"

"Aye. Bound for Batavia. The owner wishes to study the Dutch colonial
system. Wants to expose it, he says. One can't help hearing a lot when
keeping watch aft--you know how it is. Then we are going to Ceylon
to meet the mail-boat there. The owner is going home as he came out,
overland through Egypt. The yacht would return round the Cape, of
course."

"A lady?" said Lingard. "You say there is a lady on board. Are you
armed?"

"Not much," replied Carter, negligently. "There are a few muskets and
two sporting guns aft; that's about all--I fancy it's too much, or not
enough," he added with a faint smile.

Lingard looked at him narrowly.

"Did you come out from home in that craft?" he asked.

"Not I! I am not one of them regular yacht hands. I came out of the
hospital in Hongkong. I've been two years on the China coast."

He stopped, then added in an explanatory murmur:

"Opium clippers--you know. Nothing of brass buttons about me. My ship
left me behind, and I was in want of work. I took this job but I didn't
want to go home particularly. It's slow work after sailing with old
Robinson in the Ly-e-moon. That was my ship. Heard of her, Captain?"

"Yes, yes," said Lingard, hastily. "Look here, Mr. Carter, which way was
your chief officer trying for Singapore? Through the Straits of Rhio?"

"I suppose so," answered Carter in a slightly surprised tone; "why do
you ask?"

"Just to know . . . What is it, Mr. Shaw?"

"There's a black cloud rising to the northward, sir, and we shall get a
breeze directly," said Shaw from the doorway.

He lingered there with his eyes fixed on the decanters.

"Will you have a glass?" said Lingard, leaving his seat. "I will go up
and have a look."

He went on deck. Shaw approached the table and began to help himself,
handling the bottles in profound silence and with exaggerated caution,
as if he had been measuring out of fragile vessels a dose of some deadly
poison. Carter, his hands in his pockets, and leaning back, examined
him from head to foot with a cool stare. The mate of the brig raised the
glass to his lips, and glaring above the rim at the stranger, drained
the contents slowly.

"You have a fine nose for finding ships in the dark, Mister," he said,
distinctly, putting the glass on the table with extreme gentleness.

"Eh? What's that? I sighted you just after sunset."

"And you knew where to look, too," said Shaw, staring hard.

"I looked to the westward where there was still some light, as any
sensible man would do," retorted the other a little impatiently. "What
are you trying to get at?"

"And you have a ready tongue to blow about yourself--haven't you?"

"Never saw such a man in my life," declared Carter, with a return of his
nonchalant manner. "You seem to be troubled about something."

"I don't like boats to come sneaking up from nowhere in particular,
alongside a ship when I am in charge of the deck. I can keep a lookout
as well as any man out of home ports, but I hate to be circumvented by
muffled oars and such ungentlemanlike tricks. Yacht officer--indeed.
These seas must be full of such yachtsmen. I consider you played a mean
trick on me. I told my old man there was nothing in sight at sunset--and
no more there was. I believe you blundered upon us by chance--for all
your boasting about sunsets and bearings. Gammon! I know you came
on blindly on top of us, and with muffled oars, too. D'ye call that
decent?"

"If I did muffle the oars it was for a good reason. I wanted to slip
past a cove where some native craft were moored. That was common
prudence in such a small boat, and not armed--as I am. I saw you right
enough, but I had no intention to startle anybody. Take my word for it."

"I wish you had gone somewhere else," growled Shaw. "I hate to be put in
the wrong through accident and untruthfulness--there! Here's my old man
calling me--"

He left the cabin hurriedly and soon afterward Lingard came down,
and sat again facing Carter across the table. His face was grave but
resolute.

"We shall get the breeze directly," he said.

"Then, sir," said Carter, getting up, "if you will give me back that
letter I shall go on cruising about here to speak some other ship. I
trust you will report us wherever you are going."

"I am going to the yacht and I shall keep the letter," answered Lingard
with decision. "I know exactly where she is, and I must go to the rescue
of those people. It's most fortunate you've fallen in with me, Mr.
Carter. Fortunate for them and fortunate for me," he added in a lower
tone.

"Yes," drawled Carter, reflectively. "There may be a tidy bit of salvage
money if you should get the vessel off, but I don't think you can do
much. I had better stay out here and try to speak some gunboat--"

"You must come back to your ship with me," said Lingard,
authoritatively. "Never mind the gunboats."

"That wouldn't be carrying out my orders," argued Carter. "I've got to
speak a homeward-bound ship or a man-of-war--that's plain enough. I am
not anxious to knock about for days in an open boat, but--let me fill my
fresh-water breaker, Captain, and I will be off."

"Nonsense," said Lingard, sharply. "You've got to come with me to show
the place and--and help. I'll take your boat in tow."

Carter did not seem convinced. Lingard laid a heavy hand on his
shoulder.

"Look here, young fellow. I am Tom Lingard and there's not a white man
among these islands, and very few natives, that have not heard of me. My
luck brought you into my ship--and now I've got you, you must stay. You
must!"

The last "must" burst out loud and sharp like a pistol-shot. Carter
stepped back.

"Do you mean you would keep me by force?" he asked, startled.

"Force," repeated Lingard. "It rests with you. I cannot let you speak
any vessel. Your yacht has gone ashore in a most inconvenient place--for
me; and with your boats sent off here and there, you would bring every
infernal gunboat buzzing to a spot that was as quiet and retired as the
heart of man could wish. You stranding just on that spot of the whole
coast was my bad luck. And that I could not help. You coming upon me
like this is my good luck. And that I hold!"

He dropped his clenched fist, big and muscular, in the light of the
lamp on the black cloth, amongst the glitter of glasses, with the strong
fingers closed tight upon the firm flesh of the palm. He left it there
for a moment as if showing Carter that luck he was going to hold. And he
went on:

"Do you know into what hornet's nest your stupid people have blundered?
How much d'ye think their lives are worth, just now? Not a brass
farthing if the breeze fails me for another twenty-four hours. You may
well open your eyes. It is so! And it may be too late now, while I am
arguing with you here."

He tapped the table with his knuckles, and the glasses, waking up,
jingled a thin, plaintive finale to his speech. Carter stood leaning
against the sideboard. He was amazed by the unexpected turn of the
conversation; his jaw dropped slightly and his eyes never swerved for a
moment from Lingard's face. The silence in the cabin lasted only a few
seconds, but to Carter, who waited breathlessly, it seemed very long.
And all at once he heard in it, for the first time, the cabin clock tick
distinctly, in pulsating beats, as though a little heart of metal behind
the dial had been started into sudden palpitation.

"A gunboat!" shouted Lingard, suddenly, as if he had seen only in
that moment, by the light of some vivid flash of thought, all the
difficulties of the situation. "If you don't go back with me there will
be nothing left for you to go back to--very soon. Your gunboat won't
find a single ship's rib or a single corpse left for a landmark. That
she won't. It isn't a gunboat skipper you want. I am the man you
want. You don't know your luck when you see it, but I know mine, I
do--and--look here--"

He touched Carter's chest with his forefinger, and said with a sudden
gentleness of tone:

"I am a white man inside and out; I won't let inoffensive people--and a
woman, too--come to harm if I can help it. And if I can't help, nobody
can. You understand--nobody! There's no time for it. But I am like any
other man that is worth his salt: I won't let the end of an undertaking
go by the board while there is a chance to hold on--and it's like
this--"

His voice was persuasive--almost caressing; he had hold now of a coat
button and tugged at it slightly as he went on in a confidential manner:

"As it turns out, Mr. Carter, I would--in a manner of speaking--I would
as soon shoot you where you stand as let you go to raise an alarm
all over this sea about your confounded yacht. I have other lives to
consider--and friends--and promises--and--and myself, too. I shall keep
you," he concluded, sharply.

Carter drew a long breath. On the deck above, the two men could
hear soft footfalls, short murmurs, indistinct words spoken near the
skylight. Shaw's voice rang out loudly in growling tones:

"Furl the royals, you tindal!"

"It's the queerest old go," muttered Carter, looking down on to the
floor. "You are a strange man. I suppose I must believe what you
say--unless you and that fat mate of yours are a couple of escaped
lunatics that got hold of a brig by some means. Why, that chap up there
wanted to pick a quarrel with me for coming aboard, and now you threaten
to shoot me rather than let me go. Not that I care much about that; for
some time or other you would get hanged for it; and you don't look like
a man that will end that way. If what you say is only half true, I ought
to get back to the yacht as quick as ever I can. It strikes me that your
coming to them will be only a small mercy, anyhow--and I may be of some
use--But this is the queerest. . . . May I go in my boat?"

"As you like," said Lingard. "There's a rain squall coming."

"I am in charge and will get wet along of my chaps. Give us a good long
line, Captain."

"It's done already," said Lingard. "You seem a sensible sailorman and
can see that it would be useless to try and give me the slip."

"For a man so ready to shoot, you seem very trustful," drawled Carter.
"If I cut adrift in a squall, I stand a pretty fair chance not to see
you again."

"You just try," said Lingard, drily. "I have eyes in this brig, young
man, that will see your boat when you couldn't see the ship. You are of
the kind I like, but if you monkey with me I will find you--and when I
find you I will run you down as surely as I stand here."

Carter slapped his thigh and his eyes twinkled.

"By the Lord Harry!" he cried. "If it wasn't for the men with me, I
would try for sport. You are so cocksure about the lot you can do,
Captain. You would aggravate a saint into open mutiny."

His easy good humour had returned; but after a short burst of laughter,
he became serious.

"Never fear," he said, "I won't slip away. If there is to be any
throat-cutting--as you seem to hint--mine will be there, too, I promise
you, and. . . ."

He stretched his arms out, glanced at them, shook them a little.

"And this pair of arms to take care of it," he added, in his old,
careless drawl.

But the master of the brig sitting with both his elbows on the table,
his face in his hands, had fallen unexpectedly into a meditation so
concentrated and so profound that he seemed neither to hear, see, nor
breathe. The sight of that man's complete absorption in thought was to
Carter almost more surprising than any other occurrence of that night.
Had his strange host vanished suddenly from before his eyes, it could
not have made him feel more uncomfortably alone in that cabin where
the pertinacious clock kept ticking off the useless minutes of the calm
before it would, with the same steady beat, begin to measure the aimless
disturbance of the storm.



III

After waiting a moment, Carter went on deck. The sky, the sea, the
brig itself had disappeared in a darkness that had become impenetrable,
palpable, and stifling. An immense cloud had come up running over the
heavens, as if looking for the little craft, and now hung over it,
arrested. To the south there was a livid trembling gleam, faint and sad,
like a vanishing memory of destroyed starlight. To the north, as if
to prove the impossible, an incredibly blacker patch outlined on the
tremendous blackness of the sky the heart of the coming squall. The
glimmers in the water had gone out and the invisible sea all around lay
mute and still as if it had died suddenly of fright.

Carter could see nothing. He felt about him people moving; he heard
them in the darkness whispering faintly as if they had been exchanging
secrets important or infamous. The night effaced even words, and its
mystery had captured everything and every sound--had left nothing free
but the unexpected that seemed to hover about one, ready to stretch out
its stealthy hand in a touch sudden, familiar, and appalling. Even the
careless disposition of the young ex-officer of an opium-clipper was
affected by the ominous aspect of the hour. What was this vessel?
What were those people? What would happen to-morrow? To the yacht? To
himself? He felt suddenly without any additional reason but the darkness
that it was a poor show, anyhow, a dashed poor show for all hands. The
irrational conviction made him falter for a second where he stood and he
gripped the slide of the companionway hard.

Shaw's voice right close to his ear relieved and cleared his troubled
thoughts.

"Oh! it's you, Mister. Come up at last," said the mate of the brig
slowly. "It appears we've got to give you a tow now. Of all the rum
incidents, this beats all. A boat sneaks up from nowhere and turns
out to be a long-expected friend! For you are one of them friends the
skipper was going to meet somewhere here. Ain't you now? Come! I know
more than you may think. Are we off to--you may just as well tell--off
to--h'm ha . . . you know?"

"Yes. I know. Don't you?" articulated Carter, innocently.

Shaw remained very quiet for a minute.

"Where's my skipper?" he asked at last.

"I left him down below in a kind of trance. Where's my boat?"

"Your boat is hanging astern. And my opinion is that you are as uncivil
as I've proved you to be untruthful. Egzz-actly."

Carter stumbled toward the taffrail and in the first step he made came
full against somebody who glided away. It seemed to him that such a
night brings men to a lower level. He thought that he might have been
knocked on the head by anybody strong enough to lift a crow-bar. He felt
strangely irritated. He said loudly, aiming his words at Shaw whom he
supposed somewhere near:

"And my opinion is that you and your skipper will come to a sudden bad
end before--"

"I thought you were in your boat. Have you changed your mind?" asked
Lingard in his deep voice close to Carter's elbow.

Carter felt his way along the rail, till his hand found a line that
seemed, in the calm, to stream out of its own accord into the darkness.
He hailed his boat, and directly heard the wash of water against her
bows as she was hauled quickly under the counter. Then he loomed up
shapeless on the rail, and the next moment disappeared as if he had
fallen out of the universe. Lingard heard him say:

"Catch hold of my leg, John." There were hollow sounds in the boat; a
voice growled, "All right."

"Keep clear of the counter," said Lingard, speaking in quiet warning
tones into the night. "The brig may get a lot of sternway on her should
this squall not strike her fairly."

"Aye, aye. I will mind," was the muttered answer from the water.

Lingard crossed over to the port side, and looked steadily at the sooty
mass of approaching vapours. After a moment he said curtly, "Brace up
for the port tack, Mr. Shaw," and remained silent, with his face to
the sea. A sound, sorrowful and startling like the sigh of some immense
creature, travelling across the starless space, passed above the
vertical and lofty spars of the motionless brig.

It grew louder, then suddenly ceased for a moment, and the taut rigging
of the brig was heard vibrating its answer in a singing note to this
threatening murmur of the winds. A long and slow undulation lifted the
level of the waters, as if the sea had drawn a deep breath of anxious
suspense. The next minute an immense disturbance leaped out of the
darkness upon the sea, kindling upon it a livid clearness of foam, and
the first gust of the squall boarded the brig in a stinging flick of
rain and spray. As if overwhelmed by the suddenness of the fierce onset,
the vessel remained for a second upright where she floated, shaking with
tremendous jerks from trucks to keel; while high up in the night the
invisible canvas was heard rattling and beating about violently.

Then, with a quick double report, as of heavy guns, both topsails filled
at once and the brig fell over swiftly on her side. Shaw was thrown
headlong against the skylight, and Lingard, who had encircled the
weather rail with his arm, felt the vessel under his feet dart forward
smoothly, and the deck become less slanting--the speed of the brig
running off a little now, easing the overturning strain of the wind upon
the distended surfaces of the sails. It was only the fineness of the
little vessel's lines and the perfect shape of her hull that saved the
canvas, and perhaps the spars, by enabling the ready craft to get way
upon herself with such lightning-like rapidity. Lingard drew a long
breath and yelled jubilantly at Shaw who was struggling up against wind
and rain to his commander's side.

"She'll do. Hold on everything."

Shaw tried to speak. He swallowed great mouthfuls of tepid water
which the wind drove down his throat. The brig seemed to sail through
undulating waves that passed swishing between the masts and swept over
the decks with the fierce rush and noise of a cataract. From every spar
and every rope a ragged sheet of water streamed flicking to leeward. The
overpowering deluge seemed to last for an age; became unbearable--and,
all at once, stopped. In a couple of minutes the shower had run its
length over the brig and now could be seen like a straight grey wall,
going away into the night under the fierce whispering of dissolving
clouds. The wind eased. To the northward, low down in the darkness,
three stars appeared in a row, leaping in and out between the crests
of waves like the distant heads of swimmers in a running surf; and the
retreating edge of the cloud, perfectly straight from east to west,
slipped along the dome of the sky like an immense hemispheric, iron
shutter pivoting down smoothly as if operated by some mighty engine. An
inspiring and penetrating freshness flowed together with the shimmer
of light, through the augmented glory of the heaven, a glory exalted,
undimmed, and strangely startling as if a new world had been created
during the short flight of the stormy cloud. It was a return to life,
a return to space; the earth coming out from under a pall to take its
place in the renewed and immense scintillation of the universe.

The brig, her yards slightly checked in, ran with an easy motion under
the topsails, jib and driver, pushing contemptuously aside the turbulent
crowd of noisy and agitated waves. As the craft went swiftly ahead she
unrolled behind her over the uneasy darkness of the sea a broad ribbon
of seething foam shot with wispy gleams of dark discs escaping from
under the rudder. Far away astern, at the end of a line no thicker than
a black thread, which dipped now and then its long curve in the bursting
froth, a toy-like object could be made out, elongated and dark, racing
after the brig over the snowy whiteness of her wake.

Lingard walked aft, and, with both his hands on the taffrail, looked
eagerly for Carter's boat. The first glance satisfied him that the
yacht's gig was towing easily at the end of the long scope of line, and
he turned away to look ahead and to leeward with a steady gaze. It was
then half an hour past midnight and Shaw, relieved by Wasub, had gone
below. Before he went, he said to Lingard, "I will be off, sir, if
you're not going to make more sail yet." "Not yet for a while," had
answered Lingard in a preoccupied manner; and Shaw departed aggrieved at
such a neglect of making the best of a good breeze.

On the main deck dark-skinned men, whose clothing clung to their
shivering limbs as if they had been overboard, had finished recoiling
the braces, and clearing the gear. The kassab, after having hung the
fore-topsail halyards in the becket, strutted into the waist toward a
row of men who stood idly with their shoulders against the side of the
long boat amidships. He passed along looking up close at the stolid
faces. Room was made for him, and he took his place at the end.

"It was a great rain and a mighty wind, O men," he said, dogmatically,
"but no wind can ever hurt this ship. That I knew while I stood minding
the sail which is under my care."

A dull and inexpressive murmur was heard from the men. Over the high
weather rail, a topping wave flung into their eyes a handful of heavy
drops that stung like hail. There were low groans of indignation. A man
sighed. Another emitted a spasmodic laugh through his chattering teeth.
No one moved away. The little kassab wiped his face and went on in his
cracked voice, to the accompaniment of the swishing sounds made by the
seas that swept regularly astern along the ship's side.

"Have you heard him shout at the wind--louder than the wind? I have
heard, being far forward. And before, too, in the many years I served
this white man I have heard him often cry magic words that make all
safe. Ya-wa! This is truth. Ask Wasub who is a Haji, even as I am."

"I have seen white men's ships with their masts broken--also wrecked
like our own praus," remarked sadly a lean, lank fellow who shivered
beside the kassab, hanging his head and trying to grasp his shoulder
blades.

"True," admitted the kassab. "They are all the children of Satan but to
some more favour is shown. To obey such men on the sea or in a fight
is good. I saw him who is master here fight with wild men who eat their
enemies--far away to the eastward--and I dealt blows by his side without
fear; for the charms he, no doubt, possesses protect his servants also.
I am a believer and the Stoned One can not touch my forehead. Yet the
reward of victory comes from the accursed. For six years have I sailed
with that white man; first as one who minds the rudder, for I am a
man of the sea, born in a prau, and am skilled in such work. And now,
because of my great knowledge of his desires, I have the care of all
things in this ship."

Several voices muttered, "True. True." They remained apathetic and
patient, in the rush of wind, under the repeated short flights of
sprays. The slight roll of the ship balanced them stiffly all together
where they stood propped against the big boat. The breeze humming
between the inclined masts enveloped their dark and silent figures in
the unceasing resonance of its breath.

The brig's head had been laid so as to pass a little to windward of the
small islands of the Carimata group. They had been till then hidden in
the night, but now both men on the lookout reported land ahead in one
long cry. Lingard, standing to leeward abreast of the wheel, watched
the islet first seen. When it was nearly abeam of the brig he gave his
orders, and Wasub hurried off to the main deck. The helm was put down,
the yards on the main came slowly square and the wet canvas of the
main-topsail clung suddenly to the mast after a single heavy flap. The
dazzling streak of the ship's wake vanished. The vessel lost her way
and began to dip her bows into the quick succession of the running head
seas. And at every slow plunge of the craft, the song of the wind would
swell louder amongst the waving spars, with a wild and mournful note.

Just as the brig's boat had been swung out, ready for lowering, the
yacht's gig hauled up by its line appeared tossing and splashing on
the lee quarter. Carter stood up in the stern sheets balancing himself
cleverly to the disordered motion of his cockleshell. He hailed the brig
twice to know what was the matter, not being able from below and in the
darkness to make out what that confused group of men on the poop were
about. He got no answer, though he could see the shape of a man standing
by himself aft, and apparently watching him. He was going to repeat his
hail for the third time when he heard the rattling of tackles followed
by a heavy splash, a burst of voices, scrambling hollow sounds--and a
dark mass detaching itself from the brig's side swept past him on the
crest of a passing wave. For less than a second he could see on the
shimmer of the night sky the shape of a boat, the heads of men, the
blades of oars pointing upward while being got out hurriedly. Then
all this sank out of sight, reappeared once more far off and hardly
discernible, before vanishing for good.

"Why, they've lowered a boat!" exclaimed Carter, falling back in his
seat. He remembered that he had seen only a few hours ago three native
praus lurking amongst those very islands. For a moment he had the idea
of casting off to go in chase of that boat, so as to find out. . . .
Find out what? He gave up his idea at once. What could he do?

The conviction that the yacht, and everything belonging to her, were in
some indefinite but very real danger, took afresh a strong hold of him,
and the persuasion that the master of the brig was going there to
help did not by any means assuage his alarm. The fact only served to
complicate his uneasiness with a sense of mystery.

The white man who spoke as if that sea was all his own, or as if people
intruded upon his privacy by taking the liberty of getting wrecked on a
coast where he and his friends did some queer business, seemed to him an
undesirable helper. That the boat had been lowered to communicate with
the praus seen and avoided by him in the evening he had no doubt. The
thought had flashed on him at once. It had an ugly look. Yet the best
thing to do after all was to hang on and get back to the yacht and warn
them. . . . Warn them against whom? The man had been perfectly open with
him. Warn them against what? It struck him that he hadn't the slightest
conception of what would happen, of what was even likely to happen. That
strange rescuer himself was bringing the news of danger. Danger from the
natives of course. And yet he was in communication with those natives.
That was evident. That boat going off in the night. . . . Carter swore
heartily to himself. His perplexity became positive bodily pain as he
sat, wet, uncomfortable, and still, one hand on the tiller, thrown up
and down in headlong swings of his boat. And before his eyes, towering
high, the black hull of the brig also rose and fell, setting her stern
down in the sea, now and again, with a tremendous and foaming splash.
Not a sound from her reached Carter's ears. She seemed an abandoned
craft but for the outline of a man's head and body still visible in a
watchful attitude above the taffrail.

Carter told his bowman to haul up closer and hailed:

"Brig ahoy. Anything wrong?"

He waited, listening. The shadowy man still watched. After some time a
curt "No" came back in answer.

"Are you going to keep hove-to long?" shouted Carter.

"Don't know. Not long. Drop your boat clear of the ship. Drop clear. Do
damage if you don't."

"Slack away, John!" said Carter in a resigned tone to the elderly seaman
in the bow. "Slack away and let us ride easy to the full scope. They
don't seem very talkative on board there."

Even while he was speaking the line ran out and the regular undulations
of the passing seas drove the boat away from the brig. Carter turned
a little in his seat to look at the land. It loomed up dead to leeward
like a lofty and irregular cone only a mile or a mile and a half
distant. The noise of the surf beating upon its base was heard against
the wind in measured detonations. The fatigue of many days spent in the
boat asserted itself above the restlessness of Carter's thoughts and,
gradually, he lost the notion of the passing time without altogether
losing the consciousness of his situation.

In the intervals of that benumbed stupor--rather than sleep--he was
aware that the interrupted noise of the surf had grown into a continuous
great rumble, swelling periodically into a loud roar; that the high
islet appeared now bigger, and that a white fringe of foam was visible
at its feet. Still there was no stir or movement of any kind on board
the brig. He noticed that the wind was moderating and the sea going down
with it, and then dozed off again for a minute. When next he opened his
eyes with a start, it was just in time to see with surprise a new star
soar noiselessly straight up from behind the land, take up its position
in a brilliant constellation--and go out suddenly. Two more followed,
ascending together, and after reaching about the same elevation, expired
side by side.

"Them's rockets, sir--ain't they?" said one of the men in a muffled
voice.

"Aye, rockets," grunted Carter. "And now, what's the next move?" he
muttered to himself dismally.

He got his answer in the fierce swishing whirr of a slender ray of
fire that, shooting violently upward from the sombre hull of the brig,
dissolved at once into a dull red shower of falling sparks. Only one,
white and brilliant, remained alone poised high overhead, and after
glowing vividly for a second, exploded with a feeble report. Almost at
the same time he saw the brig's head fall off the wind, made out the
yards swinging round to fill the main topsail, and heard distinctly the
thud of the first wave thrown off by the advancing bows. The next minute
the tow-line got the strain and his boat started hurriedly after the
brig with a sudden jerk.

Leaning forward, wide awake and attentive, Carter steered. His men
sat one behind another with shoulders up, and arched backs, dozing,
uncomfortable but patient, upon the thwarts. The care requisite to steer
the boat properly in the track of the seething and disturbed water left
by the brig in her rapid course prevented him from reflecting much upon
the incertitude of the future and upon his own unusual situation.

Now he was only exceedingly anxious to see the yacht again, and it was
with a feeling of very real satisfaction that he saw all plain sail
being made on the brig. Through the remaining hours of the night he sat
grasping the tiller and keeping his eyes on the shadowy and high pyramid
of canvas gliding steadily ahead of his boat with a slight balancing
movement from side to side.



IV

It was noon before the brig, piloted by Lingard through the deep
channels between the outer coral reefs, rounded within pistol-shot a low
hummock of sand which marked the end of a long stretch of stony ledges
that, being mostly awash, showed a black head only, here and there
amongst the hissing brown froth of the yellow sea. As the brig drew
clear of the sandy patch there appeared, dead to windward and beyond a
maze of broken water, sandspits, and clusters of rocks, the black hull
of the yacht heeling over, high and motionless upon the great expanse of
glittering shallows. Her long, naked spars were inclined slightly as
if she had been sailing with a good breeze. There was to the lookers-on
aboard the brig something sad and disappointing in the yacht's aspect
as she lay perfectly still in an attitude that in a seaman's mind is
associated with the idea of rapid motion.

"Here she is!" said Shaw, who, clad in a spotless white suit, came just
then from forward where he had been busy with the anchors. "She is well
on, sir--isn't she? Looks like a mudflat to me from here."

"Yes. It is a mudflat," said Lingard, slowly, raising the long glass to
his eye. "Haul the mainsail up, Mr. Shaw," he went on while he took a
steady look at the yacht. "We will have to work in short tacks here."

He put the glass down and moved away from the rail. For the next hour
he handled his little vessel in the intricate and narrow channel with
careless certitude, as if every stone, every grain of sand upon the
treacherous bottom had been plainly disclosed to his sight. He handled
her in the fitful and unsteady breeze with a matter-of-fact audacity
that made Shaw, forward at his station, gasp in sheer alarm. When
heading toward the inshore shoals the brig was never put round till the
quick, loud cries of the leadsmen announced that there were no more than
three feet of water under her keel; and when standing toward the steep
inner edge of the long reef, where the lead was of no use, the helm
would be put down only when the cutwater touched the faint line of the
bordering foam. Lingard's love for his brig was a man's love, and was
so great that it could never be appeased unless he called on her to put
forth all her qualities and her power, to repay his exacting affection
by a faithfulness tried to the very utmost limit of endurance. Every
flutter of the sails flew down from aloft along the taut leeches, to
enter his heart in a sense of acute delight; and the gentle murmur of
water alongside, which, continuous and soft, showed that in all her
windings his incomparable craft had never, even for an instant, ceased
to carry her way, was to him more precious and inspiring than the soft
whisper of tender words would have been to another man. It was in such
moments that he lived intensely, in a flush of strong feeling that made
him long to press his little vessel to his breast. She was his perfect
world full of trustful joy.

The people on board the yacht, who watched eagerly the first sail they
had seen since they had been ashore on that deserted part of the coast,
soon made her out, with some disappointment, to be a small merchant brig
beating up tack for tack along the inner edge of the reef--probably with
the intention to communicate and offer assistance. The general opinion
among the seafaring portion of her crew was that little effective
assistance could be expected from a vessel of that description. Only
the sailing-master of the yacht remarked to the boatswain (who had the
advantage of being his first cousin): "This man is well acquainted here;
you can see that by the way he handles his brig. I shan't be sorry to
have somebody to stand by us. Can't tell when we will get off this mud,
George."

A long board, sailed very close, enabled the brig to fetch the southern
limit of discoloured water over the bank on which the yacht had
stranded. On the very edge of the muddy patch she was put in stays for
the last time. As soon as she had paid off on the other tack, sail was
shortened smartly, and the brig commenced the stretch that was to bring
her to her anchorage, under her topsails, lower staysails and jib. There
was then less than a quarter of a mile of shallow water between her and
the yacht; but while that vessel had gone ashore with her head to the
eastward the brig was moving slowly in a west-northwest direction, and
consequently, sailed--so to speak--past the whole length of the yacht.
Lingard saw every soul in the schooner on deck, watching his advent in
a silence which was as unbroken and perfect as that on board his own
vessel.

A little man with a red face framed in white whiskers waved a gold-laced
cap above the rail in the waist of the yacht. Lingard raised his arm in
return. Further aft, under the white awnings, he could see two men and
a woman. One of the men and the lady were in blue. The other man,
who seemed very tall and stood with his arm entwined round an awning
stanchion above his head, was clad in white. Lingard saw them plainly.
They looked at the brig through binoculars, turned their faces to
one another, moved their lips, seemed surprised. A large dog put his
forepaws on the rail, and, lifting up his big, black head, sent out
three loud and plaintive barks, then dropped down out of sight. A sudden
stir and an appearance of excitement amongst all hands on board the
yacht was caused by their perceiving that the boat towing astern of the
stranger was their own second gig.

Arms were outstretched with pointing fingers. Someone shouted out a
long sentence of which not a word could be made out; and then the brig,
having reached the western limit of the bank, began to move diagonally
away, increasing her distance from the yacht but bringing her stern
gradually into view. The people aft, Lingard noticed, left their places
and walked over to the taffrail so as to keep him longer in sight.

When about a mile off the bank and nearly in line with the stern of the
yacht the brig's topsails fluttered and the yards came down slowly
on the caps; the fore and aft canvas ran down; and for some time she
floated quietly with folded wings upon the transparent sheet of water,
under the radiant silence of the sky. Then her anchor went to the bottom
with a rumbling noise resembling the roll of distant thunder. In a
moment her head tended to the last puffs of the northerly airs and the
ensign at the peak stirred, unfurled itself slowly, collapsed, flew out
again, and finally hung down straight and still, as if weighted with
lead.

"Dead calm, sir," said Shaw to Lingard. "Dead calm again. We got into
this funny place in the nick of time, sir."

They stood for a while side by side, looking round upon the coast and
the sea. The brig had been brought up in the middle of a broad belt of
clear water. To the north rocky ledges showed in black and white lines
upon the slight swell setting in from there. A small island stood out
from the broken water like the square tower of some submerged building.
It was about two miles distant from the brig. To the eastward the coast
was low; a coast of green forests fringed with dark mangroves. There was
in its sombre dullness a clearly defined opening, as if a small piece
had been cut out with a sharp knife. The water in it shone like a patch
of polished silver. Lingard pointed it out to Shaw.

"This is the entrance to the place where we are going," he said.

Shaw stared, round-eyed.

"I thought you came here on account of this here yacht," he stammered,
surprised.

"Ah. The yacht," said Lingard, musingly, keeping his eyes on the break
in the coast. "The yacht--" He stamped his foot suddenly. "I would give
all I am worth and throw in a few days of life into the bargain if I
could get her off and away before to-night."

He calmed down, and again stood gazing at the land. A little within the
entrance from behind the wall of forests an invisible fire belched out
steadily the black and heavy convolutions of thick smoke, which stood
out high, like a twisted and shivering pillar against the clear blue of
the sky.

"We must stop that game, Mr. Shaw," said Lingard, abruptly.

"Yes, sir. What game?" asked Shaw, looking round in wonder.

"This smoke," said Lingard, impatiently. "It's a signal."

"Certainly, sir--though I don't see how we can do it. It seems far
inland. A signal for what, sir?"

"It was not meant for us," said Lingard in an unexpectedly savage tone.
"Here, Shaw, make them put a blank charge into that forecastle gun. Tell
'em to ram hard the wadding and grease the mouth. We want to make a good
noise. If old Jorgenson hears it, that fire will be out before you have
time to turn round twice. . . . In a minute, Mr. Carter."

The yacht's boat had come alongside as soon as the brig had been brought
up, and Carter had been waiting to take Lingard on board the yacht. They
both walked now to the gangway. Shaw, following his commander, stood by
to take his last orders.

"Put all the boats in the water, Mr. Shaw," Lingard was saying, with one
foot on the rail, ready to leave his ship, "and mount the four-pounder
swivel in the longboat's bow. Cast off the sea lashings of the guns,
but don't run 'em out yet. Keep the topsails loose and the jib ready for
setting, I may want the sails in a hurry. Now, Mr. Carter, I am ready
for you."

"Shove off, boys," said Carter as soon as they were seated in the boat.
"Shove off, and give way for a last pull before you get a long rest."

The men lay back on their oars, grunting. Their faces were drawn, grey
and streaked with the dried salt sprays. They had the worried expression
of men who had a long call made upon their endurance. Carter, heavy-eyed
and dull, steered for the yacht's gangway. Lingard asked as they were
crossing the brig's bows:

"Water enough alongside your craft, I suppose?"

"Yes. Eight to twelve feet," answered Carter, hoarsely. "Say, Captain!
Where's your show of cutthroats? Why! This sea is as empty as a church
on a week-day."

The booming report, nearly over his head, of the brig's eighteen-pounder
interrupted him. A round puff of white vapour, spreading itself lazily,
clung in fading shreds about the foreyard. Lingard, turning half round
in the stern sheets, looked at the smoke on the shore. Carter remained
silent, staring sleepily at the yacht they were approaching. Lingard
kept watching the smoke so intensely that he almost forgot where he
was, till Carter's voice pronouncing sharply at his ear the words "way
enough," recalled him to himself.

They were in the shadow of the yacht and coming alongside her ladder.
The master of the brig looked upward into the face of a gentleman,
with long whiskers and a shaved chin, staring down at him over the side
through a single eyeglass. As he put his foot on the bottom step he
could see the shore smoke still ascending, unceasing and thick; but even
as he looked the very base of the black pillar rose above the ragged
line of tree-tops. The whole thing floated clear away from the earth,
and rolling itself into an irregularly shaped mass, drifted out to
seaward, travelling slowly over the blue heavens, like a threatening and
lonely cloud.



PART II. THE SHORE OF REFUGE

I

The coast off which the little brig, floating upright above her anchor,
seemed to guard the high hull of the yacht has no distinctive features.
It is land without form. It stretches away without cape or bluff, long
and low--indefinitely; and when the heavy gusts of the northeast monsoon
drive the thick rain slanting over the sea, it is seen faintly under the
grey sky, black and with a blurred outline like the straight edge of a
dissolving shore. In the long season of unclouded days, it presents to
view only a narrow band of earth that appears crushed flat upon the vast
level of waters by the weight of the sky, whose immense dome rests on it
in a line as fine and true as that of the sea horizon itself.

Notwithstanding its nearness to the centres of European power, this
coast has been known for ages to the armed wanderers of these seas
as "The Shore of Refuge." It has no specific name on the charts, and
geography manuals don't mention it at all; but the wreckage of many
defeats unerringly drifts into its creeks. Its approaches are extremely
difficult for a stranger. Looked at from seaward, the innumerable islets
fringing what, on account of its vast size, may be called the mainland,
merge into a background that presents not a single landmark to point the
way through the intricate channels. It may be said that in a belt of sea
twenty miles broad along that low shore there is much more coral, mud,
sand, and stones than actual sea water. It was amongst the outlying
shoals of this stretch that the yacht had gone ashore and the events
consequent upon her stranding took place.

The diffused light of the short daybreak showed the open water to the
westward, sleeping, smooth and grey, under a faded heaven. The straight
coast threw a heavy belt of gloom along the shoals, which, in the calm
of expiring night, were unmarked by the slightest ripple. In the faint
dawn the low clumps of bushes on the sandbanks appeared immense.

Two figures, noiseless like two shadows, moved slowly over the beach of
a rocky islet, and stopped side by side on the very edge of the water.
Behind them, between the mats from which they had arisen, a small heap
of black embers smouldered quietly. They stood upright and perfectly
still, but for the slight movement of their heads from right to left and
back again as they swept their gaze through the grey emptiness of the
waters where, about two miles distant, the hull of the yacht loomed up
to seaward, black and shapeless, against the wan sky.

The two figures looked beyond without exchanging as much as a murmur.
The taller of the two grounded, at arm's length, the stock of a gun with
a long barrel; the hair of the other fell down to its waist; and, near
by, the leaves of creepers drooping from the summit of the steep rock
stirred no more than the festooned stone. The faint light, disclosing
here and there a gleam of white sandbanks and the blurred hummocks of
islets scattered within the gloom of the coast, the profound silence,
the vast stillness all round, accentuated the loneliness of the two
human beings who, urged by a sleepless hope, had risen thus, at break of
day, to look afar upon the veiled face of the sea.

"Nothing!" said the man with a sigh, and as if awakening from a long
period of musing.

He was clad in a jacket of coarse blue cotton, of the kind a poor
fisherman might own, and he wore it wide open on a muscular chest the
colour and smoothness of bronze. From the twist of threadbare sarong
wound tightly on the hips protruded outward to the left the ivory hilt,
ringed with six bands of gold, of a weapon that would not have disgraced
a ruler. Silver glittered about the flintlock and the hardwood stock
of his gun. The red and gold handkerchief folded round his head was of
costly stuff, such as is woven by high-born women in the households of
chiefs, only the gold threads were tarnished and the silk frayed in the
folds. His head was thrown back, the dropped eyelids narrowed the gleam
of his eyes. His face was hairless, the nose short with mobile nostrils,
and the smile of careless good-humour seemed to have been permanently
wrought, as if with a delicate tool, into the slight hollows about
the corners of rather full lips. His upright figure had a negligent
elegance. But in the careless face, in the easy gestures of the whole
man there was something attentive and restrained.

After giving the offing a last searching glance, he turned and, facing
the rising sun, walked bare-footed on the elastic sand. The trailed butt
of his gun made a deep furrow. The embers had ceased to smoulder. He
looked down at them pensively for a while, then called over his shoulder
to the girl who had remained behind, still scanning the sea:

"The fire is out, Immada."

At the sound of his voice the girl moved toward the mats. Her black hair
hung like a mantle. Her sarong, the kilt-like garment which both sexes
wear, had the national check of grey and red, but she had not completed
her attire by the belt, scarves, the loose upper wrappings, and the
head-covering of a woman. A black silk jacket, like that of a man of
rank, was buttoned over her bust and fitted closely to her slender
waist. The edge of a stand-up collar, stiff with gold embroidery,
rubbed her cheek. She had no bracelets, no anklets, and although dressed
practically in man's clothes, had about her person no weapon of any
sort. Her arms hung down in exceedingly tight sleeves slit a little way
up from the wrist, gold-braided and with a row of small gold buttons.
She walked, brown and alert, all of a piece, with short steps, the eyes
lively in an impassive little face, the arched mouth closed firmly; and
her whole person breathed in its rigid grace the fiery gravity of youth
at the beginning of the task of life--at the beginning of beliefs and
hopes.

This was the day of Lingard's arrival upon the coast, but, as is known,
the brig, delayed by the calm, did not appear in sight of the shallows
till the morning was far advanced. Disappointed in their hope to see the
expected sail shining in the first rays of the rising sun, the man and
the woman, without attempting to relight the fire, lounged on their
sleeping mats. At their feet a common canoe, hauled out of the water,
was, for more security, moored by a grass rope to the shaft of a long
spear planted firmly on the white beach, and the incoming tide lapped
monotonously against its stern.

The girl, twisting up her black hair, fastened it with slender wooden
pins. The man, reclining at full length, had made room on his mat for
the gun--as one would do for a friend--and, supported on his elbow,
looked toward the yacht with eyes whose fixed dreaminess like a
transparent veil would show the slow passage of every gloomy thought by
deepening gradually into a sombre stare.

"We have seen three sunrises on this islet, and no friend came from the
sea," he said without changing his attitude, with his back toward the
girl who sat on the other side of the cold embers.

"Yes; and the moon is waning," she answered in a low voice. "The moon
is waning. Yet he promised to be here when the nights are light and the
water covers the sandbanks as far as the bushes."

"The traveller knows the time of his setting out, but not the time of
his return," observed the man, calmly.

The girl sighed.

"The nights of waiting are long," she murmured.

"And sometimes they are vain," said the man with the same composure.
"Perhaps he will never return."

"Why?" exclaimed the girl.

"The road is long and the heart may grow cold," was the answer in a
quiet voice. "If he does not return it is because he has forgotten."

"Oh, Hassim, it is because he is dead," cried the girl, indignantly.

The man, looking fixedly to seaward, smiled at the ardour of her tone.

They were brother and sister, and though very much alike, the family
resemblance was lost in the more general traits common to the whole
race.

They were natives of Wajo and it is a common saying amongst the Malay
race that to be a successful traveller and trader a man must have some
Wajo blood in his veins. And with those people trading, which means also
travelling afar, is a romantic and an honourable occupation. The trader
must possess an adventurous spirit and a keen understanding; he should
have the fearlessness of youth and the sagacity of age; he should be
diplomatic and courageous, so as to secure the favour of the great and
inspire fear in evil-doers.

These qualities naturally are not expected in a shopkeeper or a Chinaman
pedlar; they are considered indispensable only for a man who, of noble
birth and perhaps related to the ruler of his own country, wanders over
the seas in a craft of his own and with many followers; carries from
island to island important news as well as merchandise; who may be
trusted with secret messages and valuable goods; a man who, in short,
is as ready to intrigue and fight as to buy and sell. Such is the ideal
trader of Wajo.

Trading, thus understood, was the occupation of ambitious men who played
an occult but important part in all those national risings, religious
disturbances, and also in the organized piratical movements on a large
scale which, during the first half of the last century, affected the
fate of more than one native dynasty and, for a few years at least,
seriously endangered the Dutch rule in the East. When, at the cost of
much blood and gold, a comparative peace had been imposed on the
islands the same occupation, though shorn of its glorious possibilities,
remained attractive for the most adventurous of a restless race. The
younger sons and relations of many a native ruler traversed the seas of
the Archipelago, visited the innumerable and little-known islands, and
the then practically unknown shores of New Guinea; every spot where
European trade had not penetrated--from Aru to Atjeh, from Sumbawa to
Palawan.



II

It was in the most unknown perhaps of such spots, a small bay on the
coast of New Guinea, that young Pata Hassim, the nephew of one of the
greatest chiefs of Wajo, met Lingard for the first time.

He was a trader after the Wajo manner, and in a stout sea-going prau
armed with two guns and manned by young men who were related to his
family by blood or dependence, had come in there to buy some birds
of paradise skins for the old Sultan of Ternate; a risky expedition
undertaken not in the way of business but as a matter of courtesy toward
the aged Sultan who had entertained him sumptuously in that dismal brick
palace at Ternate for a month or more.

While lying off the village, very much on his guard, waiting for the
skins and negotiating with the treacherous coast-savages who are the
go-betweens in that trade, Hassim saw one morning Lingard's brig come
to an anchor in the bay, and shortly afterward observed a white man of
great stature with a beard that shone like gold, land from a boat and
stroll on unarmed, though followed by four Malays of the brig's crew,
toward the native village.

Hassim was struck with wonder and amazement at the cool recklessness of
such a proceeding; and, after; in true Malay fashion, discussing with
his people for an hour or so the urgency of the case, he also landed,
but well escorted and armed, with the intention of going to see what
would happen.

The affair really was very simple, "such as"--Lingard would say--"such
as might have happened to anybody." He went ashore with the intention
to look for some stream where he could conveniently replenish his water
casks, this being really the motive which had induced him to enter the
bay.

While, with his men close by and surrounded by a mop-headed, sooty
crowd, he was showing a few cotton handkerchiefs, and trying to explain
by signs the object of his landing, a spear, lunged from behind, grazed
his neck. Probably the Papuan wanted only to ascertain whether such a
creature could be killed or hurt, and most likely firmly believed that
it could not; but one of Lingard's seamen at once retaliated by striking
at the experimenting savage with his parang--three such choppers brought
for the purpose of clearing the bush, if necessary, being all the
weapons the party from the brig possessed.

A deadly tumult ensued with such suddenness that Lingard, turning round
swiftly, saw his defender, already speared in three places, fall forward
at his feet. Wasub, who was there, and afterward told the story once a
week on an average, used to horrify his hearers by showing how the man
blinked his eyes quickly before he fell. Lingard was unarmed. To the
end of his life he remained incorrigibly reckless in that respect,
explaining that he was "much too quick tempered to carry firearms on the
chance of a row. And if put to it," he argued, "I can make shift to kill
a man with my fist anyhow; and then--don't ye see--you know what
you're doing and are not so apt to start a trouble from sheer temper or
funk--see?"

In this case he did his best to kill a man with a blow from the shoulder
and catching up another by the middle flung him at the naked, wild
crowd. "He hurled men about as the wind hurls broken boughs. He made a
broad way through our enemies!" related Wasub in his jerky voice. It is
more probable that Lingard's quick movements and the amazing aspect of
such a strange being caused the warriors to fall back before his rush.

Taking instant advantage of their surprise and fear, Lingard, followed
by his men, dashed along the kind of ruinous jetty leading to the
village which was erected as usual over the water. They darted into one
of the miserable huts built of rotten mats and bits of decayed canoes,
and in this shelter showing daylight through all its sides, they
had time to draw breath and realize that their position was not much
improved.

The women and children screaming had cleared out into the bush, while
at the shore end of the jetty the warriors capered and yelled, preparing
for a general attack. Lingard noticed with mortification that his
boat-keeper apparently had lost his head, for, instead of swimming off
to the ship to give the alarm, as he was perfectly able to do, the
man actually struck out for a small rock a hundred yards away and was
frantically trying to climb up its perpendicular side. The tide being
out, to jump into the horrible mud under the houses would have been
almost certain death. Nothing remained therefore--since the miserable
dwelling would not have withstood a vigorous kick, let alone a
siege--but to rush back on shore and regain possession of the boat. To
this Lingard made up his mind quickly and, arming himself with a crooked
stick he found under his hand, sallied forth at the head of his three
men. As he bounded along, far in advance, he had just time to perceive
clearly the desperate nature of the undertaking, when he heard two shots
fired to his right. The solid mass of black bodies and frizzly heads in
front of him wavered and broke up. They did not run away, however.

Lingard pursued his course, but now with that thrill of exultation which
even a faint prospect of success inspires in a sanguine man. He heard a
shout of many voices far off, then there was another report of a shot,
and a musket ball fired at long range spurted a tiny jet of sand between
him and his wild enemies. His next bound would have carried him into
their midst had they awaited his onset, but his uplifted arm found
nothing to strike. Black backs were leaping high or gliding horizontally
through the grass toward the edge of the bush.

He flung his stick at the nearest pair of black shoulders and stopped
short. The tall grasses swayed themselves into a rest, a chorus of yells
and piercing shrieks died out in a dismal howl, and all at once the
wooded shores and the blue bay seemed to fall under the spell of a
luminous stillness. The change was as startling as the awakening from a
dream. The sudden silence struck Lingard as amazing.

He broke it by lifting his voice in a stentorian shout, which arrested
the pursuit of his men. They retired reluctantly, glaring back angrily
at the wall of a jungle where not a single leaf stirred. The strangers,
whose opportune appearance had decided the issue of that adventure, did
not attempt to join in the pursuit but halted in a compact body on the
ground lately occupied by the savages.

Lingard and the young leader of the Wajo traders met in the splendid
light of noonday, and amidst the attentive silence of their followers,
on the very spot where the Malay seaman had lost his life. Lingard,
striding up from one side, thrust out his open palm; Hassim responded at
once to the frank gesture and they exchanged their first hand-clasp over
the prostrate body, as if fate had already exacted the price of a death
for the most ominous of her gifts--the gift of friendship that sometimes
contains the whole good or evil of a life.

"I'll never forget this day," cried Lingard in a hearty tone; and the
other smiled quietly.

Then after a short pause--"Will you burn the village for vengeance?"
asked the Malay with a quick glance down at the dead Lascar who, on his
face and with stretched arms, seemed to cling desperately to that earth
of which he had known so little.

Lingard hesitated.

"No," he said, at last. "It would do good to no one."

"True," said Hassim, gently, "but was this man your debtor--a slave?"

"Slave?" cried Lingard. "This is an English brig. Slave? No. A free man
like myself."

"Hai. He is indeed free now," muttered the Malay with another glance
downward. "But who will pay the bereaved for his life?"

"If there is anywhere a woman or child belonging to him, I--my serang
would know--I shall seek them out," cried Lingard, remorsefully.

"You speak like a chief," said Hassim, "only our great men do not go
to battle with naked hands. O you white men! O the valour of you white
men!"

"It was folly, pure folly," protested Lingard, "and this poor fellow has
paid for it."

"He could not avoid his destiny," murmured the Malay. "It is in my mind
my trading is finished now in this place," he added, cheerfully.

Lingard expressed his regret.

"It is no matter, it is no matter," assured the other courteously, and
after Lingard had given a pressing invitation for Hassim and his two
companions of high rank to visit the brig, the two parties separated.

The evening was calm when the Malay craft left its berth near the shore
and was rowed slowly across the bay to Lingard's anchorage. The end of a
stout line was thrown on board, and that night the white man's brig and
the brown man's prau swung together to the same anchor.

The sun setting to seaward shot its last rays between the headlands,
when the body of the killed Lascar, wrapped up decently in a white
sheet, according to Mohammedan usage, was lowered gently below the
still waters of the bay upon which his curious glances, only a few
hours before, had rested for the first time. At the moment the dead man,
released from slip-ropes, disappeared without a ripple before the eyes
of his shipmates, the bright flash and the heavy report of the brig's
bow gun were succeeded by the muttering echoes of the encircling shores
and by the loud cries of sea birds that, wheeling in clouds, seemed
to scream after the departing seaman a wild and eternal good-bye. The
master of the brig, making his way aft with hanging head, was followed
by low murmurs of pleased surprise from his crew as well as from the
strangers who crowded the main deck. In such acts performed simply, from
conviction, what may be called the romantic side of the man's nature
came out; that responsive sensitiveness to the shadowy appeals made by
life and death, which is the groundwork of a chivalrous character.

Lingard entertained his three visitors far into the night. A sheep from
the brig's sea stock was given to the men of the prau, while in the
cabin, Hassim and his two friends, sitting in a row on the stern settee,
looked very splendid with costly metals and flawed jewels. The talk
conducted with hearty friendship on Lingard's part, and on the part of
the Malays with the well-bred air of discreet courtesy, which is natural
to the better class of that people, touched upon many subjects and, in
the end, drifted to politics.

"It is in my mind that you are a powerful man in your own country," said
Hassim, with a circular glance at the cuddy.

"My country is upon a far-away sea where the light breezes are as strong
as the winds of the rainy weather here," said Lingard; and there were
low exclamations of wonder. "I left it very young, and I don't know
about my power there where great men alone are as numerous as the poor
people in all your islands, Tuan Hassim. But here," he continued, "here,
which is also my country--being an English craft and worthy of it,
too--I am powerful enough. In fact, I am Rajah here. This bit of my
country is all my own."

The visitors were impressed, exchanged meaning glances, nodded at each
other.

"Good, good," said Hassim at last, with a smile. "You carry your country
and your power with you over the sea. A Rajah upon the sea. Good!"

Lingard laughed thunderously while the others looked amused.

"Your country is very powerful--we know," began again Hassim after a
pause, "but is it stronger than the country of the Dutch who steal our
land?"

"Stronger?" cried Lingard. He opened a broad palm. "Stronger? We
could take them in our hand like this--" and he closed his fingers
triumphantly.

"And do you make them pay tribute for their land?" enquired Hassim with
eagerness.

"No," answered Lingard in a sobered tone; "this, Tuan Hassim, you see,
is not the custom of white men. We could, of course--but it is not the
custom."

"Is it not?" said the other with a sceptical smile. "They are stronger
than we are and they want tribute from us. And sometimes they get
it--even from Wajo where every man is free and wears a kris."

There was a period of dead silence while Lingard looked thoughtful and
the Malays gazed stonily at nothing.

"But we burn our powder amongst ourselves," went on Hassim, gently, "and
blunt our weapons upon one another."

He sighed, paused, and then changing to an easy tone began to urge
Lingard to visit Wajo "for trade and to see friends," he said, laying
his hand on his breast and inclining his body slightly.

"Aye. To trade with friends," cried Lingard with a laugh, "for such a
ship"--he waved his arm--"for such a vessel as this is like a household
where there are many behind the curtain. It is as costly as a wife and
children."

The guests rose and took their leave.

"You fired three shots for me, Panglima Hassim," said Lingard,
seriously, "and I have had three barrels of powder put on board your
prau; one for each shot. But we are not quits."

The Malay's eyes glittered with pleasure.

"This is indeed a friend's gift. Come to see me in my country!"

"I promise," said Lingard, "to see you--some day."

The calm surface of the bay reflected the glorious night sky, and the
brig with the prau riding astern seemed to be suspended amongst the
stars in a peace that was almost unearthly in the perfection of its
unstirring silence. The last hand-shakes were exchanged on deck, and the
Malays went aboard their own craft. Next morning, when a breeze sprang
up soon after sunrise, the brig and the prau left the bay together. When
clear of the land Lingard made all sail and sheered alongside to say
good-bye before parting company--the brig, of course, sailing three feet
to the prau's one. Hassim stood on the high deck aft.

"Prosperous road," hailed Lingard.

"Remember the promise!" shouted the other. "And come soon!" he went on,
raising his voice as the brig forged past. "Come soon--lest what perhaps
is written should come to pass!"

The brig shot ahead.

"What?" yelled Lingard in a puzzled tone, "what's written?"

He listened. And floating over the water came faintly the words:

"No one knows!"



III

"My word! I couldn't help liking the chap," would shout Lingard when
telling the story; and looking around at the eyes that glittered at him
through the smoke of cheroots, this Brixham trawler-boy, afterward a
youth in colliers, deep-water man, gold-digger, owner and commander of
"the finest brig afloat," knew that by his listeners--seamen, traders,
adventurers like himself--this was accepted not as the expression of a
feeling, but as the highest commendation he could give his Malay friend.

"By heavens! I shall go to Wajo!" he cried, and a semicircle of
heads nodded grave approbation while a slightly ironical voice said
deliberately--"You are a made man, Tom, if you get on the right side of
that Rajah of yours."

"Go in--and look out for yourself," cried another with a laugh.

A little professional jealousy was unavoidable, Wajo, on account of its
chronic state of disturbance, being closed to the white traders; but
there was no real ill-will in the banter of these men, who, rising with
handshakes, dropped off one by one. Lingard went straight aboard his
vessel and, till morning, walked the poop of the brig with measured
steps. The riding lights of ships twinkled all round him; the lights
ashore twinkled in rows, the stars twinkled above his head in a black
sky; and reflected in the black water of the roadstead twinkled far
below his feet. And all these innumerable and shining points were
utterly lost in the immense darkness. Once he heard faintly the rumbling
chain of some vessel coming to an anchor far away somewhere outside
the official limits of the harbour. A stranger to the port--thought
Lingard--one of us would have stood right in. Perhaps a ship from home?
And he felt strangely touched at the thought of that ship, weary with
months of wandering, and daring not to approach the place of rest. At
sunrise, while the big ship from the West, her sides streaked with rust
and grey with the salt of the sea, was moving slowly in to take up
a berth near the shore, Lingard left the roadstead on his way to the
eastward.

A heavy gulf thunderstorm was raging, when after a long passage and at
the end of a sultry calm day, wasted in drifting helplessly in sight
of his destination, Lingard, taking advantage of fitful gusts of wind,
approached the shores of Wajo. With characteristic audacity, he held on
his way, closing in with a coast to which he was a stranger, and on a
night that would have appalled any other man; while at every dazzling
flash, Hassim's native land seemed to leap nearer at the brig--and
disappear instantly as though it had crouched low for the next spring
out of an impenetrable darkness. During the long day of the calm, he had
obtained from the deck and from aloft, such good views of the coast,
and had noted the lay of the land and the position of the dangers so
carefully that, though at the precise moment when he gave the order to
let go the anchor, he had been for some time able to see no further
than if his head had been wrapped in a woollen blanket, yet the next
flickering bluish flash showed him the brig, anchored almost exactly
where he had judged her to be, off a narrow white beach near the mouth
of a river.

He could see on the shore a high cluster of bamboo huts perched upon
piles, a small grove of tall palms all bowed together before the blast
like stalks of grass, something that might have been a palisade
of pointed stakes near the water, and far off, a sombre background
resembling an immense wall--the forest-clad hills. Next moment, all this
vanished utterly from his sight, as if annihilated and, before he had
time to turn away, came back to view with a sudden crash, appearing
unscathed and motionless under hooked darts of flame, like some
legendary country of immortals, withstanding the wrath and fire of
Heaven.

Made uneasy by the nature of his holding ground, and fearing that in one
of the terrific off-shore gusts the brig would start her anchor, Lingard
remained on deck to watch over the safety of his vessel. With one hand
upon the lead-line which would give him instant warning of the brig
beginning to drag, he stood by the rail, most of the time deafened
and blinded, but also fascinated, by the repeated swift visions of an
unknown shore, a sight always so inspiring, as much perhaps by its vague
suggestion of danger as by the hopes of success it never fails to awaken
in the heart of a true adventurer. And its immutable aspect of profound
and still repose, seen thus under streams of fire and in the midst of a
violent uproar, made it appear inconceivably mysterious and amazing.

Between the squalls there were short moments of calm, while now and then
even the thunder would cease as if to draw breath. During one of those
intervals. Lingard, tired and sleepy, was beginning to doze where he
stood, when suddenly it occurred to him that, somewhere below, the sea
had spoken in a human voice. It had said, "Praise be to God--" and the
voice sounded small, clear, and confident, like the voice of a child
speaking in a cathedral. Lingard gave a start and thought--I've dreamed
this--and directly the sea said very close to him, "Give a rope."

The thunder growled wickedly, and Lingard, after shouting to the men on
deck, peered down at the water, until at last he made out floating close
alongside the upturned face of a man with staring eyes that gleamed at
him and then blinked quickly to a flash of lightning. By that time all
hands in the brig were wildly active and many ropes-ends had been thrown
over. Then together with a gust of wind, and, as if blown on board, a
man tumbled over the rail and fell all in a heap upon the deck. Before
any one had the time to pick him up, he leaped to his feet, causing the
people around him to step back hurriedly. A sinister blue glare showed
the bewildered faces and the petrified attitudes of men completely
deafened by the accompanying peal of thunder. After a time, as if to
beings plunged in the abyss of eternal silence, there came to their ears
an unfamiliar thin, far-away voice saying:

"I seek the white man."

"Here," cried Lingard. Then, when he had the stranger, dripping and
naked but for a soaked waistcloth, under the lamp of the cabin, he said,
"I don't know you."

"My name is Jaffir, and I come from Pata Hassim, who is my chief and
your friend. Do you know this?"

He held up a thick gold ring, set with a fairly good emerald.

"I have seen it before on the Rajah's finger," said Lingard, looking
very grave.

"It is the witness of the truth I speak--the message from Hassim
is--'Depart and forget!'"

"I don't forget," said Lingard, slowly. "I am not that kind of man. What
folly is this?"

It is unnecessary to give at full length the story told by Jaffir. It
appears that on his return home, after the meeting with Lingard,
Hassim found his relative dying and a strong party formed to oppose
his rightful successor. The old Rajah Tulla died late at night and--as
Jaffir put it--before the sun rose there were already blows exchanged in
the courtyard of the ruler's dalam. This was the preliminary fight of a
civil war, fostered by foreign intrigues; a war of jungle and river,
of assaulted stockades and forest ambushes. In this contest, both
parties--according to Jaffir--displayed great courage, and one of them
an unswerving devotion to what, almost from the first, was a lost cause.
Before a month elapsed Hassim, though still chief of an armed band, was
already a fugitive. He kept up the struggle, however, with some vague
notion that Lingard's arrival would turn the tide.

"For weeks we lived on wild rice; for days we fought with nothing
but water in our bellies," declaimed Jaffir in the tone of a true
fire-eater.

And then he went on to relate, how, driven steadily down to the sea,
Hassim, with a small band of followers, had been for days holding the
stockade by the waterside.

"But every night some men disappeared," confessed Jaffir. "They were
weary and hungry and they went to eat with their enemies. We are only
ten now--ten men and a woman with the heart of a man, who are tonight
starving, and to-morrow shall die swiftly. We saw your ship afar all
day; but you have come too late. And for fear of treachery and lest harm
should befall you--his friend--the Rajah gave me the ring and I crept
on my stomach over the sand, and I swam in the night--and I, Jaffir, the
best swimmer in Wajo, and the slave of Hassim, tell you--his message to
you is 'Depart and forget'--and this is his gift--take!"

He caught hold suddenly of Lingard's hand, thrust roughly into it the
ring, and then for the first time looked round the cabin with wondering
but fearless eyes. They lingered over the semicircle of bayonets and
rested fondly on musket-racks. He grunted in admiration.

"Ya-wa, this is strength!" he murmured as if to himself. "But it has
come too late."

"Perhaps not," cried Lingard.

"Too late," said Jaffir, "we are ten only, and at sunrise we go out to
die." He went to the cabin door and hesitated there with a puzzled air,
being unused to locks and door handles.

"What are you going to do?" asked Lingard.

"I shall swim back," replied Jaffir. "The message is spoken and the
night can not last forever."

"You can stop with me," said Lingard, looking at the man searchingly.

"Hassim waits," was the curt answer.

"Did he tell you to return?" asked Lingard.

"No! What need?" said the other in a surprised tone.

Lingard seized his hand impulsively.

"If I had ten men like you!" he cried.

"We are ten, but they are twenty to one," said Jaffir, simply.

Lingard opened the door.

"Do you want anything that a man can give?" he asked.

The Malay had a moment of hesitation, and Lingard noticed the sunken
eyes, the prominent ribs, and the worn-out look of the man.

"Speak out," he urged with a smile; "the bearer of a gift must have a
reward."

"A drink of water and a handful of rice for strength to reach the
shore," said Jaffir sturdily. "For over there"--he tossed his head--"we
had nothing to eat to-day."

"You shall have it--give it to you with my own hands," muttered Lingard.

He did so, and thus lowered himself in Jaffir's estimation for a time.
While the messenger, squatting on the floor, ate without haste but with
considerable earnestness, Lingard thought out a plan of action. In his
ignorance as to the true state of affairs in the country, to save
Hassim from the immediate danger of his position was all that he could
reasonably attempt. To that end Lingard proposed to swing out his
long-boat and send her close inshore to take off Hassim and his men. He
knew enough of Malays to feel sure that on such a night the besiegers,
now certain of success, and being, Jaffir said, in possession of
everything that could float, would not be very vigilant, especially on
the sea front of the stockade. The very fact of Jaffir having managed
to swim off undetected proved that much. The brig's boat could--when the
frequency of lightning abated--approach unseen close to the beach, and
the defeated party, either stealing out one by one or making a rush in a
body, would embark and be received in the brig.

This plan was explained to Jaffir, who heard it without the slightest
mark of interest, being apparently too busy eating. When the last grain
of rice was gone, he stood up, took a long pull at the water bottle,
muttered: "I hear. Good. I will tell Hassim," and tightening the rag
round his loins, prepared to go. "Give me time to swim ashore," he said,
"and when the boat starts, put another light beside the one that burns
now like a star above your vessel. We shall see and understand. And
don't send the boat till there is less lightning: a boat is bigger than
a man in the water. Tell the rowers to pull for the palm-grove and cease
when an oar, thrust down with a strong arm, touches the bottom. Very
soon they will hear our hail; but if no one comes they must go away
before daylight. A chief may prefer death to life, and we who are left
are all of true heart. Do you understand, O big man?"

"The chap has plenty of sense," muttered Lingard to himself, and when
they stood side by side on the deck, he said: "But there may be enemies
on the beach, O Jaffir, and they also may shout to deceive my men. So
let your hail be Lightning! Will you remember?"

For a time Jaffir seemed to be choking.

"Lit-ing! Is that right? I say--is that right, O strong man?" Next
moment he appeared upright and shadowy on the rail.

"Yes. That's right. Go now," said Lingard, and Jaffir leaped off,
becoming invisible long before he struck the water. Then there was a
splash; after a while a spluttering voice cried faintly, "Lit-ing! Ah,
ha!" and suddenly the next thunder-squall burst upon the coast. In the
crashing flares of light Lingard had again and again the quick vision of
a white beach, the inclined palm-trees of the grove, the stockade by
the sea, the forest far away: a vast landscape mysterious and
still--Hassim's native country sleeping unmoved under the wrath and fire
of Heaven.



IV

A Traveller visiting Wajo to-day may, if he deserves the confidence of
the common people, hear the traditional account of the last civil war,
together with the legend of a chief and his sister, whose mother had
been a great princess suspected of sorcery and on her death-bed had
communicated to these two the secrets of the art of magic. The chief's
sister especially, "with the aspect of a child and the fearlessness of a
great fighter," became skilled in casting spells. They were defeated by
the son of their uncle, because--will explain the narrator simply--"The
courage of us Wajo people is so great that magic can do nothing against
it. I fought in that war. We had them with their backs to the sea."
And then he will go on to relate in an awed tone how on a certain night
"when there was such a thunderstorm as has been never heard of before
or since" a ship, resembling the ships of white men, appeared off the
coast, "as though she had sailed down from the clouds. She moved," he
will affirm, "with her sails bellying against the wind; in size she was
like an island; the lightning played between her masts which were as
high as the summits of mountains; a star burned low through the clouds
above her. We knew it for a star at once because no flame of man's
kindling could have endured the wind and rain of that night. It was such
a night that we on the watch hardly dared look upon the sea. The heavy
rain was beating down our eyelids. And when day came, the ship was
nowhere to be seen, and in the stockade where the day before there were
a hundred or more at our mercy, there was no one. The chief, Hassim, was
gone, and the lady who was a princess in the country--and nobody knows
what became of them from that day to this. Sometimes traders from our
parts talk of having heard of them here, and heard of them there, but
these are the lies of men who go afar for gain. We who live in the
country believe that the ship sailed back into the clouds whence the
Lady's magic made her come. Did we not see the ship with our own eyes?
And as to Rajah Hassim and his sister, Mas Immada, some men say one
thing and some another, but God alone knows the truth."

Such is the traditional account of Lingard's visit to the shores of
Boni. And the truth is he came and went the same night; for, when the
dawn broke on a cloudy sky the brig, under reefed canvas and smothered
in sprays, was storming along to the southward on her way out of the
Gulf. Lingard, watching over the rapid course of his vessel, looked
ahead with anxious eyes and more than once asked himself with wonder,
why, after all, was he thus pressing her under all the sail she could
carry. His hair was blown about by the wind, his mind was full of care
and the indistinct shapes of many new thoughts, and under his feet, the
obedient brig dashed headlong from wave to wave.

Her owner and commander did not know where he was going. That adventurer
had only a confused notion of being on the threshold of a big adventure.
There was something to be done, and he felt he would have to do it. It
was expected of him. The seas expected it; the land expected it. Men
also. The story of war and of suffering; Jaffir's display of fidelity,
the sight of Hassim and his sister, the night, the tempest, the coast
under streams of fire--all this made one inspiring manifestation of a
life calling to him distinctly for interference. But what appealed to
him most was the silent, the complete, unquestioning, and apparently
uncurious, trust of these people. They came away from death straight
into his arms as it were, and remained in them passive as though
there had been no such thing as doubt or hope or desire. This amazing
unconcern seemed to put him under a heavy load of obligation.

He argued to himself that had not these defeated men expected everything
from him they could not have been so indifferent to his action. Their
dumb quietude stirred him more than the most ardent pleading. Not a
word, not a whisper, not a questioning look even! They did not ask! It
flattered him. He was also rather glad of it, because if the unconscious
part of him was perfectly certain of its action, he, himself, did not
know what to do with those bruised and battered beings a playful fate
had delivered suddenly into his hands.

He had received the fugitives personally, had helped some over the rail;
in the darkness, slashed about by lightning, he had guessed that not one
of them was unwounded, and in the midst of tottering shapes he wondered
how on earth they had managed to reach the long-boat that had brought
them off. He caught unceremoniously in his arms the smallest of these
shapes and carried it into the cabin, then without looking at his light
burden ran up again on deck to get the brig under way. While shouting
out orders he was dimly aware of someone hovering near his elbow. It was
Hassim.

"I am not ready for war," he explained, rapidly, over his shoulder,
"and to-morrow there may be no wind." Afterward for a time he forgot
everybody and everything while he conned the brig through the few
outlying dangers. But in half an hour, and running off with the wind on
the quarter, he was quite clear of the coast and breathed freely. It
was only then that he approached two others on that poop where he was
accustomed in moments of difficulty to commune alone with his craft.
Hassim had called his sister out of the cabin; now and then Lingard
could see them with fierce distinctness, side by side, and with twined
arms, looking toward the mysterious country that seemed at every flash
to leap away farther from the brig--unscathed and fading.

The thought uppermost in Lingard's mind was: "What on earth am I going
to do with them?" And no one seemed to care what he would do. Jaffir
with eight others quartered on the main hatch, looked to each other's
wounds and conversed interminably in low tones, cheerful and quiet, like
well-behaved children. Each of them had saved his kris, but Lingard had
to make a distribution of cotton cloth out of his trade-goods. Whenever
he passed by them, they all looked after him gravely. Hassim and Immada
lived in the cuddy. The chief's sister took the air only in the evening
and those two could be heard every night, invisible and murmuring in the
shadows of the quarter-deck. Every Malay on board kept respectfully away
from them.

Lingard, on the poop, listened to the soft voices, rising and falling,
in a melancholy cadence; sometimes the woman cried out as if in anger or
in pain. He would stop short. The sound of a deep sigh would float up
to him on the stillness of the night. Attentive stars surrounded the
wandering brig and on all sides their light fell through a vast silence
upon a noiseless sea. Lingard would begin again to pace the deck,
muttering to himself.

"Belarab's the man for this job. His is the only place where I can look
for help, but I don't think I know enough to find it. I wish I had old
Jorgenson here--just for ten minutes."

This Jorgenson knew things that had happened a long time ago, and lived
amongst men efficient in meeting the accidents of the day, but who did
not care what would happen to-morrow and who had no time to remember
yesterday. Strictly speaking, he did not live amongst them. He only
appeared there from time to time. He lived in the native quarter, with
a native woman, in a native house standing in the middle of a plot
of fenced ground where grew plantains, and furnished only with mats,
cooking pots, a queer fishing net on two sticks, and a small mahogany
case with a lock and a silver plate engraved with the words "Captain H.
C. Jorgenson. Barque Wild Rose."

It was like an inscription on a tomb. The Wild Rose was dead, and so was
Captain H. C. Jorgenson, and the sextant case was all that was left
of them. Old Jorgenson, gaunt and mute, would turn up at meal times on
board any trading vessel in the Roads, and the stewards--Chinamen
or mulattos--would sulkily put on an extra plate without waiting for
orders. When the seamen traders foregathered noisily round a glittering
cluster of bottles and glasses on a lighted verandah, old Jorgenson
would emerge up the stairs as if from a dark sea, and, stepping up with
a kind of tottering jauntiness, would help himself in the first tumbler
to hand.

"I drink to you all. No--no chair."

He would stand silent over the talking group. His taciturnity was as
eloquent as the repeated warning of the slave of the feast. His flesh
had gone the way of all flesh, his spirit had sunk in the turmoil of his
past, but his immense and bony frame survived as if made of iron. His
hands trembled but his eyes were steady. He was supposed to know details
about the end of mysterious men and of mysterious enterprises. He was an
evident failure himself, but he was believed to know secrets that would
make the fortune of any man; yet there was also a general impression
that his knowledge was not of that nature which would make it profitable
for a moderately prudent person.

This powerful skeleton, dressed in faded blue serge and without any kind
of linen, existed anyhow. Sometimes, if offered the job, he piloted
a home ship through the Straits of Rhio, after, however, assuring the
captain:

"You don't want a pilot; a man could go through with his eyes shut. But
if you want me, I'll come. Ten dollars."

Then, after seeing his charge clear of the last island of the group he
would go back thirty miles in a canoe, with two old Malays who seemed
to be in some way his followers. To travel thirty miles at sea under
the equatorial sun and in a cranky dug-out where once down you must not
move, is an achievement that requires the endurance of a fakir and the
virtue of a salamander. Ten dollars was cheap and generally he was in
demand. When times were hard he would borrow five dollars from any of
the adventurers with the remark:

"I can't pay you back, very soon, but the girl must eat, and if you want
to know anything, I can tell you."

It was remarkable that nobody ever smiled at that "anything." The usual
thing was to say:

"Thank you, old man; when I am pushed for a bit of information I'll come
to you."

Jorgenson nodded then and would say: "Remember that unless you young
chaps are like we men who ranged about here years ago, what I could tell
you would be worse than poison."

It was from Jorgenson, who had his favourites with whom he was less
silent, that Lingard had heard of Darat-es-Salam, the "Shore of Refuge."
Jorgenson had, as he expressed it, "known the inside of that country
just after the high old times when the white-clad Padris preached and
fought all over Sumatra till the Dutch shook in their shoes." Only he
did not say "shook" and "shoes" but the above paraphrase conveys well
enough his contemptuous meaning. Lingard tried now to remember and piece
together the practical bits of old Jorgenson's amazing tales; but all
that had remained with him was an approximate idea of the locality and
a very strong but confused notion of the dangerous nature of its
approaches. He hesitated, and the brig, answering in her movements to
the state of the man's mind, lingered on the road, seemed to hesitate
also, swinging this way and that on the days of calm.

It was just because of that hesitation that a big New York ship, loaded
with oil in cases for Japan, and passing through the Billiton passage,
sighted one morning a very smart brig being hove-to right in the
fair-way and a little to the east of Carimata. The lank skipper, in a
frock-coat, and the big mate with heavy moustaches, judged her almost
too pretty for a Britisher, and wondered at the man on board laying his
topsail to the mast for no reason that they could see. The big ship's
sails fanned her along, flapping in the light air, and when the brig was
last seen far astern she had still her mainyard aback as if waiting for
someone. But when, next day, a London tea-clipper passed on the same
track, she saw no pretty brig hesitating, all white and still at the
parting of the ways. All that night Lingard had talked with Hassim while
the stars streamed from east to west like an immense river of sparks
above their heads. Immada listened, sometimes exclaiming low, sometimes
holding her breath. She clapped her hands once. A faint dawn appeared.

"You shall be treated like my father in the country," Hassim was saying.
A heavy dew dripped off the rigging and the darkened sails were black
on the pale azure of the sky. "You shall be the father who advises for
good--"

"I shall be a steady friend, and as a friend I want to be treated--no
more," said Lingard. "Take back your ring."

"Why do you scorn my gift?" asked Hassim, with a sad and ironic smile.

"Take it," said Lingard. "It is still mine. How can I forget that, when
facing death, you thought of my safety? There are many dangers before
us. We shall be often separated--to work better for the same end. If
ever you and Immada need help at once and I am within reach, send me a
message with this ring and if I am alive I will not fail you." He looked
around at the pale daybreak. "I shall talk to Belarab straight--like we
whites do. I have never seen him, but I am a strong man. Belarab must
help us to reconquer your country and when our end is attained I won't
let him eat you up."

Hassim took the ring and inclined his head.

"It's time for us to be moving," said Lingard. He felt a slight tug at
his sleeve. He looked back and caught Immada in the act of pressing her
forehead to the grey flannel. "Don't, child!" he said, softly.

The sun rose above the faint blue line of the Shore of Refuge.

The hesitation was over. The man and the vessel, working in accord, had
found their way to the faint blue shore. Before the sun had descended
half-way to its rest the brig was anchored within a gunshot of the slimy
mangroves, in a place where for a hundred years or more no white man's
vessel had been entrusted to the hold of the bottom. The adventurers
of two centuries ago had no doubt known of that anchorage for they were
very ignorant and incomparably audacious. If it is true, as some say,
that the spirits of the dead haunt the places where the living have
sinned and toiled, then they might have seen a white long-boat, pulled
by eight oars and steered by a man sunburnt and bearded, a cabbage-leaf
hat on head, and pistols in his belt, skirting the black mud, full of
twisted roots, in search of a likely opening.

Creek after creek was passed and the boat crept on slowly like a
monstrous water-spider with a big body and eight slender legs. . . . Did
you follow with your ghostly eyes the quest of this obscure adventurer
of yesterday, you shades of forgotten adventurers who, in leather
jerkins and sweating under steel helmets, attacked with long rapiers the
palisades of the strange heathen, or, musket on shoulder and match in
cock, guarded timber blockhouses built upon the banks of rivers that
command good trade? You, who, wearied with the toil of fighting, slept
wrapped in frieze mantles on the sand of quiet beaches, dreaming of
fabulous diamonds and of a far-off home.

"Here's an opening," said Lingard to Hassim, who sat at his side, just
as the sun was setting away to his left. "Here's an opening big enough
for a ship. It's the entrance we are looking for, I believe. We shall
pull all night up this creek if necessary and it's the very devil if we
don't come upon Belarab's lair before daylight."

He shoved the tiller hard over and the boat, swerving sharply, vanished
from the coast.

And perhaps the ghosts of old adventurers nodded wisely their ghostly
heads and exchanged the ghost of a wistful smile.



V

"What's the matter with King Tom of late?" would ask someone when, all
the cards in a heap on the table, the traders lying back in their chairs
took a spell from a hard gamble.

"Tom has learned to hold his tongue, he must be up to some dam' good
thing," opined another; while a man with hooked features and of German
extraction who was supposed to be agent for a Dutch crockery house--the
famous "Sphinx" mark--broke in resentfully:

"Nefer mind him, shentlemens, he's matt, matt as a Marsh Hase. Dree
monats ago I call on board his prig to talk pizness. And he says like
dis--'Glear oudt.' 'Vat for?' I say. 'Glear oudt before I shuck you
oferboard.' Gott-for-dam! Iss dat the vay to talk pizness? I vant sell
him ein liddle case first chop grockery for trade and--"

"Ha, ha, ha! I don't blame Tom," interrupted the owner of a pearling
schooner, who had come into the Roads for stores. "Why, Mosey, there
isn't a mangy cannibal left in the whole of New Guinea that hasn't got a
cup and saucer of your providing. You've flooded the market, savee?"

Jorgenson stood by, a skeleton at the gaming table.

"Because you are a Dutch spy," he said, suddenly, in an awful tone.

The agent of the Sphinx mark jumped up in a sudden fury.

"Vat? Vat? Shentlemens, you all know me!" Not a muscle moved in
the faces around. "Know me," he stammered with wet lips. "Vat, funf
year--berfegtly acquaint--grockery--Verfluchte sponsher. Ich? Spy. Vat
for spy? Vordamte English pedlars!"

The door slammed. "Is that so?" asked a New England voice. "Why don't
you let daylight into him?"

"Oh, we can't do that here," murmured one of the players. "Your deal,
Trench, let us get on."

"Can't you?" drawled the New England voice. "You law-abiding,
get-a-summons, act-of--parliament lot of sons of Belial--can't you?
Now, look a-here, these Colt pistols I am selling--" He took the pearler
aside and could be heard talking earnestly in the corner. "See--you
load--and--see?" There were rapid clicks. "Simple, isn't it? And if
any trouble--say with your divers"--_click, click, click_--"Through and
through--like a sieve--warranted to cure the worst kind of cussedness
in any nigger. Yes, siree! A case of twenty-four or single specimens--as
you like. No? Shot-guns--rifles? No! Waal, I guess you're of no use to
me, but I could do a deal with that Tom--what d'ye call him? Where d'ye
catch him? Everywhere--eh? Waal--that's nowhere. But I shall find him
some day--yes, siree."

Jorgenson, utterly disregarded, looked down dreamily at the falling
cards. "Spy--I tell you," he muttered to himself. "If you want to know
anything, ask me."

When Lingard returned from Wajo--after an uncommonly long
absence--everyone remarked a great change. He was less talkative and
not so noisy, he was still hospitable but his hospitality was less
expansive, and the man who was never so happy as when discussing
impossibly wild projects with half a dozen congenial spirits often
showed a disinclination to meet his best friends. In a word, he
returned much less of a good fellow than he went away. His visits to the
Settlements were not less frequent, but much shorter; and when there he
was always in a hurry to be gone.

During two years the brig had, in her way, as hard a life of it as the
man. Swift and trim she flitted amongst the islands of little known
groups. She could be descried afar from lonely headlands, a white
speck travelling fast over the blue sea; the apathetic keepers of rare
lighthouses dotting the great highway to the east came to know the cut
of her topsails. They saw her passing east, passing west. They had faint
glimpses of her flying with masts aslant in the mist of a rain-squall,
or could observe her at leisure, upright and with shivering sails,
forging ahead through a long day of unsteady airs. Men saw her battling
with a heavy monsoon in the Bay of Bengal, lying becalmed in the Java
Sea, or gliding out suddenly from behind a point of land, graceful and
silent in the clear moonlight. Her activity was the subject of excited
but low-toned conversations, which would be interrupted when her master
appeared.

"Here he is. Came in last night," whispered the gossiping group.

Lingard did not see the covert glances of respect tempered by irony; he
nodded and passed on.

"Hey, Tom! No time for a drink?" would shout someone.

He would shake his head without looking back--far away already.

Florid and burly he could be seen, for a day or two, getting out of
dusty gharries, striding in sunshine from the Occidental Bank to the
Harbour Office, crossing the Esplanade, disappearing down a street of
Chinese shops, while at his elbow and as tall as himself, old Jorgenson
paced along, lean and faded, obstinate and disregarded, like a haunting
spirit from the past eager to step back into the life of men.

Lingard ignored this wreck of an adventurer, sticking to him closer than
his shadow, and the other did not try to attract attention. He waited
patiently at the doors of offices, would vanish at tiffin time, would
invariably turn up again in the evening and then he kept his place
till Lingard went aboard for the night. The police peons on duty looked
disdainfully at the phantom of Captain H. C. Jorgenson, Barque Wild
Rose, wandering on the silent quay or standing still for hours at the
edge of the sombre roadstead speckled by the anchor lights of ships--an
adventurous soul longing to recross the waters of oblivion.

The sampan-men, sculling lazily homeward past the black hull of the brig
at anchor, could hear far into the night the drawl of the New England
voice escaping through the lifted panes of the cabin skylight. Snatches
of nasal sentences floated in the stillness around the still craft.

"Yes, siree! Mexican war rifles--good as new--six in a case--my people
in Baltimore--that's so. Hundred and twenty rounds thrown in for
each specimen--marked to suit your requirements. Suppose--musical
instruments, this side up with care--how's that for your taste? No, no!
Cash down--my people in Balt--Shooting sea-gulls you say? Waal! It's
a risky business--see here--ten per cent. discount--it's out of my own
pocket--"

As time wore on, and nothing happened, at least nothing that one could
hear of, the excitement died out. Lingard's new attitude was accepted
as only "his way." There was nothing in it, maintained some. Others
dissented. A good deal of curiosity, however, remained and the faint
rumour of something big being in preparation followed him into every
harbour he went to, from Rangoon to Hongkong.

He felt nowhere so much at home as when his brig was anchored on the
inner side of the great stretch of shoals. The centre of his life had
shifted about four hundred miles--from the Straits of Malacca to the
Shore of Refuge--and when there he felt himself within the circle of
another existence, governed by his impulse, nearer his desire. Hassim
and Immada would come down to the coast and wait for him on the islet.
He always left them with regret.

At the end of the first stage in each trip, Jorgenson waited for him
at the top of the boat-stairs and without a word fell into step at his
elbow. They seldom exchanged three words in a day; but one evening about
six months before Lingard's last trip, as they were crossing the
short bridge over the canal where native craft lie moored in clusters,
Jorgenson lengthened his stride and came abreast. It was a moonlight
night and nothing stirred on earth but the shadows of high clouds.
Lingard took off his hat and drew in a long sigh in the tepid breeze.
Jorgenson spoke suddenly in a cautious tone: "The new Rajah Tulla
smokes opium and is sometimes dangerous to speak to. There is a lot of
discontent in Wajo amongst the big people."

"Good! Good!" whispered Lingard, excitedly, off his guard for once.
Then--"How the devil do you know anything about it?" he asked.

Jorgenson pointed at the mass of praus, coasting boats, and sampans
that, jammed up together in the canal, lay covered with mats and flooded
by the cold moonlight with here and there a dim lantern burning amongst
the confusion of high sterns, spars, masts and lowered sails.

"There!" he said, as they moved on, and their hatted and clothed shadows
fell heavily on the queer-shaped vessels that carry the fortunes of
brown men upon a shallow sea. "There! I can sit with them, I can talk
to them, I can come and go as I like. They know me now--it's
time-thirty-five years. Some of them give a plate of rice and a bit of
fish to the white man. That's all I get--after thirty-five years--given
up to them."

He was silent for a time.

"I was like you once," he added, and then laying his hand on Lingard's
sleeve, murmured--"Are you very deep in this thing?"

"To the very last cent," said Lingard, quietly, and looking straight
before him.

The glitter of the roadstead went out, and the masts of anchored ships
vanished in the invading shadow of a cloud.

"Drop it," whispered Jorgenson.

"I am in debt," said Lingard, slowly, and stood still.

"Drop it!"

"Never dropped anything in my life."

"Drop it!"

"By God, I won't!" cried Lingard, stamping his foot.

There was a pause.

"I was like you--once," repeated Jorgenson. "Five and thirty
years--never dropped anything. And what you can do is only child's play
to some jobs I have had on my hands--understand that--great man as you
are, Captain Lingard of the Lightning. . . . You should have seen the
Wild Rose," he added with a sudden break in his voice.

Lingard leaned over the guard-rail of the pier. Jorgenson came closer.

"I set fire to her with my own hands!" he said in a vibrating tone and
very low, as if making a monstrous confession.

"Poor devil," muttered Lingard, profoundly moved by the tragic enormity
of the act. "I suppose there was no way out?"

"I wasn't going to let her rot to pieces in some Dutch port," said
Jorgenson, gloomily. "Did you ever hear of Dawson?"

"Something--I don't remember now--" muttered Lingard, who felt a chill
down his back at the idea of his own vessel decaying slowly in some
Dutch port. "He died--didn't he?" he asked, absently, while he
wondered whether he would have the pluck to set fire to the brig--on an
emergency.

"Cut his throat on the beach below Fort Rotterdam," said Jorgenson. His
gaunt figure wavered in the unsteady moonshine as though made of mist.
"Yes. He broke some trade regulation or other and talked big about
law-courts and legal trials to the lieutenant of the Komet. 'Certainly,'
says the hound. 'Jurisdiction of Macassar, I will take your schooner
there.' Then coming into the roads he tows her full tilt on a ledge of
rocks on the north side--smash! When she was half full of water he takes
his hat off to Dawson. 'There's the shore,' says he--'go and get your
legal trial, you--Englishman--'" He lifted a long arm and shook his fist
at the moon which dodged suddenly behind a cloud. "All was lost. Poor
Dawson walked the streets for months barefooted and in rags. Then one
day he begged a knife from some charitable soul, went down to take a
last look at the wreck, and--"

"I don't interfere with the Dutch," interrupted Lingard, impatiently. "I
want Hassim to get back his own--"

"And suppose the Dutch want the things just so," returned Jorgenson.
"Anyway there is a devil in such work--drop it!"

"Look here," said Lingard, "I took these people off when they were in
their last ditch. That means something. I ought not to have meddled and
it would have been all over in a few hours. I must have meant something
when I interfered, whether I knew it or not. I meant it then--and did
not know it. Very well. I mean it now--and do know it. When you save
people from death you take a share in their life. That's how I look at
it."

Jorgenson shook his head.

"Foolishness!" he cried, then asked softly in a voice that trembled with
curiosity--"Where did you leave them?"

"With Belarab," breathed out Lingard. "You knew him in the old days."

"I knew him, I knew his father," burst out the other in an excited
whisper. "Whom did I not know? I knew Sentot when he was King of the
South Shore of Java and the Dutch offered a price for his head--enough
to make any man's fortune. He slept twice on board the Wild Rose when
things had begun to go wrong with him. I knew him, I knew all his
chiefs, the priests, the fighting men, the old regent who lost heart and
went over to the Dutch, I knew--" he stammered as if the words could not
come out, gave it up and sighed--"Belarab's father escaped with me," he
began again, quietly, "and joined the Padris in Sumatra. He rose to be
a great leader. Belarab was a youth then. Those were the times. I ranged
the coast--and laughed at the cruisers; I saw every battle fought in the
Battak country--and I saw the Dutch run; I was at the taking of Singal
and escaped. I was the white man who advised the chiefs of Manangkabo.
There was a lot about me in the Dutch papers at the time. They said I
was a Frenchman turned Mohammedan--" he swore a great oath, and, reeling
against the guard-rail, panted, muttering curses on newspapers.

"Well, Belarab has the job in hand," said Lingard, composedly. "He is
the chief man on the Shore of Refuge. There are others, of course. He
has sent messages north and south. We must have men."

"All the devils unchained," said Jorgenson. "You have done it and
now--look out--look out. . . ."

"Nothing can go wrong as far as I can see," argued Lingard. "They all
know what's to be done. I've got them in hand. You don't think Belarab
unsafe? Do you?"

"Haven't seen him for fifteen years--but the whole thing's unsafe,"
growled Jorgenson.

"I tell you I've fixed it so that nothing can go wrong. It would be
better if I had a white man over there to look after things generally.
There is a good lot of stores and arms--and Belarab would bear
watching--no doubt. Are you in any want?" he added, putting his hand in
his pocket.

"No, there's plenty to eat in the house," answered Jorgenson, curtly.
"Drop it," he burst out. "It would be better for you to jump overboard
at once. Look at me. I came out a boy of eighteen. I can speak English,
I can speak Dutch, I can speak every cursed lingo of these islands--I
remember things that would make your hair stand on end--but I have
forgotten the language of my own country. I've traded, I've fought, I
never broke my word to white or native. And, look at me. If it hadn't
been for the girl I would have died in a ditch ten years ago. Everything
left me--youth, money, strength, hope--the very sleep. But she stuck by
the wreck."

"That says a lot for her and something for you," said Lingard, cheerily.

Jorgenson shook his head.

"That's the worst of all," he said with slow emphasis. "That's the
end. I came to them from the other side of the earth and they took me
and--see what they made of me."

"What place do you belong to?" asked Lingard.

"Tromso," groaned out Jorgenson; "I will never see snow again," he
sobbed out, his face in his hands.

Lingard looked at him in silence.

"Would you come with me?" he said. "As I told you, I am in want of a--"

"I would see you damned first!" broke out the other, savagely. "I am
an old white loafer, but you don't get me to meddle in their infernal
affairs. They have a devil of their own--"

"The thing simply can't fail. I've calculated every move. I've guarded
against everything. I am no fool."

"Yes--you are. Good-night."

"Well, good-bye," said Lingard, calmly.

He stepped into his boat, and Jorgenson walked up the jetty. Lingard,
clearing the yoke lines, heard him call out from a distance:

"Drop it!"

"I sail before sunrise," he shouted in answer, and went on board.

When he came up from his cabin after an uneasy night, it was dark yet. A
lank figure strolled across the deck.

"Here I am," said Jorgenson, huskily. "Die there or here--all one. But,
if I die there, remember the girl must eat."

Lingard was one of the few who had seen Jorgenson's girl. She had a
wrinkled brown face, a lot of tangled grey hair, a few black stumps
of teeth, and had been married to him lately by an enterprising young
missionary from Bukit Timah. What her appearance might have been once
when Jorgenson gave for her three hundred dollars and several brass
guns, it was impossible to say. All that was left of her youth was a
pair of eyes, undimmed and mournful, which, when she was alone, seemed
to look stonily into the past of two lives. When Jorgenson was near
they followed his movements with anxious pertinacity. And now within the
sarong thrown over the grey head they were dropping unseen tears while
Jorgenson's girl rocked herself to and fro, squatting alone in a corner
of the dark hut.

"Don't you worry about that," said Lingard, grasping Jorgenson's hand.
"She shall want for nothing. All I expect you to do is to look a little
after Belarab's morals when I am away. One more trip I must make, and
then we shall be ready to go ahead. I've foreseen every single thing.
Trust me!"

In this way did the restless shade of Captain H. C. Jorgenson recross
the water of oblivion to step back into the life of men.



VI

For two years, Lingard, who had thrown himself body and soul into the
great enterprise, had lived in the long intoxication of slowly preparing
success. No thought of failure had crossed his mind, and no price
appeared too heavy to pay for such a magnificent achievement. It was
nothing less than bringing Hassim triumphantly back to that country
seen once at night under the low clouds and in the incessant tumult of
thunder. When at the conclusion of some long talk with Hassim, who for
the twentieth time perhaps had related the story of his wrongs and his
struggle, he lifted his big arm and shaking his fist above his head,
shouted: "We will stir them up. We will wake up the country!" he was,
without knowing it in the least, making a complete confession of the
idealism hidden under the simplicity of his strength. He would wake up
the country! That was the fundamental and unconscious emotion on which
were engrafted his need of action, the primitive sense of what was due
to justice, to gratitude, to friendship, the sentimental pity for the
hard lot of Immada--poor child--the proud conviction that of all the
men in the world, in his world, he alone had the means and the pluck "to
lift up the big end" of such an adventure.

Money was wanted and men were wanted, and he had obtained enough of both
in two years from that day when, pistols in his belt and a cabbage-leaf
hat on head, he had unexpectedly, and at early dawn, confronted in
perfect silence that mysterious Belarab, who himself was for a moment
too astounded for speech at the sight of a white face.

The sun had not yet cleared the forests of the interior, but a sky
already full of light arched over a dark oval lagoon, over wide fields
as yet full of shadows, that seemed slowly changing into the whiteness
of the morning mist. There were huts, fences, palisades, big houses
that, erected on lofty piles, were seen above the tops of clustered
fruit trees, as if suspended in the air.

Such was the aspect of Belarab's settlement when Lingard set his eyes
on it for the first time. There were all these things, a great number
of faces at the back of the spare and muffled-up figure confronting him,
and in the swiftly increasing light a complete stillness that made the
murmur of the word "Marhaba" (welcome), pronounced at last by the chief,
perfectly audible to every one of his followers. The bodyguards who
stood about him in black skull-caps and with long-shafted lances,
preserved an impassive aspect. Across open spaces men could be seen
running to the waterside. A group of women standing on a low knoll gazed
intently, and nothing of them but the heads showed above the unstirring
stalks of a maize field. Suddenly within a cluster of empty huts near
by the voice of an invisible hag was heard scolding with shrill fury an
invisible young girl:

"Strangers! You want to see the strangers? O devoid of all decency!
Must I so lame and old husk the rice alone? May evil befall thee and the
strangers! May they never find favour! May they be pursued with swords!
I am old. I am old. There is no good in strangers! O girl! May they
burn."

"Welcome," repeated Belarab, gravely, and looking straight into
Lingard's eyes.

Lingard spent six days that time in Belarab's settlement. Of these,
three were passed in observing each other without a question being asked
or a hint given as to the object in view. Lingard lounged on the fine
mats with which the chief had furnished a small bamboo house outside a
fortified enclosure, where a white flag with a green border fluttered on
a high and slender pole but still below the walls of long, high-roofed
buildings, raised forty feet or more on hard-wood posts.

Far away the inland forests were tinted a shimmering blue, like the
forests of a dream. On the seaward side the belt of great trunks and
matted undergrowth came to the western shore of the oval lagoon; and in
the pure freshness of the air the groups of brown houses reflected in
the water or seen above the waving green of the fields, the clumps of
palm trees, the fenced-in plantations, the groves of fruit trees, made
up a picture of sumptuous prosperity.

Above the buildings, the men, the women, the still sheet of water and
the great plain of crops glistening with dew, stretched the exalted,
the miraculous peace of a cloudless sky. And no road seemed to lead
into this country of splendour and stillness. One could not believe the
unquiet sea was so near, with its gifts and its unending menace. Even
during the months of storms, the great clamour rising from the whitened
expanse of the Shallows dwelt high in the air in a vast murmur, now
feeble now stronger, that seemed to swing back and forth on the wind
above the earth without any one being able to tell whence it came. It
was like the solemn chant of a waterfall swelling and dying away above
the woods, the fields, above the roofs of houses and the heads of men,
above the secret peace of that hidden and flourishing settlement of
vanquished fanatics, fugitives, and outcasts.

Every afternoon Belarab, followed by an escort that stopped outside
the door, entered alone the house of his guest. He gave the salutation,
inquired after his health, conversed about insignificant things with an
inscrutable mien. But all the time the steadfast gaze of his thoughtful
eyes seemed to seek the truth within that white face. In the cool of
the evening, before the sun had set, they talked together, passing and
repassing between the rugged pillars of the grove near the gate of the
stockade. The escort away in the oblique sunlight, followed with their
eyes the strolling figures appearing and vanishing behind the trees.
Many words were pronounced, but nothing was said that would disclose
the thoughts of the two men. They clasped hands demonstratively before
separating, and the heavy slam of the gate was followed by the triple
thud of the wooden bars dropped into iron clamps.

On the third night, Lingard was awakened from a light sleep by the sound
of whispering outside. A black shadow obscured the stars in the doorway,
and a man entering suddenly, stood above his couch while another could
be seen squatting--a dark lump on the threshold of the hut.

"Fear not. I am Belarab," said a cautious voice.

"I was not afraid," whispered Lingard. "It is the man coming in the dark
and without warning who is in danger."

"And did you not come to me without warning? I said 'welcome'--it was as
easy for me to say 'kill him.'"

"You were within reach of my arm. We would have died together," retorted
Lingard, quietly.

The other clicked his tongue twice, and his indistinct shape seemed to
sink half-way through the floor.

"It was not written thus before we were born," he said, sitting
cross-legged near the mats, and in a deadened voice. "Therefore you are
my guest. Let the talk between us be straight like the shaft of a spear
and shorter than the remainder of this night. What do you want?"

"First, your long life," answered Lingard, leaning forward toward the
gleam of a pair of eyes, "and then--your help."



VII

The faint murmur of the words spoken on that night lingered for a long
time in Lingard's ears, more persistent than the memory of an uproar; he
looked with a fixed gaze at the stars burning peacefully in the square
of the doorway, while after listening in silence to all he had to say,
Belarab, as if seduced by the strength and audacity of the white man,
opened his heart without reserve. He talked of his youth surrounded by
the fury of fanaticism and war, of battles on the hills, of
advances through the forests, of men's unswerving piety, of their
unextinguishable hate. Not a single wandering cloud obscured the gentle
splendour of the rectangular patch of starlight framed in the opaque
blackness of the hut. Belarab murmured on of a succession of reverses,
of the ring of disasters narrowing round men's fading hopes and
undiminished courage. He whispered of defeat and flight, of the days
of despair, of the nights without sleep, of unending pursuit, of the
bewildered horror and sombre fury, of their women and children killed in
the stockade before the besieged sallied forth to die.

"I have seen all this before I was in years a man," he cried, low.

His voice vibrated. In the pause that succeeded they heard a light sigh
of the sleeping follower who, clasping his legs above his ankles, rested
his forehead on his knees.

"And there was amongst us," began Belarab again, "one white man who
remained to the end, who was faithful with his strength, with his
courage, with his wisdom. A great man. He had great riches but a greater
heart."

The memory of Jorgenson, emaciated and grey-haired, and trying to borrow
five dollars to get something to eat for the girl, passed before Lingard
suddenly upon the pacific glitter of the stars.

"He resembled you," pursued Belarab, abruptly. "We escaped with him, and
in his ship came here. It was a solitude. The forest came near to the
sheet of water, the rank grass waved upon the heads of tall men. Telal,
my father, died of weariness; we were only a few, and we all nearly died
of trouble and sadness--here. On this spot! And no enemies could tell
where we had gone. It was the Shore of Refuge--and starvation."

He droned on in the night, with rising and falling inflections. He told
how his desperate companions wanted to go out and die fighting on the
sea against the ships from the west, the ships with high sides and white
sails; and how, unflinching and alone, he kept them battling with the
thorny bush, with the rank grass, with the soaring and enormous trees.
Lingard, leaning on his elbow and staring through the door, recalled
the image of the wide fields outside, sleeping now, in an immensity of
serenity and starlight. This quiet and almost invisible talker had done
it all; in him was the origin, the creation, the fate; and in the
wonder of that thought the shadowy murmuring figure acquired a gigantic
greatness of significance, as if it had been the embodiment of some
natural force, of a force forever masterful and undying.

"And even now my life is unsafe as if I were their enemy," said Belarab,
mournfully. "Eyes do not kill, nor angry words; and curses have no
power, else the Dutch would not grow fat living on our land, and I would
not be alive to-night. Do you understand? Have you seen the men who
fought in the old days? They have not forgotten the times of war. I have
given them homes and quiet hearts and full bellies. I alone. And they
curse my name in the dark, in each other's ears--because they can never
forget."

This man, whose talk had been of war and violence, discovered
unexpectedly a passionate craving for security and peace. No one would
understand him. Some of those who would not understand had died. His
white teeth gleamed cruelly in the dark. But there were others he could
not kill. The fools. He wanted the land and the people in it to be
forgotten as if they had been swallowed by the sea. But they had neither
wisdom nor patience. Could they not wait? They chanted prayers five
times every day, but they had not the faith.

"Death comes to all--and to the believers the end of trouble. But you
white men who are too strong for us, you also die. You die. And there
is a Paradise as great as all earth and all Heaven together, but not for
you--not for you!"

Lingard, amazed, listened without a sound. The sleeper snored faintly.
Belarab continued very calm after this almost involuntary outburst of
a consoling belief. He explained that he wanted somebody at his back,
somebody strong and whom he could trust, some outside force that would
awe the unruly, that would inspire their ignorance with fear, and make
his rule secure. He groped in the dark and seizing Lingard's arm above
the elbow pressed it with force--then let go. And Lingard understood why
his temerity had been so successful.

Then and there, in return for Lingard's open support, a few guns and a
little money, Belarab promised his help for the conquest of Wajo. There
was no doubt he could find men who would fight. He could send messages
to friends at a distance and there were also many unquiet spirits in his
own district ready for any adventure. He spoke of these men with
fierce contempt and an angry tenderness, in mingled accents of envy and
disdain. He was wearied by their folly, by their recklessness, by their
impatience--and he seemed to resent these as if they had been gifts of
which he himself had been deprived by the fatality of his wisdom. They
would fight. When the time came Lingard had only to speak, and a sign
from him would send them to a vain death--those men who could not wait
for an opportunity on this earth or for the eternal revenge of Heaven.

He ceased, and towered upright in the gloom.

"Awake!" he exclaimed, low, bending over the sleeping man.

Their black shapes, passing in turn, eclipsed for two successive moments
the glitter of the stars, and Lingard, who had not stirred, remained
alone. He lay back full length with an arm thrown across his eyes.

When three days afterward he left Belarab's settlement, it was on a calm
morning of unclouded peace. All the boats of the brig came up into the
lagoon armed and manned to make more impressive the solemn fact of a
concluded alliance. A staring crowd watched his imposing departure in
profound silence and with an increased sense of wonder at the mystery of
his apparition. The progress of the boats was smooth and slow while they
crossed the wide lagoon. Lingard looked back once. A great stillness had
laid its hand over the earth, the sky, and the men; upon the immobility
of landscape and people. Hassim and Immada, standing out clearly by
the side of the chief, raised their arms in a last salutation; and the
distant gesture appeared sad, futile, lost in space, like a sign of
distress made by castaways in the vain hope of an impossible help.

He departed, he returned, he went away again, and each time those two
figures, lonely on some sandbank of the Shallows, made at him the same
futile sign of greeting or good-bye. Their arms at each movement seemed
to draw closer around his heart the bonds of a protecting affection.
He worked prosaically, earning money to pay the cost of the romantic
necessity that had invaded his life. And the money ran like water out of
his hands. The owner of the New England voice remitted not a little of
it to his people in Baltimore. But import houses in the ports of the
Far East had their share. It paid for a fast prau which, commanded by
Jaffir, sailed into unfrequented bays and up unexplored rivers, carrying
secret messages, important news, generous bribes. A good part of it went
to the purchase of the Emma.

The Emma was a battered and decrepit old schooner that, in the decline
of her existence, had been much ill-used by a paunchy white trader of
cunning and gluttonous aspect. This man boasted outrageously afterward
of the good price he had got "for that rotten old hooker of mine--you
know." The Emma left port mysteriously in company with the brig and
henceforth vanished from the seas forever. Lingard had her towed up the
creek and ran her aground upon that shore of the lagoon farthest from
Belarab's settlement. There had been at that time a great rise of
waters, which retiring soon after left the old craft cradled in the mud,
with her bows grounded high between the trunks of two big trees, and
leaning over a little as though after a hard life she had settled
wearily to an everlasting rest. There, a few months later, Jorgenson
found her when, called back into the life of men, he reappeared,
together with Lingard, in the Land of Refuge.

"She is better than a fort on shore," said Lingard, as side by side they
leant over the taffrail, looking across the lagoon on the houses and
palm groves of the settlement. "All the guns and powder I have got
together so far are stored in her. Good idea, wasn't it? There will
be, perhaps, no other such flood for years, and now they can't come
alongside unless right under the counter, and only one boat at a time.
I think you are perfectly safe here; you could keep off a whole fleet of
boats; she isn't easy to set fire to; the forest in front is better than
a wall. Well?"

Jorgenson assented in grunts. He looked at the desolate emptiness of the
decks, at the stripped spars, at the dead body of the dismantled little
vessel that would know the life of the seas no more. The gloom of the
forest fell on her, mournful like a winding sheet. The bushes of the
bank tapped their twigs on the bluff of her bows, and a pendent spike of
tiny brown blossoms swung to and fro over the ruins of her windlass.

Hassim's companions garrisoned the old hulk, and Jorgenson, left
in charge, prowled about from stem to stern, taciturn and anxiously
faithful to his trust. He had been received with astonishment,
respect--and awe. Belarab visited him often. Sometimes those whom he had
known in their prime years ago, during a struggle for faith and life,
would come to talk with the white man. Their voices were like the echoes
of stirring events, in the pale glamour of a youth gone by. They nodded
their old heads. Do you remember?--they said. He remembered only too
well! He was like a man raised from the dead, for whom the fascinating
trust in the power of life is tainted by the black scepticism of the
grave.

Only at times the invincible belief in the reality of existence would
come back, insidious and inspiring. He squared his shoulders, held
himself straight, and walked with a firmer step. He felt a glow within
him and the quickened beat of his heart. Then he calculated in silent
excitement Lingard's chances of success, and he lived for a time with
the life of that other man who knew nothing of the black scepticism of
the grave. The chances were good, very good.

"I should like to see it through," Jorgenson muttered to himself
ardently; and his lustreless eyes would flash for a moment.



PART III. THE CAPTURE

I

"Some people," said Lingard, "go about the world with their eyes shut.
You are right. The sea is free to all of us. Some work on it, and some
play the fool on it--and I don't care. Only you may take it from me
that I will let no man's play interfere with my work. You want me to
understand you are a very great man--"

Mr. Travers smiled, coldly.

"Oh, yes," continued Lingard, "I understand that well enough. But
remember you are very far from home, while I, here, I am where I belong.
And I belong where I am. I am just Tom Lingard, no more, no less,
wherever I happen to be, and--you may ask--" A sweep of his hand along
the western horizon entrusted with perfect confidence the remainder of
his speech to the dumb testimony of the sea.

He had been on board the yacht for more than an hour, and nothing,
for him, had come of it but the birth of an unreasoning hate. To the
unconscious demand of these people's presence, of their ignorance, of
their faces, of their voices, of their eyes, he had nothing to give but
a resentment that had in it a germ of reckless violence. He could tell
them nothing because he had not the means. Their coming at this moment,
when he had wandered beyond that circle which race, memories, early
associations, all the essential conditions of one's origin, trace round
every man's life, deprived him in a manner of the power of speech. He
was confounded. It was like meeting exacting spectres in a desert.

He stared at the open sea, his arms crossed, with a reflective
fierceness. His very appearance made him utterly different from everyone
on board that vessel. The grey shirt, the blue sash, one rolled-up
sleeve baring a sculptural forearm, the negligent masterfulness of his
tone and pose were very distasteful to Mr. Travers, who, having made
up his mind to wait for some kind of official assistance, regarded
the intrusion of that inexplicable man with suspicion. From the moment
Lingard came on board the yacht, every eye in that vessel had been fixed
upon him. Only Carter, within earshot and leaning with his elbow upon
the rail, stared down at the deck as if overcome with drowsiness or lost
in thought.

Of the three other persons aft, Mr. Travers kept his hands in the side
pockets of his jacket and did not conceal his growing disgust.

On the other side of the deck, a lady, in a long chair, had a passive
attitude that to Mr. d'Alcacer, standing near her, seemed characteristic
of the manner in which she accepted the necessities of existence. Years
before, as an attache of his Embassy in London, he had found her an
interesting hostess. She was even more interesting now, since a chance
meeting and Mr. Travers' offer of a passage to Batavia had given him an
opportunity of studying the various shades of scorn which he suspected
to be the secret of her acquiescence in the shallowness of events and
the monotony of a worldly existence.

There were things that from the first he had not been able to
understand; for instance, why she should have married Mr. Travers. It
must have been from ambition. He could not help feeling that such a
successful mistake would explain completely her scorn and also her
acquiescence. The meeting in Manila had been utterly unexpected to
him, and he accounted for it to his uncle, the Governor-General of the
colony, by pointing out that Englishmen, when worsted in the struggle
of love or politics, travel extensively, as if by encompassing a large
portion of earth's surface they hoped to gather fresh strength for a
renewed contest. As to himself, he judged--but did not say--that his
contest with fate was ended, though he also travelled, leaving behind
him in the capitals of Europe a story in which there was nothing
scandalous but the publicity of an excessive feeling, and nothing more
tragic than the early death of a woman whose brilliant perfections were
no better known to the great world than the discreet and passionate
devotion she had innocently inspired.

The invitation to join the yacht was the culminating point of many
exchanged civilities, and was mainly prompted by Mr. Travers' desire
to have somebody to talk to. D'Alcacer had accepted with the reckless
indifference of a man to whom one method of flight from a relentless
enemy is as good as another. Certainly the prospect of listening to long
monologues on commerce, administration, and politics did not promise
much alleviation to his sorrow; and he could not expect much else from
Mr. Travers, whose life and thought, ignorant of human passion, were
devoted to extracting the greatest possible amount of personal advantage
from human institutions. D'Alcacer found, however, that he could attain
a measure of forgetfulness--the most precious thing for him now--in the
society of Edith Travers.

She had awakened his curiosity, which he thought nothing and nobody on
earth could do any more.

These two talked of things indifferent and interesting, certainly not
connected with human institutions, and only very slightly with human
passions; but d'Alcacer could not help being made aware of her latent
capacity for sympathy developed in those who are disenchanted with life
or death. How far she was disenchanted he did not know, and did
not attempt to find out. This restraint was imposed upon him by the
chivalrous respect he had for the secrets of women and by a conviction
that deep feeling is often impenetrably obscure, even to those it
masters for their inspiration or their ruin. He believed that even she
herself would never know; but his grave curiosity was satisfied by the
observation of her mental state, and he was not sorry that the stranding
of the yacht prolonged his opportunity.

Time passed on that mudbank as well as anywhere else, and it was not
from a multiplicity of events, but from the lapse of time alone, that
he expected relief. Yet in the sameness of days upon the Shallows, time
flowing ceaselessly, flowed imperceptibly; and, since every man clings
to his own, be it joy, be it grief, he was pleased after the unrest
of his wanderings to be able to fancy the whole universe and even time
itself apparently come to a standstill; as if unwilling to take him away
further from his sorrow, which was fading indeed but undiminished, as
things fade, not in the distance but in the mist.


II

D'Alcacer was a man of nearly forty, lean and sallow, with hollow eyes
and a drooping brown moustache. His gaze was penetrating and direct, his
smile frequent and fleeting. He observed Lingard with great interest.
He was attracted by that elusive something--a line, a fold, perhaps
the form of the eye, the droop of an eyelid, the curve of a cheek, that
trifling trait which on no two faces on earth is alike, that in each
face is the very foundation of expression, as if, all the rest being
heredity, mystery, or accident, it alone had been shaped consciously by
the soul within.

Now and then he bent slightly over the slow beat of a red fan in the
curve of the deck chair to say a few words to Mrs. Travers, who answered
him without looking up, without a modulation of tone or a play of
feature, as if she had spoken from behind the veil of an immense
indifference stretched between her and all men, between her heart and
the meaning of events, between her eyes and the shallow sea which, like
her gaze, appeared profound, forever stilled, and seemed, far off in the
distance of a faint horizon, beyond the reach of eye, beyond the power
of hand or voice, to lose itself in the sky.

Mr. Travers stepped aside, and speaking to Carter, overwhelmed him with
reproaches.

"You misunderstood your instructions," murmured Mr. Travers rapidly.
"Why did you bring this man here? I am surprised--"

"Not half so much as I was last night," growled the young seaman,
without any reverence in his tone, very provoking to Mr. Travers.

"I perceive now you were totally unfit for the mission I entrusted you
with," went on the owner of the yacht.

"It's he who got hold of me," said Carter. "Haven't you heard him
yourself, sir?"

"Nonsense," whispered Mr. Travers, angrily. "Have you any idea what his
intentions may be?"

"I half believe," answered Carter, "that his intention was to shoot me
in his cabin last night if I--"

"That's not the point," interrupted Mr. Travers. "Have you any opinion
as to his motives in coming here?"

Carter raised his weary, bloodshot eyes in a face scarlet and peeling as
though it had been licked by a flame. "I know no more than you do, sir.
Last night when he had me in that cabin of his, he said he would just as
soon shoot me as let me go to look for any other help. It looks as if
he were desperately bent upon getting a lot of salvage money out of a
stranded yacht."

Mr. Travers turned away, and, for a moment, appeared immersed in deep
thought. This accident of stranding upon a deserted coast was annoying
as a loss of time. He tried to minimize it by putting in order the notes
collected during the year's travel in the East. He had sent off for
assistance; his sailing-master, very crestfallen, made bold to say that
the yacht would most likely float at the next spring tides; d'Alcacer,
a person of undoubted nobility though of inferior principles, was better
than no company, in so far at least that he could play picquet.

Mr. Travers had made up his mind to wait. Then suddenly this rough
man, looking as if he had stepped out from an engraving in a book about
buccaneers, broke in upon his resignation with mysterious allusions to
danger, which sounded absurd yet were disturbing; with dark and warning
sentences that sounded like disguised menaces.

Mr. Travers had a heavy and rather long chin which he shaved. His eyes
were blue, a chill, naive blue. He faced Lingard untouched by travel,
without a mark of weariness or exposure, with the air of having been
born invulnerable. He had a full, pale face; and his complexion was
perfectly colourless, yet amazingly fresh, as if he had been reared in
the shade.

He thought:

"I must put an end to this preposterous hectoring. I won't be
intimidated into paying for services I don't need."

Mr. Travers felt a strong disgust for the impudence of the attempt; and
all at once, incredibly, strangely, as though the thing, like a contest
with a rival or a friend, had been of profound importance to his career,
he felt inexplicably elated at the thought of defeating the secret
purposes of that man.

Lingard, unconscious of everything and everybody, contemplated the sea.
He had grown on it, he had lived with it; it had enticed him away from
home; on it his thoughts had expanded and his hand had found work to do.
It had suggested endeavour, it had made him owner and commander of the
finest brig afloat; it had lulled him into a belief in himself, in
his strength, in his luck--and suddenly, by its complicity in a fatal
accident, it had brought him face to face with a difficulty that looked
like the beginning of disaster.

He had said all he dared to say--and he perceived that he was not
believed. This had not happened to him for years. It had never happened.
It bewildered him as if he had suddenly discovered that he was no longer
himself. He had come to them and had said: "I mean well by you. I am
Tom Lingard--" and they did not believe! Before such scepticism he was
helpless, because he had never imagined it possible. He had said: "You
are in the way of my work. You are in the way of what I can not give up
for any one; but I will see you through all safe if you will only
trust me--me, Tom Lingard." And they would not believe him! It was
intolerable. He imagined himself sweeping their disbelief out of his
way. And why not? He did not know them, he did not care for them, he
did not even need to lift his hand against them! All he had to do was to
shut his eyes now for a day or two, and afterward he could forget that
he had ever seen them. It would be easy. Let their disbelief vanish,
their folly disappear, their bodies perish. . . . It was that--or ruin!



III

Lingard's gaze, detaching itself from the silent sea, travelled slowly
over the silent figures clustering forward, over the faces of the seamen
attentive and surprised, over the faces never seen before yet suggesting
old days--his youth--other seas--the distant shores of early memories.
Mr. Travers gave a start also, and the hand which had been busy with
his left whisker went into the pocket of his jacket, as though he
had plucked out something worth keeping. He made a quick step toward
Lingard.

"I don't see my way to utilize your services," he said, with cold
finality.

Lingard, grasping his beard, looked down at him thoughtfully for a short
time.

"Perhaps it's just as well," he said, very slowly, "because I did not
offer my services. I've offered to take you on board my brig for a
few days, as your only chance of safety. And you asked me what were
my motives. My motives! If you don't see them they are not for you to
know."

And these men who, two hours before had never seen each other, stood
for a moment close together, antagonistic, as if they had been life-long
enemies, one short, dapper and glaring upward, the other towering
heavily, and looking down in contempt and anger.

Mr. d'Alcacer, without taking his eyes off them, bent low over the deck
chair.

"Have you ever seen a man dashing himself at a stone wall?" he asked,
confidentially.

"No," said Mrs. Travers, gazing straight before her above the slow
flutter of the fan. "No, I did not know it was ever done; men burrow
under or slip round quietly while they look the other way."

"Ah! you define diplomacy," murmured d'Alcacer. "A little of it here
would do no harm. But our picturesque visitor has none of it. I've a
great liking for him."

"Already!" breathed out Mrs. Travers, with a smile that touched her lips
with its bright wing and was flown almost before it could be seen.

"There is liking at first sight," affirmed d'Alcacer, "as well as love
at first sight--the coup de foudre--you know."

She looked up for a moment, and he went on, gravely: "I think it is the
truest, the most profound of sentiments. You do not love because of what
is in the other. You love because of something that is in you--something
alive--in yourself." He struck his breast lightly with the tip of one
finger. "A capacity in you. And not everyone may have it--not everyone
deserves to be touched by fire from heaven."

"And die," she said.

He made a slight movement.

"Who can tell? That is as it may be. But it is always a privilege, even
if one must live a little after being burnt."

Through the silence between them, Mr. Travers' voice came plainly,
saying with irritation:

"I've told you already that I do not want you. I've sent a messenger to
the governor of the Straits. Don't be importunate."

Then Lingard, standing with his back to them, growled out something
which must have exasperated Mr. Travers, because his voice was pitched
higher:

"You are playing a dangerous game, I warn you. Sir John, as it happens,
is a personal friend of mine. He will send a cruiser--" and Lingard
interrupted recklessly loud:

"As long as she does not get here for the next ten days, I don't care.
Cruisers are scarce just now in the Straits; and to turn my back on you
is no hanging matter anyhow. I would risk that, and more! Do you hear?
And more!"

He stamped his foot heavily, Mr. Travers stepped back.

"You will gain nothing by trying to frighten me," he said. "I don't know
who you are."

Every eye in the yacht was wide open. The men, crowded upon each
other, stared stupidly like a flock of sheep. Mr. Travers pulled out
a handkerchief and passed it over his forehead. The face of the
sailing-master who leaned against the main mast--as near as he dared
to approach the gentry--was shining and crimson between white whiskers,
like a glowing coal between two patches of snow.

D'Alcacer whispered:

"It is a quarrel, and the picturesque man is angry. He is hurt."

Mrs. Travers' fan rested on her knees, and she sat still as if waiting
to hear more.

"Do you think I ought to make an effort for peace?" asked d'Alcacer.

She did not answer, and after waiting a little, he insisted:

"What is your opinion? Shall I try to mediate--as a neutral, as a
benevolent neutral? I like that man with the beard."

The interchange of angry phrases went on aloud, amidst general
consternation.

"I would turn my back on you only I am thinking of these poor devils
here," growled Lingard, furiously. "Did you ask them how they feel about
it?"

"I ask no one," spluttered Mr. Travers. "Everybody here depends on my
judgment."

"I am sorry for them then," pronounced Lingard with sudden deliberation,
and leaning forward with his arms crossed on his breast.

At this Mr. Travers positively jumped, and forgot himself so far as to
shout:

"You are an impudent fellow. I have nothing more to say to you."

D'Alcacer, after muttering to himself, "This is getting serious," made a
movement, and could not believe his ears when he heard Mrs. Travers say
rapidly with a kind of fervour:

"Don't go, pray; don't stop them. Oh! This is truth--this is
anger--something real at last."

D'Alcacer leaned back at once against the rail.

Then Mr. Travers, with one arm extended, repeated very loudly:

"Nothing more to say. Leave my ship at once!"

And directly the black dog, stretched at his wife's feet, muzzle on
paws and blinking yellow eyes, growled discontentedly at the noise. Mrs.
Travers laughed a faint, bright laugh, that seemed to escape, to glide,
to dart between her white teeth. D'Alcacer, concealing his amazement,
was looking down at her gravely: and after a slight gasp, she said with
little bursts of merriment between every few words:

"No, but this is--such--such a fresh experience for me to hear--to see
something--genuine and human. Ah! ah! one would think they had waited
all their lives for this opportunity--ah! ah! ah! All their lives--for
this! ah! ah! ah!"

These strange words struck d'Alcacer as perfectly just, as throwing an
unexpected light. But after a smile, he said, seriously:

"This reality may go too far. A man who looks so picturesque is capable
of anything. Allow me--" And he left her side, moving toward Lingard,
loose-limbed and gaunt, yet having in his whole bearing, in his walk, in
every leisurely movement, an air of distinction and ceremony.

Lingard spun round with aggressive mien to the light touch on his
shoulder, but as soon as he took his eyes off Mr. Travers, his anger
fell, seemed to sink without a sound at his feet like a rejected
garment.

"Pardon me," said d'Alcacer, composedly. The slight wave of his hand was
hardly more than an indication, the beginning of a conciliating gesture.
"Pardon me; but this is a matter requiring perfect confidence on both
sides. Don Martin, here, who is a person of importance. . . ."

"I've spoken my mind plainly. I have said as much as I dare. On my word
I have," declared Lingard with an air of good temper.

"Ah!" said d'Alcacer, reflectively, "then your reserve is a matter of
pledged faith--of--of honour?"

Lingard also appeared thoughtful for a moment.

"You may put it that way. And I owe nothing to a man who couldn't see my
hand when I put it out to him as I came aboard."

"You have so much the advantage of us here," replied d'Alcacer, "that
you may well be generous and forget that oversight; and then just a
little more confidence. . . ."

"My dear d'Alcacer, you are absurd," broke in Mr. Travers, in a calm
voice but with white lips. "I did not come out all this way to shake
hands promiscuously and receive confidences from the first adventurer
that comes along."

D'Alcacer stepped back with an almost imperceptible inclination of the
head at Lingard, who stood for a moment with twitching face.

"I _am_ an adventurer," he burst out, "and if I hadn't been an
adventurer, I would have had to starve or work at home for such people
as you. If I weren't an adventurer, you would be most likely lying dead
on this deck with your cut throat gaping at the sky."

Mr. Travers waved this speech away. But others also had heard. Carter
listened watchfully and something, some alarming notion seemed to dawn
all at once upon the thick little sailing-master, who rushed on his
short legs, and tugging at Carter's sleeve, stammered desperately:

"What's he saying? Who's he? What's up? Are the natives unfriendly? My
book says--'Natives friendly all along this coast!' My book says--"

Carter, who had glanced over the side, jerked his arm free.

"You go down into the pantry, where you belong, Skipper, and read that
bit about the natives over again," he said to his superior officer, with
savage contempt. "I'll be hanged if some of them ain't coming aboard now
to eat you--book and all. Get out of the way, and let the gentlemen have
the first chance of a row."

Then addressing Lingard, he drawled in his old way:

"That crazy mate of yours has sent your boat back, with a couple of
visitors in her, too."

Before he apprehended plainly the meaning of these words, Lingard caught
sight of two heads rising above the rail, the head of Hassim and the
head of Immada. Then their bodies ascended into view as though these two
beings had gradually emerged from the Shallows. They stood for a moment
on the platform looking down on the deck as if about to step into the
unknown, then descended and walking aft entered the half-light under the
awning shading the luxurious surroundings, the complicated emotions of
the, to them, inconceivable existences.

Lingard without waiting a moment cried:

"What news, O Rajah?"

Hassim's eyes made the round of the schooner's decks. He had left his
gun in the boat and advanced empty handed, with a tranquil assurance as
if bearing a welcome offering in the faint smile of his lips. Immada,
half hidden behind his shoulder, followed lightly, her elbows pressed
close to her side. The thick fringe of her eyelashes was dropped like
a veil; she looked youthful and brooding; she had an aspect of shy
resolution.

They stopped within arm's length of the whites, and for some time nobody
said a word. Then Hassim gave Lingard a significant glance, and uttered
rapidly with a slight toss of the head that indicated in a manner the
whole of the yacht:

"I see no guns!"

"N--no!" said Lingard, looking suddenly confused. It had occurred to him
that for the first time in two years or more he had forgotten, utterly
forgotten, these people's existence.

Immada stood slight and rigid with downcast eyes. Hassim, at his ease,
scrutinized the faces, as if searching for elusive points of similitude
or for subtle shades of difference.

"What is this new intrusion?" asked Mr. Travers, angrily.

"These are the fisher-folk, sir," broke in the sailing-master, "we've
observed these three days past flitting about in a canoe; but they
never had the sense to answer our hail; and yet a bit of fish for
your breakfast--" He smiled obsequiously, and all at once, without
provocation, began to bellow:

"Hey! Johnnie! Hab got fish? Fish! One peecee fish! Eh? Savee? Fish!
Fish--" He gave it up suddenly to say in a deferential tone--"Can't
make them savages understand anything, sir," and withdrew as if after a
clever feat.

Hassim looked at Lingard.

"Why did the little white man make that outcry?" he asked, anxiously.

"Their desire is to eat fish," said Lingard in an enraged tone.

Then before the air of extreme surprise which incontinently appeared on
the other's face, he could not restrain a short and hopeless laugh.

"Eat fish," repeated Hassim, staring. "O you white people! O you white
people! Eat fish! Good! But why make that noise? And why did you send
them here without guns?" After a significant glance down upon the slope
of the deck caused by the vessel being on the ground, he added with a
slight nod at Lingard--"And without knowledge?"

"You should not have come here, O Hassim," said Lingard, testily. "Here
no one understands. They take a rajah for a fisherman--"

"Ya-wa! A great mistake, for, truly, the chief of ten fugitives without
a country is much less than the headman of a fishing village," observed
Hassim, composedly. Immada sighed. "But you, Tuan, at least know the
truth," he went on with quiet irony; then after a pause--"We came here
because you had forgotten to look toward us, who had waited, sleeping
little at night, and in the day watching with hot eyes the empty water
at the foot of the sky for you."

Immada murmured, without lifting her head:

"You never looked for us. Never, never once."

"There was too much trouble in my eyes," explained Lingard with that
patient gentleness of tone and face which, every time he spoke to the
young girl, seemed to disengage itself from his whole person, enveloping
his fierceness, softening his aspect, such as the dreamy mist that in
the early radiance of the morning weaves a veil of tender charm about a
rugged rock in mid-ocean. "I must look now to the right and to the
left as in a time of sudden danger," he added after a moment and she
whispered an appalled "Why?" so low that its pain floated away in the
silence of attentive men, without response, unheard, ignored, like the
pain of an impalpable thought.



IV

D'Alcacer, standing back, surveyed them all with a profound and alert
attention. Lingard seemed unable to tear himself away from the yacht,
and remained, checked, as it were in the act of going, like a man who
has stopped to think out the last thing to say; and that stillness of a
body, forgotten by the labouring mind, reminded Carter of that moment
in the cabin, when alone he had seen this man thus wrestling with his
thought, motionless and locked in the grip of his conscience.

Mr. Travers muttered audibly through his teeth:

"How long is this performance going to last? I have desired you to go."

"Think of these poor devils," whispered Lingard, with a quick glance at
the crew huddled up near by.

"You are the kind of man I would be least disposed to trust--in any
case," said Mr. Travers, incisively, very low, and with an inexplicable
but very apparent satisfaction. "You are only wasting your time here."

"You--You--" He stammered and stared. He chewed with growls some
insulting word and at last swallowed it with an effort. "My time pays
for your life," he said.

He became aware of a sudden stir, and saw that Mrs. Travers had risen
from her chair.

She walked impulsively toward the group on the quarter-deck, making
straight for Immada. Hassim had stepped aside and his detached gaze of a
Malay gentleman passed by her as if she had been invisible.

She was tall, supple, moving freely. Her complexion was so dazzling
in the shade that it seemed to throw out a halo round her head. Upon
a smooth and wide brow an abundance of pale fair hair, fine as silk,
undulating like the sea, heavy like a helmet, descended low without a
trace of gloss, without a gleam in its coils, as though it had never
been touched by a ray of light; and a throat white, smooth, palpitating
with life, a round neck modelled with strength and delicacy, supported
gloriously that radiant face and that pale mass of hair unkissed by
sunshine.

She said with animation:

"Why, it's a girl!"

Mrs. Travers extorted from d'Alcacer a fresh tribute of curiosity. A
strong puff of wind fluttered the awnings and one of the screens blowing
out wide let in upon the quarter-deck the rippling glitter of the
Shallows, showing to d'Alcacer the luminous vastness of the sea, with
the line of the distant horizon, dark like the edge of the encompassing
night, drawn at the height of Mrs. Travers' shoulder. . . . Where was
it he had seen her last--a long time before, on the other side of the
world? There was also the glitter of splendour around her then, and an
impression of luminous vastness. The encompassing night, too, was there,
the night that waits for its time to move forward upon the glitter, the
splendour, the men, the women.

He could not remember for the moment, but he became convinced that of
all the women he knew, she alone seemed to be made for action. Every one
of her movements had firmness, ease, the meaning of a vital fact,
the moral beauty of a fearless expression. Her supple figure was not
dishonoured by any faltering of outlines under the plain dress of dark
blue stuff moulding her form with bold simplicity.

She had only very few steps to make, but before she had stopped,
confronting Immada, d'Alcacer remembered her suddenly as he had seen
her last, out West, far away, impossibly different, as if in another
universe, as if presented by the fantasy of a fevered memory. He saw
her in a luminous perspective of palatial drawing rooms, in the restless
eddy and flow of a human sea, at the foot of walls high as cliffs, under
lofty ceilings that like a tropical sky flung light and heat upon the
shallow glitter of uniforms, of stars, of diamonds, of eyes sparkling
in the weary or impassive faces of the throng at an official reception.
Outside he had found the unavoidable darkness with its aspect of patient
waiting, a cloudy sky holding back the dawn of a London morning. It was
difficult to believe.

Lingard, who had been looking dangerously fierce, slapped his thigh and
showed signs of agitation.

"By heavens, I had forgotten all about you!" he pronounced in dismay.

Mrs. Travers fixed her eyes on Immada. Fairhaired and white she asserted
herself before the girl of olive face and raven locks with the maturity
of perfection, with the superiority of the flower over the leaf, of the
phrase that contains a thought over the cry that can only express an
emotion. Immense spaces and countless centuries stretched between
them: and she looked at her as when one looks into one's own heart
with absorbed curiosity, with still wonder, with an immense compassion.
Lingard murmured, warningly:

"Don't touch her."

Mrs. Travers looked at him.

"Do you think I could hurt her?" she asked, softly, and was so startled
to hear him mutter a gloomy "Perhaps," that she hesitated before she
smiled.

"Almost a child! And so pretty! What a delicate face," she said, while
another deep sigh of the sea breeze lifted and let fall the screens, so
that the sound, the wind, and the glitter seemed to rush in together and
bear her words away into space. "I had no idea of anything so charmingly
gentle," she went on in a voice that without effort glowed, caressed,
and had a magic power of delight to the soul. "So young! And she lives
here--does she? On the sea--or where? Lives--" Then faintly, as if she
had been in the act of speaking, removed instantly to a great distance,
she was heard again: "How does she live?"

Lingard had hardly seen Edith Travers till then. He had seen no one
really but Mr. Travers. He looked and listened with something of the
stupor of a new sensation.

Then he made a distinct effort to collect his thoughts and said with a
remnant of anger:

"What have you got to do with her? She knows war. Do you know anything
about it? And hunger, too, and thirst, and unhappiness; things you have
only heard about. She has been as near death as I am to you--and what is
all that to any of you here?"

"That child!" she said in slow wonder.

Immada turned upon Mrs. Travers her eyes black as coal, sparkling and
soft like a tropical night; and the glances of the two women, their
dissimilar and inquiring glances met, seemed to touch, clasp, hold each
other with the grip of an intimate contact. They separated.

"What are they come for? Why did you show them the way to this place?"
asked Immada, faintly.

Lingard shook his head in denial.

"Poor girl," said Mrs. Travers. "Are they all so pretty?"

"Who-all?" mumbled Lingard. "There isn't an other one like her if you
were to ransack the islands all round the compass."

"Edith!" ejaculated Mr. Travers in a remonstrating, acrimonious voice,
and everyone gave him a look of vague surprise.

Then Mrs. Travers asked:

"Who is she?"

Lingard very red and grave declared curtly:

"A princess."

Immediately he looked round with suspicion. No one smiled. D'Alcacer,
courteous and nonchalant, lounged up close to Mrs. Travers' elbow.

"If she is a princess, then this man is a knight," he murmured with
conviction. "A knight as I live! A descendant of the immortal hidalgo
errant upon the sea. It would be good for us to have him for a friend.
Seriously I think that you ought--"

The two stepped aside and spoke low and hurriedly.

"Yes, you ought--"

"How can I?" she interrupted, catching the meaning like a ball.

"By saying something."

"Is it really necessary?" she asked, doubtfully.

"It would do no harm," said d'Alcacer with sudden carelessness; "a
friend is always better than an enemy."

"Always?" she repeated, meaningly. "But what could I say?"

"Some words," he answered; "I should think any words in your voice--"

"Mr. d'Alcacer!"

"Or you could perhaps look at him once or twice as though he were not
exactly a robber," he continued.

"Mr. d'Alcacer, are you afraid?"

"Extremely," he said, stooping to pick up the fan at her feet. "That is
the reason I am so anxious to conciliate. And you must not forget that
one of your queens once stepped on the cloak of perhaps such a man."

Her eyes sparkled and she dropped them suddenly.

"I am not a queen," she said, coldly.

"Unfortunately not," he admitted; "but then the other was a woman with
no charm but her crown."

At that moment Lingard, to whom Hassim had been talking earnestly,
protested aloud:

"I never saw these people before."

Immada caught hold of her brother's arm. Mr. Travers said harshly:

"Oblige me by taking these natives away."

"Never before," murmured Immada as if lost in ecstasy. D'Alcacer glanced
at Mrs. Travers and made a step forward.

"Could not the difficulty, whatever it is, be arranged, Captain?" he
said with careful politeness. "Observe that we are not only men here--"

"Let them die!" cried Immada, triumphantly.

Though Lingard alone understood the meaning of these words, all on board
felt oppressed by the uneasy silence which followed her cry.

"Ah! He is going. Now, Mrs. Travers," whispered d'Alcacer.

"I hope!" said Mrs. Travers, impulsively, and stopped as if alarmed at
the sound.

Lingard stood still.

"I hope," she began again, "that this poor girl will know happier
days--" She hesitated.

Lingard waited, attentive and serious.

"Under your care," she finished. "And I believe you meant to be friendly
to us."

"Thank you," said Lingard with dignity.

"You and d'Alcacer," observed Mr. Travers, austerely, "are unnecessarily
detaining this--ah--person, and--ah--friends--ah!"

"I had forgotten you--and now--what? One must--it is hard--hard--" went
on Lingard, disconnectedly, while he looked into Mrs. Travers'
violet eyes, and felt his mind overpowered and troubled as if by the
contemplation of vast distances. "I--you don't know--I--you--cannot
. . . Ha! It's all that man's doing," he burst out.

For a time, as if beside himself, he glared at Mrs. Travers, then flung
up one arm and strode off toward the gangway, where Hassim and Immada
waited for him, interested and patient. With a single word "Come," he
preceded them down into the boat. Not a sound was heard on the yacht's
deck, while these three disappeared one after another below the rail as
if they had descended into the sea.



V

The afternoon dragged itself out in silence. Mrs. Travers sat pensive
and idle with her fan on her knees. D'Alcacer, who thought the incident
should have been treated in a conciliatory spirit, attempted to
communicate his view to his host, but that gentleman, purposely
misunderstanding his motive, overwhelmed him with so many apologies
and expressions of regret at the irksome and perhaps inconvenient delay
"which you suffer from through your good-natured acceptance of our
invitation" that the other was obliged to refrain from pursuing the
subject further.

"Even my regard for you, my dear d'Alcacer, could not induce me to
submit to such a bare-faced attempt at extortion," affirmed Mr. Travers
with uncompromising virtue. "The man wanted to force his services
upon me, and then put in a heavy claim for salvage. That is the whole
secret--you may depend on it. I detected him at once, of course." The
eye-glass glittered perspicuously. "He underrated my intelligence; and
what a violent scoundrel! The existence of such a man in the time we
live in is a scandal."

D'Alcacer retired, and, full of vague forebodings, tried in vain for
hours to interest himself in a book. Mr. Travers walked up and down
restlessly, trying to persuade himself that his indignation was based
on purely moral grounds. The glaring day, like a mass of white-hot iron
withdrawn from the fire, was losing gradually its heat and its glare
in a richer deepening of tone. At the usual time two seamen, walking
noiselessly aft in their yachting shoes, rolled up in silence the
quarter-deck screens; and the coast, the shallows, the dark islets and
the snowy sandbanks uncovered thus day after day were seen once more
in their aspect of dumb watchfulness. The brig, swung end on in the
foreground, her squared yards crossing heavily the soaring symmetry of
the rigging, resembled a creature instinct with life, with the power of
springing into action lurking in the light grace of its repose.

A pair of stewards in white jackets with brass buttons appeared on deck
and began to flit about without a sound, laying the table for dinner on
the flat top of the cabin skylight. The sun, drifting away toward
other lands, toward other seas, toward other men; the sun, all red in a
cloudless sky raked the yacht with a parting salvo of crimson rays that
shattered themselves into sparks of fire upon the crystal and silver
of the dinner-service, put a short flame into the blades of knives, and
spread a rosy tint over the white of plates. A trail of purple, like a
smear of blood on a blue shield, lay over the sea.

On sitting down Mr. Travers alluded in a vexed tone to the necessity of
living on preserves, all the stock of fresh provisions for the passage
to Batavia having been already consumed. It was distinctly unpleasant.

"I don't travel for my pleasure, however," he added; "and the belief
that the sacrifice of my time and comfort will be productive of some
good to the world at large would make up for any amount of privations."

Mrs. Travers and d'Alcacer seemed unable to shake off a strong aversion
to talk, and the conversation, like an expiring breeze, kept on dying
out repeatedly after each languid gust. The large silence of the
horizon, the profound repose of all things visible, enveloping the
bodies and penetrating the souls with their quieting influence, stilled
thought as well as voice. For a long time no one spoke. Behind the
taciturnity of the masters the servants hovered without noise.

Suddenly, Mr. Travers, as if concluding a train of thought, muttered
aloud:

"I own with regret I did in a measure lose my temper; but then you will
admit that the existence of such a man is a disgrace to civilization."

This remark was not taken up and he returned for a time to the nursing
of his indignation, at the bottom of which, like a monster in a fog,
crept a bizarre feeling of rancour. He waved away an offered dish.

"This coast," he began again, "has been placed under the sole protection
of Holland by the Treaty of 1820. The Treaty of 1820 creates special
rights and obligations. . . ."

Both his hearers felt vividly the urgent necessity to hear no more.
D'Alcacer, uncomfortable on a campstool, sat stiff and stared at the
glass stopper of a carafe. Mrs. Travers turned a little sideways and
leaning on her elbow rested her head on the palm of her hand like one
thinking about matters of profound import. Mr. Travers talked; he talked
inflexibly, in a harsh blank voice, as if reading a proclamation.
The other two, as if in a state of incomplete trance, had their ears
assailed by fragments of official verbiage.

"An international understanding--the duty to civilize--failed to carry
out--compact--Canning--" D'Alcacer became attentive for a moment.
"--not that this attempt, almost amusing in its impudence, influences my
opinion. I won't admit the possibility of any violence being offered to
people of our position. It is the social aspect of such an incident I am
desirous of criticising."

Here d'Alcacer lost himself again in the recollection of Mrs. Travers
and Immada looking at each other--the beginning and the end, the
flower and the leaf, the phrase and the cry. Mr. Travers' voice went
on dogmatic and obstinate for a long time. The end came with a certain
vehemence.

"And if the inferior race must perish, it is a gain, a step toward the
perfecting of society which is the aim of progress."

He ceased. The sparks of sunset in crystal and silver had gone out,
and around the yacht the expanse of coast and Shallows seemed to await,
unmoved, the coming of utter darkness. The dinner was over a long time
ago and the patient stewards had been waiting, stoical in the downpour
of words like sentries under a shower.

Mrs. Travers rose nervously and going aft began to gaze at the coast.
Behind her the sun, sunk already, seemed to force through the mass of
waters the glow of an unextinguishable fire, and below her feet, on each
side of the yacht, the lustrous sea, as if reflecting the colour of her
eyes, was tinged a sombre violet hue.

D'Alcacer came up to her with quiet footsteps and for some time they
leaned side by side over the rail in silence. Then he said--"How quiet
it is!" and she seemed to perceive that the quietness of that evening
was more profound and more significant than ever before. Almost without
knowing it she murmured--"It's like a dream." Another long silence
ensued; the tranquillity of the universe had such an August ampleness
that the sounds remained on the lips as if checked by the fear of
profanation. The sky was limpid like a diamond, and under the last
gleams of sunset the night was spreading its veil over the earth. There
was something precious and soothing in the beautifully serene end of
that expiring day, of the day vibrating, glittering and ardent, and
dying now in infinite peace, without a stir, without a tremor, without a
sigh--in the certitude of resurrection.

Then all at once the shadow deepened swiftly, the stars came out in a
crowd, scattering a rain of pale sparks upon the blackness of the water,
while the coast stretched low down, a dark belt without a gleam. Above
it the top-hamper of the brig loomed indistinct and high.

Mrs. Travers spoke first.

"How unnaturally quiet! It is like a desert of land and water without a
living soul."

"One man at least dwells in it," said d'Alcacer, lightly, "and if he is
to be believed there are other men, full of evil intentions."

"Do you think it is true?" Mrs. Travers asked.

Before answering d'Alcacer tried to see the expression of her face but
the obscurity was too profound already.

"How can one see a dark truth on such a dark night?" he said, evasively.
"But it is easy to believe in evil, here or anywhere else."

She seemed to be lost in thought for a while.

"And that man himself?" she asked.

After some time d'Alcacer began to speak slowly. "Rough, uncommon,
decidedly uncommon of his kind. Not at all what Don Martin thinks him to
be. For the rest--mysterious to me. He is _your_ countryman after all--"

She seemed quite surprised by that view.

"Yes," she said, slowly. "But you know, I can not--what shall I
say?--imagine him at all. He has nothing in common with the mankind I
know. There is nothing to begin upon. How does such a man live? What are
his thoughts? His actions? His affections? His--"

"His conventions," suggested d'Alcacer. "That would include everything."

Mr. Travers appeared suddenly behind them with a glowing cigar in
his teeth. He took it between his fingers to declare with persistent
acrimony that no amount of "scoundrelly intimidation" would prevent him
from having his usual walk. There was about three hundred yards to the
southward of the yacht a sandbank nearly a mile long, gleaming a silvery
white in the darkness, plumetted in the centre with a thicket of dry
bushes that rustled very loud in the slightest stir of the heavy night
air. The day after the stranding they had landed on it "to stretch their
legs a bit," as the sailing-master defined it, and every evening since,
as if exercising a privilege or performing a duty, the three paced there
for an hour backward and forward lost in dusky immensity, threading at
the edge of water the belt of damp sand, smooth, level, elastic to the
touch like living flesh and sweating a little under the pressure of
their feet.

This time d'Alcacer alone followed Mr. Travers. Mrs. Travers heard them
get into the yacht's smallest boat, and the night-watchman, tugging at
a pair of sculls, pulled them off to the nearest point. Then the man
returned. He came up the ladder and she heard him say to someone on
deck:

"Orders to go back in an hour."

His footsteps died out forward, and a somnolent, unbreathing repose took
possession of the stranded yacht.



VI

After a time this absolute silence which she almost could feel pressing
upon her on all sides induced in Mrs. Travers a state of hallucination.
She saw herself standing alone, at the end of time, on the brink of
days. All was unmoving as if the dawn would never come, the stars would
never fade, the sun would never rise any more; all was mute, still,
dead--as if the shadow of the outer darkness, the shadow of the
uninterrupted, of the everlasting night that fills the universe, the
shadow of the night so profound and so vast that the blazing suns lost
in it are only like sparks, like pin-points of fire, the restless shadow
that like a suspicion of an evil truth darkens everything upon the earth
on its passage, had enveloped her, had stood arrested as if to remain
with her forever.

And there was such a finality in that illusion, such an accord with the
trend of her thought that when she murmured into the darkness a faint
"so be it" she seemed to have spoken one of those sentences that resume
and close a life.

As a young girl, often reproved for her romantic ideas, she had
dreams where the sincerity of a great passion appeared like the ideal
fulfilment and the only truth of life. Entering the world she discovered
that ideal to be unattainable because the world is too prudent to
be sincere. Then she hoped that she could find the truth of life an
ambition which she understood as a lifelong devotion to some unselfish
ideal. Mr. Travers' name was on men's lips; he seemed capable of
enthusiasm and of devotion; he impressed her imagination by his
impenetrability. She married him, found him enthusiastically devoted to
the nursing of his own career, and had nothing to hope for now.

That her husband should be bewildered by the curious misunderstanding
which had taken place and also permanently grieved by her disloyalty
to his respectable ideals was only natural. He was, however, perfectly
satisfied with her beauty, her brilliance, and her useful connections.
She was admired, she was envied; she was surrounded by splendour and
adulation; the days went on rapid, brilliant, uniform, without a glimpse
of sincerity or true passion, without a single true emotion--not even
that of a great sorrow. And swiftly and stealthily they had led her on
and on, to this evening, to this coast, to this sea, to this moment of
time and to this spot on the earth's surface where she felt unerringly
that the moving shadow of the unbroken night had stood still to remain
with her forever.

"So be it!" she murmured, resigned and defiant, at the mute and smooth
obscurity that hung before her eyes in a black curtain without a
fold; and as if in answer to that whisper a lantern was run up to the
foreyard-arm of the brig. She saw it ascend swinging for a. short space,
and suddenly remain motionless in the air, piercing the dense night
between the two vessels by its glance of flame that strong and steady
seemed, from afar, to fall upon her alone.

Her thoughts, like a fascinated moth, went fluttering toward that
light--that man--that girl, who had known war, danger, seen death near,
had obtained evidently the devotion of that man. The occurrences of the
afternoon had been strange in themselves, but what struck her artistic
sense was the vigour of their presentation. They outlined themselves
before her memory with the clear simplicity of some immortal legend.
They were mysterious, but she felt certain they were absolutely true.
They embodied artless and masterful feelings; such, no doubt, as had
swayed mankind in the simplicity of its youth. She envied, for a moment,
the lot of that humble and obscure sister. Nothing stood between that
girl and the truth of her sensations. She could be sincerely courageous,
and tender and passionate and--well--ferocious. Why not ferocious? She
could know the truth of terror--and of affection, absolutely, without
artificial trammels, without the pain of restraint.

Thinking of what such life could be Mrs. Travers felt invaded by that
inexplicable exaltation which the consciousness of their physical
capacities so often gives to intellectual beings. She glowed with a
sudden persuasion that she also could be equal to such an existence; and
her heart was dilated with a momentary longing to know the naked truth
of things; the naked truth of life and passion buried under the growth
of centuries.

She glowed and, suddenly, she quivered with the shock of coming to
herself as if she had fallen down from a star. There was a sound of
rippling water and a shapeless mass glided out of the dark void she
confronted. A voice below her feet said:

"I made out your shape--on the sky." A cry of surprise expired on her
lips and she could only peer downward. Lingard, alone in the brig's
dinghy, with another stroke sent the light boat nearly under the yacht's
counter, laid his sculls in, and rose from the thwart. His head and
shoulders loomed up alongside and he had the appearance of standing upon
the sea. Involuntarily Mrs. Travers made a movement of retreat.

"Stop," he said, anxiously, "don't speak loud. No one must know. Where
do your people think themselves, I wonder? In a dock at home? And you--"

"My husband is not on board," she interrupted, hurriedly.

"I know."

She bent a little more over the rail.

"Then you are having us watched. Why?"

"Somebody must watch. Your people keep such a good look-out--don't they?
Yes. Ever since dark one of my boats has been dodging astern here, in
the deep water. I swore to myself I would never see one of you, never
speak to one of you here, that I would be dumb, blind, deaf. And--here I
am!"

Mrs. Travers' alarm and mistrust were replaced by an immense curiosity,
burning, yet quiet, too, as if before the inevitable work of destiny.
She looked downward at Lingard. His head was bared, and, with one hand
upon the ship's side, he seemed to be thinking deeply.

"Because you had something more to tell us," Mrs. Travers suggested,
gently.

"Yes," he said in a low tone and without moving in the least.

"Will you come on board and wait?" she asked.

"Who? I!" He lifted his head so quickly as to startle her. "I have
nothing to say to him; and I'll never put my foot on board this craft.
I've been told to go. That's enough."

"He is accustomed to be addressed deferentially," she said after a
pause, "and you--"

"Who is he?" asked Lingard, simply.

These three words seemed to her to scatter her past in the air--like
smoke. They robbed all the multitude of mankind of every vestige of
importance. She was amazed to find that on this night, in this place,
there could be no adequate answer to the searching naiveness of that
question.

"I didn't ask for much," Lingard began again. "Did I? Only that you all
should come on board my brig for five days. That's all. . . . Do I
look like a liar? There are things I could not tell him. I couldn't
explain--I couldn't--not to him--to no man--to no man in the world--"

His voice dropped.

"Not to myself," he ended as if in a dream.

"We have remained unmolested so long here," began Mrs. Travers a little
unsteadily, "that it makes it very difficult to believe in danger, now.
We saw no one all these days except those two people who came for you.
If you may not explain--"

"Of course, you can't be expected to see through a wall," broke in
Lingard. "This coast's like a wall, but I know what's on the other side.
. . . A yacht here, of all things that float! When I set eyes on her I
could fancy she hadn't been more than an hour from home. Nothing but the
look of her spars made me think of old times. And then the faces of the
chaps on board. I seemed to know them all. It was like home coming to me
when I wasn't thinking of it. And I hated the sight of you all."

"If we are exposed to any peril," she said after a pause during which
she tried to penetrate the secret of passion hidden behind that man's
words, "it need not affect you. Our other boat is gone to the Straits
and effective help is sure to come very soon."

"Affect me! Is that precious watchman of yours coming aft? I don't want
anybody to know I came here again begging, even of you. Is he coming
aft? . . . Listen! I've stopped your other boat."

His head and shoulders disappeared as though he had dived into a denser
layer of obscurity floating on the water. The watchman, who had the
intention to stretch himself in one of the deck chairs, catching sight
of the owner's wife, walked straight to the lamp that hung under the
ridge pole of the awning, and after fumbling with it for a time went
away forward with an indolent gait.

"You dared!" Mrs. Travers whispered down in an intense tone; and
directly, Lingard's head emerged again below her with an upturned face.

"It was dare--or give up. The help from the Straits would have been too
late anyhow if I hadn't the power to keep you safe; and if I had the
power I could see you through it--alone. I expected to find a reasonable
man to talk to. I ought to have known better. You come from too far to
understand these things. Well, I dared; I've sent after your other boat
a fellow who, with me at his back, would try to stop the governor of
the Straits himself. He will do it. Perhaps it's done already. You
have nothing to hope for. But I am here. You said you believed I meant
well--"

"Yes," she murmured.

"That's why I thought I would tell you everything. I had to begin with
this business about the boat. And what do you think of me now? I've cut
you off from the rest of the earth. You people would disappear like a
stone in the water. You left one foreign port for another. Who's there
to trouble about what became of you? Who would know? Who could guess? It
would be months before they began to stir."

"I understand," she said, steadily, "we are helpless."

"And alone," he added.

After a pause she said in a deliberate, restrained voice:

"What does this mean? Plunder, captivity?"

"It would have meant death if I hadn't been here," he answered.

"But you have the power to--"

"Why, do you think, you are alive yet?" he cried. "Jorgenson has been
arguing with them on shore," he went on, more calmly, with a swing of
his arm toward where the night seemed darkest. "Do you think he would
have kept them back if they hadn't expected me every day? His words
would have been nothing without my fist."

She heard a dull blow struck on the side of the yacht and concealed in
the same darkness that wrapped the unconcern of the earth and sea, the
fury and the pain of hearts; she smiled above his head, fascinated by
the simplicity of images and expressions.

Lingard made a brusque movement, the lively little boat being unsteady
under his feet, and she spoke slowly, absently, as if her thought had
been lost in the vagueness of her sensations.

"And this--this--Jorgenson, you said? Who is he?"

"A man," he answered, "a man like myself."

"Like yourself?"

"Just like myself," he said with strange reluctance, as if admitting a
painful truth. "More sense, perhaps, but less luck. Though, since your
yacht has turned up here, I begin to think that my luck is nothing much
to boast of either."

"Is our presence here so fatal?"

"It may be death to some. It may be worse than death to me. And it rests
with you in a way. Think of that! I can never find such another chance
again. But that's nothing! A man who has saved my life once and that I
passed my word to would think I had thrown him over. But that's nothing!
Listen! As true as I stand here in my boat talking to you, I believe the
girl would die of grief."

"You love her," she said, softly.

"Like my own daughter," he cried, low.

Mrs. Travers said, "Oh!" faintly, and for a moment there was a silence,
then he began again:

"Look here. When I was a boy in a trawler, and looked at you yacht
people, in the Channel ports, you were as strange to me as the Malays
here are strange to you. I left home sixteen years ago and fought my way
all round the earth. I had the time to forget where I began. What are
you to me against these two? If I was to die here on the spot would you
care? No one would care at home. No one in the whole world--but these
two."

"What can I do?" she asked, and waited, leaning over.

He seemed to reflect, then lifting his head, spoke gently:

"Do you understand the danger you are in? Are you afraid?"

"I understand the expression you used, of course. Understand the
danger?" she went on. "No--decidedly no. And--honestly--I am not
afraid."

"Aren't you?" he said in a disappointed voice. "Perhaps you don't
believe me? I believed you, though, when you said you were sure I meant
well. I trusted you enough to come here asking for your help--telling
you what no one knows."

"You mistake me," she said with impulsive earnestness. "This is so
extraordinarily unusual--sudden--outside my experience."

"Aye!" he murmured, "what would you know of danger and trouble? You! But
perhaps by thinking it over--"

"You want me to think myself into a fright!" Mrs. Travers laughed
lightly, and in the gloom of his thought this flash of joyous sound
was incongruous and almost terrible. Next moment the night appeared
brilliant as day, warm as sunshine; but when she ceased the returning
darkness gave him pain as if it had struck heavily against his breast.
"I don't think I could do that," she finished in a serious tone.

"Couldn't you?" He hesitated, perplexed. "Things are bad enough to make
it no shame. I tell you," he said, rapidly, "and I am not a timid man, I
may not be able to do much if you people don't help me."

"You want me to pretend I am alarmed?" she asked, quickly.

"Aye, to pretend--as well you may. It's a lot to ask of you--who perhaps
never had to make-believe a thing in your life--isn't it?"

"It is," she said after a time.

The unexpected bitterness of her tone struck Lingard with dismay.

"Don't be offended," he entreated. "I've got to plan a way out of this
mess. It's no play either. Could you pretend?"

"Perhaps, if I tried very hard. But to what end?"

"You must all shift aboard the brig," he began, speaking quickly, "and
then we may get over this trouble without coming to blows. Now, if you
were to say that you wish it; that you feel unsafe in the yacht--don't
you see?"

"I see," she pronounced, thoughtfully.

"The brig is small but the cuddy is fit for a lady," went on Lingard
with animation.

"Has it not already sheltered a princess?" she commented, coolly.

"And I shall not intrude."

"This is an inducement."

"Nobody will dare to intrude. You needn't even see me."

"This is almost decisive, only--"

"I know my place."

"Only, I might not have the influence," she finished.

"That I can not believe," he said, roughly. "The long and the short of
it is you don't trust me because you think that only people of your own
condition speak the truth always."

"Evidently," she murmured.

"You say to yourself--here's a fellow deep in with pirates, thieves,
niggers--"

"To be sure--"

"A man I never saw the like before," went on Lingard, headlong,
"a--ruffian."

He checked himself, full of confusion. After a time he heard her saying,
calmly:

"You are like other men in this, that you get angry when you can not
have your way at once."

"I angry!" he exclaimed in deadened voice. "You do not understand. I am
thinking of you also--it is hard on me--"

"I mistrust not you, but my own power. You have produced an unfortunate
impression on Mr. Travers."

"Unfortunate impression! He treated me as if I had been a long-shore
loafer. Never mind that. He is your husband. Fear in those you care for
is hard to bear for any man. And so, he--"

"What Machiavellism!"

"Eh, what did you say?"

"I only wondered where you had observed that. On the sea?"

"Observed what?" he said, absently. Then pursuing his idea--"One word
from you ought to be enough."

"You think so?"

"I am sure of it. Why, even I, myself--"

"Of course," she interrupted. "But don't you think that after parting
with you on such--such--inimical terms, there would be a difficulty in
resuming relations?"

"A man like me would do anything for money--don't you see?"

After a pause she asked:

"And would you care for that argument to be used?"

"As long as you know better!"

His voice vibrated--she drew back disturbed, as if unexpectedly he had
touched her.

"What can there be at stake?" she began, wonderingly.

"A kingdom," said Lingard.

Mrs. Travers leaned far over the rail, staring, and their faces, one
above the other, came very close together.

"Not for yourself?" she whispered.

He felt the touch of her breath on his forehead and remained still for
a moment, perfectly still as if he did not intend to move or speak any
more.

"Those things," he began, suddenly, "come in your way, when you don't
think, and they get all round you before you know what you mean to
do. When I went into that bay in New Guinea I never guessed where that
course would take me to. I could tell you a story. You would understand!
You! You!"

He stammered, hesitated, and suddenly spoke, liberating the visions
of two years into the night where Mrs. Travers could follow them as if
outlined in words of fire.



VII

His tale was as startling as the discovery of a new world. She was being
taken along the boundary of an exciting existence, and she looked into
it through the guileless enthusiasm of the narrator. The heroic quality
of the feelings concealed what was disproportionate and absurd in
that gratitude, in that friendship, in that inexplicable devotion. The
headlong fierceness of purpose invested his obscure design of conquest
with the proportions of a great enterprise. It was clear that no vision
of a subjugated world could have been more inspiring to the most famous
adventurer of history.

From time to time he interrupted himself to ask, confidently, as if
he had been speaking to an old friend, "What would you have done?" and
hurried on without pausing for approval.

It struck her that there was a great passion in all this, the beauty of
an implanted faculty of affection that had found itself, its immediate
need of an object and the way of expansion; a tenderness expressed
violently; a tenderness that could only be satisfied by backing human
beings against their own destiny. Perhaps her hatred of convention,
trammelling the frankness of her own impulses, had rendered her more
alert to perceive what is intrinsically great and profound within the
forms of human folly, so simple and so infinitely varied according to
the region of the earth and to the moment of time.

What of it that the narrator was only a roving seaman; the kingdom of
the jungle, the men of the forest, the lives obscure! That simple soul
was possessed by the greatness of the idea; there was nothing sordid in
its flaming impulses. When she once understood that, the story appealed
to the audacity of her thoughts, and she became so charmed with what she
heard that she forgot where she was. She forgot that she was personally
close to that tale which she saw detached, far away from her, truth or
fiction, presented in picturesque speech, real only by the response of
her emotion.

Lingard paused. In the cessation of the impassioned murmur she began to
reflect. And at first it was only an oppressive notion of there being
some significance that really mattered in this man's story. That
mattered to her. For the first time the shadow of danger and death
crossed her mind. Was that the significance? Suddenly, in a flash of
acute discernment, she saw herself involved helplessly in that story, as
one is involved in a natural cataclysm.

He was speaking again. He had not been silent more than a minute. It
seemed to Mrs. Travers that years had elapsed, so different now was the
effect of his words. Her mind was agitated as if his coming to speak and
confide in her had been a tremendous occurrence. It was a fact of her
own existence; it was part of the story also. This was the disturbing
thought. She heard him pronounce several names: Belarab, Daman, Tengga,
Ningrat. These belonged now to her life and she was appalled to find she
was unable to connect these names with any human appearance. They stood
out alone, as if written on the night; they took on a symbolic shape;
they imposed themselves upon her senses. She whispered as if pondering:
"Belarab, Daman, Ningrat," and these barbarous sounds seemed to possess
an exceptional energy, a fatal aspect, the savour of madness.

"Not one of them but has a heavy score to settle with the whites. What's
that to me! I had somehow to get men who would fight. I risked my life
to get that lot. I made them promises which I shall keep--or--! Can you
see now why I dared to stop your boat? I am in so deep that I care
for no Sir John in the world. When I look at the work ahead I care for
nothing. I gave you one chance--one good chance. That I had to do. No! I
suppose I didn't look enough of a gentleman. Yes! Yes! That's it. Yet
I know what a gentleman is. I lived with them for years. I chummed with
them--yes--on gold-fields and in other places where a man has got
to show the stuff that's in him. Some of them write from home to me
here--such as you see me, because I--never mind! And I know what a
gentleman would do. Come! Wouldn't he treat a stranger fairly? Wouldn't
he remember that no man is a liar till you prove him so? Wouldn't he
keep his word wherever given? Well, I am going to do that. Not a hair of
your head shall be touched as long as I live!"

She had regained much of her composure but at these words she felt that
staggering sense of utter insecurity which is given one by the first
tremor of an earthquake. It was followed by an expectant stillness of
sensations. She remained silent. He thought she did not believe him.

"Come! What on earth do you think brought me here--to--to--talk like
this to you? There was Hassim--Rajah Tulla, I should say--who was asking
me this afternoon: 'What will you do now with these, your people?' I
believe he thinks yet I fetched you here for some reason. You can't tell
what crooked notion they will get into their thick heads. It's enough to
make one swear." He swore. "My people! Are you? How much? Say--how much?
You're no more mine than I am yours. Would any of you fine folks at home
face black ruin to save a fishing smack's crew from getting drowned?"

Notwithstanding that sense of insecurity which lingered faintly in her
mind she had no image of death before her. She felt intensely alive.
She felt alive in a flush of strength, with an impression of novelty as
though life had been the gift of this very moment. The danger hidden in
the night gave no sign to awaken her terror, but the workings of a
human soul, simple and violent, were laid bare before her and had the
disturbing charm of an unheard-of experience. She was listening to a man
who concealed nothing. She said, interrogatively:

"And yet you have come?"

"Yes," he answered, "to you--and for you only."

The flood tide running strong over the banks made a placid trickling
sound about the yacht's rudder.

"I would not be saved alone."

"Then you must bring them over yourself," he said in a sombre tone.
"There's the brig. You have me--my men--my guns. You know what to do.

"I will try," she said.

"Very well. I am sorry for the poor devils forward there if you fail.
But of course you won't. Watch that light on the brig. I had it hoisted
on purpose. The trouble may be nearer than we think. Two of my boats
are gone scouting and if the news they bring me is bad the light will
be lowered. Think what that means. And I've told you what I have told
nobody. Think of my feelings also. I told you because I--because I had
to."

He gave a shove against the yacht's side and glided away from under her
eyes. A rippling sound died out.

She walked away from the rail. The lamp and the skylights shone
faintly along the dark stretch of the decks. This evening was like the
last--like all the evenings before.

"Is all this I have heard possible?" she asked herself. "No--but it is
true."

She sat down in a deck chair to think and found she could only remember.
She jumped up. She was sure somebody was hailing the yacht faintly. Was
that man hailing? She listened, and hearing nothing was annoyed with
herself for being haunted by a voice.

"He said he could trust me. Now, what is this danger? What is danger?"
she meditated.

Footsteps were coming from forward. The figure of the watchman flitted
vaguely over the gangway. He was whistling softly and vanished. Hollow
sounds in the boat were succeeded by a splash of oars. The night
swallowed these slight noises. Mrs. Travers sat down again and found
herself much calmer.

She had the faculty of being able to think her own thoughts--and the
courage. She could take no action of any kind till her husband's return.
Lingard's warnings were not what had impressed her most. This man had
presented his innermost self unclothed by any subterfuge. There were
in plain sight his desires, his perplexities, affections, doubts, his
violence, his folly; and the existence they made up was lawless but not
vile. She had too much elevation of mind to look upon him from any other
but a strictly human standpoint. If he trusted her (how strange;
why should he? Was he wrong?) she accepted the trust with scrupulous
fairness. And when it dawned upon her that of all the men in the world
this unquestionably was the one she knew best, she had a moment of
wonder followed by an impression of profound sadness. It seemed an
unfortunate matter that concerned her alone.

Her thought was suspended while she listened attentively for the return
of the yacht's boat. She was dismayed at the task before her. Not a
sound broke the stillness and she felt as if she were lost in empty
space. Then suddenly someone amidships yawned immensely and said: "Oh,
dear! Oh, dear!" A voice asked: "Ain't they back yet?" A negative grunt
answered.

Mrs. Travers found that Lingard was touching, because he could be
understood. How simple was life, she reflected. She was frank with
herself. She considered him apart from social organization. She
discovered he had no place in it. How delightful! Here was a human
being and the naked truth of things was not so very far from her
notwithstanding the growth of centuries. Then it occurred to her that
this man by his action stripped her at once of her position, of her
wealth, of her rank, of her past. "I am helpless. What remains?" she
asked herself. Nothing! Anybody there might have suggested: "Your
presence." She was too artificial yet to think of her beauty; and yet
the power of personality is part of the naked truth of things.

She looked over her shoulder, and saw the light at the brig's
foreyard-arm burning with a strong, calm flame in the dust of starlight
suspended above the coast. She heard the heavy bump as of a boat run
headlong against the ladder. They were back! She rose in sudden and
extreme agitation. What should she say? How much? How to begin? Why say
anything? It would be absurd, like talking seriously about a dream.
She would not dare! In a moment she was driven into a state of mind
bordering on distraction. She heard somebody run up the gangway steps.
With the idea of gaining time she walked rapidly aft to the taffrail.
The light of the brig faced her without a flicker, enormous amongst the
suns scattered in the immensity of the night.

She fixed her eyes on it. She thought: "I shan't tell him anything.
Impossible. No! I shall tell everything." She expected every moment to
hear her husband's voice and the suspense was intolerable because she
felt that then she must decide. Somebody on deck was babbling excitedly.
She devoutly hoped d'Alcacer would speak first and thus put off the
fatal moment. A voice said roughly: "What's that?" And in the midst of
her distress she recognized Carter's voice, having noticed that young
man who was of a different stamp from the rest of the crew. She came to
the conclusion that the matter could be related jocularly, or--why not
pretend fear? At that moment the brig's yard-arm light she was looking
at trembled distinctly, and she was dumfounded as if she had seen a
commotion in the firmament. With her lips open for a cry she saw it fall
straight down several feet, flicker, and go out. All perplexity passed
from her mind. This first fact of the danger gave her a thrill of quite
a new emotion. Something had to be done at once. For some remote reason
she felt ashamed of her hesitations.

She moved swiftly forward and under the lamp came face to face with
Carter who was coming aft. Both stopped, staring, the light fell on
their faces, and both were struck by each other's expression. The four
eyes shone wide.

"You have seen?" she asked, beginning to tremble.

"How do you know?" he said, at the same time, evidently surprised.

Suddenly she saw that everybody was on deck.

"The light is down," she stammered.

"The gentlemen are lost," said Carter. Then he perceived she did not
seem to understand. "Kidnapped off the sandbank," he continued, looking
at her fixedly to see how she would take it. She seemed calm. "Kidnapped
like a pair of lambs! Not a squeak," he burst out with indignation. "But
the sandbank is long and they might have been at the other end. You were
on deck, ma'am?" he asked.

"Yes," she murmured. "In the chair here."

"We were all down below. I had to rest a little. When I came up the
watchman was asleep. He swears he wasn't, but I know better. Nobody
heard any noise, unless you did. But perhaps you were asleep?" he asked,
deferentially.

"Yes--no--I must have been," she said, faintly.



VIII

Lingard's soul was exalted by his talk with Mrs. Travers, by the strain
of incertitude and by extreme fatigue. On returning on board he asked
after Hassim and was told that the Rajah and his sister had gone off in
their canoe promising to return before midnight. The boats sent to scout
between the islets north and south of the anchorage had not come back
yet. He went into his cabin and throwing himself on the couch closed his
eyes thinking: "I must sleep or I shall go mad."

At times he felt an unshaken confidence in Mrs. Travers--then he
remembered her face. Next moment the face would fade, he would make an
effort to hold on to the image, fail--and then become convinced without
the shadow of a doubt that he was utterly lost, unless he let all these
people be wiped off the face of the earth.

"They all heard that man order me out of his ship," he thought, and
thereupon for a second or so he contemplated without flinching the lurid
image of a massacre. "And yet I had to tell her that not a hair of her
head shall be touched. Not a hair."

And irrationally at the recollection of these words there seemed to be
no trouble of any kind left in the world. Now and then, however, there
were black instants when from sheer weariness he thought of nothing at
all; and during one of these he fell asleep, losing the consciousness
of external things as suddenly as if he had been felled by a blow on the
head.

When he sat up, almost before he was properly awake, his first alarmed
conviction was that he had slept the night through. There was a light in
the cuddy and through the open door of his cabin he saw distinctly Mrs.
Travers pass out of view across the lighted space.

"They did come on board after all," he thought--"how is it I haven't
been called!"

He darted into the cuddy. Nobody! Looking up at the clock in the
skylight he was vexed to see it had stopped till his ear caught the
faint beat of the mechanism. It was going then! He could not have been
asleep more than ten minutes. He had not been on board more than twenty!

So it was only a deception; he had seen no one. And yet he remembered
the turn of the head, the line of the neck, the colour of the hair,
the movement of the passing figure. He returned spiritlessly to his
state-room muttering, "No more sleep for me to-night," and came out
directly, holding a few sheets of paper covered with a high, angular
handwriting.

This was Jorgenson's letter written three days before and entrusted to
Hassim. Lingard had read it already twice, but he turned up the lamp a
little higher and sat down to read it again. On the red shield above his
head the gilt sheaf of thunderbolts darting between the initials of his
name seemed to be aimed straight at the nape of his neck as he sat with
bared elbows spread on the table, poring over the crumpled sheets. The
letter began:

Hassim and Immada are going out to-night to look for you. You are behind
your time and every passing day makes things worse.

Ten days ago three of Belarab's men, who had been collecting turtles'
eggs on the islets, came flying back with a story of a ship stranded on
the outer mudflats. Belarab at once forbade any boat from leaving the
lagoon. So far good. There was a great excitement in the village. I
judge it must be a schooner--probably some fool of a trader. However,
you will know all about her when you read this. You may say I might
have pulled out to sea to have a look for myself. But besides Belarab's
orders to the contrary, which I would attend to for the sake of example,
all you are worth in this world, Tom, is here in the Emma, under my
feet, and I would not leave my charge even for half a day. Hassim
attended the council held every evening in the shed outside Belarab's
stockade. That holy man Ningrat was for looting that vessel. Hassim
reproved him saying that the vessel probably was sent by you because
no white men were known to come inside the shoals. Belarab backed up
Hassim. Ningrat was very angry and reproached Belarab for keeping him,
Ningrat, short of opium to smoke. He began by calling him "O! son,"
and ended by shouting, "O! you worse than an unbeliever!" There was a
hullabaloo. The followers of Tengga were ready to interfere and you
know how it is between Tengga and Belarab. Tengga always wanted to oust
Belarab, and his chances were getting pretty good before you turned up
and armed Belarab's bodyguard with muskets. However, Hassim stopped that
row, and no one was hurt that time. Next day, which was Friday, Ningrat
after reading the prayers in the mosque talked to the people outside. He
bleated and capered like an old goat, prophesying misfortune, ruin, and
extermination if these whites were allowed to get away. He is mad but
then they think him a saint, and he had been fighting the Dutch for
years in his young days. Six of Belarab's guard marched down the village
street carrying muskets at full cock and the crowd cleared out. Ningrat
was spirited away by Tengga's men into their master's stockade. If it
was not for the fear of you turning up any moment there would have been
a party-fight that evening. I think it is a pity Tengga is not chief
of the land instead of Belarab. A brave and foresighted man, however
treacherous at heart, can always be trusted to a certain extent. One can
never get anything clear from Belarab. Peace! Peace! You know his fad.
And this fad makes him act silly. The peace racket will get him into a
row. It may cost him his life in the end. However, Tengga does not feel
himself strong enough yet to act with his own followers only and Belarab
has, on my advice, disarmed all villagers. His men went into the houses
and took away by force all the firearms and as many spears as they
could lay hands on. The women screamed abuse of course, but there was no
resistance. A few men were seen clearing out into the forest with their
arms. Note this, for it means there is another power beside Belarab's in
the village: the growing power of Tengga.

One morning--four days ago--I went to see Tengga. I found him by the
shore trimming a plank with a small hatchet while a slave held an
umbrella over his head. He is amusing himself in building a boat just
now. He threw his hatchet down to meet me and led me by the hand to
a shady spot. He told me frankly he had sent out two good swimmers to
observe the stranded vessel. These men stole down the creek in a canoe
and when on the sea coast swam from sandbank to sandbank until they
approached unobserved--I think--to about fifty yards from that schooner
What can that craft be? I can't make it out. The men reported there
were three chiefs on board. One with a glittering eye, one a lean man
in white, and another without any hair on the face and dressed in a
different style. Could it be a woman? I don't know what to think. I wish
you were here. After a lot of chatter Tengga said: "Six years ago I was
ruler of a country and the Dutch drove me out. The country was small but
nothing is too small for them to take. They pretended to give it back
to my nephew--may he burn! I ran away or they would have killed me. I am
nothing here--but I remember. These white people out there can not run
away and they are very few. There is perhaps a little to loot. I would
give it to my men who followed me in my calamity because I am their
chief and my father was the chief of their fathers." I pointed out the
imprudence of this. He said: "The dead do not show the way." To this I
remarked that the ignorant do not give information. Tengga kept quiet
for a while, then said: "We must not touch them because their skin is
like yours and to kill them would be wrong, but at the bidding of you
whites we may go and fight with people of our own skin and our own
faith--and that is good. I have promised to Tuan Lingard twenty men and
a prau to make war in Wajo. The men are good and look at the prau; it
is swift and strong." I must say, Tom, the prau is the best craft of
the kind I have ever seen. I said you paid him well for the help. "And
I also would pay," says he, "if you let me have a few guns and a little
powder for my men. You and I shall share the loot of that ship outside,
and Tuan Lingard will not know. It is only a little game. You have
plenty of guns and powder under your care." He meant in the Emma. On
that I spoke out pretty straight and we got rather warm until at last
he gave me to understand that as he had about forty followers of his own
and I had only nine of Hassim's chaps to defend the Emma with, he could
very well go for me and get the lot. "And then," says he, "I would be so
strong that everybody would be on my side." I discovered in the course
of further talk that there is a notion amongst many people that you have
come to grief in some way and won't show up here any more. After this
I saw the position was serious and I was in a hurry to get back to the
Emma, but pretending I did not care I smiled and thanked Tengga for
giving me warning of his intentions about me and the Emma. At this he
nearly choked himself with his betel quid and fixing me with his little
eyes, muttered: "Even a lizard will give a fly the time to say its
prayers." I turned my back on him and was very thankful to get beyond
the throw of a spear. I haven't been out of the Emma since.



IX

The letter went on to enlarge on the intrigues of Tengga, the wavering
conduct of Belarab, and the state of the public mind. It noted every
gust of opinion and every event, with an earnestness of belief in their
importance befitting the chronicle of a crisis in the history of an
empire. The shade of Jorgenson had, indeed, stepped back into the life
of men. The old adventurer looked on with a perfect understanding of
the value of trifles, using his eyes for that other man whose conscience
would have the task to unravel the tangle. Lingard lived through those
days in the Settlement and was thankful to Jorgenson; only as he lived
not from day to day but from sentence to sentence of the writing, there
was an effect of bewildering rapidity in the succession of events that
made him grunt with surprise sometimes or growl--"What?" to himself
angrily and turn back several lines or a whole page more than once.
Toward the end he had a heavy frown of perplexity and fidgeted as he
read:

--and I began to think I could keep things quiet till you came or those
wretched white people got their schooner off, when Sherif Daman arrived
from the north on the very day he was expected, with two Illanun praus.
He looks like an Arab. It was very evident to me he can wind the two
Illanun pangerans round his little finger. The two praus are large and
armed. They came up the creek, flags and streamers flying, beating drums
and gongs, and entered the lagoon with their decks full of armed men
brandishing two-handed swords and sounding the war cry. It is a fine
force for you, only Belarab who is a perverse devil would not receive
Sherif Daman at once. So Daman went to see Tengga who detained him a
very long time. Leaving Tengga he came on board the Emma, and I could
see directly there was something up.

He began by asking me for the ammunition and weapons they are to get
from you, saying he was anxious to sail at once toward Wajo, since it
was agreed he was to precede you by a few days. I replied that that
was true enough but that I could not think of giving him the powder
and muskets till you came. He began to talk about you and hinted that
perhaps you will never come. "And no matter," says he, "here is Rajah
Hassim and the Lady Immada and we would fight for them if no white man
was left in the world. Only we must have something to fight with." He
pretended then to forget me altogether and talked with Hassim while I
sat listening. He began to boast how well he got along the Bruni coast.
No Illanun prau had passed down that coast for years.

Immada wanted me to give the arms he was asking for. The girl is beside
herself with fear of something happening that would put a stopper on
the Wajo expedition. She has set her mind on getting her country back.
Hassim is very reserved but he is very anxious, too. Daman got nothing
from me, and that very evening the praus were ordered by Belarab to
leave the lagoon. He does not trust the Illanuns--and small blame to
him. Sherif Daman went like a lamb. He has no powder for his guns. As
the praus passed by the Emma he shouted to me he was going to wait for
you outside the creek. Tengga has given him a man who would show him the
place. All this looks very queer to me.

Look out outside then. The praus are dodging amongst the islets. Daman
visits Tengga. Tengga called on me as a good friend to try and persuade
me to give Daman the arms and gunpowder he is so anxious to get. Somehow
or other they tried to get around Belarab, who came to see me last night
and hinted I had better do so. He is anxious for these Illanuns to leave
the neighbourhood. He thinks that if they loot the schooner they will be
off at once. That's all he wants now. Immada has been to see Belarab's
women and stopped two nights in the stockade. Belarab's youngest
wife--he got married six weeks ago--is on the side of Tengga's party
because she thinks Belarab would get a share of the loot and she got
into her silly head there are jewels and silks in that schooner. What
between Tengga worrying him outside and the women worrying him at home,
Belarab had such a lively time of it that he concluded he would go to
pray at his father's tomb. So for the last two days he has been away
camping in that unhealthy place. When he comes back he will be down with
fever as sure as fate and then he will be no good for anything. Tengga
lights up smoky fires often. Some signal to Daman. I go ashore with
Hassim's men and put them out. This is risking a fight every time--for
Tengga's men look very black at us. I don't know what the next move may
be. Hassim's as true as steel. Immada is very unhappy. They will tell
you many details I have no time to write.

The last page fluttered on the table out of Lingard's fingers. He sat
very still for a moment looking straight before him, then went on deck.

"Our boats back yet?" he asked Shaw, whom he saw prowling on the
quarter-deck.

"No, sir, I wish they were. I am waiting for them to go and turn in,"
answered the mate in an aggrieved manner.

"Lower that lantern forward there," cried Lingard, suddenly, in Malay.

"This trade isn't fit for a decent man," muttered Shaw to himself, and
he moved away to lean on the rail, looking moodily to seaward. After a
while: "There seems to be commotion on board that yacht," he said.
"I see a lot of lights moving about her decks. Anything wrong, do you
think, sir?"

"No, I know what it is," said Lingard in a tone of elation. She has done
it! he thought.

He returned to the cabin, put away Jorgenson's letter and pulled out the
drawer of the table. It was full of cartridges. He took a musket down,
loaded it, then took another and another. He hammered at the waddings
with fierce joyousness. The ramrods rang and jumped. It seemed to him
he was doing his share of some work in which that woman was playing her
part faithfully. "She has done it," he repeated, mentally. "She will sit
in the cuddy. She will sleep in my berth. Well, I'm not ashamed of the
brig. By heavens--no! I shall keep away: never come near them as I've
promised. Now there's nothing more to say. I've told her everything at
once. There's nothing more."

He felt a heaviness in his burning breast, in all his limbs as if the
blood in his veins had become molten lead.

"I shall get the yacht off. Three, four days--no, a week."

He found he couldn't do it under a week. It occurred to him he would see
her every day till the yacht was afloat. No, he wouldn't intrude, but he
was master and owner of the brig after all. He didn't mean to skulk like
a whipped cur about his own decks.

"It'll be ten days before the schooner is ready. I'll take every scrap
of ballast out of her. I'll strip her--I'll take her lower masts out
of her, by heavens! I'll make sure. Then another week to fit
out--and--goodbye. Wish I had never seen them. Good-bye--forever. Home's
the place for them. Not for me. On another coast she would not have
listened. Ah, but she is a woman--every inch of her. I shall shake
hands. Yes. I shall take her hand--just before she goes. Why the devil
not? I am master here after all--in this brig--as good as any one--by
heavens, better than any one--better than any one on earth."

He heard Shaw walk smartly forward above his head hailing:

"What's that--a boat?"

A voice answered indistinctly.

"One of my boats is back," thought Lingard. "News about Daman perhaps.
I don't care if he kicks. I wish he would. I would soon show her I can
fight as well as I can handle the brig. Two praus. Only two praus. I
wouldn't mind if there were twenty. I would sweep 'em off the sea--I
would blow 'em out of the water--I would make the brig walk over them.
'Now,' I'd say to her, 'you who are not afraid, look how it's done!'"

He felt light. He had the sensation of being whirled high in the midst
of an uproar and as powerless as a feather in a hurricane. He shuddered
profoundly. His arms hung down, and he stood before the table staring
like a man overcome by some fatal intelligence.

Shaw, going into the waist to receive what he thought was one of the
brig's boats, came against Carter making his way aft hurriedly.

"Hullo! Is it you again?" he said, swiftly, barring the way.

"I come from the yacht," began Carter with some impatience.

"Where else could you come from?" said Shaw. "And what might you want
now?"

"I want to see your skipper."

"Well, you can't," declared Shaw, viciously. "He's turned in for the
night."

"He expects me," said Carter, stamping his foot. "I've got to tell him
what happened."

"Don't you fret yourself, young man," said Shaw in a superior manner;
"he knows all about it."

They stood suddenly silent in the dark. Carter seemed at a loss what to
do. Shaw, though surprised by it, enjoyed the effect he had produced.

"Damn me, if I did not think so," murmured Carter to himself; then
drawling coolly asked--"And perhaps you know, too?"

"What do you think? Think I am a dummy here? I ain't mate of this brig
for nothing."

"No, you are not," said Carter with a certain bitterness of tone.
"People do all kinds of queer things for a living, and I am not
particular myself, but I would think twice before taking your billet."

"What? What do you in-si-nu-ate. My billet? You ain't fit for it, you
yacht-swabbing brass-buttoned imposter."

"What's this? Any of our boats back?" asked Lingard from the poop. "Let
the seacannie in charge come to me at once."

"There's only a message from the yacht," began Shaw, deliberately.

"Yacht! Get the deck lamps along here in the waist! See the ladder
lowered. Bear a hand, serang! Mr. Shaw! Burn the flare up aft. Two of
them! Give light to the yacht's boats that will be coming alongside.
Steward! Where's that steward? Turn him out then."

Bare feet began to patter all round Carter. Shadows glided swiftly.

"Are these flares coming? Where's the quartermaster on duty?" shouted
Lingard in English and Malay. "This way, come here! Put it on a rocket
stick--can't you? Hold over the side--thus! Stand by with the lines for
the boats forward there. Mr. Shaw--we want more light!"

"Aye, aye, sir," called out Shaw, but he did not move, as if dazed by
the vehemence of his commander.

"That's what we want," muttered Carter under his breath. "Imposter! What
do you call yourself?" he said half aloud to Shaw.

The ruddy glare of the flares disclosed Lingard from head to foot,
standing at the break of the poop. His head was bare, his face, crudely
lighted, had a fierce and changing expression in the sway of flames.

"What can be his game?" thought Carter, impressed by the powerful
and wild aspect of that figure. "He's changed somehow since I saw him
first," he reflected. It struck him the change was serious, not exactly
for the worse, perhaps--and yet. . . . Lingard smiled at him from the
poop.

Carter went up the steps and without pausing informed him of what had
happened.

"Mrs. Travers told me to go to you at once. She's very upset as you may
guess," he drawled, looking Lingard hard in the face. Lingard knitted
his eyebrows. "The hands, too, are scared," Carter went on. "They fancy
the savages, or whatever they may be who stole the owner, are going to
board the yacht every minute. I don't think so myself but--"

"Quite right--most unlikely," muttered Lingard.

"Aye, I daresay you know all about it," continued Carter, coolly, "the
men are startled and no mistake, but I can't blame them very much. There
isn't enough even of carving knives aboard to go round. One old signal
gun! A poor show for better men than they."

"There's no mistake I suppose about this affair?" asked Lingard.

"Well, unless the gentlemen are having a lark with us at hide and seek.
The man says he waited ten minutes at the point, then pulled slowly
along the bank looking out, expecting to see them walking back. He
made the trunk of a tree apparently stranded on the sand and as he was
sculling past he says a man jumped up from behind that log, flung a
stick at him and went off running. He backed water at once and began to
shout, 'Are you there, sir?' No one answered. He could hear the bushes
rustle and some strange noises like whisperings. It was very dark. After
calling out several times, and waiting on his oars, he got frightened
and pulled back to the yacht. That is clear enough. The only doubt in
my mind is if they are alive or not. I didn't let on to Mrs. Travers.
That's a kind of thing you keep to yourself, of course."

"I don't think they are dead," said Lingard, slowly, and as if thinking
of something else.

"Oh! If you say so it's all right," said Carter with deliberation.

"What?" asked Lingard, absently; "fling a stick, did they? Fling a
spear!"

"That's it!" assented Carter, "but I didn't say anything. I only
wondered if the same kind of stick hadn't been flung at the owner,
that's all. But I suppose you know your business best, Captain."

Lingard, grasping his whole beard, reflected profoundly, erect and with
bowed head in the glare of the flares.

"I suppose you think it's my doing?" he asked, sharply, without looking
up.

Carter surveyed him with a candidly curious gaze. "Well, Captain, Mrs.
Travers did let on a bit to me about our chief-officer's boat. You've
stopped it, haven't you? How she got to know God only knows. She
was sorry she spoke, too, but it wasn't so much of news to me as she
thought. I can put two and two together, sometimes. Those rockets, last
night, eh? I wished I had bitten my tongue out before I told you about
our first gig. But I was taken unawares. Wasn't I? I put it to you:
wasn't I? And so I told her when she asked me what passed between
you and me on board this brig, not twenty-four hours ago. Things look
different now, all of a sudden. Enough to scare a woman, but she is
the best man of them all on board. The others are fairly off the chump
because it's a bit dark and something has happened they ain't used to.
But she has something on her mind. I can't make her out!" He paused,
wriggled his shoulders slightly--"No more than I can make you out," he
added.

"That's your trouble, is it?" said Lingard, slowly.

"Aye, Captain. Is it all clear to you? Stopping boats, kidnapping
gentlemen. That's fun in a way, only--I am a youngster to you--but is it
all clear to you? Old Robinson wasn't particular, you know, and he--"

"Clearer than daylight," cried Lingard, hotly. "I can't give up--"

He checked himself. Carter waited. The flare bearers stood rigid,
turning their faces away from the flame, and in the play of gleams at
its foot the mast near by, like a lofty column, ascended in the great
darkness. A lot of ropes ran up slanting into a dark void and were
lost to sight, but high aloft a brace block gleamed white, the end of a
yard-arm could be seen suspended in the air and as if glowing with its
own light. The sky had clouded over the brig without a breath of wind.

"Give up," repeated Carter with an uneasy shuffle of feet.

"Nobody," finished Lingard. "I can't. It's as clear as daylight. I
can't! No! Nothing!"

He stared straight out afar, and after looking at him Carter felt moved
by a bit of youthful intuition to murmur, "That's bad," in a tone
that almost in spite of himself hinted at the dawning of a befogged
compassion.

He had a sense of confusion within him, the sense of mystery without.
He had never experienced anything like it all the time when serving with
old Robinson in the Ly-e-moon. And yet he had seen and taken part in
some queer doings that were not clear to him at the time. They were
secret but they suggested something comprehensible. This affair did not.
It had somehow a subtlety that affected him. He was uneasy as if there
had been a breath of magic on events and men giving to this complication
of a yachting voyage a significance impossible to perceive, but felt
in the words, in the gestures, in the events, which made them all
strangely, obscurely startling.

He was not one who could keep track of his sensations, and besides he
had not the leisure. He had to answer Lingard's questions about the
people of the yacht. No, he couldn't say Mrs. Travers was what you may
call frightened. She seemed to have something in her mind. Oh, yes! The
chaps were in a funk. Would they fight? Anybody would fight when driven
to it, funk or no funk. That was his experience. Naturally one liked
to have something better than a handspike to do it with. Still--In the
pause Carter seemed to weigh with composure the chances of men with
handspikes.

"What do you want to fight us for?" he asked, suddenly.

Lingard started.

"I don't," he said; "I wouldn't be asking you."

"There's no saying what you would do, Captain," replied Carter; "it
isn't twenty-four hours since you wanted to shoot me."

"I only said I would, rather than let you go raising trouble for me,"
explained Lingard.

"One night isn't like another," mumbled Carter, "but how am I to know?
It seems to me you are making trouble for yourself as fast as you can."

"Well, supposing I am," said Lingard with sudden gloominess. "Would your
men fight if I armed them properly?"

"What--for you or for themselves?" asked Carter.

"For the woman," burst out Lingard. "You forget there's a woman on
board. I don't care _that_ for their carcases."

Carter pondered conscientiously.

"Not to-night," he said at last. "There's one or two good men amongst
them, but the rest are struck all of a heap. Not to-night. Give them
time to get steady a bit if you want them to fight."

He gave facts and opinions with a mixture of loyalty and mistrust. His
own state puzzled him exceedingly. He couldn't make out anything, he did
not know what to believe and yet he had an impulsive desire, an inspired
desire to help the man. At times it appeared a necessity--at others
policy; between whiles a great folly, which perhaps did not matter
because he suspected himself of being helpless anyway. Then he had
moments of anger. In those moments he would feel in his pocket the
butt of a loaded pistol. He had provided himself with the weapon, when
directed by Mrs. Travers to go on board the brig.

"If he wants to interfere with me, I'll let drive at him and take my
chance of getting away," he had explained hurriedly.

He remembered how startled Mrs. Travers looked. Of course, a woman like
that--not used to hear such talk. Therefore it was no use listening to
her, except for good manners' sake. Once bit twice shy. He had no mind
to be kidnapped, not he, nor bullied either.

"I can't let him nab me, too. You will want me now, Mrs. Travers," he
had said; "and I promise you not to fire off the old thing unless he
jolly well forces me to."

He was youthfully wise in his resolution not to give way to her
entreaties, though her extraordinary agitation did stagger him for a
moment. When the boat was already on its way to the brig, he remembered
her calling out after him:

"You must not! You don't understand."

Her voice coming faintly in the darkness moved him, it resembled so much
a cry of distress.

"Give way, boys, give way," he urged his men.

He was wise, resolute, and he was also youthful enough to almost wish
it should "come to it." And with foresight he even instructed the boat's
crew to keep the gig just abaft the main rigging of the brig.

"When you see me drop into her all of a sudden, shove off and pull for
dear life."

Somehow just then he was not so anxious for a shot, but he held on with
a determined mental grasp to his fine resolution, lest it should slip
away from him and perish in a sea of doubts.

"Hadn't I better get back to the yacht?" he asked, gently.

Getting no answer he went on with deliberation:

"Mrs. Travers ordered me to say that no matter how this came about
she is ready to trust you. She is waiting for some kind of answer, I
suppose."

"Ready to trust me," repeated Lingard. His eyes lit up fiercely.

Every sway of flares tossed slightly to and fro the massy shadows of
the main deck, where here and there the figure of a man could be seen
standing very still with a dusky face and glittering eyeballs.

Carter stole his hand warily into his breast pocket:

"Well, Captain," he said. He was not going to be bullied, let the
owner's wife trust whom she liked.

"Have you got anything in writing for me there?" asked Lingard,
advancing a pace, exultingly.

Carter, alert, stepped back to keep his distance. Shaw stared from the
side; his rubicund cheeks quivered, his round eyes seemed starting out
of his head, and his mouth was open as though he had been ready to choke
with pent-up curiosity, amazement, and indignation.

"No! Not in writing," said Carter, steadily and low.

Lingard had the air of being awakened by a shout. A heavy and darkening
frown seemed to fall out of the night upon his forehead and swiftly
passed into the night again, and when it departed it left him so calm,
his glance so lucid, his mien so composed that it was difficult to
believe the man's heart had undergone within the last second the trial
of humiliation and of danger. He smiled sadly:

"Well, young man," he asked with a kind of good-humoured resignation,
"what is it you have there? A knife or a pistol?"

"A pistol," said Carter. "Are you surprised, Captain?" He spoke with
heat because a sense of regret was stealing slowly within him, as
stealthily, as irresistibly as the flowing tide. "Who began these
tricks?" He withdrew his hand, empty, and raised his voice. "You are up
to something I can't make out. You--you are not straight."

The flares held on high streamed right up without swaying, and in that
instant of profound calm the shadows on the brig's deck became as still
as the men.

"You think not?" said Lingard, thoughtfully.

Carter nodded. He resented the turn of the incident and the growing
impulse to surrender to that man.

"Mrs. Travers trusts me though," went on Lingard with gentle triumph as
if advancing an unanswerable argument.

"So she says," grunted Carter; "I warned her. She's a baby. They're all
as innocent as babies there. And you know it. And I know it. I've heard
of your kind. You would dump the lot of us overboard if it served your
turn. That's what I think."

"And that's all."

Carter nodded slightly and looked away. There was a silence. Lingard's
eyes travelled over the brig. The lighted part of the vessel appeared in
bright and wavering detail walled and canopied by the night. He felt a
light breath on his face. The air was stirring, but the Shallows, silent
and lost in the darkness, gave no sound of life.

This stillness oppressed Lingard. The world of his endeavours and his
hopes seemed dead, seemed gone. His desire existed homeless in the
obscurity that had devoured his corner of the sea, this stretch of the
coast, his certitude of success. And here in the midst of what was the
domain of his adventurous soul there was a lost youngster ready to shoot
him on suspicion of some extravagant treachery. Came ready to shoot!
That's good, too! He was too weary to laugh--and perhaps too sad. Also
the danger of the pistol-shot, which he believed real--the young are
rash--irritated him. The night and the spot were full of contradictions.
It was impossible to say who in this shadowy warfare was to be an enemy,
and who were the allies. So close were the contacts issuing from this
complication of a yachting voyage, that he seemed to have them all
within his breast.

"Shoot me! He is quite up to that trick--damn him. Yet I would trust him
sooner than any man in that yacht."

Such were his thoughts while he looked at Carter, who was biting his
lips, in the vexation of the long silence. When they spoke again to each
other they talked soberly, with a sense of relief, as if they had come
into cool air from an overheated room and when Carter, dismissed, went
into his boat, he had practically agreed to the line of action traced
by Lingard for the crew of the yacht. He had agreed as if in implicit
confidence. It was one of the absurdities of the situation which had to
be accepted and could never be understood.

"Do I talk straight now?" had asked Lingard.

"It seems straight enough," assented Carter with an air of reserve; "I
will work with you so far anyhow."

"Mrs. Travers trusts me," remarked Lingard again.

"By the Lord Harry!" cried Carter, giving way suddenly to some latent
conviction. "I was warning her against you. Say, Captain, you are a
devil of a man. How did you manage it?"

"I trusted her," said Lingard.

"Did you?" cried the amazed Carter. "When? How? Where--"

"You know too much already," retorted Lingard, quietly. "Waste no time.
I will be after you."

Carter whistled low.

"There's a pair of you I can't make out," he called back, hurrying over
the side.

Shaw took this opportunity to approach. Beginning with hesitation: "A
word with you, sir," the mate went on to say he was a respectable man.
He delivered himself in a ringing, unsteady voice. He was married, he
had children, he abhorred illegality. The light played about his obese
figure, he had flung his mushroom hat on the deck, he was not afraid to
speak the truth. The grey moustache stood out aggressively, his glances
were uneasy; he pressed his hands to his stomach convulsively, opened
his thick, short arms wide, wished it to be understood he had been
chief-officer of home ships, with a spotless character and he hoped
"quite up to his work." He was a peaceable man, none more; disposed
to stretch a point when it "came to a difference with niggers of some
kind--they had to be taught manners and reason" and he was not averse at
a pinch to--but here were white people--gentlemen, ladies, not to speak
of the crew. He had never spoken to a superior like this before,
and this was prudence, his conviction, a point of view, a point of
principle, a conscious superiority and a burst of resentment hoarded
through years against all the successive and unsatisfactory captains of
his existence. There never had been such an opportunity to show he could
not be put upon. He had one of them on a string and he was going to lead
him a dance. There was courage, too, in it, since he believed himself
fallen unawares into the clutches of a particularly desperate man and
beyond the reach of law.

A certain small amount of calculation entered the audacity of his
remonstrance. Perhaps--it flashed upon him--the yacht's gentry will hear
I stood up for them. This could conceivably be of advantage to a man
who wanted a lift in the world. "Owner of a yacht--badly scared--a
gentleman--money nothing to him." Thereupon Shaw declared with heat that
he couldn't be an accessory either after or before the fact. Those
that never went home--who had nothing to go to perhaps--he interjected,
hurriedly, could do as they liked. He couldn't. He had a wife, a
family, a little house--paid for--with difficulty. He followed the sea
respectably out and home, all regular, not vagabonding here and there,
chumming with the first nigger that came along and laying traps for his
betters.

One of the two flare bearers sighed at his elbow, and shifted his weight
to the other foot.

These two had been keeping so perfectly still that the movement was
as startling as if a statue had changed its pose. After looking at the
offender with cold malevolence, Shaw went on to speak of law-courts,
of trials, and of the liberty of the subject; then he pointed out the
certitude and the inconvenience of being found out, affecting for the
moment the dispassionateness of wisdom.

"There will be fifteen years in gaol at the end of this job for
everybody," said Shaw, "and I have a boy that don't know his father yet.
Fine things for him to learn when he grows up. The innocent are dead
certain here to catch it along with you. The missus will break her heart
unless she starves first. Home sold up."

He saw a mysterious iniquity in a dangerous relation to himself and
began to lose his head. What he really wanted was to have his
existence left intact, for his own cherishing and pride. It was a moral
aspiration, but in his alarm the native grossness of his nature came
clattering out like a devil out of a trap. He would blow the gaff,
split, give away the whole show, he would back up honest people, kiss
the book, say what he thought, let all the world know . . . and when he
paused to draw breath, all around him was silent and still. Before the
impetus of that respectable passion his words were scattered like chaff
driven by a gale and rushed headlong into the night of the Shallows. And
in the great obscurity, imperturbable, it heard him say he "washed his
hands of everything."

"And the brig?" asked Lingard, suddenly.

Shaw was checked. For a second the seaman in him instinctively admitted
the claim of the ship.

"The brig. The brig. She's right enough," he mumbled. He had nothing to
say against the brig--not he. She wasn't like the big ships he was used
to, but of her kind the best craft he ever. . . . And with a brusque
return upon himself, he protested that he had been decoyed on board
under false pretences. It was as bad as being shanghaied when in liquor.
It was--upon his soul. And into a craft next thing to a pirate! That
was the name for it or his own name was not Shaw. He said this glaring
owlishly. Lingard, perfectly still and mute, bore the blows without a
sign.

The silly fuss of that man seared his very soul. There was no end to
this plague of fools coming to him from the forgotten ends of the earth.
A fellow like that could not be told. No one could be told. Blind they
came and blind they would go out. He admitted reluctantly, but without
doubt, that as if pushed by a force from outside he would have to
try and save two of them. To this end he foresaw the probable need of
leaving his brig for a time. He would have to leave her with that man.
The mate. He had engaged him himself--to make his insurance valid--to be
able sometimes to speak--to have near him. Who would have believed such
a fool-man could exist on the face of the sea! Who? Leave the brig with
him. The brig!

Ever since sunset, the breeze kept off by the heat of the day had been
trying to re-establish in the darkness its sway over the Shoals. Its
approaches had been heard in the night, its patient murmurs, its foiled
sighs; but now a surprisingly heavy puff came in a free rush as if,
far away there to the northward, the last defence of the calm had
been victoriously carried. The flames borne down streamed bluishly,
horizontal and noisy at the end of tall sticks, like fluttering
pennants; and behold, the shadows on the deck went mad and jostled each
other as if trying to escape from a doomed craft, the darkness, held
up dome-like by the brilliant glare, seemed to tumble headlong upon the
brig in an overwhelming downfall, the men stood swaying as if ready
to fall under the ruins of a black and noiseless disaster. The blurred
outlines of the brig, the masts, the rigging, seemed to shudder in the
terror of coming extinction--and then the darkness leaped upward again,
the shadows returned to their places, the men were seen distinct,
swarthy, with calm faces, with glittering eyeballs. The destruction in
the breath had passed, was gone.

A discord of three voices raised together in a drawling wail trailed on
the sudden immobility of the air.

"Brig ahoy! Give us a rope!"

The first boat-load from the yacht emerged floating slowly into the
pool of purple light wavering round the brig on the black water. Two men
squeezed in the bows pulled uncomfortably; in the middle, on a heap of
seamen's canvas bags, another sat, insecure, propped with both arms,
stiff-legged, angularly helpless. The light from the poop brought
everything out in lurid detail, and the boat floating slowly toward the
brig had a suspicious and pitiful aspect. The shabby load lumbering
her looked somehow as if it had been stolen by those men who resembled
castaways. In the sternsheets Carter, standing up, steered with his leg.
He had a smile of youthful sarcasm.

"Here they are!" he cried to Lingard. "You've got your own way, Captain.
I thought I had better come myself with the first precious lot--"

"Pull around the stern. The brig's on the swing," interrupted Lingard.

"Aye, aye! We'll try not to smash the brig. We would be lost indeed
if--fend off there, John; fend off, old reliable, if you care a pin
for your salty hide. I like the old chap," he said, when he stood by
Lingard's side looking down at the boat which was being rapidly cleared
by whites and Malays working shoulder to shoulder in silence. "I like
him. He don't belong to that yachting lot either. They picked him up
on the road somewhere. Look at the old dog--carved out of a ship's
timber--as talkative as a fish--grim as a gutted wreck. That's the man
for me. All the others there are married, or going to be, or ought
to be, or sorry they ain't. Every man jack of them has a petticoat in
tow--dash me! Never heard in all my travels such a jabber about wives
and kids. Hurry up with your dunnage--below there! Aye! I had no
difficulty in getting them to clear out from the yacht. They never saw
a pair of gents stolen before--you understand. It upset all their little
notions of what a stranding means, hereabouts. Not that mine aren't
mixed a bit, too--and yet I've seen a thing or two."

His excitement was revealed in this boyish impulse to talk.

"Look," he said, pointing at the growing pile of bags and bedding on the
brig's quarter-deck. "Look. Don't they mean to sleep soft--and dream of
home--maybe. Home. Think of that, Captain. These chaps can't get clear
away from it. It isn't like you and me--"

Lingard made a movement.

"I ran away myself when so high. My old man's a Trinity pilot. That's a
job worth staying at home for. Mother writes sometimes, but they can't
miss me much. There's fourteen of us altogether--eight at home yet. No
fear of the old country ever getting undermanned--let die who must. Only
let it be a fair game, Captain. Let's have a fair show."

Lingard assured him briefly he should have it. That was the very reason
he wanted the yacht's crew in the brig, he added. Then quiet and grave
he inquired whether that pistol was still in Carter's pocket.

"Never mind that," said the young man, hurriedly. "Remember who began.
To be shot at wouldn't rile me so much--it's being threatened, don't you
see, that was heavy on my chest. Last night is very far off though--and
I will be hanged if I know what I meant exactly when I took the old
thing from its nail. There. More I can't say till all's settled one way
or another. Will that do?"

Flushing brick red, he suspended his judgment and stayed his hand with
the generosity of youth.

. . . . . . .

Apparently it suited Lingard to be reprieved in that form. He bowed
his head slowly. It would do. To leave his life to that youngster's
ignorance seemed to redress the balance of his mind against a lot of
secret intentions. It was distasteful and bitter as an expiation should
be. He also held a life in his hand; a life, and many deaths besides,
but these were like one single feather in the scales of his conscience.
That he should feel so was unavoidable because his strength would at no
price permit itself to be wasted. It would not be--and there was an
end of it. All he could do was to throw in another risk into the sea
of risks. Thus was he enabled to recognize that a drop of water in
the ocean makes a great difference. His very desire, unconquered, but
exiled, had left the place where he could constantly hear its voice. He
saw it, he saw himself, the past, the future, he saw it all, shifting
and indistinct like those shapes the strained eye of a wanderer outlines
in darker strokes upon the face of the night.



X

When Lingard went to his boat to follow Carter, who had gone back to the
yacht, Wasub, mast and sail on shoulder, preceded him down the ladder.
The old man leaped in smartly and busied himself in getting the dinghy
ready for his commander.

In that little boat Lingard was accustomed to traverse the Shallows
alone. She had a short mast and a lug-sail, carried two easily, floated
in a few inches of water. In her he was independent of a crew, and, if
the wind failed, could make his way with a pair of sculls taking short
cuts over shoal places. There were so many islets and sandbanks that in
case of sudden bad weather there was always a lee to be found, and when
he wished to land he could pull her up a beach, striding ahead, painter
in hand, like a giant child dragging a toy boat. When the brig was
anchored within the Shallows it was in her that he visited the lagoon.
Once, when caught by a sudden freshening of the sea-breeze, he had waded
up a shelving bank carrying her on his head and for two days they had
rested together on the sand, while around them the shallow waters raged
lividly, and across three miles of foam the brig would time after time
dissolve in the mist and re-appear distinct, nodding her tall spars that
seemed to touch a weeping sky of lamentable greyness.

Whenever he came into the lagoon tugging with bare arms, Jorgenson,
who would be watching the entrance of the creek ever since a muffled
detonation of a gun to seaward had warned him of the brig's arrival on
the Shore of Refuge, would mutter to himself--"Here's Tom coming in his
nutshell." And indeed she was in shape somewhat like half a nutshell and
also in the colour of her dark varnished planks. The man's shoulders and
head rose high above her gunwales; loaded with Lingard's heavy frame she
would climb sturdily the steep ridges, slide squatting into the hollows
of the sea, or, now and then, take a sedate leap over a short wave. Her
behaviour had a stout trustworthiness about it, and she reminded one of
a surefooted mountain-pony carrying over difficult ground a rider much
bigger than himself.

Wasub wiped the thwarts, ranged the mast and sail along the side,
shipped the rowlocks. Lingard looked down at his old servant's spare
shoulders upon which the light from above fell unsteady but vivid. Wasub
worked for the comfort of his commander and his singleminded absorption
in that task flashed upon Lingard the consolation of an act of
friendliness. The elderly Malay at last lifted his head with a
deferential murmur; his wrinkled old face with half a dozen wiry hairs
pendulous at each corner of the dark lips expressed a kind of weary
satisfaction, and the slightly oblique worn eyes stole a discreet upward
glance containing a hint of some remote meaning. Lingard found himself
compelled by the justice of that obscure claim to murmur as he stepped
into the boat:

"These are times of danger."

He sat down and took up the sculls. Wasub held on to the gunwale as to a
last hope of a further confidence. He had served in the brig five years.
Lingard remembered that very well. This aged figure had been intimately
associated with the brig's life and with his own, appearing silently
ready for every incident and emergency in an unquestioning expectation
of orders; symbolic of blind trust in his strength, of an unlimited
obedience to his will. Was it unlimited?

"We shall require courage and fidelity," added Lingard, in a tentative
tone.

"There are those who know me," snapped the old man, readily, as if the
words had been waiting for a long time. "Observe, Tuan. I have filled
with fresh water the little breaker in the bows."

"I know you, too," said Lingard.

"And the wind--and the sea," ejaculated the serang, jerkily. "These
also are faithful to the strong. By Allah! I who am a pilgrim and have
listened to words of wisdom in many places, I tell you, Tuan, there is
strength in the knowledge of what is hidden in things without life, as
well as in the living men. Will Tuan be gone long?"

"I come back in a short time--together with the rest of the whites from
over there. This is the beginning of many stratagems. Wasub! Daman, the
son of a dog, has suddenly made prisoners two of my own people. My face
is made black."

"Tse! Tse! What ferocity is that! One should not offer shame to a friend
or to a friend's brother lest revenge come sweeping like a flood. Yet
can an Illanun chief be other than tyrannical? My old eyes have seen
much but they never saw a tiger change its stripes. Ya-wa! The tiger can
not. This is the wisdom of us ignorant Malay men. The wisdom of white
Tuans is great. They think that by the power of many speeches the tiger
may--" He broke off and in a crisp, busy tone said: "The rudder dwells
safely under the aftermost seat should Tuan be pleased to sail the boat.
This breeze will not die away before sunrise." Again his voice changed
as if two different souls had been flitting in and out of his body. "No,
no, kill the tiger and then the stripes may be counted without fear--one
by one, thus."

He pointed a frail brown finger and, abruptly, made a mirthless dry
sound as if a rattle had been sprung in his throat.

"The wretches are many," said Lingard.

"Nay, Tuan. They follow their great men even as we in the brig follow
you. That is right."

Lingard reflected for a moment.

"My men will follow me then," he said.

"They are poor calashes without sense," commented Wasub with pitying
superiority. "Some with no more comprehension than men of the bush
freshly caught. There is Sali, the foolish son of my sister and by your
great favour appointed to mind the tiller of this ship. His stupidity is
extreme, but his eyes are good--nearly as good as mine that by praying
and much exercise can see far into the night."

Lingard laughed low and then looked earnestly at the serang. Above their
heads a man shook a flare over the side and a thin shower of sparks
floated downward and expired before touching the water.

"So you can see in the night, O serang! Well, then, look and speak.
Speak! Fight--or no fight? Weapons or words? Which folly? Well, what do
you see?"

"A darkness, a darkness," whispered Wasub at last in a frightened tone.
"There are nights--" He shook his head and muttered. "Look. The tide has
turned. Ya, Tuan. The tide has turned."

Lingard looked downward where the water could be seen, gliding past the
ship's side, moving smoothly, streaked with lines of froth, across the
illumined circle thrown round the brig by the lights on her poop.
Air bubbles sparkled, lines of darkness, ripples of glitter appeared,
glided, went astern without a splash, without a trickle, without a
plaint, without a break. The unchecked gentleness of the flow captured
the eye by a subtle spell, fastened insidiously upon the mind a
disturbing sense of the irretrievable. The ebbing of the sea athwart the
lonely sheen of flames resembled the eternal ebb-tide of time; and when
at last Lingard looked up, the knowledge of that noiseless passage of
the waters produced on his mind a bewildering effect. For a moment the
speck of light lost in vast obscurity the brig, the boat, the hidden
coast, the Shallows, the very walls and roof of darkness--the seen
and the unseen alike seemed to be gliding smoothly onward through the
enormous gloom of space. Then, with a great mental effort, he brought
everything to a sudden standstill; and only the froth and bubbles went
on streaming past ceaselessly, unchecked by the power of his will.

"The tide has turned--you say, serang? Has it--? Well, perhaps it has,
perhaps it has," he finished, muttering to himself.

"Truly it has. Can not Tuan see it run under his own eyes?" said Wasub
with an alarmed earnestness. "Look. Now it is in my mind that a prau
coming from amongst the southern islands, if steered cunningly in the
free set of the current, would approach the bows of this, our brig,
drifting silently as a shape without a substance."

"And board suddenly--is that it?" said Lingard.

"Daman is crafty and the Illanuns are very bloodthirsty. Night is
nothing to them. They are certainly valorous. Are they not born in the
midst of fighting and are they not inspired by the evil of their hearts
even before they can speak? And their chiefs would be leading them while
you, Tuan, are going from us even now--"

"You don't want me to go?" asked Lingard.

For a time Wasub listened attentively to the profound silence.

"Can we fight without a leader?" he began again. "It is the belief in
victory that gives courage. And what would poor calashes do, sons of
peasants and fishermen, freshly caught--without knowledge? They believe
in your strength--and in your power--or else--Will those whites that
came so suddenly avenge you? They are here like fish within the stakes.
Ya-wa! Who will bring the news and who will come to find the truth and
perchance to carry off your body? You go alone, Tuan!"

"There must be no fighting. It would be a calamity," insisted Lingard.
"There is blood that must not be spilt."

"Hear, Tuan!" exclaimed Wasub with heat. "The waters are running out
now." He punctuated his speech by slight jerks at the dinghy. "The
waters go and at the appointed time they shall return. And if between
their going and coming the blood of all the men in the world were poured
into it, the sea would not rise higher at the full by the breadth of my
finger nail."

"But the world would not be the same. You do not see that, serang. Give
the boat a good shove."

"Directly," said the old Malay and his face became impassive. "Tuan
knows when it is best to go, and death sometimes retreats before a firm
tread like a startled snake. Tuan should take a follower with him, not
a silly youth, but one who has lived--who has a steady heart--who would
walk close behind watchfully--and quietly. Yes. Quietly and with quick
eyes--like mine--perhaps with a weapon--I know how to strike."

Lingard looked at the wrinkled visage very near his own and into the
peering old eyes. They shone strangely. A tense eagerness was expressed
in the squatting figure leaning out toward him. On the other
side, within reach of his arm, the night stood like a wall
-discouraging--opaque--impenetrable. No help would avail. The darkness
he had to combat was too impalpable to be cleft by a blow--too dense to
be pierced by the eye; yet as if by some enchantment in the words that
made this vain offer of fidelity, it became less overpowering to his
sight, less crushing to his thought. He had a moment of pride which
soothed his heart for the space of two beats. His unreasonable and
misjudged heart, shrinking before the menace of failure, expanded freely
with a sense of generous gratitude. In the threatening dimness of his
emotions this man's offer made a point of clearness, the glimmer of
a torch held aloft in the night. It was priceless, no doubt, but
ineffectual; too small, too far, too solitary. It did not dispel the
mysterious obscurity that had descended upon his fortunes so that his
eyes could no longer see the work of his hands. The sadness of defeat
pervaded the world.

"And what could you do, O Wasub?" he said.

"I could always call out--'Take care, Tuan.'"

"And then for these charm-words of mine. Hey? Turn danger aside? What?
But perchance you would die all the same. Treachery is a strong magic,
too--as you said."

"Yes, indeed! The order might come to your servant. But I--Wasub--the
son of a free man, a follower of Rajahs, a fugitive, a slave, a
pilgrim--diver for pearls, serang of white men's ships, I have had too
many masters. Too many. You are the last." After a silence he said in an
almost indifferent voice: "If you go, Tuan, let us go together."

For a time Lingard made no sound.

"No use," he said at last. "No use, serang. One life is enough to pay
for a man's folly--and you have a household."

"I have two--Tuan; but it is a long time since I sat on the ladder of
a house to talk at ease with neighbours. Yes. Two households; one in--"
Lingard smiled faintly. "Tuan, let me follow you."

"No. You have said it, serang--I am alone. That is true, and alone I
shall go on this very night. But first I must bring all the white people
here. Push."

"Ready, Tuan? Look out!"

Wasub's body swung over the sea with extended arms. Lingard caught up
the sculls, and as the dinghy darted away from the brig's side he had
a complete view of the lighted poop--Shaw leaning massively over the
taffrail in sulky dejection, the flare bearers erect and rigid, the
heads along the rail, the eyes staring after him above the bulwarks. The
fore-end of the brig was wrapped in a lurid and sombre mistiness; the
sullen mingling of darkness and of light; her masts pointing straight up
could be tracked by torn gleams and vanished above as if the trucks
had been tall enough to pierce the heavy mass of vapours motionless
overhead. She was beautifully precious. His loving eyes saw her floating
at rest in a wavering halo, between an invisible sky and an invisible
sea, like a miraculous craft suspended in the air. He turned his
head away as if the sight had been too much for him at the moment of
separation, and, as soon as his little boat had passed beyond the limit
of the light thrown upon the water, he perceived very low in the black
void of the west the stern lantern of the yacht shining feebly like a
star about to set, unattainable, infinitely remote--belonging to another
universe.



PART IV. THE GIFT OF THE SHALLOWS

I

Lingard brought Mrs. Travers away from the yacht, going alone with her
in the little boat. During the bustle of the embarkment, and till the
last of the crew had left the schooner, he had remained towering and
silent by her side. It was only when the murmuring and uneasy voices
of the sailors going away in the boats had been completely lost in the
distance that his voice was heard, grave in the silence, pronouncing the
words--"Follow me." She followed him; their footsteps rang hollow and
loud on the empty deck. At the bottom of the steps he turned round and
said very low:

"Take care."

He got into the boat and held on. It seemed to him that she was
intimidated by the darkness. She felt her arm gripped firmly--"I've got
you," he said. She stepped in, headlong, trusting herself blindly to his
grip, and sank on the stern seat catching her breath a little. She heard
a slight splash, and the indistinct side of the deserted yacht melted
suddenly into the body of the night.

Rowing, he faced her, a hooded and cloaked shape, and above her head he
had before his eyes the gleam of the stern lantern expiring slowly on
the abandoned vessel. When it went out without a warning flicker he
could see nothing of the stranded yacht's outline. She had vanished
utterly like a dream; and the occurrences of the last twenty-four hours
seemed also to be a part of a vanished dream. The hooded and cloaked
figure was part of it, too. It spoke not; it moved not; it would vanish
presently. Lingard tried to remember Mrs. Travers' features, even as
she sat within two feet of him in the boat. He seemed to have taken
from that vanished schooner not a woman but a memory--the tormenting
recollection of a human being he would see no more.

At every stroke of the short sculls Mrs. Travers felt the boat leap
forward with her. Lingard, to keep his direction, had to look over his
shoulder frequently--"You will be safe in the brig," he said. She was
silent. A dream! A dream! He lay back vigorously; the water slapped
loudly against the blunt bows. The ruddy glow thrown afar by the flares
was reflected deep within the hood. The dream had a pale visage, the
memory had living eyes.

"I had to come for you myself," he said.

"I expected it of you." These were the first words he had heard her say
since they had met for the third time.

"And I swore--before you, too--that I would never put my foot on board
your craft."

"It was good of you to--" she began.

"I forgot somehow," he said, simply.

"I expected it of you," she repeated. He gave three quick strokes before
he asked very gently:

"What more do you expect?"

"Everything," she said. He was rounding then the stern of the brig and
had to look away. Then he turned to her.

"And you trust me to--" he exclaimed.

"I would like to trust you," she interrupted, "because--"

Above them a startled voice cried in Malay, "Captain coming." The
strange sound silenced her. Lingard laid in his sculls and she saw
herself gliding under the high side of the brig. A dark, staring face
appeared very near her eyes, black fingers caught the gunwale of the
boat. She stood up swaying. "Take care," said Lingard again, but this
time, in the light, did not offer to help her. She went up alone and he
followed her over the rail.

The quarter-deck was thronged by men of two races. Lingard and Mrs.
Travers crossed it rapidly between the groups that moved out of the
way on their passage. Lingard threw open the cabin door for her, but
remained on deck to inquire about his boats. They had returned while he
was on board the yacht, and the two men in charge of them came aft to
make their reports. The boat sent north had seen nothing. The boat
which had been directed to explore the banks and islets to the south had
actually been in sight of Daman's praus. The man in charge reported
that several fires were burning on the shore, the crews of the two praus
being encamped on a sandbank. Cooking was going on. They had been near
enough to hear the voices. There was a man keeping watch on the ridge;
they knew this because they heard him shouting to the people below, by
the fires. Lingard wanted to know how they had managed to remain unseen.
"The night was our hiding place," answered the man in his deep growling
voice. He knew nothing of any white men being in Daman's camp. Why
should there be? Rajah Hassim and the Lady, his sister, appeared
unexpectedly near his boat in their canoe. Rajah Hassim had ordered him
then in whispers to go back to the brig at once, and tell Tuan what he
had observed. Rajah Hassim said also that he would return to the brig
with more news very soon. He obeyed because the Rajah was to him a
person of authority, "having the perfect knowledge of Tuan's mind as we
all know."--"Enough," cried Lingard, suddenly.

The man looked up heavily for a moment, and retreated forward without
another word. Lingard followed him with irritated eyes. A new power had
come into the world, had possessed itself of human speech, had imparted
to it a sinister irony of allusion. To be told that someone had "a
perfect knowledge of his mind" startled him and made him wince. It made
him aware that now he did not know his mind himself--that it seemed
impossible for him ever to regain that knowledge. And the new power not
only had cast its spell upon the words he had to hear, but also upon the
facts that assailed him, upon the people he saw, upon the thoughts he
had to guide, upon the feelings he had to bear. They remained what
they had ever been--the visible surface of life open in the sun to the
conquering tread of an unfettered will. Yesterday they could have been
discerned clearly, mastered and despised; but now another power had come
into the world, and had cast over them all the wavering gloom of a dark
and inscrutable purpose.



II

Recovering himself with a slight start Lingard gave the order to
extinguish all the lights in the brig. Now the transfer of the crew from
the yacht had been effected there was every advantage in the darkness.
He gave the order from instinct, it being the right thing to do in the
circumstances. His thoughts were in the cabin of his brig, where there
was a woman waiting. He put his hand over his eyes, collecting himself
as if before a great mental effort. He could hear about him the excited
murmurs of the white men whom in the morning he had so ardently desired
to have safe in his keeping. He had them there now; but accident,
ill-luck, a cursed folly, had tricked him out of the success of his
plan. He would have to go in and talk to Mrs. Travers. The idea dismayed
him. Of necessity he was not one of those men who have the mastery of
expression. To liberate his soul was for him a gigantic undertaking,
a matter of desperate effort, of doubtful success. "I must have it
out with her," he murmured to himself as though at the prospect of
a struggle. He was uncertain of himself, of her; he was uncertain of
everything and everybody; but he was very certain he wanted to look at
her.

At the moment he turned to the door of the cabin both flares went out
together and the black vault of the night upheld above the brig by the
fierce flames fell behind him and buried the deck in sudden darkness.
The buzz of strange voices instantly hummed louder with a startled note.
"Hallo!"--"Can't see a mortal thing"--"Well, what next?"--insisted a
voice--"I want to know what next?"

Lingard checked himself ready to open the door and waited absurdly for
the answer as though in the hope of some suggestion. "What's up with
you? Think yourself lucky," said somebody.--"It's all very well--for
to-night," began the voice.--"What are you fashing yourself for?"
remonstrated the other, reasonably, "we'll get home right enough."--"I
am not so sure; the second mate he says--" "Never mind what he says;
that 'ere man who has got this brig will see us through. The owner's
wife will talk to him--she will. Money can do a lot." The two voices
came nearer, and spoke more distinctly, close behind Lingard. "Suppose
them blooming savages set fire to the yacht. What's to prevent
them?"--"And suppose they do. This 'ere brig's good enough to get away
in. Ain't she? Guns and all. We'll get home yet all right. What do you
say, John?"

"I say nothing and care less," said a third voice, peaceful and faint.

"D'you mean to say, John, you would go to the bottom as soon as you
would go home? Come now!"--"To the bottom," repeated the wan voice,
composedly. "Aye! That's where we all are going to, in one way or
another. The way don't matter."

"Ough! You would give the blues to the funny man of a blooming circus.
What would my missus say if I wasn't to turn up never at all?"--"She
would get another man; there's always plenty of fools about." A quiet
and mirthless chuckle was heard in the pause of shocked silence.
Lingard, with his hand on the door, remained still. Further off a growl
burst out: "I do hate to be chucked in the dark aboard a strange ship.
I wonder where they keep their fresh water. Can't get any sense out of
them silly niggers. We don't seem to be more account here than a lot of
cattle. Likely as not we'll have to berth on this blooming quarter-deck
for God knows how long." Then again very near Lingard the first voice
said, deadened discreetly--"There's something curious about this here
brig turning up sudden-like, ain't there? And that skipper of her--now?
What kind of a man is he--anyhow?"

"Oh, he's one of them skippers going about loose. The brig's his own, I
am thinking. He just goes about in her looking for what he may pick up
honest or dishonest. My brother-in-law has served two commissions in
these seas, and was telling me awful yarns about what's going on in them
God-forsaken parts. Likely he lied, though. Them man-of-war's men are
a holy terror for yarns. Bless you, what do I care who this skipper is?
Let him do his best and don't trouble your head. You won't see him again
in your life once we get clear."

"And can he do anything for the owner?" asked the first voice
again.--"Can he! We can do nothing--that's one thing certain. The owner
may be lying clubbed to death this very minute for all we know. By all
accounts these savages here are a crool murdering lot. Mind you, I am
sorry for him as much as anybody."--"Aye, aye," muttered the other,
approvingly.--"He may not have been ready, poor man," began again the
reasonable voice. Lingard heard a deep sigh.--"If there's anything as
can be done for him, the owner's wife she's got to fix it up with this
'ere skipper. Under Providence he may serve her turn."

Lingard flung open the cabin door, entered, and, with a slam, shut the
darkness out.

"I am, under Providence, to serve your turn," he said after standing
very still for a while, with his eyes upon Mrs. Travers. The brig's
swing-lamp lighted the cabin with an extraordinary brilliance. Mrs.
Travers had thrown back her hood. The radiant brightness of the little
place enfolded her so close, clung to her with such force that it might
have been part of her very essence. There were no shadows on her face;
it was fiercely lighted, hermetically closed, of impenetrable fairness.

Lingard looked in unconscious ecstasy at this vision, so amazing that it
seemed to have strayed into his existence from beyond the limits of
the conceivable. It was impossible to guess her thoughts, to know her
feelings, to understand her grief or her joy. But she knew all that
was at the bottom of his heart. He had told her himself, impelled by
a sudden thought, going to her in darkness, in desperation, in absurd
hope, in incredible trust. He had told her what he had told no one
on earth, except perhaps, at times, himself, but without words--less
clearly. He had told her and she had listened in silence. She had
listened leaning over the rail till at last her breath was on his
forehead. He remembered this and had a moment of soaring pride and of
unutterable dismay. He spoke, with an effort.

"You've heard what I said just now? Here I am."

"Do you expect me to say something?" she asked. "Is it necessary? Is it
possible?"

"No," he answered. "It is said already. I know what you expect from me.
Everything."

"Everything," she repeated, paused, and added much lower, "It is the
very least." He seemed to lose himself in thought.

"It is extraordinary," he reflected half aloud, "how I dislike that
man." She leaned forward a little.

"Remember those two men are innocent," she began.

"So am I--innocent. So is everybody in the world. Have you ever met a
man or a woman that was not? They've got to take their chances all the
same."

"I expect you to be generous," she said.

"To you?"

"Well--to me. Yes--if you like to me alone."

"To you alone! And you know everything!" His voice dropped. "You want
your happiness."

She made an impatient movement and he saw her clench the hand that was
lying on the table.

"I want my husband back," she said, sharply.

"Yes. Yes. It's what I was saying. Same thing," he muttered with strange
placidity. She looked at him searchingly. He had a large simplicity that
filled one's vision. She found herself slowly invaded by this masterful
figure. He was not mediocre. Whatever he might have been he was not
mediocre. The glamour of a lawless life stretched over him like the sky
over the sea down on all sides to an unbroken horizon. Within, he moved
very lonely, dangerous and romantic. There was in him crime, sacrifice,
tenderness, devotion, and the madness of a fixed idea. She thought with
wonder that of all the men in the world he was indeed the one she knew
the best and yet she could not foresee the speech or the act of the next
minute. She said distinctly:

"You've given me your confidence. Now I want you to give me the life of
these two men. The life of two men whom you do not know, whom to-morrow
you will forget. It can be done. It must be done. You cannot refuse them
to me." She waited.

"Why can't I refuse?" he whispered, gloomily, without looking up.

"You ask!" she exclaimed. He made no sign. He seemed at a loss for
words.

"You ask . . . Ah!" she cried. "Don't you see that I have no kingdoms to
conquer?"



III

A slight change of expression which passed away almost directly showed
that Lingard heard the passionate cry wrung from her by the distress of
her mind. He made no sign. She perceived clearly the extreme difficulty
of her position. The situation was dangerous; not so much the facts
of it as the feeling of it. At times it appeared no more actual than a
tradition; and she thought of herself as of some woman in a ballad, who
has to beg for the lives of innocent captives. To save the lives of Mr.
Travers and Mr. d'Alcacer was more than a duty. It was a necessity, it
was an imperative need, it was an irresistible mission. Yet she had to
reflect upon the horrors of a cruel and obscure death before she could
feel for them the pity they deserved. It was when she looked at Lingard
that her heart was wrung by an extremity of compassion. The others were
pitiful, but he, the victim of his own extravagant impulses, appeared
tragic, fascinating, and culpable. Lingard lifted his head. Whispers
were heard at the door and Hassim followed by Immada entered the cabin.

Mrs. Travers looked at Lingard, because of all the faces in the cabin
his was the only one that was intelligible to her. Hassim began to speak
at once, and when he ceased Immada's deep sigh was heard in the sudden
silence. Then Lingard looked at Mrs. Travers and said:

"The gentlemen are alive. Rajah Hassim here has seen them less than two
hours ago, and so has the girl. They are alive and unharmed, so far. And
now. . . ."

He paused. Mrs. Travers, leaning on her elbow, shaded her eyes under the
glint of suspended thunderbolts.

"You must hate us," she murmured.

"Hate you," he repeated with, as she fancied, a tinge of disdain in his
tone. "No. I hate myself."

"Why yourself?" she asked, very low.

"For not knowing my mind," he answered. "For not knowing my mind. For
not knowing what it is that's got hold of me since--since this morning.
I was angry then. . . . Nothing but very angry. . . ."

"And now?" she murmured.

"I am . . . unhappy," he said. After a moment of silence which gave to
Mrs. Travers the time to wonder how it was that this man had succeeded
in penetrating into the very depths of her compassion, he hit the table
such a blow that all the heavy muskets seemed to jump a little.

Mrs. Travers heard Hassim pronounce a few words earnestly, and a moan of
distress from Immada.

"I believed in you before you . . . before you gave me your confidence,"
she began. "You could see that. Could you not?"

He looked at her fixedly. "You are not the first that believed in me,"
he said.

Hassim, lounging with his back against the closed door, kept his eye on
him watchfully and Immada's dark and sorrowful eyes rested on the face
of the white woman. Mrs. Travers felt as though she were engaged in
a contest with them; in a struggle for the possession of that man's
strength and of that man's devotion. When she looked up at Lingard she
saw on his face--which should have been impassive or exalted, the face
of a stern leader or the face of a pitiless dreamer--an expression
of utter forgetfulness. He seemed to be tasting the delight of some
profound and amazing sensation. And suddenly in the midst of her appeal
to his generosity, in the middle of a phrase, Mrs. Travers faltered,
becoming aware that she was the object of his contemplation.

"Do not! Do not look at that woman!" cried Immada. "O! Master--look
away. . . ." Hassim threw one arm round the girl's neck. Her voice sank.
"O! Master--look at us." Hassim, drawing her to himself, covered her
lips with his hand. She struggled a little like a snared bird and
submitted, hiding her face on his shoulder, very quiet, sobbing without
noise.

"What do they say to you?" asked Mrs. Travers with a faint and pained
smile. "What can they say? It is intolerable to think that their words
which have no meaning for me may go straight to your heart. . . ."

"Look away," whispered Lingard without making the slightest movement.

Mrs. Travers sighed.

"Yes, it is very hard to think that I who want to touch you cannot make
myself understood as well as they. And yet I speak the language of your
childhood, the language of the man for whom there is no hope but in your
generosity."

He shook his head. She gazed at him anxiously for a moment. "In your
memories then," she said and was surprised by the expression of profound
sadness that over-spread his attentive face.

"Do you know what I remember?" he said. "Do you want to know?" She
listened with slightly parted lips. "I will tell you. Poverty, hard
work--and death," he went on, very quietly. "And now I've told you, and
you don't know. That's how it is between us. You talk to me--I talk to
you--and we don't know."

Her eyelids dropped.

"What can I find to say?" she went on. "What can I do? I mustn't
give in. Think! Amongst your memories there must be some face--some
voice--some name, if nothing more. I can not believe that there is
nothing but bitterness."

"There's no bitterness," he murmured.

"O! Brother, my heart is faint with fear," whispered Immada. Lingard
turned swiftly to that whisper.

"Then, they are to be saved," exclaimed Mrs. Travers. "Ah, I knew. . . ."

"Bear thy fear in patience," said Hassim, rapidly, to his sister.

"They are to be saved. You have said it," Lingard pronounced aloud,
suddenly. He felt like a swimmer who, in the midst of superhuman efforts
to reach the shore, perceives that the undertow is taking him to sea. He
would go with the mysterious current; he would go swiftly--and see the
end, the fulfilment both blissful and terrible.

With this state of exaltation in which he saw himself in some
incomprehensible way always victorious, whatever might befall, there was
mingled a tenacity of purpose. He could not sacrifice his intention,
the intention of years, the intention of his life; he could no more
part with it and exist than he could cut out his heart and live. The
adventurer held fast to his adventure which made him in his own sight
exactly what he was.

He considered the problem with cool audacity, backed by a belief in
his own power. It was not these two men he had to save; he had to save
himself! And looked upon in this way the situation appeared familiar.

Hassim had told him the two white men had been taken by their captors
to Daman's camp. The young Rajah, leaving his sister in the canoe, had
landed on the sand and had crept to the very edge of light thrown by the
fires by which the Illanuns were cooking. Daman was sitting apart by a
larger blaze. Two praus rode in shallow water near the sandbank; on the
ridge, a sentry walked watching the lights of the brig; the camp was
full of quiet whispers. Hassim returned to his canoe, then he and his
sister, paddling cautiously round the anchored praus, in which women's
voices could be heard, approached the other end of the camp. The light
of the big blaze there fell on the water and the canoe skirted it
without a splash, keeping in the night. Hassim, landing for the second
time, crept again close to the fires. Each prau had, according to the
customs of the Illanun rovers when on a raiding expedition, a smaller
war-boat and these being light and manageable were hauled up on the sand
not far from the big blaze; they sat high on the shelving shore throwing
heavy shadows. Hassim crept up toward the largest of them and then
standing on tiptoe could look at the camp across the gunwales. The
confused talking of the men was like the buzz of insects in a forest.
A child wailed on board one of the praus and a woman hailed the shore
shrilly. Hassim unsheathed his kris and held it in his hand.

Very soon--he said--he saw the two white men walking amongst the fires.
They waved their arms and talked together, stopping from time to time;
they approached Daman; and the short man with the hair on his face
addressed him earnestly and at great length. Daman sat cross-legged upon
a little carpet with an open Koran on his knees and chanted the versets
swaying to and fro with his eyes shut.

The Illanun chiefs reclining wrapped in cloaks on the ground raised
themselves on their elbows to look at the whites. When the short white
man finished speaking he gazed down at them for a while, then stamped
his foot. He looked angry because no one understood him. Then suddenly
he looked very sad; he covered his face with his hands; the tall man put
his hand on the short man's shoulder and whispered into his ear. The dry
wood of the fires crackled, the Illanuns slept, cooked, talked, but
with their weapons at hand. An armed man or two came up to stare at the
prisoners and then returned to their fire. The two whites sank down in
the sand in front of Daman. Their clothes were soiled, there was sand in
their hair. The tall man had lost his hat; the glass in the eye of the
short man glittered very much; his back was muddy and one sleeve of his
coat torn up to the elbow.

All this Hassim saw and then retreated undetected to that part of
the shore where Immada waited for him, keeping the canoe afloat. The
Illanuns, trusting to the sea, kept very bad watch on their prisoners,
and had he been able to speak with them Hassim thought an escape could
have been effected. But they could not have understood his signs and
still less his words. He consulted with his sister. Immada murmured
sadly; at their feet the ripple broke with a mournful sound no louder
than their voices.

Hassim's loyalty was unshaken, but now it led him on not in the bright
light of hopes but in the deepened shadow of doubt. He wanted to obtain
information for his friend who was so powerful and who perhaps would
know how to be constant. When followed by Immada he approached the camp
again--this time openly--their appearance did not excite much surprise.
It was well known to the Chiefs of the Illanuns that the Rajah for whom
they were to fight--if God so willed--was upon the shoals looking out
for the coming of the white man who had much wealth and a store of
weapons and who was his servant. Daman, who alone understood the exact
relation, welcomed them with impenetrable gravity. Hassim took his
seat on the carpet at his right hand. A consultation was being held
half-aloud in short and apparently careless sentences, with long
intervals of silence between. Immada, nestling close to her brother,
leaned one arm on his shoulder and listened with serious attention and
with outward calm as became a princess of Wajo accustomed to consort
with warriors and statesmen in moments of danger and in the hours of
deliberation. Her heart was beating rapidly, and facing her the silent
white men stared at these two known faces, as if across a gulf.
Four Illanun chiefs sat in a row. Their ample cloaks fell from their
shoulders, and lay behind them on the sand in which their four long
lances were planted upright, each supporting a small oblong shield of
wood, carved on the edges and stained a dull purple. Daman stretched out
his arm and pointed at the prisoners. The faces of the white men were
very quiet. Daman looked at them mutely and ardently, as if consumed by
an unspeakable longing.

The Koran, in a silk cover, hung on his breast by a crimson cord. It
rested over his heart and, just below, the plain buffalo-horn handle of
a kris, stuck into the twist of his sarong, protruded ready to his hand.
The clouds thickening over the camp made the darkness press heavily on
the glow of scattered fires. "There is blood between me and the whites,"
he pronounced, violently. The Illanun chiefs remained impassive. There
was blood between them and all mankind. Hassim remarked dispassionately
that there was one white man with whom it would be wise to remain
friendly; and besides, was not Daman his friend already? Daman smiled
with half-closed eyes. He was that white man's friend, not his slave.
The Illanuns playing with their sword-handles grunted assent. Why, asked
Daman, did these strange whites travel so far from their country? The
great white man whom they all knew did not want them. No one wanted
them. Evil would follow in their footsteps. They were such men as are
sent by rulers to examine the aspects of far-off countries and talk of
peace and make treaties. Such is the beginning of great sorrows. The
Illanuns were far from their country, where no white man dared to come,
and therefore they were free to seek their enemies upon the open waters.
They had found these two who had come to see. He asked what they had
come to see? Was there nothing to look at in their own country?

He talked in an ironic and subdued tone. The scattered heaps of embers
glowed a deeper red; the big blaze of the chief's fire sank low and
grew dim before he ceased. Straight-limbed figures rose, sank, moved,
whispered on the beach. Here and there a spear-blade caught a red gleam
above the black shape of a head.

"The Illanuns seek booty on the sea," cried Daman. "Their fathers and
the fathers of their fathers have done the same, being fearless like
those who embrace death closely."

A low laugh was heard. "We strike and go," said an exulting voice. "We
live and die with our weapons in our hands." The Illanuns leaped to
their feet. They stamped on the sand, flourishing naked blades over the
heads of their prisoners. A tumult arose.

When it subsided Daman stood up in a cloak that wrapped him to his feet
and spoke again giving advice.

The white men sat on the sand and turned their eyes from face to face
as if trying to understand. It was agreed to send the prisoners into the
lagoon where their fate would be decided by the ruler of the land. The
Illanuns only wanted to plunder the ship. They did not care what became
of the men. "But Daman cares," remarked Hassim to Lingard, when relating
what took place. "He cares, O Tuan!"

Hassim had learned also that the Settlement was in a state of unrest
as if on the eve of war. Belarab with his followers was encamped by his
father's tomb in the hollow beyond the cultivated fields. His stockade
was shut up and no one appeared on the verandahs of the houses within.
You could tell there were people inside only by the smoke of the cooking
fires. Tengga's followers meantime swaggered about the Settlement
behaving tyrannically to those who were peaceable. A great madness had
descended upon the people, a madness strong as the madness of love, the
madness of battle, the desire to spill blood. A strange fear also had
made them wild. The big smoke seen that morning above the forests of
the coast was some agreed signal from Tengga to Daman but what it meant
Hassim had been unable to find out. He feared for Jorgenson's safety.
He said that while one of the war-boats was being made ready to take the
captives into the lagoon, he and his sister left the camp quietly and
got away in their canoe. The flares of the brig, reflected in a faint
loom upon the clouds, enabled them to make straight for the vessel
across the banks. Before they had gone half way these flames went out
and the darkness seemed denser than any he had known before. But it was
no greater than the darkness of his mind--he added. He had looked upon
the white men sitting unmoved and silent under the edge of swords; he
had looked at Daman, he had heard bitter words spoken; he was looking
now at his white friend--and the issue of events he could not see. One
can see men's faces but their fate, which is written on their foreheads,
one cannot see. He had no more to say, and what he had spoken was true
in every word.



IV

Lingard repeated it all to Mrs. Travers. Her courage, her intelligence,
the quickness of her apprehension, the colour of her eyes and the
intrepidity of her glance evoked in him an admiring enthusiasm. She
stood by his side! Every moment that fatal illusion clung closer to his
soul--like a garment of light--like an armour of fire.

He was unwilling to face the facts. All his life--till that day--had
been a wrestle with events in the daylight of this world, but now he
could not bring his mind to the consideration of his position. It
was Mrs. Travers who, after waiting awhile, forced on him the pain
of thought by wanting to know what bearing Hassim's news had upon the
situation.

Lingard had not the slightest doubt Daman wanted him to know what had
been done with the prisoners. That is why Daman had welcomed Hassim, and
let him hear the decision and had allowed him to leave the camp on the
sandbank. There could be only one object in this; to let him, Lingard,
know that the prisoners had been put out of his reach as long as he
remained in his brig. Now this brig was his strength. To make him leave
his brig was like removing his hand from his sword.

"Do you understand what I mean, Mrs. Travers?" he asked. "They are
afraid of me because I know how to fight this brig. They fear the
brig because when I am on board her, the brig and I are one. An armed
man--don't you see? Without the brig I am disarmed, without me she can't
strike. So Daman thinks. He does not know everything but he is not far
off the truth. He says to himself that if I man the boats to go after
these whites into the lagoon then his Illanuns will get the yacht for
sure--and perhaps the brig as well. If I stop here with my brig he holds
the two white men and can talk as big as he pleases. Belarab believes in
me no doubt, but Daman trusts no man on earth. He simply does not know
how to trust any one, because he is always plotting himself. He came to
help me and as soon as he found I was not there he began to plot with
Tengga. Now he has made a move--a clever move; a cleverer move than he
thinks. Why? I'll tell you why. Because I, Tom Lingard, haven't a single
white man aboard this brig I can trust. Not one. I only just discovered
my mate's got the notion I am some kind of pirate. And all your yacht
people think the same. It is as though you had brought a curse on me
in your yacht. Nobody believes me. Good God! What have I come to! Even
those two--look at them--I say look at them! By all the stars they doubt
me! Me! . . ."

He pointed at Hassim and Immada. The girl seemed frightened. Hassim
looked on calm and intelligent with inexhaustible patience. Lingard's
voice fell suddenly.

"And by heavens they may be right. Who knows? You? Do you know? They
have waited for years. Look. They are waiting with heavy hearts. Do you
think that I don't care? Ought I to have kept it all in--told no one--no
one--not even you? Are they waiting for what will never come now?"

Mrs. Travers rose and moved quickly round the table. "Can we give
anything to this--this Daman or these other men? We could give them more
than they could think of asking. I--my husband. . . ."

"Don't talk to me of your husband," he said, roughly. "You don't know
what you are doing." She confronted the sombre anger of his eyes--"But I
must," she asserted with heat.--"Must," he mused, noticing that she was
only half a head less tall than himself. "Must! Oh, yes. Of course, you
must. Must! Yes. But I don't want to hear. Give! What can you give? You
may have all the treasures of the world for all I know. No! You can't
give anything. . . ."

"I was thinking of your difficulty when I spoke," she interrupted. His
eyes wandered downward following the line of her shoulder.--"Of me--of
me!" he repeated.

All this was said almost in whispers. The sound of slow footsteps was
heard on deck above their heads. Lingard turned his face to the open
skylight.

"On deck there! Any wind?"

All was still for a moment. Somebody above answered in a leisurely tone:

"A steady little draught from the northward."

Then after a pause added in a mutter:

"Pitch dark."

"Aye, dark enough," murmured Lingard. He must do something. Now. At
once. The world was waiting. The world full of hopes and fear.
What should he do? Instead of answering that question he traced the
ungleaming coils of her twisted hair and became fascinated by a stray
lock at her neck. What should he do? No one to leave his brig to. The
voice that had answered his question was Carter's voice. "He is hanging
about keeping his eye on me," he said to Mrs. Travers. She shook her
head and tried to smile. The man above coughed discreetly. "No," said
Lingard, "you must understand that you have nothing to give."

The man on deck who seemed to have lingered by the skylight was heard
saying quietly, "I am at hand if you want me, Mrs. Travers." Hassim and
Immada looked up. "You see," exclaimed Lingard. "What did I tell you?
He's keeping his eye on me! On board my own ship. Am I dreaming? Am I in
a fever? Tell him to come down," he said after a pause. Mrs. Travers
did so and Lingard thought her voice very commanding and very sweet.
"There's nothing in the world I love so much as this brig," he went on.
"Nothing in the world. If I lost her I would have no standing room on
the earth for my feet. You don't understand this. You can't."

Carter came in and shut the cabin door carefully. He looked with
serenity at everyone in turn.

"All quiet?" asked Lingard.

"Quiet enough if you like to call it so," he answered. "But if you only
put your head outside the door you'll hear them all on the quarter-deck
snoring against each other, as if there were no wives at home and no
pirates at sea."

"Look here," said Lingard. "I found out that I can't trust my mate."

"Can't you?" drawled Carter. "I am not exactly surprised. I must say
_he_ does not snore but I believe it is because he is too crazy to
sleep. He waylaid me on the poop just now and said something about evil
communications corrupting good manners. Seems to me I've heard that
before. Queer thing to say. He tried to make it out somehow that if he
wasn't corrupt it wasn't your fault. As if this was any concern of mine.
He's as mad as he's fat--or else he puts it on." Carter laughed a little
and leaned his shoulders against a bulkhead.

Lingard gazed at the woman who expected so much from him and in the
light she seemed to shed he saw himself leading a column of armed boats
to the attack of the Settlement. He could burn the whole place to the
ground and drive every soul of them into the bush. He could! And
there was a surprise, a shock, a vague horror at the thought of the
destructive power of his will. He could give her ever so many lives. He
had seen her yesterday, and it seemed to him he had been all his life
waiting for her to make a sign. She was very still. He pondered a plan
of attack. He saw smoke and flame--and next moment he saw himself alone
amongst shapeless ruins with the whispers, with the sigh and moan of the
Shallows in his ears. He shuddered, and shaking his hand:

"No! I cannot give you all those lives!" he cried.

Then, before Mrs. Travers could guess the meaning of this outburst, he
declared that as the two captives must be saved he would go alone into
the lagoon. He could not think of using force. "You understand why," he
said to Mrs. Travers and she whispered a faint "Yes." He would run the
risk alone. His hope was in Belarab being able to see where his true
interest lay. "If I can only get at him I would soon make him see," he
mused aloud. "Haven't I kept his power up for these two years past? And
he knows it, too. He feels it." Whether he would be allowed to reach
Belarab was another matter. Lingard lost himself in deep thought. "He
would not dare," he burst out. Mrs. Travers listened with parted lips.
Carter did not move a muscle of his youthful and self-possessed face;
only when Lingard, turning suddenly, came up close to him and asked with
a red flash of eyes and in a lowered voice, "Could you fight this brig?"
something like a smile made a stir amongst the hairs of his little fair
moustache.

"'Could I?" he said. "I could try, anyhow." He paused, and added hardly
above his breath, "For the lady--of course."

Lingard seemed staggered as though he had been hit in the chest. "I was
thinking of the brig," he said, gently.

"Mrs. Travers would be on board," retorted Carter.

"What! on board. Ah yes; on board. Where else?" stammered Lingard.

Carter looked at him in amazement. "Fight! You ask!" he said, slowly.
"You just try me."

"I shall," ejaculated Lingard. He left the cabin calling out "serang!" A
thin cracked voice was heard immediately answering, "Tuan!" and the door
slammed to.

"You trust him, Mrs. Travers?" asked Carter, rapidly.

"You do not--why?" she answered.

"I can't make him out. If he was another kind of man I would say he was
drunk," said Carter. "Why is he here at all--he, and this brig of his?
Excuse my boldness--but have you promised him anything?"

"I--I promised!" exclaimed Mrs. Travers in a bitter tone which silenced
Carter for a moment.

"So much the better," he said at last. "Let him show what he can do
first and . . ."

"Here! Take this," said Lingard, who re-entered the cabin fumbling about
his neck. Carter mechanically extended his hand.

"What's this for?" he asked, looking at a small brass key attached to a
thin chain.

"Powder magazine. Trap door under the table. The man who has this key
commands the brig while I am away. The serang understands. You have her
very life in your hand there."

Carter looked at the small key lying in his half-open palm.

"I was just telling Mrs. Travers I didn't trust you--not
altogether. . . ."

"I know all about it," interrupted Lingard, contemptuously. "You carry
a blamed pistol in your pocket to blow my brains out--don't you? What's
that to me? I am thinking of the brig. I think I know your sort. You
will do."

"Well, perhaps I might," mumbled Carter, modestly.

"Don't be rash," said Lingard, anxiously. "If you've got to fight use
your head as well as your hands. If there's a breeze fight under way. If
they should try to board in a calm, trust to the small arms to hold them
off. Keep your head and--" He looked intensely into Carter's eyes; his
lips worked without a sound as though he had been suddenly struck dumb.
"Don't think about me. What's that to you who I am? Think of the ship,"
he burst out. "Don't let her go!--Don't let her go!" The passion in his
voice impressed his hearers who for a time preserved a profound silence.

"All right," said Carter at last. "I will stick to your brig as though
she were my own; but I would like to see clear through all this. Look
here--you are going off somewhere? Alone, you said?"

"Yes. Alone."

"Very well. Mind, then, that you don't come back with a crowd of those
brown friends of yours--or by the Heavens above us I won't let you come
within hail of your own ship. Am I to keep this key?"

"Captain Lingard," said Mrs. Travers suddenly. "Would it not be better
to tell him everything?"

"Tell him everything?" repeated Lingard. "Everything! Yesterday it might
have been done. Only yesterday! Yesterday, did I say? Only six hours
ago--only six hours ago I had something to tell. You heard it. And now
it's gone. Tell him! There's nothing to tell any more." He remained for
a time with bowed head, while before him Mrs. Travers, who had begun a
gesture of protest, dropped her arms suddenly. In a moment he looked up
again.

"Keep the key," he said, calmly, "and when the time comes step forward
and take charge. I am satisfied."

"I would like to see clear through all this though," muttered Carter
again. "And for how long are you leaving us, Captain?" Lingard made no
answer. Carter waited awhile. "Come, sir," he urged. "I ought to have
some notion. What is it? Two, three days?" Lingard started.

"Days," he repeated. "Ah, days. What is it you want to know? Two . . .
three--what did the old fellow say--perhaps for life." This was spoken
so low that no one but Carter heard the last words.--"Do you mean it?"
he murmured. Lingard nodded.--"Wait as long as you can--then go," he
said in the same hardly audible voice. "Go where?"--"Where you like,
nearest port, any port."--"Very good. That's something plain at any
rate," commented the young man with imperturbable good humour.

"I go, O Hassim!" began Lingard and the Malay made a slow inclination of
the head which he did not raise again till Lingard had ceased speaking.
He betrayed neither surprise nor any other emotion while Lingard in a
few concise and sharp sentences made him acquainted with his purpose to
bring about singlehanded the release of the prisoners. When Lingard had
ended with the words: "And you must find a way to help me in the time of
trouble, O Rajah Hassim," he looked up and said:

"Good. You never asked me for anything before."

He smiled at his white friend. There was something subtle in the smile
and afterward an added firmness in the repose of the lips. Immada moved
a step forward. She looked at Lingard with terror in her black and
dilated eyes. She exclaimed in a voice whose vibration startled the
hearts of all the hearers with an indefinable sense of alarm, "He will
perish, Hassim! He will perish alone!"

"No," said Hassim. "Thy fear is as vain to-night as it was at sunrise.
He shall not perish alone."

Her eyelids dropped slowly. From her veiled eyes the tears fell,
vanishing in the silence. Lingard's forehead became furrowed by folds
that seemed to contain an infinity of sombre thoughts. "Remember, O
Hassim, that when I promised you to take you back to your country you
promised me to be a friend to all white men. A friend to all whites who
are of my people, forever."

"My memory is good, O Tuan," said Hassim; "I am not yet back in my
country, but is not everyone the ruler of his own heart? Promises made
by a man of noble birth live as long as the speaker endures."

"Good-bye," said Lingard to Mrs. Travers. "You will be safe here." He
looked all around the cabin. "I leave you," he began again and stopped
short. Mrs. Travers' hand, resting lightly on the edge of the table,
began to tremble. "It's for you . . . Yes. For you alone . . . and it
seems it can't be. . . ."

It seemed to him that he was saying good-bye to all the world, that
he was taking a last leave of his own self. Mrs. Travers did not say a
word, but Immada threw herself between them and cried:

"You are a cruel woman! You are driving him away from where his strength
is. You put madness into his heart, O! Blind--without pity--without
shame! . . ."

"Immada," said Hassim's calm voice. Nobody moved.

"What did she say to me?" faltered Mrs. Travers and again repeated in a
voice that sounded hard, "What did she say?"

"Forgive her," said Lingard. "Her fears are for me . . ."--"It's about
your going?" Mrs. Travers interrupted, swiftly.

"Yes, it is--and you must forgive her." He had turned away his eyes with
something that resembled embarrassment but suddenly he was assailed by
an irresistible longing to look again at that woman. At the moment of
parting he clung to her with his glance as a man holds with his hands
a priceless and disputed possession. The faint blush that overspread
gradually Mrs. Travers' features gave her face an air of extraordinary
and startling animation.

"The danger you run?" she asked, eagerly. He repelled the suggestion by
a slighting gesture of the hand.--"Nothing worth looking at twice. Don't
give it a thought," he said. "I've been in tighter places." He clapped
his hands and waited till he heard the cabin door open behind his back.
"Steward, my pistols." The mulatto in slippers, aproned to the chin,
glided through the cabin with unseeing eyes as though for him no one
there had existed. . . .--"Is it my heart that aches so?" Mrs. Travers
asked herself, contemplating Lingard's motionless figure. "How long will
this sensation of dull pain last? Will it last forever. . . ."--"How
many changes of clothes shall I put up, sir?" asked the steward, while
Lingard took the pistols from him and eased the hammers after putting
on fresh caps.--"I will take nothing this time, steward." He received in
turn from the mulatto's hands a red silk handkerchief, a pocket book, a
cigar-case. He knotted the handkerchief loosely round his throat; it
was evident he was going through the routine of every departure for
the shore; he even opened the cigar-case to see whether it had been
filled.--"Hat, sir," murmured the half-caste. Lingard flung it on his
head.--"Take your orders from this lady, steward--till I come back. The
cabin is hers--do you hear?" He sighed ready to go and seemed unable to
lift a foot.--"I am coming with you," declared Mrs. Travers suddenly in
a tone of unalterable decision. He did not look at her; he did not even
look up; he said nothing, till after Carter had cried: "You can't, Mrs.
Travers!"--when without budging he whispered to himself:--"Of course."
Mrs. Travers had pulled already the hood of her cloak over her head
and her face within the dark cloth had turned an intense and unearthly
white, in which the violet of her eyes appeared unfathomably mysterious.
Carter started forward.--"You don't know this man," he almost shouted.

"I do know him," she said, and before the reproachfully unbelieving
attitude of the other she added, speaking slowly and with emphasis:
"There is not, I verily believe, a single thought or act of his life
that I don't know."--"It's true--it's true," muttered Lingard to
himself. Carter threw up his arms with a groan. "Stand back," said a
voice that sounded to him like a growl of thunder, and he felt a grip
on his hand which seemed to crush every bone. He jerked it away.--"Mrs.
Travers! stay," he cried. They had vanished through the open door and
the sound of their footsteps had already died away. Carter turned about
bewildered as if looking for help.--"Who is he, steward? Who in the name
of all the mad devils is he?" he asked, wildly. He was confounded by the
cold and philosophical tone of the answer:--"'Tain't my place to trouble
about that, sir--nor yours I guess."--"Isn't it!" shouted Carter. "Why,
he has carried the lady off." The steward was looking critically at
the lamp and after a while screwed the light down.--"That's better," he
mumbled.--"Good God! What is a fellow to do?" continued Carter, looking
at Hassim and Immada who were whispering together and gave him only an
absent glance. He rushed on deck and was struck blind instantly by the
night that seemed to have been lying in wait for him; he stumbled over
something soft, kicked something hard, flung himself on the rail. "Come
back," he cried. "Come back. Captain! Mrs. Travers!--or let me come,
too."

He listened. The breeze blew cool against his cheek. A black bandage
seemed to lie over his eyes. "Gone," he groaned, utterly crushed.
And suddenly he heard Mrs. Travers' voice remote in the depths of
the night.--"Defend the brig," it said, and these words, pronouncing
themselves in the immensity of a lightless universe, thrilled every
fibre of his body by the commanding sadness of their tone. "Defend,
defend the brig." . . . "I am damned if I do," shouted Carter in
despair. "Unless you come back! . . . Mrs. Travers!"

". . . as though--I were--on board--myself," went on the rising
cadence of the voice, more distant now, a marvel of faint and imperious
clearness.

Carter shouted no more; he tried to make out the boat for a time, and
when, giving it up, he leaped down from the rail, the heavy obscurity
of the brig's main deck was agitated like a sombre pool by his jump,
swayed, eddied, seemed to break up. Blotches of darkness recoiled,
drifted away, bare feet shuffled hastily, confused murmurs died out.
"Lascars," he muttered, "The crew is all agog." Afterward he listened
for a moment to the faintly tumultuous snores of the white men sleeping
in rows, with their heads under the break of the poop. Somewhere
about his feet, the yacht's black dog, invisible, and chained to a
deck-ringbolt, whined, rattled the thin links, pattered with his claws
in his distress at the unfamiliar surroundings, begging for the charity
of human notice. Carter stooped impulsively, and was met by a startling
lick in the face.--"Hallo, boy!" He thumped the thick curly sides,
stroked the smooth head--"Good boy, Rover. Down. Lie down, dog. You
don't know what to make of it--do you, boy?" The dog became still as
death. "Well, neither do I," muttered Carter. But such natures are
helped by a cheerful contempt for the intricate and endless suggestions
of thought. He told himself that he would soon see what was to come of
it, and dismissed all speculation. Had he been a little older he would
have felt that the situation was beyond his grasp; but he was too
young to see it whole and in a manner detached from himself. All these
inexplicable events filled him with deep concern--but then on the other
hand he had the key of the magazine and he could not find it in his
heart to dislike Lingard. He was positive about this at last, and to
know that much after the discomfort of an inward conflict went a long
way toward a solution. When he followed Shaw into the cabin he could not
repress a sense of enjoyment or hide a faint and malicious smile.

"Gone away--did you say? And carried off the lady with him?" discoursed
Shaw very loud in the doorway. "Did he? Well, I am not surprised. What
can you expect from a man like that, who leaves his ship in an open
roadstead without--I won't say orders--but without as much as a single
word to his next in command? And at night at that! That just shows you
the kind of man. Is this the way to treat a chief mate? I apprehend he
was riled at the little al-ter-cation we had just before you came on
board. I told him a truth or two--but--never mind. There's the law and
that's enough for me. I am captain as long as he is out of the ship, and
if his address before very long is not in one of Her Majesty's jails or
other I au-tho-rize you to call me a Dutchman. You mark my words."

He walked in masterfully, sat down and surveyed the cabin in a leisurely
and autocratic manner; but suddenly his eyes became stony with amazement
and indignation; he pointed a fat and trembling forefinger.

"Niggers," he said, huskily. "In the cuddy! In the cuddy!" He appeared
bereft of speech for a time.

Since he entered the cabin Hassim had been watching him in thoughtful
and expectant silence. "I can't have it," he continued with genuine
feeling in his voice. "Damme! I've too much respect for myself." He rose
with heavy deliberation; his eyes bulged out in a severe and
dignified stare. "Out you go!" he bellowed; suddenly, making a step
forward.--"Great Scott! What are you up to, mister?" asked in a tone of
dispassionate surprise the steward whose head appeared in the doorway.
"These are the Captain's friends." "Show me a man's friends and . . ."
began Shaw, dogmatically, but abruptly passed into the tone of
admonition. "You take your mug out of the way, bottle-washer. They ain't
friends of mine. I ain't a vagabond. I know what's due to myself. Quit!"
he hissed, fiercely. Hassim, with an alert movement, grasped the handle
of his kris. Shaw puffed out his cheeks and frowned.--"Look out! He
will stick you like a prize pig," murmured Carter without moving
a muscle. Shaw looked round helplessly.--"And you would enjoy the
fun--wouldn't you?" he said with slow bitterness. Carter's distant
non-committal smile quite overwhelmed him by its horrid frigidity.
Extreme despondency replaced the proper feeling of racial pride in the
primitive soul of the mate. "My God! What luck! What have I done to fall
amongst that lot?" he groaned, sat down, and took his big grey head in
his hands. Carter drew aside to make room for Immada, who, in obedience
to a whisper from her brother, sought to leave the cabin. She passed
out after an instant of hesitation, during which she looked up at Carter
once. Her brother, motionless in a defensive attitude, protected her
retreat. She disappeared; Hassim's grip on his weapon relaxed; he looked
in turn at every object in the cabin as if to fix its position in
his mind forever, and following his sister, walked out with noiseless
footfalls.

They entered the same darkness which had received, enveloped, and hidden
the troubled souls of Lingard and Edith, but to these two the light from
which they had felt themselves driven away was now like the light of
forbidden hopes; it had the awful and tranquil brightness that a light
burning on the shore has for an exhausted swimmer about to give himself
up to the fateful sea. They looked back; it had disappeared; Carter had
shut the cabin door behind them to have it out with Shaw. He wanted to
arrive at some kind of working compromise with the nominal commander,
but the mate was so demoralized by the novelty of the assaults made upon
his respectability that the young defender of the brig could get nothing
from him except lamentations mingled with mild blasphemies. The brig
slept, and along her quiet deck the voices raised in her cabin--Shaw's
appeals and reproaches directed vociferously to heaven, together with
Carter's inflexible drawl mingled into one deadened, modulated, and
continuous murmur. The lockouts in the waist, motionless and peering
into obscurity, one ear turned to the sea, were aware of that strange
resonance like the ghost of a quarrel that seemed to hover at their
backs. Wasub, after seeing Hassim and Immada into their canoe, prowled
to and fro the whole length of the vessel vigilantly. There was not
a star in the sky and no gleam on the water; there was no horizon, no
outline, no shape for the eye to rest upon, nothing for the hand to
grasp. An obscurity that seemed without limit in space and time had
submerged the universe like a destroying flood.

A lull of the breeze kept for a time the small boat in the neighbourhood
of the brig. The hoisted sail, invisible, fluttered faintly,
mysteriously, and the boat rising and falling bodily to the passage of
each invisible undulation of the waters seemed to repose upon a living
breast. Lingard, his hand on the tiller, sat up erect, expectant and
silent. Mrs. Travers had drawn her cloak close around her body. Their
glances plunged infinitely deep into a lightless void, and yet they were
still so near the brig that the piteous whine of the dog, mingled with
the angry rattling of the chain, reached their ears faintly, evoking
obscure images of distress and fury. A sharp bark ending in a plaintive
howl that seemed raised by the passage of phantoms invisible to men,
rent the black stillness, as though the instinct of the brute inspired
by the soul of night had voiced in a lamentable plaint the fear of the
future, the anguish of lurking death, the terror of shadows. Not far
from the brig's boat Hassim and Immada in their canoe, letting their
paddles trail in the water, sat in a silent and invincible torpor as
if the fitful puffs of wind had carried to their hearts the breath of a
subtle poison that, very soon, would make them die.--"Have you seen
the white woman's eyes?" cried the girl. She struck her palms together
loudly and remained with her arms extended, with her hands clasped. "O
Hassim! Have you seen her eyes shining under her eyebrows like rays of
light darting under the arched boughs in a forest? They pierced me. I
shuddered at the sound of her voice! I saw her walk behind him--and
it seems to me that she does not live on earth--that all this is
witchcraft."

She lamented in the night. Hassim kept silent. He had no illusions and
in any other man but Lingard he would have thought the proceeding no
better than suicidal folly. For him Travers and d'Alcacer were two
powerful Rajahs--probably relatives of the Ruler of the land of the
English whom he knew to be a woman; but why they should come and
interfere with the recovery of his own kingdom was an obscure problem.
He was concerned for Lingard's safety. That the risk was incurred mostly
for his sake--so that the prospects of the great enterprise should not
be ruined by a quarrel over the lives of these whites--did not strike
him so much as may be imagined. There was that in him which made such
an action on Lingard's part appear all but unavoidable. Was he not Rajah
Hassim and was not the other a man of strong heart, of strong arm, of
proud courage, a man great enough to protect highborn princes--a friend?
Immada's words called out a smile which, like the words, was lost in the
darkness. "Forget your weariness," he said, gently, "lest, O Sister, we
should arrive too late." The coming day would throw its light on some
decisive event. Hassim thought of his own men who guarded the Emma and
he wished to be where they could hear his voice. He regretted Jaffir was
not there. Hassim was saddened by the absence from his side of that man
who once had carried what he thought would be his last message to his
friend. It had not been the last. He had lived to cherish new hopes and
to face new troubles and, perchance, to frame another message yet, while
death knocked with the hands of armed enemies at the gate. The breeze
steadied; the succeeding swells swung the canoe smoothly up the unbroken
ridges of water travelling apace along the land. They progressed slowly;
but Immada's heart was more weary than her arms, and Hassim, dipping the
blade of his paddle without a splash, peered right and left, trying to
make out the shadowy forms of islets. A long way ahead of the canoe and
holding the same course, the brig's dinghy ran with broad lug extended,
making for that narrow and winding passage between the coast and the
southern shoals, which led to the mouth of the creek connecting the
lagoon with the sea.

Thus on that starless night the Shallows were peopled by uneasy souls.
The thick veil of clouds stretched over them, cut them off from the
rest of the universe. At times Mrs. Travers had in the darkness the
impression of dizzy speed, and again it seemed to her that the boat was
standing still, that everything in the world was standing still and only
her fancy roamed free from all trammels. Lingard, perfectly motionless
by her side, steered, shaping his course by the feel of the wind.
Presently he perceived ahead a ghostly flicker of faint, livid light
which the earth seemed to throw up against the uniform blackness of
the sky. The dinghy was approaching the expanse of the Shallows. The
confused clamour of broken water deepened its note.

"How long are we going to sail like this?" asked Mrs. Travers, gently.
She did not recognize the voice that pronounced the word "Always" in
answer to her question. It had the impersonal ring of a voice without a
master. Her heart beat fast.

"Captain Lingard!" she cried.

"Yes. What?" he said, nervously, as if startled out of a dream.

"I asked you how long we were going to sail like this," she repeated,
distinctly.

"If the breeze holds we shall be in the lagoon soon after daybreak. That
will be the right time, too. I shall leave you on board the hulk with
Jorgenson."

"And you? What will you do?" she asked. She had to wait for a while.

"I will do what I can," she heard him say at last. There was another
pause. "All I can," he added.

The breeze dropped, the sail fluttered.

"I have perfect confidence in you," she said. "But are you certain of
success?"

"No."

The futility of her question came home to Mrs. Travers. In a few hours
of life she had been torn away from all her certitudes, flung into
a world of improbabilities. This thought instead of augmenting her
distress seemed to soothe her. What she experienced was not doubt and
it was not fear. It was something else. It might have been only a great
fatigue.

She heard a dull detonation as if in the depth of the sea. It was hardly
more than a shock and a vibration. A roller had broken amongst the
shoals; the livid clearness Lingard had seen ahead flashed and flickered
in expanded white sheets much nearer to the boat now. And all this--the
wan burst of light, the faint shock as of something remote and immense
falling into ruins, was taking place outside the limits of her
life which remained encircled by an impenetrable darkness and by an
impenetrable silence. Puffs of wind blew about her head and expired;
the sail collapsed, shivered audibly, stood full and still in turn;
and again the sensation of vertiginous speed and of absolute immobility
succeeding each other with increasing swiftness merged at last into
a bizarre state of headlong motion and profound peace. The darkness
enfolded her like the enervating caress of a sombre universe. It was
gentle and destructive. Its languor seduced her soul into surrender.
Nothing existed and even all her memories vanished into space. She was
content that nothing should exist.

Lingard, aware all the time of their contact in the narrow stern sheets
of the boat, was startled by the pressure of the woman's head drooping
on his shoulder. He stiffened himself still more as though he had
tried on the approach of a danger to conceal his life in the breathless
rigidity of his body. The boat soared and descended slowly; a region
of foam and reefs stretched across her course hissing like a gigantic
cauldron; a strong gust of wind drove her straight at it for a moment
then passed on and abandoned her to the regular balancing of the swell.
The struggle of the rocks forever overwhelmed and emerging, with the sea
forever victorious and repulsed, fascinated the man. He watched it as he
would have watched something going on within himself while Mrs. Travers
slept sustained by his arm, pressed to his side, abandoned to his
support. The shoals guarding the Shore of Refuge had given him his first
glimpse of success--the solid support he needed for his action. The
Shallows were the shelter of his dreams; their voice had the power to
soothe and exalt his thoughts with the promise of freedom for his hopes.
Never had there been such a generous friendship. . . . A mass of white
foam whirling about a centre of intense blackness spun silently past the
side of the boat. . . . That woman he held like a captive on his arm had
also been given to him by the Shallows.

Suddenly his eyes caught on a distant sandbank the red gleam of Daman's
camp fire instantly eclipsed like the wink of a signalling lantern along
the level of the waters. It brought to his mind the existence of the two
men--those other captives. If the war canoe transporting them into the
lagoon had left the sands shortly after Hassim's retreat from Daman's
camp, Travers and d'Alcacer were by this time far away up the creek.
Every thought of action had become odious to Lingard since all he could
do in the world now was to hasten the moment of his separation from that
woman to whom he had confessed the whole secret of his life.

And she slept. She could sleep! He looked down at her as he would have
looked at the slumbering ignorance of a child, but the life within him
had the fierce beat of supreme moments. Near by, the eddies sighed along
the reefs, the water soughed amongst the stones, clung round the rocks
with tragic murmurs that resembled promises, good-byes, or prayers. From
the unfathomable distances of the night came the booming of the swell
assaulting the seaward face of the Shallows. He felt the woman's
nearness with such intensity that he heard nothing. . . . Then suddenly
he thought of death.

"Wake up!" he shouted in her ear, swinging round in his seat. Mrs.
Travers gasped; a splash of water flicked her over the eyes and she felt
the separate drops run down her cheeks, she tasted them on her lips,
tepid and bitter like tears. A swishing undulation tossed the boat on
high followed by another and still another; and then the boat with the
breeze abeam glided through still water, laying over at a steady angle.

"Clear of the reef now," remarked Lingard in a tone of relief.

"Were we in any danger?" asked Mrs. Travers in a whisper.

"Well, the breeze dropped and we drifted in very close to the rocks," he
answered. "I had to rouse you. It wouldn't have done for you to wake up
suddenly struggling in the water."

So she had slept! It seemed to her incredible that she should have
closed her eyes in this small boat, with the knowledge of their
desperate errand, on so disturbed a sea. The man by her side leaned
forward, extended his arm, and the boat going off before the wind went
on faster on an even keel. A motionless black bank resting on the sea
stretched infinitely right in their way in ominous stillness. She called
Lingard's attention to it. "Look at this awful cloud."

"This cloud is the coast and in a moment we shall be entering the
creek," he said, quietly. Mrs. Travers stared at it. Was it land--land!
It seemed to her even less palpable than a cloud, a mere sinister
immobility above the unrest of the sea, nursing in its depth the unrest
of men who, to her mind, were no more real than fantastic shadows.



V

What struck Mrs. Travers most, directly she set eyes on him, was the
other-world aspect of Jorgenson. He had been buried out of sight so long
that his tall, gaunt body, his unhurried, mechanical movements, his
set face and his eyes with an empty gaze suggested an invincible
indifference to all the possible surprises of the earth. That appearance
of a resuscitated man who seemed to be commanded by a conjuring spell
strolled along the decks of what was even to Mrs. Travers' eyes the mere
corpse of a ship and turned on her a pair of deep-sunk, expressionless
eyes with an almost unearthly detachment. Mrs. Travers had never been
looked at before with that strange and pregnant abstraction. Yet she
didn't dislike Jorgenson. In the early morning light, white from head to
foot in a perfectly clean suit of clothes which seemed hardly to contain
any limbs, freshly shaven (Jorgenson's sunken cheeks with their withered
colouring always had a sort of gloss as though he had the habit of
shaving every two hours or so), he looked as immaculate as though he
had been indeed a pure spirit superior to the soiling contacts of the
material earth. He was disturbing but he was not repulsive. He gave no
sign of greeting.

Lingard addressed him at once.

"You have had a regular staircase built up the side of the hulk,
Jorgenson," he said. "It was very convenient for us to come aboard now,
but in case of an attack don't you think . . ."

"I did think." There was nothing so dispassionate in the world as the
voice of Captain H. C. Jorgenson, ex Barque Wild Rose, since he had
recrossed the Waters of Oblivion to step back into the life of men. "I
did think, but since I don't want to make trouble. . . ."

"Oh, you don't want to make trouble," interrupted Lingard.

"No. Don't believe in it. Do you, King Tom?"

"I may have to make trouble."

"So you came up here in this small dinghy of yours like this to start
making trouble, did you?"

"What's the matter with you? Don't you know me yet, Jorgenson?"

"I thought I knew you. How could I tell that a man like you would come
along for a fight bringing a woman with him?"

"This lady is Mrs. Travers," said Lingard. "The wife of one of the
luckless gentlemen Daman got hold of last evening. . . . This is
Jorgenson, the friend of whom I have been telling you, Mrs. Travers."

Mrs. Travers smiled faintly. Her eyes roamed far and near and the
strangeness of her surroundings, the overpowering curiosity, the
conflict of interest and doubt gave her the aspect of one still new to
life, presenting an innocent and naive attitude before the surprises
of experience. She looked very guileless and youthful between those two
men. Lingard gazed at her with that unconscious tenderness mingled with
wonder, which some men manifest toward girlhood. There was nothing of
a conqueror of kingdoms in his bearing. Jorgenson preserved his
amazing abstraction which seemed neither to hear nor see anything. But,
evidently, he kept a mysterious grip on events in the world of living
men because he asked very naturally:

"How did she get away?"

"The lady wasn't on the sandbank," explained Lingard, curtly.

"What sandbank?" muttered Jorgenson, perfunctorily. . . . "Is the yacht
looted, Tom?"

"Nothing of the kind," said Lingard.

"Ah, many dead?" inquired Jorgenson.

"I tell you there was nothing of the kind," said Lingard, impatiently.

"What? No fight!" inquired Jorgenson again without the slightest sign of
animation.

"No."

"And you a fighting man."

"Listen to me, Jorgenson. Things turned out so that before the time came
for a fight it was already too late." He turned to Mrs. Travers still
looking about with anxious eyes and a faint smile on her lips. "While I
was talking to you that evening from the boat it was already too late.
No. There was never any time for it. I have told you all about myself,
Mrs. Travers, and you know that I speak the truth when I say too late.
If you had only been alone in that yacht going about the seas!"

"Yes," she struck in, "but I was not alone."

Lingard dropped his chin on his breast. Already a foretaste of noonday
heat staled the sparkling freshness of the morning. The smile had
vanished from Edith Travers' lips and her eyes rested on Lingard's bowed
head with an expression no longer curious but which might have appeared
enigmatic to Jorgenson if he had looked at her. But Jorgenson looked at
nothing. He asked from the remoteness of his dead past, "What have you
left outside, Tom? What is there now?"

"There's the yacht on the shoals, my brig at anchor, and about a hundred
of the worst kind of Illanun vagabonds under three chiefs and with two
war-praus moored to the edge of the bank. Maybe Daman is with them, too,
out there."

"No," said Jorgenson, positively.

"He has come in," cried Lingard. "He brought his prisoners in himself
then."

"Landed by torchlight," uttered precisely the shade of Captain
Jorgenson, late of the Barque Wild Rose. He swung his arm pointing
across the lagoon and Mrs. Travers turned about in that direction.

All the scene was but a great light and a great solitude. Her gaze
travelled over the lustrous, dark sheet of empty water to a shore
bordered by a white beach empty, too, and showing no sign of human life.
The human habitations were lost in the shade of the fruit trees, masked
by the cultivated patches of Indian corn and the banana plantations.
Near the shore the rigid lines of two stockaded forts could be
distinguished flanking the beach, and between them with a great open
space before it, the brown roof slope of an enormous long building that
seemed suspended in the air had a great square flag fluttering above it.
Something like a small white flame in the sky was the carved white coral
finial on the gable of the mosque which had caught full the rays of
the sun. A multitude of gay streamers, white and red, flew over the
half-concealed roofs, over the brilliant fields and amongst the sombre
palm groves. But it might have been a deserted settlement decorated and
abandoned by its departed population. Lingard pointed to the stockade on
the right.

"That's where your husband is," he said to Mrs. Travers.

"Who is the other?" uttered Jorgenson's voice at their backs. He also
was turned that way with his strange sightless gaze fixed beyond them
into the void.

"A Spanish gentleman I believe you said, Mrs Travers," observed Lingard.

"It is extremely difficult to believe that there is anybody there,"
murmured Mrs. Travers.

"Did you see them both, Jorgenson?" asked Lingard.

"Made out nobody. Too far. Too dark."

As a matter of fact Jorgenson had seen nothing, about an hour before
daybreak, but the distant glare of torches while the loud shouts of an
excited multitude had reached him across the water only like a faint
and tempestuous murmur. Presently the lights went away processionally
through the groves of trees into the armed stockades. The distant glare
vanished in the fading darkness and the murmurs of the invisible crowd
ceased suddenly as if carried off by the retreating shadow of the night.
Daylight followed swiftly, disclosing to the sleepless Jorgenson the
solitude of the shore and the ghostly outlines of the familiar forms of
grouped trees and scattered human habitations. He had watched the varied
colours come out in the dawn, the wide cultivated Settlement of
many shades of green, framed far away by the fine black lines of the
forest-edge that was its limit and its protection.

Mrs. Travers stood against the rail as motionless as a statue. Her face
had lost all its mobility and her cheeks were dead white as if all the
blood in her body had flowed back into her heart and had remained there.
Her very lips had lost their colour. Lingard caught hold of her arm
roughly.

"Don't, Mrs. Travers. Why are you terrifying yourself like this? If you
don't believe what I say listen to me asking Jorgenson. . . ."

"Yes, ask me," mumbled Jorgenson in his white moustache.

"Speak straight, Jorgenson. What do you think? Are the gentlemen alive?"

"Certainly," said Jorgenson in a sort of disappointed tone as though he
had expected a much more difficult question.

"Is their life in immediate danger?"

"Of course not," said Jorgenson.

Lingard turned away from the oracle. "You have heard him, Mrs. Travers.
You may believe every word he says. There isn't a thought or a purpose
in that Settlement," he continued, pointing at the dumb solitude of the
lagoon, "that this man doesn't know as if they were his own."

"I know. Ask me," muttered Jorgenson, mechanically.

Mrs. Travers said nothing but made a slight movement and her whole rigid
figure swayed dangerously. Lingard put his arm firmly round her waist
and she did not seem aware of it till after she had turned her head and
found Lingard's face very near her own. But his eyes full of concern
looked so close into hers that she was obliged to shut them like a woman
about to faint.

The effect this produced upon Lingard was such that she felt the
tightening of his arm and as she opened her eyes again some of the
colour returned to her face. She met the deepened expression of his
solicitude with a look so steady, with a gaze that in spite of herself
was so profoundly vivid that its clearness seemed to Lingard to throw
all his past life into shade.--"I don't feel faint. It isn't that at
all," she declared in a perfectly calm voice. It seemed to Lingard as
cold as ice.

"Very well," he agreed with a resigned smile. "But you just catch hold
of that rail, please, before I let you go." She, too, forced a smile on
her lips.

"What incredulity," she remarked, and for a time made not the slightest
movement. At last, as if making a concession, she rested the tips of her
fingers on the rail. Lingard gradually removed his arm. "And pray don't
look upon me as a conventional 'weak woman' person, the delicate lady of
your own conception," she said, facing Lingard, with her arm extended to
the rail. "Make that effort please against your own conception of what
a woman like me should be. I am perhaps as strong as you are, Captain
Lingard. I mean it literally. In my body."--"Don't you think I have
seen that long ago?" she heard his deep voice protesting.--"And as to
my courage," Mrs. Travers continued, her expression charmingly undecided
between frowns and smiles; "didn't I tell you only a few hours ago, only
last evening, that I was not capable of thinking myself into a fright;
you remember, when you were begging me to try something of the kind.
Don't imagine that I would have been ashamed to try. But I couldn't have
done it. No. Not even for the sake of somebody else's kingdom. Do you
understand me?"

"God knows," said the attentive Lingard after a time, with an unexpected
sigh. "You people seem to be made of another stuff."

"What has put that absurd notion into your head?"

"I didn't mean better or worse. And I wouldn't say it isn't good stuff
either. What I meant to say is that it's different. One feels it. And
here we are."

"Yes, here we are," repeated Mrs. Travers. "And as to this moment of
emotion, what provoked it is not a concern for anybody or anything
outside myself. I felt no terror. I cannot even fix my fears upon any
distinct image. You think I am shamelessly heartless in telling you
this."

Lingard made no sign. It didn't occur to him to make a sign. He
simply hung on Mrs. Travers' words as it were only for the sake of the
sound.--"I am simply frank with you," she continued. "What do I know of
savagery, violence, murder? I have never seen a dead body in my life.
The light, the silence, the mysterious emptiness of this place have
suddenly affected my imagination, I suppose. What is the meaning of this
wonderful peace in which we stand--you and I alone?"

Lingard shook his head. He saw the narrow gleam of the woman's teeth
between the parted lips of her smile, as if all the ardour of her
conviction had been dissolved at the end of her speech into wistful
recognition of their partnership before things outside their knowledge.
And he was warmed by something a little helpless in that smile. Within
three feet of them the shade of Jorgenson, very gaunt and neat, stared
into space.

"Yes. You are strong," said Lingard. "But a whole long night sitting in
a small boat! I wonder you are not too stiff to stand."

"I am not stiff in the least," she interrupted, still smiling. "I am
really a very strong woman," she added, earnestly. "Whatever happens you
may reckon on that fact."

Lingard gave her an admiring glance. But the shade of Jorgenson, perhaps
catching in its remoteness the sound of the word woman, was suddenly
moved to begin scolding with all the liberty of a ghost, in a flow of
passionless indignation.

"Woman! That's what I say. That's just about the last touch--that you,
Tom Lingard, red-eyed Tom, King Tom, and all those fine names, that you
should leave your weapons twenty miles behind you, your men, your guns,
your brig that is your strength, and come along here with your mouth
full of fight, bare-handed and with a woman in tow.--Well--well!"

"Don't forget, Jorgenson, that the lady hears you," remonstrated Lingard
in a vexed tone. . . . "He doesn't mean to be rude," he remarked to Mrs.
Travers quite loud, as if indeed Jorgenson were but an immaterial and
feelingless illusion. "He has forgotten."

"The woman is not in the least offended. I ask for nothing better than
to be taken on that footing."

"Forgot nothing!" mumbled Jorgenson with a sort of ghostly assertiveness
and as it were for his own satisfaction. "What's the world coming to?"

"It was I who insisted on coming with Captain Lingard," said Mrs.
Travers, treating Jorgenson to a fascinating sweetness of tone.

"That's what I say! What is the world coming to? Hasn't King Tom a mind
of his own? What has come over him? He's mad! Leaving his brig with a
hundred and twenty born and bred pirates of the worst kind in two praus
on the other side of a sandbank. Did you insist on that, too? Has he put
himself in the hands of a strange woman?"

Jorgenson seemed to be asking those questions of himself. Mrs. Travers
observed the empty stare, the self-communing voice, his unearthly lack
of animation. Somehow it made it very easy to speak the whole truth to
him.

"No," she said, "it is I who am altogether in his hands."

Nobody would have guessed that Jorgenson had heard a single word of that
emphatic declaration if he had not addressed himself to Lingard with the
question neither more nor less abstracted than all his other speeches.

"Why then did you bring her along?"

"You don't understand. It was only right and proper. One of the
gentlemen is the lady's husband."

"Oh, yes," muttered Jorgenson. "Who's the other?"

"You have been told. A friend."

"Poor Mr. d'Alcacer," said Mrs. Travers. "What bad luck for him to have
accepted our invitation. But he is really a mere acquaintance."

"I hardly noticed him," observed Lingard, gloomily. "He was talking to
you over the back of your chair when I came aboard the yacht as if he
had been a very good friend."

"We always understood each other very well," said Mrs. Travers, picking
up from the rail the long glass that was lying there. "I always liked
him, the frankness of his mind, and his great loyalty."

"What did he do?" asked Lingard.

"He loved," said Mrs. Travers, lightly. "But that's an old story." She
raised the glass to her eyes, one arm extended fully to sustain the long
tube, and Lingard forgot d'Alcacer in admiring the firmness of her pose
and the absolute steadiness of the heavy glass. She was as firm as a
rock after all those emotions and all that fatigue.

Mrs. Travers directed the glass instinctively toward the entrance of the
lagoon. The smooth water there shone like a piece of silver in the dark
frame of the forest. A black speck swept across the field of her vision.
It was some time before she could find it again and then she saw,
apparently so near as to be within reach of the voice, a small canoe
with two people in it. She saw the wet paddles rising and dipping with
a flash in the sunlight. She made out plainly the face of Immada, who
seemed to be looking straight into the big end of the telescope. The
chief and his sister, after resting under the bank for a couple of
hours in the middle of the night, had entered the lagoon and were making
straight for the hulk. They were already near enough to be perfectly
distinguishable to the naked eye if there had been anybody on board to
glance that way. But nobody was even thinking of them. They might not
have existed except perhaps in the memory of old Jorgenson. But that was
mostly busy with all the mysterious secrets of his late tomb.

Mrs. Travers lowered the glass suddenly. Lingard came out from a sort of
trance and said:

"Mr. d'Alcacer. Loved! Why shouldn't he?"

Mrs. Travers looked frankly into Lingard's gloomy eyes. "It isn't that
alone, of course," she said. "First of all he knew how to love and then.
. . . You don't know how artificial and barren certain kinds of life
can be. But Mr. d'Alcacer's life was not that. His devotion was worth
having."

"You seem to know a lot about him,'" said Lingard, enviously. "Why do
you smile?" She continued to smile at him for a little while. The long
brass tube over her shoulder shone like gold against the pale fairness
of her bare head.--"At a thought," she answered, preserving the low tone
of the conversation into which they had fallen as if their words could
have disturbed the self-absorption of Captain H. C. Jorgenson. "At the
thought that for all my long acquaintance with Mr. d'Alcacer I don't
know half as much about him as I know about you."

"Ah, that's impossible," contradicted Lingard. "Spaniard or no Spaniard,
he is one of your kind."

"Tarred with the same brush," murmured Mrs. Travers, with only a
half-amused irony. But Lingard continued:

"He was trying to make it up between me and your husband, wasn't he? I
was too angry to pay much attention, but I liked him well enough. What
pleased me most was the way in which he gave it up. That was done like a
gentleman. Do you understand what I mean, Mrs. Travers?"

"I quite understand."

"Yes, you would," he commented, simply. "But just then I was too angry
to talk to anybody. And so I cleared out on board my own ship and stayed
there, not knowing what to do and wishing you all at the bottom of the
sea. Don't mistake me, Mrs. Travers; it's you, the people aft, that I
wished at the bottom of the sea. I had nothing against the poor devils
on board, They would have trusted me quick enough. So I fumed there
till--till. . . ."

"Till nine o'clock or a little after," suggested Mrs. Travers,
impenetrably.

"No. Till I remembered you," said Lingard with the utmost innocence.

"Do you mean to say that you forgot my existence so completely till
then? You had spoken to me on board the yacht, you know."

"Did I? I thought I did. What did I say?"

"You told me not to touch a dusky princess," answered Mrs. Travers with
a short laugh. Then with a visible change of mood as if she had suddenly
out of a light heart been recalled to the sense of the true situation:
"But indeed I meant no harm to this figure of your dream. And, look over
there. She is pursuing you." Lingard glanced toward the north shore and
suppressed an exclamation of remorse. For the second time he discovered
that he had forgotten the existence of Hassim and Immada. The canoe was
now near enough for its occupants to distinguish plainly the heads of
three people above the low bulwark of the Emma. Immada let her paddle
trail suddenly in the water, with the exclamation, "I see the white
woman there." Her brother looked over his shoulder and the canoe
floated, arrested as if by the sudden power of a spell.--"They are no
dream to me," muttered Lingard, sturdily. Mrs. Travers turned abruptly
away to look at the further shore. It was still and empty to the naked
eye and seemed to quiver in the sunshine like an immense painted curtain
lowered upon the unknown.

"Here's Rajah Hassim coming, Jorgenson. I had an idea he would perhaps
stay outside." Mrs. Travers heard Lingard's voice at her back and the
answering grunt of Jorgenson. She raised deliberately the long glass to
her eye, pointing it at the shore.

She distinguished plainly now the colours in the flutter of the
streamers above the brown roofs of the large Settlement, the stir of
palm groves, the black shadows inland and the dazzling white beach of
coral sand all ablaze in its formidable mystery. She swept the whole
range of the view and was going to lower the glass when from behind
the massive angle of the stockade there stepped out into the brilliant
immobility of the landscape a man in a long white gown and with an
enormous black turban surmounting a dark face. Slow and grave he
paced the beach ominously in the sunshine, an enigmatical figure in an
Oriental tale with something weird and menacing in its sudden emergence
and lonely progress.

With an involuntary gasp Mrs. Travers lowered the glass. All at once
behind her back she heard a low musical voice beginning to pour out
incomprehensible words in a tone of passionate pleading. Hassim and
Immada had come on board and had approached Lingard. Yes! It was
intolerable to feel that this flow of soft speech which had no meaning
for her could make its way straight into that man's heart.



PART V. THE POINT OF HONOUR AND THE POINT OF PASSION

I

"May I come in?"

"Yes," said a voice within. "The door is open." It had a wooden latch.
Mr. Travers lifted it while the voice of his wife continued as he
entered. "Did you imagine I had locked myself in? Did you ever know me
lock myself in?"

Mr. Travers closed the door behind him. "No, it has never come to that,"
he said in a tone that was not conciliatory. In that place which was a
room in a wooden hut and had a square opening without glass but with a
half-closed shutter he could not distinguish his wife very well at once.
She was sitting in an armchair and what he could see best was her
fair hair all loose over the back of the chair. There was a moment
of silence. The measured footsteps of two men pacing athwart the
quarter-deck of the dead ship Emma commanded by the derelict shade of
Jorgenson could be heard outside.

Jorgenson, on taking up his dead command, had a house of thin boards
built on the after deck for his own accommodation and that of Lingard
during his flying visits to the Shore of Refuge. A narrow passage
divided it in two and Lingard's side was furnished with a camp bedstead,
a rough desk, and a rattan armchair. On one of his visits Lingard had
brought with him a black seaman's chest and left it there. Apart from
these objects and a small looking-glass worth about half a crown and
nailed to the wall there was nothing else in there whatever. What was
on Jorgenson's side of the deckhouse no one had seen, but from external
evidence one could infer the existence of a set of razors.

The erection of that primitive deckhouse was a matter of propriety
rather than of necessity. It was proper that the white men should have a
place to themselves on board, but Lingard was perfectly accurate when he
told Mrs. Travers that he had never slept there once. His practice was
to sleep on deck. As to Jorgenson, if he did sleep at all he slept very
little. It might have been said that he haunted rather than commanded
the Emma. His white form flitted here and there in the night or stood
for hours, silent, contemplating the sombre glimmer of the lagoon. Mr.
Travers' eyes accustomed gradually to the dusk of the place could
now distinguish more of his wife's person than the great mass of
honey-coloured hair. He saw her face, the dark eyebrows and her eyes
that seemed profoundly black in the half light. He said:

"You couldn't have done so here. There is neither lock nor bolt."

"Isn't there? I didn't notice. I would know how to protect myself
without locks and bolts."

"I am glad to hear it," said Mr. Travers in a sullen tone and fell
silent again surveying the woman in the chair. "Indulging your taste for
fancy dress," he went on with faint irony.

Mrs. Travers clasped her hands behind her head. The wide sleeves
slipping back bared her arms to her shoulders. She was wearing a Malay
thin cotton jacket, cut low in the neck without a collar and fastened
with wrought silver clasps from the throat downward. She had replaced
her yachting skirt by a blue check sarong embroidered with threads of
gold. Mr. Travers' eyes travelling slowly down attached themselves to
the gleaming instep of an agitated foot from which hung a light leather
sandal.

"I had no clothes with me but what I stood in," said Mrs. Travers. "I
found my yachting costume too heavy. It was intolerable. I was soaked
in dew when I arrived. So when these things were produced for my
inspection. . . ."

"By enchantment," muttered Mr. Travers in a tone too heavy for sarcasm.

"No. Out of that chest. There are very fine stuffs there."

"No doubt," said Mr. Travers. "The man wouldn't be above plundering the
natives. . . ." He sat down heavily on the chest. "A most appropriate
costume for this farce," he continued. "But do you mean to wear it in
open daylight about the decks?"

"Indeed I do," said Mrs. Travers. "D'Alcacer has seen me already and he
didn't seem shocked."

"You should," said Mr. Travers, "try to get yourself presented with some
bangles for your ankles so that you may jingle as you walk."

"Bangles are not necessities," said Mrs. Travers in a weary tone and
with the fixed upward look of a person unwilling to relinquish her
dream. Mr. Travers dropped the subject to ask:

"And how long is this farce going to last?"

Mrs. Travers unclasped her hands, lowered her glance, and changed her
whole pose in a moment.

"What do you mean by farce? What farce?"

"The one which is being played at my expense."

"You believe that?"

"Not only believe. I feel deeply that it is so. At my expense. It's a
most sinister thing," Mr. Travers pursued, still with downcast eyes and
in an unforgiving tone. "I must tell you that when I saw you in that
courtyard in a crowd of natives and leaning on that man's arm, it gave
me quite a shock."

"Did I, too, look sinister?" said Mrs. Travers, turning her head
slightly toward her husband. "And yet I assure you that I was glad,
profoundly glad, to see you safe from danger for a time at least. To
gain time is everything. . . ."

"I ask myself," Mr. Travers meditated aloud, "was I ever in danger? Am
I safe now? I don't know. I can't tell. No! All this seems an abominable
farce."

There was that in his tone which made his wife continue to look at him
with awakened interest. It was obvious that he suffered from a distress
which was not the effect of fear; and Mrs. Travers' face expressed real
concern till he added in a freezing manner: "The question, however, is
as to your discretion."

She leaned back again in the chair and let her hands rest quietly in her
lap. "Would you have preferred me to remain outside, in the yacht, in
the near neighbourhood of these wild men who captured you? Or do you
think that they, too, were got up to carry on a farce?"

"Most decidedly." Mr. Travers raised his head, though of course not his
voice. "You ought to have remained in the yacht amongst white men, your
servants, the sailing-master, the crew whose duty it was to. . . . Who
would have been ready to die for you."

"I wonder why they should have--and why I should have asked them for
that sacrifice. However, I have no doubt they would have died. Or would
you have preferred me to take up my quarters on board that man's brig?
We were all fairly safe there. The real reason why I insisted on coming
in here was to be nearer to you--to see for myself what could be or was
being done. . . . But really if you want me to explain my motives then I
may just as well say nothing. I couldn't remain outside for days without
news, in a state of horrible doubt. We couldn't even tell whether you
and d'Alcacer were still alive till we arrived here. You might have been
actually murdered on the sandbank, after Rajah Hassim and that girl had
gone away; or killed while going up the river. And I wanted to know at
once, as soon as possible. It was a matter of impulse. I went off in
what I stood in without delaying a moment."

"Yes," said Mr. Travers. "And without even thinking of having a
few things put up for me in a bag. No doubt you were in a state of
excitement. Unless you took such a tragic view that it seemed to you
hardly worth while to bother about my clothes."

"It was absolutely the impulse of the moment. I could have done nothing
else. Won't you give me credit for it?"

Mr. Travers raised his eyes again to his wife's face. He saw it calm,
her attitude reposeful. Till then his tone had been resentful, dull,
without sarcasm. But now he became slightly pompous.

"No. As a matter of fact, as a matter of experience, I can't credit
you with the possession of feelings appropriate to your origin, social
position, and the ideas of the class to which you belong. It was the
heaviest disappointment of my life. I had made up my mind not to mention
it as long as I lived. This, however, seems an occasion which you have
provoked yourself. It isn't at all a solemn occasion. I don't look upon
it as solemn at all. It's very disagreeable and humiliating. But it
has presented itself. You have never taken a serious interest in the
activities of my life which of course are its distinction and its value.
And why you should be carried away suddenly by a feeling toward the mere
man I don't understand."

"Therefore you don't approve," Mrs. Travers commented in an even
tone. "But I assure you, you may safely. My feeling was of the most
conventional nature, exactly as if the whole world were looking on.
After all, we are husband and wife. It's eminently fitting that I should
be concerned about your fate. Even the man you distrust and dislike so
much (the warmest feeling, let me tell you, that I ever saw you display)
even that man found my conduct perfectly proper. His own word. Proper.
So eminently proper that it altogether silenced his objections."

Mr. Travers shifted uneasily on his seat.

"It's my belief, Edith, that if you had been a man you would have led
a most irregular life. You would have been a frank adventurer. I mean
morally. It has been a great grief to me. You have a scorn in you for
the serious side of life, for the ideas and the ambitions of the social
sphere to which you belong."

He stopped because his wife had clasped again her hands behind her head
and was no longer looking at him.

"It's perfectly obvious," he began again. "We have been living amongst
most distinguished men and women and your attitude to them has been
always so--so negative! You would never recognize the importance of
achievements, of acquired positions. I don't remember you ever admiring
frankly any political or social success. I ask myself what after all you
could possibly have expected from life."

"I could never have expected to hear such a speech from you. As to what
I did expect! . . . I must have been very stupid."

"No, you are anything but that," declared Mr. Travers, conscientiously.
"It isn't stupidity." He hesitated for a moment. "It's a kind of
wilfulness, I think. I preferred not to think about this grievous
difference in our points of view, which, you will admit, I could not
have possibly foreseen before we. . . ."

A sort of solemn embarrassment had come over Mr. Travers. Mrs. Travers,
leaning her chin on the palm of her hand, stared at the bare matchboard
side of the hut.

"Do you charge me with profound girlish duplicity?" she asked, very
softly.

The inside of the deckhouse was full of stagnant heat perfumed by
a slight scent which seemed to emanate from the loose mass of Mrs.
Travers' hair. Mr. Travers evaded the direct question which struck him
as lacking fineness even to the point of impropriety.

"I must suppose that I was not in the calm possession of my insight and
judgment in those days," he said. "I--I was not in a critical state of
mind at the time," he admitted further; but even after going so far
he did not look up at his wife and therefore missed something like
the ghost of a smile on Mrs. Travers' lips. That smile was tinged with
scepticism which was too deep-seated for anything but the faintest
expression. Therefore she said nothing, and Mr. Travers went on as if
thinking aloud:

"Your conduct was, of course, above reproach; but you made for yourself
a detestable reputation of mental superiority, expressed ironically. You
inspired mistrust in the best people. You were never popular."

"I was bored," murmured Mrs. Travers in a reminiscent tone and with her
chin resting in the hollow of her hand.

Mr. Travers got up from the seaman's chest as unexpectedly as if he had
been stung by a wasp, but, of course, with a much slower and more solemn
motion.

"The matter with you, Edith, is that at heart you are perfectly
primitive." Mrs. Travers stood up, too, with a supple, leisurely
movement, and raising her hands to her hair turned half away with a
pensive remark:

"Imperfectly civilized."

"Imperfectly disciplined," corrected Mr. Travers after a moment of
dreary meditation.

She let her arms fall and turned her head.

"No, don't say that," she protested with strange earnestness. "I am the
most severely disciplined person in the world. I am tempted to say that
my discipline has stopped at nothing short of killing myself. I suppose
you can hardly understand what I mean."

Mr. Travers made a slight grimace at the floor.

"I shall not try," he said. "It sounds like something that a barbarian,
hating the delicate complexities and the restraints of a nobler life,
might have said. From you it strikes me as wilful bad taste. . . .
I have often wondered at your tastes. You have always liked
extreme opinions, exotic costumes, lawless characters, romantic
personalities--like d'Alcacer . . ."

"Poor Mr. d'Alcacer," murmured Mrs. Travers.

"A man without any ideas of duty or usefulness," said Mr. Travers,
acidly. "What are you pitying him for?"

"Why! For finding himself in this position out of mere good-nature.
He had nothing to expect from joining our voyage, no advantage for his
political ambitions or anything of the kind. I suppose you asked him on
board to break our tete-a-tete which must have grown wearisome to you."

"I am never bored," declared Mr. Travers. "D'Alcacer seemed glad to
come. And, being a Spaniard, the horrible waste of time cannot matter to
him in the least."

"Waste of time!" repeated Mrs. Travers, indignantly.

"He may yet have to pay for his good nature with his life."

Mr. Travers could not conceal a movement of anger.

"Ah! I forgot those assumptions," he said between his clenched teeth.
"He is a mere Spaniard. He takes this farcical conspiracy with perfect
nonchalance. Decayed races have their own philosophy."

"He takes it with a dignity of his own."

"I don't know what you call his dignity. I should call it lack of
self-respect."

"Why? Because he is quiet and courteous, and reserves his judgment. And
allow me to tell you, Martin, that you are not taking our troubles very
well."

"You can't expect from me all those foreign affectations. I am not in
the habit of compromising with my feelings."

Mrs. Travers turned completely round and faced her husband. "You sulk,"
she said. . . . Mr. Travers jerked his head back a little as if to let
the word go past.--"I am outraged," he declared. Mrs. Travers recognized
there something like real suffering.--"I assure you," she said,
seriously (for she was accessible to pity), "I assure you that this
strange Lingard has no idea of your importance. He doesn't know anything
of your social and political position and still less of your great
ambitions." Mr. Travers listened with some attention.--"Couldn't you
have enlightened him?" he asked.--"It would have been no use; his mind
is fixed upon his own position and upon his own sense of power. He is
a man of the lower classes. . . ."--"He is a brute," said Mr. Travers,
obstinately, and for a moment those two looked straight into each
other's eyes.--"Oh," said Mrs. Travers, slowly, "you are determined not
to compromise with your feelings!" An undertone of scorn crept into her
voice. "But shall I tell you what I think? I think," and she advanced
her head slightly toward the pale, unshaven face that confronted her
dark eyes, "I think that for all your blind scorn you judge the man
well enough to feel that you can indulge your indignation with perfect
safety. Do you hear? With perfect safety!" Directly she had spoken she
regretted these words. Really it was unreasonable to take Mr. Travers'
tricks of character more passionately on this spot of the Eastern
Archipelago full of obscure plots and warring motives than in the more
artificial atmosphere of the town. After all what she wanted was simply
to save his life, not to make him understand anything. Mr. Travers
opened his mouth and without uttering a word shut it again. His wife
turned toward the looking-glass nailed to the wall. She heard his voice
behind her.

"Edith, where's the truth in all this?"

She detected the anguish of a slow mind with an instinctive dread of
obscure places wherein new discoveries can be made. She looked over her
shoulder to say:

"It's on the surface, I assure you. Altogether on the surface."

She turned again to the looking-glass where her own face met her with
dark eyes and a fair mist of hair above the smooth forehead; but her
words had produced no soothing effect.

"But what does it mean?" cried Mr. Travers. "Why doesn't the fellow
apologize? Why are we kept here? Are we being kept here? Why don't we
get away? Why doesn't he take me back on board my yacht? What does he
want from me? How did he procure our release from these people on shore
who he says intended to cut our throats? Why did they give us up to him
instead?"

Mrs. Travers began to twist her hair on her head.

"Matters of high policy and of local politics. Conflict of personal
interests, mistrust between the parties, intrigues of individuals--you
ought to know how that sort of thing works. His diplomacy made use of
all that. The first thing to do was not to liberate you but to get you
into his keeping. He is a very great man here and let me tell you that
your safety depends on his dexterity in the use of his prestige rather
than on his power which he cannot use. If you would let him talk to
you I am sure he would tell you as much as it is possible for him to
disclose."

"I don't want to be told about any of his rascalities. But haven't you
been taken into his confidence?"

"Completely," admitted Mrs. Travers, peering into the small
looking-glass.

"What is the influence you brought to bear upon this man? It looks to me
as if our fate were in your hands."

"Your fate is not in my hands. It is not even in his hands. There is a
moral situation here which must be solved."

"Ethics of blackmail," commented Mr. Travers with unexpected sarcasm. It
flashed through his wife's mind that perhaps she didn't know him so well
as she had supposed. It was as if the polished and solemn crust of hard
proprieties had cracked slightly, here and there, under the strain,
disclosing the mere wrongheadedness of a common mortal. But it was
only manner that had cracked a little; the marvellous stupidity of
his conceit remained the same. She thought that this discussion was
perfectly useless, and as she finished putting up her hair she said: "I
think we had better go on deck now."

"You propose to go out on deck like this?" muttered Mr. Travers with
downcast eyes.

"Like this? Certainly. It's no longer a novelty. Who is going to be
shocked?"

Mr. Travers made no reply. What she had said of his attitude was very
true. He sulked at the enormous offensiveness of men, things, and
events; of words and even of glances which he seemed to feel physically
resting on his skin like a pain, like a degrading contact. He managed
not to wince. But he sulked. His wife continued, "And let me tell
you that those clothes are fit for a princess--I mean they are of the
quality, material and style custom prescribes for the highest in the
land, a far-distant land where I am informed women rule as much as the
men. In fact they were meant to be presented to an actual princess in
due course. They were selected with the greatest care for that child
Immada. Captain Lingard. . . ."

Mr. Travers made an inarticulate noise partaking of a groan and a grunt.

"Well, I must call him by some name and this I thought would be the
least offensive for you to hear. After all, the man exists. But he is
known also on a certain portion of the earth's surface as King Tom.
D'Alcacer is greatly taken by that name. It seems to him wonderfully
well adapted to the man, in its familiarity and deference. And if you
prefer. . . ."

"I would prefer to hear nothing," said Mr. Travers, distinctly. "Not a
single word. Not even from you, till I am a free agent again. But words
don't touch me. Nothing can touch me; neither your sinister warnings nor
the moods of levity which you think proper to display before a man whose
life, according to you, hangs on a thread."

"I never forget it for a moment," said Mrs. Travers. "And I not only
know that it does but I also know the strength of the thread. It is a
wonderful thread. You may say if you like it has been spun by the same
fate which made you what you are."

Mr. Travers felt awfully offended. He had never heard anybody, let alone
his own self, addressed in such terms. The tone seemed to question his
very quality. He reflected with shocked amazement that he had lived with
that woman for eight years! And he said to her gloomily:

"You talk like a pagan."

It was a very strong condemnation which apparently Mrs. Travers had
failed to hear for she pursued with animation:

"But really, you can't expect me to meditate on it all the time or shut
myself up here and mourn the circumstances from morning to night. It
would be morbid. Let us go on deck."

"And you look simply heathenish in this costume," Mr. Travers went on
as though he had not been interrupted, and with an accent of deliberate
disgust.

Her heart was heavy but everything he said seemed to force the tone
of levity on to her lips. "As long as I don't look like a guy," she
remarked, negligently, and then caught the direction of his lurid stare
which as a matter of fact was fastened on her bare feet. She checked
herself, "Oh, yes, if you prefer it I will put on my stockings. But you
know I must be very careful of them. It's the only pair I have here. I
have washed them this morning in that bathroom which is built over the
stern. They are now drying over the rail just outside. Perhaps you will
be good enough to pass them to me when you go on deck."

Mr. Travers spun round and went on deck without a word. As soon as she
was alone Mrs. Travers pressed her hands to her temples, a gesture of
distress which relieved her by its sincerity. The measured footsteps of
two men came to her plainly from the deck, rhythmic and double with
a suggestion of tranquil and friendly intercourse. She distinguished
particularly the footfalls of the man whose life's orbit was most remote
from her own. And yet the orbits had cut! A few days ago she could
not have even conceived of his existence, and now he was the man whose
footsteps, it seemed to her, her ears could single unerringly in the
tramp of a crowd. It was, indeed, a fabulous thing. In the half light of
her over-heated shelter she let an irresolute, frightened smile pass off
her lips before she, too, went on deck.



II

An ingeniously constructed framework of light posts and thin laths
occupied the greater part of the deck amidships of the Emma. The four
walls of that airy structure were made of muslin. It was comparatively
lofty. A door-like arrangement of light battens filled with calico
was further protected by a system of curtains calculated to baffle the
pursuit of mosquitoes that haunted the shores of the lagoon in great
singing clouds from sunset till sunrise. A lot of fine mats covered
the deck space within the transparent shelter devised by Lingard and
Jorgenson to make Mrs. Travers' existence possible during the time when
the fate of the two men, and indeed probably of everybody else on board
the Emma, had to hang in the balance. Very soon Lingard's unbidden and
fatal guests had learned the trick of stepping in and out of the place
quickly. Mr. d'Alcacer performed the feat without apparent haste, almost
nonchalantly, yet as well as anybody. It was generally conceded that he
had never let a mosquito in together with himself. Mr. Travers dodged in
and out without grace and was obviously much irritated at the necessity.
Mrs. Travers did it in a manner all her own, with marked cleverness
and an unconscious air. There was an improvised table in there and some
wicker armchairs which Jorgenson had produced from somewhere in the
depths of the ship. It was hard to say what the inside of the Emma
did not contain. It was crammed with all sorts of goods like a general
store. That old hulk was the arsenal and the war-chest of Lingard's
political action; she was stocked with muskets and gunpowder, with bales
of longcloth, of cotton prints, of silks; with bags of rice and currency
brass guns. She contained everything necessary for dealing death and
distributing bribes, to act on the cupidity and upon the fears of men,
to march and to organize, to feed the friends and to combat the enemies
of the cause. She held wealth and power in her flanks, that grounded
ship that would swim no more, without masts and with the best part
of her deck cumbered by the two structures of thin boards and of
transparent muslin.

Within the latter lived the Europeans, visible in the daytime to the few
Malays on board as if through a white haze. In the evening the lighting
of the hurricane lamps inside turned them into dark phantoms surrounded
by a shining mist, against which the insect world rushing in its
millions out of the forest on the bank was baffled mysteriously in its
assault. Rigidly enclosed by transparent walls, like captives of
an enchanted cobweb, they moved about, sat, gesticulated, conversed
publicly during the day; and at night when all the lanterns but one were
extinguished, their slumbering shapes covered all over by white cotton
sheets on the camp bedsteads, which were brought in every evening,
conveyed the gruesome suggestion of dead bodies reposing on stretchers.
The food, such as it was, was served within that glorified mosquito net
which everybody called the "Cage" without any humorous intention. At
meal times the party from the yacht had the company of Lingard who
attached to this ordeal a sense of duty performed at the altar of
civility and conciliation. He could have no conception how much his
presence added to the exasperation of Mr. Travers because Mr. Travers'
manner was too intensely consistent to present any shades. It was
determined by an ineradicable conviction that he was a victim held to
ransom on some incomprehensible terms by an extraordinary and outrageous
bandit. This conviction, strung to the highest pitch, never left him for
a moment, being the object of indignant meditation to his mind, and even
clinging, as it were, to his very body. It lurked in his eyes, in his
gestures, in his ungracious mutters, and in his sinister silences. The
shock to his moral being had ended by affecting Mr. Travers' physical
machine. He was aware of hepatic pains, suffered from accesses of
somnolence and suppressed gusts of fury which frightened him secretly.
His complexion had acquired a yellow tinge, while his heavy eyes had
become bloodshot because of the smoke of the open wood fires during
his three days' detention inside Belarab's stockade. His eyes had been
always very sensitive to outward conditions. D'Alcacer's fine black eyes
were more enduring and his appearance did not differ very much from his
ordinary appearance on board the yacht. He had accepted with smiling
thanks the offer of a thin blue flannel tunic from Jorgenson. Those two
men were much of the same build, though of course d'Alcacer, quietly
alive and spiritually watchful, did not resemble Jorgenson, who, without
being exactly macabre, behaved more like an indifferent but restless
corpse. Those two could not be said to have ever conversed together.
Conversation with Jorgenson was an impossible thing. Even Lingard never
attempted the feat. He propounded questions to Jorgenson much as a
magician would interrogate an evoked shade, or gave him curt directions
as one would make use of some marvellous automaton. And that was
apparently the way in which Jorgenson preferred to be treated. Lingard's
real company on board the Emma was d'Alcacer. D'Alcacer had met Lingard
on the easy terms of a man accustomed all his life to good society in
which the very affectations must be carried on without effort. Whether
affectation, or nature, or inspired discretion, d'Alcacer never let the
slightest curiosity pierce the smoothness of his level, grave courtesy
lightened frequently by slight smiles which often had not much
connection with the words he uttered, except that somehow they made them
sound kindly and as it were tactful. In their character, however, those
words were strictly neutral.

The only time when Lingard had detected something of a deeper
comprehension in d'Alcacer was the day after the long negotiations
inside Belarab's stockade for the temporary surrender of the prisoners.
That move had been suggested to him, exactly as Mrs. Travers had told
her husband, by the rivalries of the parties and the state of public
opinion in the Settlement deprived of the presence of the man who,
theoretically at least, was the greatest power and the visible ruler
of the Shore of Refuge. Belarab still lingered at his father's tomb.
Whether that man of the embittered and pacific heart had withdrawn there
to meditate upon the unruliness of mankind and the thankless nature of
his task; or whether he had gone there simply to bathe in a particularly
clear pool which was a feature of the place, give himself up to the
enjoyment of a certain fruit which grew in profusion there and indulge
for a time in a scrupulous performance of religious exercises, his
absence from the Settlement was a fact of the utmost gravity. It is true
that the prestige of a long-unquestioned rulership and the long-settled
mental habits of the people had caused the captives to be taken straight
to Belarab's stockade as a matter of course. Belarab, at a distance,
could still outweigh the power on the spot of Tengga, whose secret
purposes were no better known, who was jovial, talkative, outspoken and
pugnacious; but who was not a professed servant of God famed for many
charities and a scrupulous performance of pious practices, and who also
had no father who had achieved a local saintship. But Belarab, with
his glamour of asceticism and melancholy together with a reputation for
severity (for a man so pious would be naturally ruthless), was not on
the spot. The only favourable point in his absence was the fact that
he had taken with him his latest wife, the same lady whom Jorgenson had
mentioned in his letter to Lingard as anxious to bring about battle,
murder, and the looting of the yacht, not because of inborn wickedness
of heart but from a simple desire for silks, jewels and other objects
of personal adornment, quite natural in a girl so young and elevated to
such a high position. Belarab had selected her to be the companion of
his retirement and Lingard was glad of it. He was not afraid of her
influence over Belarab. He knew his man. No words, no blandishments, no
sulks, scoldings, or whisperings of a favourite could affect either the
resolves or the irresolutions of that Arab whose action ever seemed
to hang in mystic suspense between the contradictory speculations and
judgments disputing the possession of his will. It was not what Belarab
would either suddenly do or leisurely determine upon that Lingard was
afraid of. The danger was that in his taciturn hesitation, which had
something hopelessly godlike in its remote calmness, the man would do
nothing and leave his white friend face to face with unruly impulses
against which Lingard had no means of action but force which he dared
not use since it would mean the destruction of his plans and the
downfall of his hopes; and worse still would wear an aspect of treachery
to Hassim and Immada, those fugitives whom he had snatched away from
the jaws of death on a night of storm and had promised to lead back
in triumph to their own country he had seen but once, sleeping unmoved
under the wrath and fire of heaven.

On the afternoon of the very day he had arrived with her on board the
Emma--to the infinite disgust of Jorgenson--Lingard held with Mrs.
Travers (after she had had a couple of hours' rest) a long, fiery, and
perplexed conversation. From the nature of the problem it could not be
exhaustive; but toward the end of it they were both feeling thoroughly
exhausted. Mrs. Travers had no longer to be instructed as to facts and
possibilities. She was aware of them only too well and it was not her
part to advise or argue. She was not called upon to decide or to plead.
The situation was far beyond that. But she was worn out with watching
the passionate conflict within the man who was both so desperately
reckless and so rigidly restrained in the very ardour of his heart and
the greatness of his soul. It was a spectacle that made her forget
the actual questions at issue. This was no stage play; and yet she had
caught herself looking at him with bated breath as at a great actor on a
darkened stage in some simple and tremendous drama. He extorted from her
a response to the forces that seemed to tear at his single-minded
brain, at his guileless breast. He shook her with his own struggles, he
possessed her with his emotions and imposed his personality as if its
tragedy were the only thing worth considering in this matter. And
yet what had she to do with all those obscure and barbarous things?
Obviously nothing. Unluckily she had been taken into the confidence of
that man's passionate perplexity, a confidence provoked apparently by
nothing but the power of her personality. She was flattered, and even
more, she was touched by it; she was aware of something that resembled
gratitude and provoked a sort of emotional return as between equals who
had secretly recognized each other's value. Yet at the same time she
regretted not having been left in the dark; as much in the dark as Mr.
Travers himself or d'Alcacer, though as to the latter it was impossible
to say how much precise, unaccountable, intuitive knowledge was buried
under his unruffled manner.

D'Alcacer was the sort of man whom it would be much easier to suspect
of anything in the world than ignorance--or stupidity. Naturally he
couldn't know anything definite or even guess at the bare outline of the
facts but somehow he must have scented the situation in those few days
of contact with Lingard. He was an acute and sympathetic observer in all
his secret aloofness from the life of men which was so very different
from Jorgenson's secret divorce from the passions of this earth. Mrs.
Travers would have liked to share with d'Alcacer the burden (for it
was a burden) of Lingard's story. After all, she had not provoked those
confidences, neither had that unexpected adventurer from the sea laid on
her an obligation of secrecy. No, not even by implication. He had never
said to her that she was the _only_ person whom he wished to know that
story.

No. What he had said was that she was the only person to whom he _could_
tell the tale himself, as if no one else on earth had the power to draw
it from him. That was the sense and nothing more. Yes, it would have
been a relief to tell d'Alcacer. It would have been a relief to her
feeling of being shut off from the world alone with Lingard as if within
the four walls of a romantic palace and in an exotic atmosphere. Yes,
that relief and also another: that of sharing the responsibility with
somebody fit to understand. Yet she shrank from it, with unaccountable
reserve, as if by talking of Lingard with d'Alcacer she was bound to
give him an insight into herself. It was a vague uneasiness and yet so
persistent that she felt it, too, when she had to approach and talk to
Lingard under d'Alcacer's eyes. Not that Mr. d'Alcacer would ever dream
of staring or even casting glances. But was he averting his eyes on
purpose? That would be even more offensive.

"I am stupid," whispered Mrs. Travers to herself, with a complete and
reassuring conviction. Yet she waited motionless till the footsteps of
the two men stopped outside the deckhouse, then separated and died away,
before she went out on deck. She came out on deck some time after her
husband. As if in intended contrast to the conflicts of men a great
aspect of serenity lay upon all visible things. Mr. Travers had gone
inside the Cage in which he really looked like a captive and thoroughly
out of place. D'Alcacer had gone in there, too, but he preserved--or was
it an illusion?--an air of independence. It was not that he put it
on. Like Mr. Travers he sat in a wicker armchair in very much the same
attitude as the other gentleman and also silent; but there was somewhere
a subtle difference which did away with the notion of captivity.
Moreover, d'Alcacer had that peculiar gift of never looking out of place
in any surroundings. Mrs. Travers, in order to save her European boots
for active service, had been persuaded to use a pair of leather sandals
also extracted from that seaman's chest in the deckhouse. An additional
fastening had been put on them but she could not avoid making a delicate
clatter as she walked on the deck. No part of her costume made her feel
so exotic. It also forced her to alter her usual gait and move with
quick, short steps very much like Immada.

"I am robbing the girl of her clothes," she had thought to herself,
"besides other things." She knew by this time that a girl of such
high rank would never dream of wearing anything that had been worn by
somebody else.

At the slight noise of Mrs. Travers' sandals d'Alcacer looked over the
back of his chair. But he turned his head away at once and Mrs. Travers,
leaning her elbow on the rail and resting her head on the palm of her
hand, looked across the calm surface of the lagoon, idly.

She was turning her back on the Cage, the fore-part of the deck and
the edge of the nearest forest. That great erection of enormous solid
trunks, dark, rugged columns festooned with writhing creepers and
steeped in gloom, was so close to the bank that by looking over the
side of the ship she could see inverted in the glassy belt of water
its massive and black reflection on the reflected sky that gave the
impression of a clear blue abyss seen through a transparent film. And
when she raised her eyes the same abysmal immobility seemed to reign
over the whole sun-bathed enlargement of that lagoon which was one of
the secret places of the earth. She felt strongly her isolation. She was
so much the only being of her kind moving within this mystery that even
to herself she looked like an apparition without rights and without
defence and that must end by surrendering to those forces which seemed
to her but the expression of the unconscious genius of the place. Hers
was the most complete loneliness, charged with a catastrophic tension.
It lay about her as though she had been set apart within a magic circle.
It cut off--but it did not protect. The footsteps that she knew how to
distinguish above all others on that deck were heard suddenly behind
her. She did not turn her head.

Since that afternoon when the gentlemen, as Lingard called them, had
been brought on board, Mrs. Travers and Lingard had not exchanged one
significant word.

When Lingard had decided to proceed by way of negotiation she had asked
him on what he based his hope of success; and he had answered her: "On
my luck." What he really depended on was his prestige; but even if he
had been aware of such a word he would not have used it, since it would
have sounded like a boast. And, besides, he did really believe in his
luck. Nobody, either white or brown, had ever doubted his word and that,
of course, gave him great assurance in entering upon the negotiation.
But the ultimate issue of it would be always a matter of luck. He said
so distinctly to Mrs. Travers at the moment of taking leave of her,
with Jorgenson already waiting for him in the boat that was to take them
across the lagoon to Belarab's stockade.

Startled by his decision (for it had come suddenly clinched by the words
"I believe I can do it"), Mrs. Travers had dropped her hand into
his strong open palm on which an expert in palmistry could have
distinguished other lines than the line of luck. Lingard's hand closed
on hers with a gentle pressure. She looked at him, speechless. He waited
for a moment, then in an unconsciously tender voice he said: "Well, wish
me luck then."

She remained silent. And he still holding her hand looked surprised at
her hesitation. It seemed to her that she could not let him go, and she
didn't know what to say till it occurred to her to make use of the power
she knew she had over him. She would try it again. "I am coming with
you," she declared with decision. "You don't suppose I could remain here
in suspense for hours, perhaps."

He dropped her hand suddenly as if it had burnt him--"Oh, yes, of
course," he mumbled with an air of confusion. One of the men over there
was her husband! And nothing less could be expected from such a woman.
He had really nothing to say but she thought he hesitated.--"Do you
think my presence would spoil everything? I assure you I am a lucky
person, too, in a way. . . . As lucky as you, at least," she had added
in a murmur and with a smile which provoked his responsive mutter--"Oh,
yes, we are a lucky pair of people."--"I count myself lucky in having
found a man like you to fight my--our battles," she said, warmly.
"Suppose you had not existed? . . . . You must let me come with you!"
For the second time before her expressed wish to stand by his side he
bowed his head. After all, if things came to the worst, she would be as
safe between him and Jorgenson as left alone on board the Emma with
a few Malay spearmen for all defence. For a moment Lingard thought
of picking up the pistols he had taken out of his belt preparatory to
joining Jorgenson in the boat, thinking it would be better to go to a
big talk completely unarmed. They were lying on the rail but he didn't
pick them up. Four shots didn't matter. They could not matter if the
world of his creation were to go to pieces. He said nothing of that to
Mrs. Travers but busied himself in giving her the means to alter her
personal appearance. It was then that the sea-chest in the deckhouse
was opened for the first time before the interested Mrs. Travers who had
followed him inside. Lingard handed to her a Malay woman's light cotton
coat with jewelled clasps to put over her European dress. It covered
half of her yachting skirt. Mrs. Travers obeyed him without comment. He
pulled out a long and wide scarf of white silk embroidered heavily on
the edges and ends, and begged her to put it over her head and arrange
the ends so as to muffle her face, leaving little more than her eyes
exposed to view.--"We are going amongst a lot of Mohammedans," he
explained.--"I see. You want me to look respectable," she jested.--"I
assure you, Mrs. Travers," he protested, earnestly, "that most of the
people there and certainly all the great men have never seen a white
woman in their lives. But perhaps you would like better one of those
other scarves? There are three in there."--"No, I like this one well
enough. They are all very gorgeous. I see that the Princess is to be
sent back to her land with all possible splendour. What a thoughtful man
you are, Captain Lingard. That child will be touched by your generosity.
. . . Will I do like this?"

"Yes," said Lingard, averting his eyes. Mrs. Travers followed him into
the boat where the Malays stared in silence while Jorgenson, stiff and
angular, gave no sign of life, not even so much as a movement of the
eyes. Lingard settled her in the stern sheets and sat down by her side.
The ardent sunshine devoured all colours. The boat swam forward on the
glare heading for the strip of coral beach dazzling like a crescent of
metal raised to a white heat. They landed. Gravely, Jorgenson opened
above Mrs. Travers' head a big white cotton parasol and she advanced
between the two men, dazed, as if in a dream and having no other contact
with the earth but through the soles of her feet. Everything was still,
empty, incandescent, and fantastic. Then when the gate of the stockade
was thrown open she perceived an expectant and still multitude of bronze
figures draped in coloured stuffs. They crowded the patches of shade
under the three lofty forest trees left within the enclosure between the
sun-smitten empty spaces of hard-baked ground. The broad blades of the
spears decorated with crimson tufts of horsehair had a cool gleam under
the outspread boughs. To the left a group of buildings on piles with
long verandahs and immense roofs towered high in the air above the
heads of the crowd, and seemed to float in the glare, looking much less
substantial than their heavy shadows. Lingard, pointing to one of the
smallest, said in an undertone, "I lived there for a fortnight when I
first came to see Belarab"; and Mrs. Travers felt more than ever as if
walking in a dream when she perceived beyond the rails of its verandah
and visible from head to foot two figures in an armour of chain mail
with pointed steel helmets crested with white and black feathers and
guarding the closed door. A high bench draped in turkey cloth stood
in an open space of the great audience shed. Lingard led her up to it,
Jorgenson on her other side closed the parasol calmly, and when she sat
down between them the whole throng before her eyes sank to the ground
with one accord disclosing in the distance of the courtyard a lonely
figure leaning against the smooth trunk of a tree. A white cloth was
fastened round his head by a yellow cord. Its pointed ends fell on
his shoulders, framing a thin dark face with large eyes, a silk cloak
striped black and white fell to his feet, and in the distance he looked
aloof and mysterious in his erect and careless attitude suggesting
assurance and power.

Lingard, bending slightly, whispered into Mrs. Travers' ear that that
man, apart and dominating the scene, was Daman, the supreme leader of
the Illanuns, the one who had ordered the capture of those gentlemen in
order perhaps to force his hand. The two barbarous, half-naked figures
covered with ornaments and charms, squatting at his feet with their
heads enfolded in crimson and gold handkerchiefs and with straight
swords lying across their knees, were the Pangerans who carried out the
order, and had brought the captives into the lagoon. But the two men in
chain armour on watch outside the door of the small house were Belarab's
two particular body-guards, who got themselves up in that way only on
very great occasions. They were the outward and visible sign that the
prisoners were in Belarab's keeping, and this was good, so far. The pity
was that the Great Chief himself was not there. Then Lingard assumed a
formal pose and Mrs. Travers stared into the great courtyard and with
rows and rows of faces ranged on the ground at her feet felt a little
giddy for a moment.

Every movement had died in the crowd. Even the eyes were still under the
variegated mass of coloured headkerchiefs: while beyond the open gate a
noble palm tree looked intensely black against the glitter of the lagoon
and the pale incandescence of the sky. Mrs. Travers gazing that way
wondered at the absence of Hassim and Immada. But the girl might have
been somewhere within one of the houses with the ladies of Belarab's
stockade. Then suddenly Mrs. Travers became aware that another bench
had been brought out and was already occupied by five men dressed in
gorgeous silks, and embroidered velvets, round-faced and grave. Their
hands reposed on their knees; but one amongst them clad in a white robe
and with a large nearly black turban on his head leaned forward a little
with his chin in his hand. His cheeks were sunken and his eyes remained
fixed on the ground as if to avoid looking at the infidel woman.

She became aware suddenly of a soft murmur, and glancing at Lingard
she saw him in an attitude of impassive attention. The momentous
negotiations had begun, and it went on like this in low undertones with
long pauses and in the immobility of all the attendants squatting on the
ground, with the distant figure of Daman far off in the shade towering
over all the assembly. But in him, too, Mrs. Travers could not detect
the slightest movement while the slightly modulated murmurs went on
enveloping her in a feeling of peace.

The fact that she couldn't understand anything of what was said soothed
her apprehensions. Sometimes a silence fell and Lingard bending toward
her would whisper, "It isn't so easy," and the stillness would be so
perfect that she would hear the flutter of a pigeon's wing somewhere
high up in the great overshadowing trees. And suddenly one of the men
before her without moving a limb would begin another speech rendered
more mysterious still by the total absence of action or play of feature.
Only the watchfulness of the eyes which showed that the speaker was
not communing with himself made it clear that this was not a spoken
meditation but a flow of argument directed to Lingard who now and then
uttered a few words either with a grave or a smiling expression. They
were always followed by murmurs which seemed mostly to her to convey
assent; and then a reflective silence would reign again and the
immobility of the crowd would appear more perfect than before.

When Lingard whispered to her that it was now his turn to make a
speech Mrs. Travers expected him to get up and assert himself by some
commanding gesture. But he did not. He remained seated, only his voice
had a vibrating quality though he obviously tried to restrain it, and
it travelled masterfully far into the silence. He spoke for a long time
while the sun climbing the unstained sky shifted the diminished shadows
of the trees, pouring on the heads of men its heat through the thick and
motionless foliage. Whenever murmurs arose he would stop and glancing
fearlessly at the assembly, wait till they subsided. Once or twice, they
rose to a loud hum and Mrs. Travers could hear on the other side of her
Jorgenson muttering something in his moustache. Beyond the rows of heads
Daman under the tree had folded his arms on his breast. The edge of
the white cloth concealed his forehead and at his feet the two Illanun
chiefs, half naked and bedecked with charms and ornaments of bright
feathers, of shells, with necklaces of teeth, claws, and shining beads,
remained cross-legged with their swords across their knees like two
bronze idols. Even the plumes of their head-dresses stirred not.

"Sudah! It is finished!" A movement passed along all the heads, the
seated bodies swayed to and fro. Lingard had ceased speaking. He
remained seated for a moment looking his audience all over and when he
stood up together with Mrs. Travers and Jorgenson the whole assembly
rose from the ground together and lost its ordered formation. Some
of Belarab's retainers, young broad-faced fellows, wearing a sort of
uniform of check-patterned sarongs, black silk jackets and crimson
skull-caps set at a rakish angle, swaggered through the broken groups
and ranged themselves in two rows before the motionless Daman and his
Illanun chiefs in martial array. The members of the council who had
left their bench approached the white people with gentle smiles
and deferential movements of the hands. Their bearing was faintly
propitiatory; only the man in the big turban remained fanatically aloof,
keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

"I have done it," murmured Lingard to Mrs. Travers.--"Was it very
difficult?" she asked.--"No," he said, conscious in his heart that he
had strained to the fullest extent the prestige of his good name and
that habit of deference to his slightest wish established by the glamour
of his wealth and the fear of his personality in this great talk which
after all had done nothing except put off the decisive hour. He offered
Mrs. Travers his arm ready to lead her away, but at the last moment did
not move.

With an authoritative gesture Daman had parted the ranks of Belarab's
young followers with the red skullcaps and was seen advancing toward the
whites striking into an astonished silence all the scattered groups in
the courtyard. But the broken ranks had closed behind him. The Illanun
chiefs, for all their truculent aspect, were much too prudent to attempt
to move. They had not needed for that the faint warning murmur from
Daman. He advanced alone. The plain hilt of a sword protruded from the
open edges of his cloak. The parted edges disclosed also the butts of
two flintlock pistols. The Koran in a velvet case hung on his breast by
a red cord of silk. He was pious, magnificent, and warlike, with calm
movements and a straight glance from under the hem of the simple piece
of linen covering his head. He carried himself rigidly and his bearing
had a sort of solemn modesty. Lingard said hurriedly to Mrs. Travers
that the man had met white people before and that, should he attempt to
shake hands with her, she ought to offer her own covered with the end
of her scarf.--"Why?" she asked. "Propriety?"--"Yes, it will be better,"
said Lingard and the next moment Mrs. Travers felt her enveloped hand
pressed gently by slender dark fingers and felt extremely Oriental
herself when, with her face muffled to the eyes, she encountered the
lustrous black stare of the sea-robbers' leader. It was only for an
instant, because Daman turned away at once to shake hands with Lingard.
In the straight, ample folds of his robes he looked very slender facing
the robust white man.

"Great is your power," he said, in a pleasant voice. "The white men are
going to be delivered to you."

"Yes, they pass into my keeping," said Lingard, returning the other's
bright smile but otherwise looking grim enough with the frown which
had settled on his forehead at Daman's approach. He glanced over his
shoulder at a group of spearmen escorting the two captives who had come
down the steps from the hut. At the sight of Daman barring as it were
Lingard's way they had stopped at some distance and had closed round the
two white men. Daman also glanced dispassionately that way.

"They were my guests," he murmured. "Please God I shall come soon to ask
you for them . . . as a friend," he added after a slight pause.

"And please God you will not go away empty handed," said Lingard,
smoothing his brow. "After all you and I were not meant to meet only
to quarrel. Would you have preferred to see them pass into Tengga's
keeping?"

"Tengga is fat and full of wiles," said Daman, disdainfully, "a mere
shopkeeper smitten by a desire to be a chief. He is nothing. But you and
I are men that have real power. Yet there is a truth that you and I can
confess to each other. Men's hearts grow quickly discontented. Listen.
The leaders of men are carried forward in the hands of their followers;
and common men's minds are unsteady, their desires changeable, and
their thoughts not to be trusted. You are a great chief they say. Do not
forget that I am a chief, too, and a leader of armed men."

"I have heard of you, too," said Lingard in a composed voice.

Daman had cast his eyes down. Suddenly he opened them very wide with an
effect that startled Mrs. Travers.--"Yes. But do you see?" Mrs. Travers,
her hand resting lightly on Lingard's arm, had the sensation of acting
in a gorgeously got up play on the brilliantly lighted stage of an
exotic opera whose accompaniment was not music but the varied strains
of the all-pervading silence.--"Yes, I see," Lingard replied with a
surprisingly confidential intonation. "But power, too, is in the hands
of a great leader."

Mrs. Travers watched the faint movements of Daman's nostrils as though
the man were suffering from some powerful emotion, while under her
fingers Lingard's forearm in its white sleeve was as steady as a limb of
marble. Without looking at him she seemed to feel that with one movement
he could crush that nervous figure in which lived the breath of the
great desert haunted by his nomad, camel-riding ancestors.--"Power is
in the hand of God," he said, all animation dying out of his face, and
paused to wait for Lingard's "Very true," then continued with a fine
smile, "but He apportions it according to His will for His own purposes,
even to those that are not of the Faith."

"Such being the will of God you should harbour no bitterness against
them in your heart."

The low exclamation, "Against those!" and a slight dismissing gesture
of a meagre dark hand out of the folds of the cloak were almost
understandable to Mrs. Travers in the perfection of their melancholy
contempt, and gave Lingard a further insight into the character of
the ally secured to him by the diplomacy of Belarab. He was only half
reassured by this assumption of superior detachment. He trusted to the
man's self-interest more; for Daman no doubt looked to the reconquered
kingdom for the reward of dignity and ease. His father and grandfather
(the men of whom Jorgenson had written as having been hanged for an
example twelve years before) had been friends of Sultans, advisers of
Rulers, wealthy financiers of the great raiding expeditions of the
past. It was hatred that had turned Daman into a self-made outcast,
till Belarab's diplomacy had drawn him out from some obscure and uneasy
retreat.

In a few words Lingard assured Daman of the complete safety of his
followers as long as they themselves made no attempt to get possession
of the stranded yacht. Lingard understood very well that the capture of
Travers and d'Alcacer was the result of a sudden fear, a move directed
by Daman to secure his own safety. The sight of the stranded yacht shook
his confidence completely. It was as if the secrets of the place had
been betrayed. After all, it was perhaps a great folly to trust any
white man, no matter how much he seemed estranged from his own people.
Daman felt he might have been the victim of a plot. Lingard's brig
appeared to him a formidable engine of war. He did not know what to
think and the motive for getting hold of the two white men was really
the wish to secure hostages. Distrusting the fierce impulses of his
followers he had hastened to put them into Belarab's keeping. But
everything in the Settlement seemed to him suspicious: Belarab's
absence, Jorgenson's refusal to make over at once the promised supply
of arms and ammunition. And now that white man had by the power of his
speech got them away from Belarab's people. So much influence filled
Daman with wonder and awe. A recluse for many years in the most obscure
corner of the Archipelago he felt himself surrounded by intrigues. But
the alliance was a great thing, too. He did not want to quarrel. He was
quite willing for the time being to accept Lingard's assurance that no
harm should befall his people encamped on the sandbanks. Attentive and
slight, he seemed to let Lingard's deliberate words sink into him. The
force of that unarmed big man seemed overwhelming. He bowed his head
slowly.

"Allah is our refuge," he murmured, accepting the inevitable.

He delighted Mrs. Travers not as a living being but like a clever
sketch in colours, a vivid rendering of an artist's vision of some soul,
delicate and fierce. His bright half-smile was extraordinary, sharp like
clear steel, painfully penetrating. Glancing right and left Mrs. Travers
saw the whole courtyard smitten by the desolating fury of sunshine and
peopled with shadows, their forms and colours fading in the violence of
the light. The very brown tones of roof and wall dazzled the eye. Then
Daman stepped aside. He was no longer smiling and Mrs. Travers advanced
with her hand on Lingard's arm through a heat so potent that it seemed
to have a taste, a feel, a smell of its own. She moved on as if floating
in it with Lingard's support.

"Where are they?" she asked.

"They are following us all right," he answered. Lingard was so certain
that the prisoners would be delivered to him on the beach that he never
glanced back till, after reaching the boat, he and Mrs. Travers turned
about.

The group of spearmen parted right and left, and Mr. Travers and
d'Alcacer walked forward alone looking unreal and odd like their own
day-ghosts. Mr. Travers gave no sign of being aware of his wife's
presence. It was certainly a shock to him. But d'Alcacer advanced
smiling, as if the beach were a drawing room.

With a very few paddlers the heavy old European-built boat moved
slowly over the water that seemed as pale and blazing as the sky above.
Jorgenson had perched himself in the bow. The other four white people
sat in the stern sheets, the ex-prisoners side by side in the middle.
Lingard spoke suddenly.

"I want you both to understand that the trouble is not over yet. Nothing
is finished. You are out on my bare word."

While Lingard was speaking Mr. Travers turned his face away but
d'Alcacer listened courteously. Not another word was spoken for the rest
of the way. The two gentlemen went up the ship's side first. Lingard
remained to help Mrs. Travers at the foot of the ladder. She pressed his
hand strongly and looking down at his upturned face:

"This was a wonderful success," she said.

For a time the character of his fascinated gaze did not change. It
was as if she had said nothing. Then he whispered, admiringly, "You
understand everything."

She moved her eyes away and had to disengage her hand to which he clung
for a moment, giddy, like a man falling out of the world.



III

Mrs. Travers, acutely aware of Lingard behind her, remained gazing over
the lagoon. After a time he stepped forward and placed himself beside
her close to the rail. She went on staring at the sheet of water turned
to deep purple under the sunset sky.

"Why have you been avoiding me since we came back from the stockade?"
she asked in a deadened voice.

"There is nothing to tell you till Rajah Hassim and his sister Immada
return with some news," Lingard answered in the same tone. "Has my
friend succeeded? Will Belarab listen to any arguments? Will he consent
to come out of his shell? Is he on his way back? I wish I knew! . . .
Not a whisper comes from there! He may have started two days ago and
he may be now near the outskirts of the Settlement. Or he may have gone
into camp half way down, from some whim or other; or he may be already
arrived for all I know. We should not have seen him. The road from the
hills does not lead along the beach."

He snatched nervously at the long glass and directed it at the dark
stockade. The sun had sunk behind the forests leaving the contour of the
tree-tops outlined by a thread of gold under a band of delicate green
lying across the lower sky. Higher up a faint crimson glow faded into
the darkened blue overhead. The shades of the evening deepened over the
lagoon, clung to the sides of the Emma and to the forms of the further
shore. Lingard laid the glass down.

"Mr. d'Alcacer, too, seems to have been avoiding me," said Mrs. Travers.
"You are on very good terms with him, Captain Lingard."

"He is a very pleasant man," murmured Lingard, absently. "But he says
funny things sometimes. He inquired the other day if there were any
playing cards on board, and when I asked him if he liked card-playing,
just for something to say, he told me with that queer smile of his that
he had read a story of some people condemned to death who passed the
time before execution playing card games with their guards."

"And what did you say?"

"I told him that there were probably cards on board somewhere--Jorgenson
would know. Then I asked him whether he looked on me as a gaoler. He was
quite startled and sorry for what he said."

"It wasn't very kind of you, Captain Lingard."

"It slipped out awkwardly and we made it up with a laugh."

Mrs. Travers leaned her elbows on the rail and put her head into her
hands. Every attitude of that woman surprised Lingard by its enchanting
effect upon himself. He sighed, and the silence lasted for a long while.

"I wish I had understood every word that was said that morning."

"That morning," repeated Lingard. "What morning do you mean?"

"I mean the morning when I walked out of Belarab's stockade on your arm,
Captain Lingard, at the head of the procession. It seemed to me that I
was walking on a splendid stage in a scene from an opera, in a gorgeous
show fit to make an audience hold its breath. You can't possibly guess
how unreal all this seemed, and how artificial I felt myself. An opera,
you know. . . ."

"I know. I was a gold digger at one time. Some of us used to come down
to Melbourne with our pockets full of money. I daresay it was poor
enough to what you must have seen, but once I went to a show like that.
It was a story acted to music. All the people went singing through it
right to the very end."

"How it must have jarred on your sense of reality," said Mrs. Travers,
still not looking at him. "You don't remember the name of the opera?"

"No. I never troubled my head about it. We--our lot never did."

"I won't ask you what the story was like. It must have appeared to
you like the very defiance of all truth. Would real people go singing
through their life anywhere except in a fairy tale?"

"These people didn't always sing for joy," said Lingard, simply. "I
don't know much about fairy tales."

"They are mostly about princesses," murmured Mrs. Travers.

Lingard didn't quite hear. He bent his ear for a moment but she wasn't
looking at him and he didn't ask her to repeat her remark. "Fairy tales
are for children, I believe," he said. "But that story with music I am
telling you of, Mrs. Travers, was not a tale for children. I assure you
that of the few shows I have seen that one was the most real to me. More
real than anything in life."

Mrs. Travers, remembering the fatal inanity of most opera librettos, was
touched by these words as if there had been something pathetic in this
readiness of response; as if she had heard a starved man talking of the
delight of a crust of dry bread. "I suppose you forgot yourself in that
story, whatever it was," she remarked in a detached tone.

"Yes, it carried me away. But I suppose you know the feeling."

"No. I never knew anything of the kind, not even when I was a chit of
a girl." Lingard seemed to accept this statement as an assertion of
superiority. He inclined his head slightly. Moreover, she might have
said what she liked. What pleased him most was her not looking at him;
for it enabled him to contemplate with perfect freedom the curve of her
cheek, her small ear half hidden by the clear mesh of fine hair,
the fascination of her uncovered neck. And her whole person was an
impossible, an amazing and solid marvel which somehow was not so much
convincing to the eye as to something within him that was apparently
independent of his senses. Not even for a moment did he think of her as
remote. Untouchable--possibly! But remote--no. Whether consciously or
unconsciously he took her spiritually for granted. It was materially
that she was a wonder of the sort that is at the same time familiar and
sacred.

"No," Mrs. Travers began again, abruptly. "I never forgot myself in a
story. It was not in me. I have not even been able to forget myself on
that morning on shore which was part of my own story."

"You carried yourself first rate," said Lingard, smiling at the nape of
her neck, her ear, the film of escaped hair, the modelling of the corner
of her eye. He could see the flutter of the dark eyelashes: and the
delicate flush on her cheek had rather the effect of scent than of
colour.

"You approved of my behaviour."

"Just right, I tell you. My word, weren't they all struck of a heap when
they made out what you were."

"I ought to feel flattered. I will confess to you that I felt only half
disguised and was half angry and wholly uncomfortable. What helped me, I
suppose, was that I wanted to please. . . ."

"I don't mean to say that they were exactly pleased," broke in Lingard,
conscientiously. "They were startled more."

"I wanted to please you," dropped Mrs. Travers, negligently. A faint,
hoarse, and impatient call of a bird was heard from the woods as if
calling to the oncoming night. Lingard's face grew hot in the deepening
dusk. The delicate lemon yellow and ethereal green tints had vanished
from the sky and the red glow darkened menacingly. The sun had set
behind the black pall of the forest, no longer edged with a line of
gold. "Yes, I was absurdly self-conscious," continued Mrs. Travers in a
conversational tone. "And it was the effect of these clothes that you
made me put on over some of my European--I almost said disguise; because
you know in the present more perfect costume I feel curiously at home;
and yet I can't say that these things really fit me. The sleeves of this
silk under-jacket are rather tight. My shoulders feel bound, too, and as
to the sarong it is scandalously short. According to rule it should have
been long enough to fall over my feet. But I like freedom of movement. I
have had very little of what I liked in life."

"I can hardly believe that," said Lingard. "If it wasn't for your saying
so. . . ."

"I wouldn't say so to everybody," she said, turning her head for a
moment to Lingard and turning it away again to the dusk which seemed to
come floating over the black lagoon. Far away in its depth a couple of
feeble lights twinkled; it was impossible to say whether on the shore
or on the edge of the more distant forest. Overhead the stars were
beginning to come out, but faint yet, as if too remote to be reflected
in the lagoon. Only to the west a setting planet shone through the red
fog of the sunset glow. "It was supposed not to be good for me to have
much freedom of action. So at least I was told. But I have a suspicion
that it was only unpleasing to other people."

"I should have thought," began Lingard, then hesitated and stopped. It
seemed to him inconceivable that everybody should not have loved to make
that woman happy. And he was impressed by the bitterness of her tone.
Mrs. Travers did not seem curious to know what he wanted to say and
after a time she added, "I don't mean only when I was a child. I don't
remember that very well. I daresay I was very objectionable as a child."

Lingard tried to imagine her as a child. The idea was novel to him.
Her perfection seemed to have come into the world complete, mature, and
without any hesitation or weakness. He had nothing in his experience
that could help him to imagine a child of that class. The children he
knew played about the village street and ran on the beach. He had been
one of them. He had seen other children, of course, since, but he
had not been in touch with them except visually and they had not been
English children. Her childhood, like his own, had been passed in
England, and that very fact made it almost impossible for him to imagine
it. He could not even tell whether it was in town or in the country, or
whether as a child she had even seen the sea. And how could a child of
that kind be objectionable? But he remembered that a child disapproved
of could be very unhappy, and he said:

"I am sorry."

Mrs. Travers laughed a little. Within the muslin cage forms had turned
to blurred shadows. Amongst them the form of d'Alcacer arose and moved.
The systematic or else the morbid dumbness of Mr. Travers bored and
exasperated him, though, as a matter of fact, that gentleman's speeches
had never had the power either to entertain or to soothe his mind.

"It's very nice of you. You have a great capacity for sympathy, but
after all I am not certain on which side your sympathies lie. With me,
or those much-tried people," said Mrs. Travers.

"With the child," said Lingard, disregarding the bantering tone. "A
child can have a very bad time of it all to itself."

"What can you know of it?" she asked.

"I have my own feelings," he answered in some surprise.

Mrs. Travers, with her back to him, was covered with confusion. Neither
could she depict to herself his childhood as if he, too, had come
into the world in the fullness of his strength and his purpose. She
discovered a certain naiveness in herself and laughed a little. He made
no sound.

"Don't be angry," she said. "I wouldn't dream of laughing at your
feelings. Indeed your feelings are the most serious thing that ever came
in my way. I couldn't help laughing at myself--at a funny discovery I
made."

"In the days of your childhood?" she heard Lingard's deep voice asking
after a pause.

"Oh, no. Ages afterward. No child could have made that discovery. Do
you know the greatest difference there is between us? It is this: That I
have been living since my childhood in front of a show and that I
never have been taken in for a moment by its tinsel and its noise or
by anything that went on on the stage. Do you understand what I mean,
Captain Lingard?"

There was a moment of silence. "What does it matter? We are no children
now." There was an infinite gentleness in Lingard's deep tones. "But if
you have been unhappy then don't tell me that it has not been made up to
you since. Surely you have only to make a sign. A woman like you."

"You think I could frighten the whole world on to its knees?"

"No, not frighten." The suggestion of a laugh in the deadened voice
passed off in a catch of the breath. Then he was heard beginning
soberly: "Your husband. . . ." He hesitated a little and she took the
opportunity to say coldly:

"His name is Mr. Travers."

Lingard didn't know how to take it. He imagined himself to have been
guilty of some sort of presumption. But how on earth was he to call the
man? After all he was her husband. That idea was disagreeable to him
because the man was also inimical in a particularly unreasonable and
galling manner. At the same time he was aware that he didn't care a
bit for his enmity and had an idea that he would not have cared for his
friendship either. And suddenly he felt very much annoyed.

"Yes. That's the man I mean," he said in a contemptuous tone. "I don't
particularly like the name and I am sure I don't want to talk about him
more than I can help. If he hadn't been your husband I wouldn't have put
up with his manners for an hour. Do you know what would have happened to
him if he hadn't been your husband?"

"No," said Mrs. Travers. "Do you, Captain Lingard?"

"Not exactly," he admitted. "Something he wouldn't have liked, you may
be sure."

"While of course he likes this very much," she observed. Lingard gave an
abrupt laugh.

"I don't think it's in my power to do anything that he would like," he
said in a serious tone. "Forgive me my frankness, Mrs. Travers, but he
makes it very difficult sometimes for me to keep civil. Whatever I have
had to put up with in life I have never had to put up with contempt."

"I quite believe that," said Mrs. Travers. "Don't your friends call you
King Tom?"

"Nobody that I care for. I have no friends. Oh, yes, they call me
that . . ."

"You have no friends?"

"Not I," he said with decision. "A man like me has no chums."

"It's quite possible," murmured Mrs. Travers to herself.

"No, not even Jorgenson. Old crazy Jorgenson. He calls me King Tom, too.
You see what that's worth."

"Yes, I see. Or rather I have heard. That poor man has no tone, and so
much depends on that. Now suppose I were to call you King Tom now
and then between ourselves," Mrs. Travers' voice proposed, distantly
tentative in the night that invested her person with a colourless
vagueness of form.

She waited in the stillness, her elbows on the rail and her face in her
hands as if she had already forgotten what she had said. She heard at
her elbow the deep murmur of:

"Let's hear you say it."

She never moved the least bit. The sombre lagoon sparkled faintly with
the reflection of the stars.

"Oh, yes, I will let you hear it," she said into the starlit space in a
voice of unaccented gentleness which changed subtly as she went on. "I
hope you will never regret that you came out of your friendless mystery
to speak to me, King Tom. How many days ago it was! And here is another
day gone. Tell me how many more of them there must be? Of these blinding
days and nights without a sound."

"Be patient," he murmured. "Don't ask me for the impossible."

"How do you or I know what is possible?" she whispered with a strange
scorn. "You wouldn't dare guess. But I tell you that every day that
passes is more impossible to me than the day before."

The passion of that whisper went like a stab into his breast. "What am
I to tell you?" he murmured, as if with despair. "Remember that every
sunset makes it a day less. Do you think I want you here?"

A bitter little laugh floated out into the starlight. Mrs. Travers heard
Lingard move suddenly away from her side. She didn't change her pose by
a hair's breadth. Presently she heard d'Alcacer coming out of the Cage.
His cultivated voice asked half playfully:

"Have you had a satisfactory conversation? May I be told something of
it?"

"Mr. d'Alcacer, you are curious."

"Well, in our position, I confess. . . . You are our only refuge,
remember."

"You want to know what we were talking about," said Mrs. Travers,
altering slowly her position so as to confront d'Alcacer whose face was
almost undistinguishable. "Oh, well, then, we talked about opera, the
realities and illusions of the stage, of dresses, of people's names, and
things of that sort."

"Nothing of importance," he said courteously. Mrs. Travers moved forward
and he stepped to one side. Inside the Cage two Malay hands were hanging
round lanterns, the light of which fell on Mr. Travers' bowed head as he
sat in his chair.

When they were all assembled for the evening meal Jorgenson strolled up
from nowhere in particular as his habit was, and speaking through the
muslin announced that Captain Lingard begged to be excused from joining
the company that evening. Then he strolled away. From that moment till
they got up from the table and the camp bedsteads were brought in not
twenty words passed between the members of the party within the net. The
strangeness of their situation made all attempts to exchange ideas very
arduous; and apart from that each had thoughts which it was distinctly
useless to communicate to the others. Mr. Travers had abandoned himself
to his sense of injury. He did not so much brood as rage inwardly in
a dull, dispirited way. The impossibility of asserting himself in any
manner galled his very soul. D'Alcacer was extremely puzzled. Detached
in a sense from the life of men perhaps as much even as Jorgenson
himself, he took yet a reasonable interest in the course of events and
had not lost all his sense of self-preservation. Without being able to
appreciate the exact values of the situation he was not one of those men
who are ever completely in the dark in any given set of circumstances.
Without being humorous he was a good-humoured man. His habitual, gentle
smile was a true expression. More of a European than of a Spaniard he
had that truly aristocratic nature which is inclined to credit every
honest man with something of its own nobility and in its judgment is
altogether independent of class feeling. He believed Lingard to be an
honest man and he never troubled his head to classify him, except in
the sense that he found him an interesting character. He had a sort of
esteem for the outward personality and the bearing of that seaman. He
found in him also the distinction of being nothing of a type. He was a
specimen to be judged only by its own worth. With his natural gift of
insight d'Alcacer told himself that many overseas adventurers of history
were probably less worthy because obviously they must have been less
simple. He didn't, however, impart those thoughts formally to Mrs.
Travers. In fact he avoided discussing Lingard with Mrs. Travers who, he
thought, was quite intelligent enough to appreciate the exact shade of
his attitude. If that shade was fine, Mrs. Travers was fine, too; and
there was no need to discuss the colours of this adventure. Moreover,
she herself seemed to avoid all direct discussion of the Lingard element
in their fate. D'Alcacer was fine enough to be aware that those two
seemed to understand each other in a way that was not obvious even to
themselves. Whenever he saw them together he was always much tempted to
observe them. And he yielded to the temptation. The fact of one's
life depending on the phases of an obscure action authorizes a certain
latitude of behaviour. He had seen them together repeatedly, communing
openly or apart, and there was in their way of joining each other,
in their poses and their ways of separating, something special and
characteristic and pertaining to themselves only, as if they had been
made for each other.

What he couldn't understand was why Mrs. Travers should have put off his
natural curiosity as to her latest conference with the Man of Fate by
an incredible statement as to the nature of the conversation. Talk about
dresses, opera, people's names. He couldn't take this seriously. She
might have invented, he thought, something more plausible; or simply
have told him that this was not for him to know. She ought to have known
that he would not have been offended. Couldn't she have seen already
that he accepted the complexion of mystery in her relation to that man
completely, unquestionably; as though it had been something preordained
from the very beginning of things? But he was not annoyed with Mrs.
Travers. After all it might have been true. She would talk exactly as
she liked, and even incredibly, if it so pleased her, and make the man
hang on her lips. And likewise she was capable of making the man talk
about anything by a power of inspiration for reasons simple or perverse.
Opera! Dresses! Yes--about Shakespeare and the musical glasses! For a
mere whim or for the deepest purpose. Women worthy of the name were like
that. They were very wonderful. They rose to the occasion and sometimes
above the occasion when things were bound to occur that would be comic
or tragic (as it happened) but generally charged with trouble even to
innocent beholders. D'Alcacer thought these thoughts without bitterness
and even without irony. With his half-secret social reputation as a man
of one great passion in a world of mere intrigues he liked all women.
He liked them in their sentiment and in their hardness, in the tragic
character of their foolish or clever impulses, at which he looked with a
sort of tender seriousness.

He didn't take a favourable view of the position but he considered Mrs.
Travers' statement about operas and dresses as a warning to keep off the
subject. For this reason he remained silent through the meal.

When the bustle of clearing away the table was over he strolled toward
Mrs. Travers and remarked very quietly:

"I think that in keeping away from us this evening the Man of Fate was
well inspired. We dined like a lot of Carthusian monks."

"You allude to our silence?"

"It was most scrupulous. If we had taken an eternal vow we couldn't have
kept it better."

"Did you feel bored?"

"Pas du tout," d'Alcacer assured her with whimsical gravity. "I felt
nothing. I sat in a state of blessed vacuity. I believe I was the
happiest of us three. Unless you, too, Mrs. Travers. . . ."

"It's absolutely no use your fishing for my thoughts, Mr. d'Alcacer. If
I were to let you see them you would be appalled."

"Thoughts really are but a shape of feelings. Let me congratulate you
on the impassive mask you can put on those horrors you say you nurse in
your breast. It was impossible to tell anything by your face."

"You will always say flattering things."

"Madame, my flatteries come from the very bottom of my heart. I have
given up long ago all desire to please. And I was not trying to get at
your thoughts. Whatever else you may expect from me you may count on my
absolute respect for your privacy. But I suppose with a mask such as you
can make for yourself you really don't care. The Man of Fate, I noticed,
is not nearly as good at it as you are."

"What a pretentious name. Do you call him by it to his face, Mr.
d'Alcacer?"

"No, I haven't the cheek," confessed d'Alcacer, equably. "And, besides,
it's too momentous for daily use. And he is so simple that he might
mistake it for a joke and nothing could be further from my thoughts.
Mrs. Travers, I will confess to you that I don't feel jocular in the
least. But what can he know about people of our sort? And when I reflect
how little people of our sort can know of such a man I am quite content
to address him as Captain Lingard. It's common and soothing and most
respectable and satisfactory; for Captain is the most empty of all
titles. What is a Captain? Anybody can be a Captain; and for Lingard
it's a name like any other. Whereas what he deserves is something
special, significant, and expressive, that would match his person, his
simple and romantic person."

He perceived that Mrs. Travers was looking at him intently. They
hastened to turn their eyes away from each other.

"He would like your appreciation," Mrs. Travers let drop negligently.

"I am afraid he would despise it."

"Despise it! Why, that sort of thing is the very breath of his
nostrils."

"You seem to understand him, Mrs. Travers. Women have a singular
capacity for understanding. I mean subjects that interest them; because
when their imagination is stimulated they are not afraid of letting it
go. A man is more mistrustful of himself, but women are born much
more reckless. They push on and on under the protection of secrecy and
silence, and the greater the obscurity of what they wish to explore the
greater their courage."

"Do you mean seriously to tell me that you consider me a creature of
darkness?"

"I spoke in general," remonstrated d'Alcacer. "Anything else would
have been an impertinence. Yes, obscurity is women's best friend. Their
daring loves it; but a sudden flash of light disconcerts them. Generally
speaking, if they don't get exactly at the truth they always manage to
come pretty near to it."

Mrs. Travers had listened with silent attention and she allowed the
silence to continue for some time after d'Alcacer had ceased. When she
spoke it was to say in an unconcerned tone that as to this subject she
had had special opportunities. Her self-possessed interlocutor
managed to repress a movement of real curiosity under an assumption
of conventional interest. "Indeed," he exclaimed, politely. "A special
opportunity. How did you manage to create it?"

This was too much for Mrs. Travers. "I! Create it!" she exclaimed,
indignantly, but under her breath. "How on earth do you think I could
have done it?"

Mr. d'Alcacer, as if communing with himself, was heard to murmur
unrepentantly that indeed women seldom knew how they had "done it," to
which Mrs. Travers in a weary tone returned the remark that no two
men were dense in the same way. To this Mr. d'Alcacer assented without
difficulty. "Yes, our brand presents more varieties. This, from a
certain point of view, is obviously to our advantage. We interest. . . .
Not that I imagine myself interesting to you, Mrs. Travers. But what
about the Man of Fate?"

"Oh, yes," breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"I see! Immensely!" said d'Alcacer in a tone of mysterious
understanding. "Was his stupidity so colossal?"

"It was indistinguishable from great visions that were in no sense mean
and made up for him a world of his own."

"I guessed that much," muttered d'Alcacer to himself. "But that, you
know, Mrs. Travers, that isn't good news at all to me. World of dreams,
eh? That's very bad, very dangerous. It's almost fatal, Mrs. Travers."

"Why all this dismay? Why do you object to a world of dreams?"

"Because I dislike the prospect of being made a sacrifice of by those
Moors. I am not an optimist like our friend there," he continued in a
low tone nodding toward the dismal figure of Mr. Travers huddled up in
the chair. "I don't regard all this as a farce and I have discovered
in myself a strong objection to having my throat cut by those gorgeous
barbarians after a lot of fatuous talk. Don't ask me why, Mrs. Travers.
Put it down to an absurd weakness."

Mrs. Travers made a slight movement in her chair, raising her hands to
her head, and in the dim light of the lanterns d'Alcacer saw the mass of
her clear gleaming hair fall down and spread itself over her shoulders.
She seized half of it in her hands which looked very white, and with her
head inclined a little on one side she began to make a plait.

"You are terrifying," he said after watching the movement of her fingers
for a while.

"Yes . . . ?" she accentuated interrogatively.

"You have the awfulness of the predestined. You, too, are the prey of
dreams."

"Not of the Moors, then," she uttered, calmly, beginning the other
plait. D'Alcacer followed the operation to the end. Close against her,
her diaphanous shadow on the muslin reproduced her slightest movements.
D'Alcacer turned his eyes away.

"No! No barbarian shall touch you. Because if it comes to that I believe
_he_ would be capable of killing you himself."

A minute elapsed before he stole a glance in her direction. She was
leaning back again, her hands had fallen on her lap and her head with a
plait of hair on each side of her face, her head incredibly changed in
character and suggesting something medieval, ascetic, drooped dreamily
on her breast.

D'Alcacer waited, holding his breath. She didn't move. In the dim gleam
of jewelled clasps, the faint sheen of gold embroideries and the shimmer
of silks, she was like a figure in a faded painting. Only her neck
appeared dazzlingly white in the smoky redness of the light. D'Alcacer's
wonder approached a feeling of awe. He was on the point of moving away
quietly when Mrs. Travers, without stirring in the least, let him hear
the words:

"I have told him that every day seemed more difficult to live. Don't you
see how impossible this is?"

D'Alcacer glanced rapidly across the Cage where Mr. Travers seemed to
be asleep all in a heap and presenting a ruffled appearance like a sick
bird. Nothing was distinct of him but the bald patch on the top of his
head.

"Yes," he murmured, "it is most unfortunate. . . . I understand your
anxiety, Mrs. Travers, but . . ."

"I am frightened," she said.

He reflected a moment. "What answer did you get?" he asked, softly.

"The answer was: 'Patience.'"

D'Alcacer laughed a little.--"You may well laugh," murmured Mrs. Travers
in a tone of anguish.--"That's why I did," he whispered. "Patience!
Didn't he see the horror of it?"--"I don't know. He walked away," said
Mrs. Travers. She looked immovably at her hands clasped in her lap,
and then with a burst of distress, "Mr. d'Alcacer, what is going to
happen?"--"Ah, you are asking yourself the question at last. _That_
will happen which cannot be avoided; and perhaps you know best what it
is."--"No. I am still asking myself what he will do."--"Ah, that is not
for me to know," declared d'Alcacer. "I can't tell you what he will do,
but I know what will happen to him."--"To him, you say! To him!" she
cried.--"He will break his heart," said d'Alcacer, distinctly, bending
a little over the chair with a slight gasp at his own audacity--and
waited.

"Croyez-vous?" came at last from Mrs. Travers in an accent so coldly
languid that d'Alcacer felt a shudder run down his spine.

Was it possible that she was that kind of woman, he asked himself.
Did she see nothing in the world outside herself? Was she above the
commonest kind of compassion? He couldn't suspect Mrs. Travers of
stupidity; but she might have been heartless and, like some women of
her class, quite unable to recognize any emotion in the world except her
own. D'Alcacer was shocked and at the same time he was relieved because
he confessed to himself that he had ventured very far. However, in her
humanity she was not vulgar enough to be offended. She was not the slave
of small meannesses. This thought pleased d'Alcacer who had schooled
himself not to expect too much from people. But he didn't know what to
do next. After what he had ventured to say and after the manner in
which she had met his audacity the only thing to do was to change the
conversation. Mrs. Travers remained perfectly still. "I will pretend
that I think she is asleep," he thought to himself, meditating a retreat
on tip-toe.

He didn't know that Mrs. Travers was simply trying to recover the full
command of her faculties. His words had given her a terrible shock.
After managing to utter this defensive "croyez-vous" which came out of
her lips cold and faint as if in a last effort of dying strength, she
felt herself turn rigid and speechless. She was thinking, stiff all over
with emotion: "D'Alcacer has seen it! How much more has he been able to
see?" She didn't ask herself that question in fear or shame but with
a reckless resignation. Out of that shock came a sensation of peace. A
glowing warmth passed through all her limbs. If d'Alcacer had peered
by that smoky light into her face he might have seen on her lips a
fatalistic smile come and go. But d'Alcacer would not have dreamed of
doing such a thing, and, besides, his attention just then was drawn in
another direction. He had heard subdued exclamations, had noticed a stir
on the decks of the Emma, and even some sort of noise outside the ship.

"These are strange sounds," he said.

"Yes, I hear," Mrs. Travers murmured, uneasily.

Vague shapes glided outside the Cage, barefooted, almost noiseless,
whispering Malay words secretly.

"It seems as though a boat had come alongside," observed d'Alcacer,
lending an attentive ear. "I wonder what it means. In our
position. . . ."

"It may mean anything," interrupted Mrs. Travers.

"Jaffir is here," said a voice in the darkness of the after end of the
ship. Then there were some more words in which d'Alcacer's attentive ear
caught the word "surat."

"A message of some sort has come," he said. "They will be calling
Captain Lingard. I wonder what thoughts or what dreams this call will
interrupt." He spoke lightly, looking now at Mrs. Travers who had
altered her position in the chair; and by their tones and attitudes
these two might have been on board the yacht sailing the sea in perfect
safety. "You, of course, are the one who will be told. Don't you feel a
sort of excitement, Mrs. Travers?"

"I have been lately exhorted to patience," she said in the same easy
tone. "I can wait and I imagine I shall have to wait till the morning."

"It can't be very late yet," he said. "Time with us has been standing
still for ever so long. And yet this may be the hour of fate."

"Is this the feeling you have at this particular moment?"

"I have had that feeling for a considerable number of moments already.
At first it was exciting. Now I am only moderately anxious. I have
employed my time in going over all my past life."

"Can one really do that?"

"Yes. I can't say I have been bored to extinction. I am still alive, as
you see; but I have done with that and I feel extremely idle. There is
only one thing I would like to do. I want to find a few words that could
convey to you my gratitude for all your friendliness in the past, at the
time when you let me see so much of you in London. I felt always
that you took me on my own terms and that so kindly that often I felt
inclined to think better of myself. But I am afraid I am wearying you,
Mrs. Travers."

"I assure you you have never done that--in the past. And as to the
present moment I beg you not to go away. Stay by me please. We are not
going to pretend that we are sleepy at this early hour."

D'Alcacer brought a stool close to the long chair and sat down on it.
"Oh, yes, the possible hour of fate," he said. "I have a request to
make, Mrs. Travers. I don't ask you to betray anything. What would be
the good? The issue when it comes will be plain enough. But I should
like to get a warning, just something that would give me time to pull
myself together, to compose myself as it were. I want you to promise me
that if the balance tips against us you will give me a sign. You could,
for instance, seize the opportunity when I am looking at you to put your
left hand to your forehead like this. It is a gesture that I have never
seen you make, and so. . . ."

"Jorgenson!" Lingard's voice was heard forward where the light of a
lantern appeared suddenly. Then, after a pause, Lingard was heard again:
"Here!"

Then the silent minutes began to go by. Mrs. Travers reclining in her
chair and d'Alcacer sitting on the stool waited motionless without a
word. Presently through the subdued murmurs and agitation pervading the
dark deck of the Emma Mrs. Travers heard a firm footstep, and, lantern
in hand, Lingard appeared outside the muslin cage.

"Will you come out and speak to me?" he said, loudly. "Not you. The
lady," he added in an authoritative tone as d'Alcacer rose hastily from
the stool. "I want Mrs. Travers."

"Of course," muttered d'Alcacer to himself and as he opened the door of
the Cage to let Mrs. Travers slip through he whispered to her, "This is
the hour of fate."

She brushed past him swiftly without the slightest sign that she had
heard the words. On the after deck between the Cage and the deckhouse
Lingard waited, lantern in hand. Nobody else was visible about; but
d'Alcacer felt in the air the presence of silent and excited beings
hovering outside the circle of light. Lingard raised the lantern as Mrs.
Travers approached and d'Alcacer heard him say:

"I have had news which you ought to know. Let us go into the deckhouse."

D'Alcacer saw their heads lighted up by the raised lantern surrounded by
the depths of shadow with an effect of a marvellous and symbolic vision.
He heard Mrs. Travers say "I would rather not hear your news," in a
tone that made that sensitive observer purse up his lips in wonder. He
thought that she was over-wrought, that the situation had grown too much
for her nerves. But this was not the tone of a frightened person. It
flashed through his mind that she had become self-conscious, and there
he stopped in his speculation. That friend of women remained discreet
even in his thoughts. He stepped backward further into the Cage and
without surprise saw Mrs. Travers follow Lingard into the deckhouse.



IV

Lingard stood the lantern on the table. Its light was very poor. He
dropped on to the sea-chest heavily. He, too, was over-wrought. His
flannel shirt was open at the neck. He had a broad belt round his waist
and was without his jacket. Before him, Mrs. Travers, straight and tall
in the gay silks, cottons, and muslins of her outlandish dress, with the
ends of the scarf thrown over her head, hanging down in front of her,
looked dimly splendid and with a black glance out of her white face. He
said:

"Do you, too, want to throw me over? I tell you you can't do that now."

"I wasn't thinking of throwing you over, but I don't even know what you
mean. There seem to be no end of things I can't do. Hadn't you better
tell me of something that I could do? Have you any idea yourself what
you want from me?"

"You can let me look at you. You can listen to me. You can speak to me."

"Frankly, I have never shirked doing all those things, whenever you
wanted me to. You have led me . . ."

"I led you!" cried Lingard.

"Oh! It was my fault," she said, without anger. "I must have dreamed
then that it was you who came to me in the dark with the tale of your
impossible life. Could I have sent you away?"

"I wish you had. Why didn't you?"

"Do you want me to tell you that you were irresistible? How could I have
sent you away? But you! What made you come back to me with your very
heart on your lips?"

When Lingard spoke after a time it was in jerky sentences.

"I didn't stop to think. I had been hurt. I didn't think of you people
as ladies and gentlemen. I thought of you as people whose lives I held
in my hand. How was it possible to forget you in my trouble? It is your
face that I brought back with me on board my brig. I don't know why. I
didn't look at you more than at anybody else. It took me all my time to
keep my temper down lest it should burn you all up. I didn't want to be
rude to you people, but I found it wasn't very easy because threats were
the only argument I had. Was I very offensive, Mrs. Travers?"

She had listened tense and very attentive, almost stern. And it was
without the slightest change of expression that she said:

"I think that you bore yourself appropriately to the state of life to
which it has pleased God to call you."

"What state?" muttered Lingard to himself. "I am what I am. They call me
Rajah Laut, King Tom, and such like. I think it amused you to hear it,
but I can tell you it is no joke to have such names fastened on one,
even in fun. And those very names have in them something which makes all
this affair here no small matter to anybody."

She stood before him with a set, severe face.--"Did you call me out
in this alarming manner only to quarrel with me?"--"No, but why do you
choose this time to tell me that my coming for help to you was nothing
but impudence in your sight? Well, I beg your pardon for intruding
on your dignity."--"You misunderstood me," said Mrs. Travers, without
relaxing for a moment her contemplative severity. "Such a flattering
thing had never happened to me before and it will never happen to me
again. But believe me, King Tom, you did me too much honour. Jorgenson
is perfectly right in being angry with you for having taken a woman in
tow."--"He didn't mean to be rude," protested Lingard, earnestly. Mrs.
Travers didn't even smile at this intrusion of a point of manners into
the atmosphere of anguish and suspense that seemed always to arise
between her and this man who, sitting on the sea-chest, had raised his
eyes to her with an air of extreme candour and seemed unable to take
them off again. She continued to look at him sternly by a tremendous
effort of will.

"How changed you are," he murmured.

He was lost in the depths of the simplest wonder. She appeared to him
vengeful and as if turned forever into stone before his bewildered
remorse. Forever. Suddenly Mrs. Travers looked round and sat down in the
chair. Her strength failed her but she remained austere with her hands
resting on the arms of her seat. Lingard sighed deeply and dropped
his eyes. She did not dare relax her muscles for fear of breaking down
altogether and betraying a reckless impulse which lurked at the bottom
of her dismay, to seize the head of d'Alcacer's Man of Fate, press it
to her breast once, fling it far away, and vanish herself, vanish out
of life like a wraith. The Man of Fate sat silent and bowed, yet with
a suggestion of strength in his dejection. "If I don't speak," Mrs.
Travers said to herself, with great inward calmness, "I shall burst into
tears." She said aloud, "What could have happened? What have you dragged
me in here for? Why don't you tell me your news?"

"I thought you didn't want to hear. I believe you really don't want to.
What is all this to you? I believe that you don't care anything about
what I feel, about what I do and how I end. I verily believe that you
don't care how you end yourself. I believe you never cared for your own
or anybody's feelings. I don't think it is because you are hard, I think
it is because you don't know, and don't want to know, and are angry with
life."

He flourished an arm recklessly, and Mrs. Travers noticed for the first
time that he held a sheet of paper in his hand.

"Is that your news there?" she asked, significantly. "It's difficult to
imagine that in this wilderness writing can have any significance. And
who on earth here could send you news on paper? Will you let me see it?
Could I understand it? Is it in English? Come, King Tom, don't look at
me in this awful way."

She got up suddenly, not in indignation, but as if at the end of her
endurance. The jewelled clasps, the gold embroideries, gleamed elusively
amongst the folds of her draperies which emitted a mysterious rustle.

"I can't stand this," she cried. "I can't stand being looked at like
this. No woman could stand it. No woman has ever been looked at like
this. What can you see? Hatred I could understand. What is it you think
me capable of?"

"You are very extraordinary," murmured Lingard, who had regained his
self-possession before that outburst.

"Very well, and you are extraordinary, too. That's understood--here we
are both under that curse and having to face together whatever may turn
up. But who on earth could have sent you this writing?"

"Who?" repeated Lingard. "Why, that young fellow that blundered on my
brig in the dark, bringing a boatload of trouble alongside on that
quiet night in Carimata Straits. The darkest night I have ever known. An
accursed night."

Mrs. Travers bit her lip, waited a little, then asked quietly:

"What difficulty has he got into now?"

"Difficulty!" cried Lingard. "He is immensely pleased with himself, the
young fool. You know, when you sent him to talk to me that evening you
left the yacht, he came with a loaded pistol in his pocket. And now he
has gone and done it."

"Done it?" repeated Mrs. Travers blankly. "Done what?"

She snatched from Lingard's unresisting palm the sheet of paper. While
she was smoothing it Lingard moved round and stood close at her elbow.
She ran quickly over the first lines, then her eyes steadied. At the end
she drew a quick breath and looked up at Lingard. Their faces had never
been so close together before and Mrs. Travers had a surprising second
of a perfectly new sensation. She looked away.--"Do you understand what
this news means?" he murmured. Mrs. Travers let her hand fall by her
side. "Yes," she said in a low tone. "The compact is broken."

Carter had begun his letter without any preliminaries:

You cleared out in the middle of the night and took the lady away with
you. You left me no proper orders. But as a sailorman I looked upon
myself as left in charge of two ships while within half a mile on that
sandbank there were more than a hundred piratical cut-throats watching
me as closely as so many tigers about to leap. Days went by without a
word of you or the lady. To leave the ships outside and go inland to
look for you was not to be thought of with all those pirates within
springing distance. Put yourself in my place. Can't you imagine my
anxiety, my sleepless nights? Each night worse than the night before.
And still no word from you. I couldn't sit still and worry my head off
about things I couldn't understand. I am a sailorman. My first duty was
to the ships. I had to put an end to this impossible situation and I
hope you will agree that I have done it in a seamanlike way. One misty
morning I moved the brig nearer the sandbank and directly the mist
cleared I opened fire on the praus of those savages which were anchored
in the channel. We aimed wide at first to give those vagabonds that
were on board a chance to clear out and join their friends camped on the
sands. I didn't want to kill people. Then we got the long gun to bear
and in about an hour we had the bottom knocked out of the two praus. The
savages on the bank howled and screamed at every shot. They are mighty
angry but I don't care for their anger now, for by sinking their praus
I have made them as harmless as a flock of lambs. They needn't starve on
their sandbank because they have two or three dugouts hauled up on
the sand and they may ferry themselves and their women to the mainland
whenever they like.

I fancy I have acted as a seaman and as a seaman I intend to go on
acting. Now I have made the ships safe I shall set about without loss of
time trying to get the yacht off the mud. When that's done I shall arm
the boats and proceed inshore to look for you and the yacht's gentry,
and shan't rest till I know whether any or all of you are above the
earth yet.

I hope these words will reach you. Just as we had done the business
of those praus the man you sent off that night in Carimata to stop our
chief officer came sailing in from the west with our first gig in
tow and the boat's crew all well. Your serang tells me he is a most
trustworthy messenger and that his name is Jaffir. He seems only too
anxious to try to get to you as soon as possible. I repeat, ships and
men have been made safe and I don't mean to give you up dead or alive.

"You are quick in taking the point," said Lingard in a dull voice, while
Mrs. Travers, with the sheet of paper gripped in her hand, looked into
his face with anxious eyes. "He has been smart and no mistake."

"He didn't know," murmured Mrs. Travers.

"No, he didn't know. But could I take everybody into my confidence?"
protested Lingard in the same low tone. "And yet who else could I trust?
It seemed to me that he must have understood without being told. But he
is too young. He may well be proud according to his lights. He has done
that job outside very smartly--damn his smartness! And here we are with
all our lives depending on my word--which is broken now, Mrs. Travers.
It is broken."

Mrs. Travers nodded at him slightly.

"They would sooner have expected to see the sun and the moon fall out of
the sky," Lingard continued with repressed fire. Next moment it seemed
to have gone out of him and Mrs. Travers heard him mutter a disconnected
phrase. . . . "The world down about my ears."

"What will you do?" she whispered.

"What will I do?" repeated Lingard, gently. "Oh, yes--do. Mrs. Travers,
do you see that I am nothing now? Just nothing."

He had lost himself in the contemplation of her face turned to him with
an expression of awed curiosity. The shock of the world coming down
about his ears in consequence of Carter's smartness was so terrific that
it had dulled his sensibilities in the manner of a great pain or of a
great catastrophe. What was there to look at but that woman's face, in
a world which had lost its consistency, its shape, and its promises in a
moment?

Mrs. Travers looked away. She understood that she had put to Lingard an
impossible question. What was presenting itself to her as a problem was
to that man a crisis of feeling. Obviously Carter's action had broken
the compact entered into with Daman, and she was intelligent enough to
understand that it was the sort of thing that could not be explained
away. It wasn't horror that she felt, but a sort of consternation,
something like the discomfiture of people who have just missed their
train. It was only more intense. The real dismay had yet to make its way
into her comprehension. To Lingard it was a blow struck straight at his
heart.

He was not angry with Carter. The fellow had acted like a seaman.
Carter's concern was for the ships. In this fatality Carter was a mere
incident. The real cause of the disaster was somewhere else, was other,
and more remote. And at the same time Lingard could not defend himself
from a feeling that it was in himself, too, somewhere in the unexplored
depths of his nature, something fatal and unavoidable. He muttered to
himself:

"No. I am not a lucky man."

This was but a feeble expression of the discovery of the truth that
suddenly had come home to him as if driven into his breast by a
revealing power which had decided that this was to be the end of his
fling. But he was not the man to give himself up to the examination
of his own sensations. His natural impulse was to grapple with the
circumstances and that was what he was trying to do; but he missed now
that sense of mastery which is half the battle. Conflict of some sort
was the very essence of his life. But this was something he had never
known before. This was a conflict within himself. He had to face
unsuspected powers, foes that he could not go out to meet at the gate.
They were within, as though he had been betrayed by somebody, by some
secret enemy. He was ready to look round for that subtle traitor. A
sort of blankness fell on his mind and he suddenly thought: "Why! It's
myself."

Immediately afterward he had a clear, merciless recollection of Hassim
and Immada. He saw them far off beyond the forests. Oh, yes, they
existed--within his breast!

"That was a night!" he muttered, looking straight at Mrs. Travers. He
had been looking at her all the time. His glance had held her under a
spell, but for a whole interminable minute he had not been aware of her
at all. At the murmur of his words she made a slight movement and he saw
her again.--"What night?" she whispered, timidly, like an intruder. She
was astonished to see him smile.--"Not like this one," he said. "You
made me notice how quiet and still it was. Yes. Listen how still it is."

Both moved their heads slightly and seemed to lend an ear. There was not
a murmur, sigh, rustle, splash, or footfall. No whispers, no tremors,
not a sound of any kind. They might have been alone on board the Emma,
abandoned even by the ghost of Captain Jorgenson departed to rejoin
the Barque Wild Rose on the shore of the Cimmerian sea.--"It's like the
stillness of the end," said Mrs. Travers in a low, equable voice.--"Yes,
but that, too, is false," said Lingard in the same tone.--"I don't
understand," Mrs. Travers began, hurriedly, after a short silence. "But
don't use that word. Don't use it, King Tom! It frightens me by its mere
sound."

Lingard made no sign. His thoughts were back with Hassim and Immada. The
young chief and his sister had gone up country on a voluntary mission
to persuade Belarab to return to his stockade and to take up again the
direction of affairs. They carried urgent messages from Lingard, who for
Belarab was the very embodiment of truth and force, that unquestioned
force which had permitted Belarab to indulge in all his melancholy
hesitations. But those two young people had also some personal prestige.
They were Lingard's heart's friends. They were like his children. But
beside that, their high birth, their warlike story, their wanderings,
adventures, and prospects had given them a glamour of their own.



V

The very day that Travers and d'Alcacer had come on board the Emma
Hassim and Immada had departed on their mission; for Lingard, of course,
could not think of leaving the white people alone with Jorgenson.
Jorgenson was all right, but his ineradicable habit of muttering in his
moustache about "throwing a lighted match amongst the powder barrels"
had inspired Lingard with a certain amount of mistrust. And, moreover,
he did not want to go away from Mrs. Travers.

It was the only correct inspiration on Carter's part to send Jaffir with
his report to Lingard. That stout-hearted fighter, swimmer, and devoted
follower of the princely misfortunes of Hassim and Immada, had looked
upon his mission to catch the chief officer of the yacht (which he had
received from Lingard in Carimata) as a trifling job. It took him a
little longer than he expected but he had got back to the brig just in
time to be sent on to Lingard with Carter's letter after a couple of
hours' rest. He had the story of all the happenings from Wasub before he
left and though his face preserved its grave impassivity, in his heart
he did not like it at all.

Fearless and wily, Jaffir was the man for difficult missions and a born
messenger--as he expressed it himself--"to bear weighty words between
great men." With his unfailing memory he was able to reproduce them
exactly, whether soft or hard, in council or in private; for he knew no
fear. With him there was no need for writing which might fall into the
hands of the enemy. If he died on the way the message would die with
him. He had also the gift of getting at the sense of any situation
and an observant eye. He was distinctly one of those men from whom
trustworthy information can be obtained by the leaders of great
enterprises. Lingard did put several questions to him, but in this
instance, of course, Jaffir could have only very little to say. Of
Carter, whom he called the "young one," he said that he looked as white
men look when they are pleased with themselves; then added without
waiting for a definite question--"The ships out there are now safe
enough, O, Rajah Laut!" There was no elation in his tone.

Lingard looked at him blankly. When the Greatest of White Men remarked
that there was yet a price to be paid for that safety, Jaffir assented
by a "Yes, by Allah!" without losing for a moment his grim composure.
When told that he would be required to go and find his master and
the lady Immada who were somewhere in the back country, in Belarab's
travelling camp, he declared himself ready to proceed at once. He had
eaten his fill and had slept three hours on board the brig and he was
not tired. When he was young he used to get tired sometimes; but for
many years now he had known no such weakness. He did not require the
boat with paddlers in which he had come up into the lagoon. He would go
alone in a small canoe. This was no time, he remarked, for publicity and
ostentation. His pent-up anxiety burst through his lips. "It is in my
mind, Tuan, that death has not been so near them since that night when
you came sailing in a black cloud and took us all out of the stockade."

Lingard said nothing but there was in Jaffir a faith in that white man
which was not easily shaken.

"How are you going to save them this time, O Rajah Laut?" he asked,
simply.

"Belarab is my friend," murmured Lingard.

In his anxiety Jaffir was very outspoken. "A man of peace!" he exclaimed
in a low tone. "Who could be safe with a man like that?" he asked,
contemptuously.

"There is no war," said Lingard

"There is suspicion, dread, and revenge, and the anger of armed men,"
retorted Jaffir. "You have taken the white prisoners out of their hands
by the force of your words alone. Is that so, Tuan?"

"Yes," said Lingard.

"And you have them on board here?" asked Jaffir, with a glance over his
shoulder at the white and misty structure within which by the light of a
small oil flame d'Alcacer and Mrs. Travers were just then conversing.

"Yes, I have them here."

"Then, Rajah Laut," whispered Jaffir, "you can make all safe by giving
them back."

"Can I do that?" were the words breathed out through Lingard's lips to
the faithful follower of Hassim and Immada.

"Can you do anything else?" was the whispered retort of Jaffir the
messenger accustomed to speak frankly to the great of the earth. "You
are a white man and you can have only one word. And now I go."

A small, rough dug-out belonging to the Emma had been brought round to
the ladder. A shadowy calash hovering respectfully in the darkness of
the deck had already cleared his throat twice in a warning manner.

"Yes, Jaffir, go," said Lingard, "and be my friend."

"I am the friend of a great prince," said the other, sturdily. "But you,
Rajah Laut, were even greater. And great you will remain while you are
with us, people of this sea and of this land. But what becomes of the
strength of your arms before your own white people? Where does it go to,
I say? Well, then, we must trust in the strength of your heart."

"I hope that will never fail," said Lingard, and Jaffir emitted a grunt
of satisfaction. "But God alone sees into men's hearts."

"Yes. Our refuge is with Allah," assented Jaffir, who had acquired
the habit of pious turns of speech in the frequentation of professedly
religious men, of whom there were many in Belarab's stockade. As a
matter of fact, he reposed all his trust in Lingard who had with him
the prestige of a providential man sent at the hour of need by heaven
itself. He waited a while, then: "What is the message I am to take?" he
asked.

"Tell the whole tale to the Rajah Hassim," said Lingard. "And tell him
to make his way here with the lady his sister secretly and with speed.
The time of great trouble has come. Let us, at least, be together."

"Right! Right!" Jaffir approved, heartily. "To die alone under the
weight of one's enemies is a dreadful fate."

He stepped back out of the sheen of the lamp by which they had been
talking and making his way down into the small canoe he took up a paddle
and without a splash vanished on the dark lagoon.

It was then that Mrs. Travers and d'Alcacer heard Lingard call aloud for
Jorgenson. Instantly the familiar shadow stood at Lingard's elbow and
listened in detached silence. Only at the end of the tale it marvelled
audibly: "Here's a mess for you if you like." But really nothing in the
world could astonish or startle old Jorgenson. He turned away muttering
in his moustache. Lingard remained with his chin in his hand and
Jaffir's last words took gradual possession of his mind. Then brusquely
he picked up the lamp and went to seek Mrs. Travers. He went to seek her
because he actually needed her bodily presence, the sound of her voice,
the dark, clear glance of her eyes. She could do nothing for him. On
his way he became aware that Jorgenson had turned out the few Malays
on board the Emma and was disposing them about the decks to watch
the lagoon in all directions. On calling Mrs. Travers out of the Cage
Lingard was, in the midst of his mental struggle, conscious of a certain
satisfaction in taking her away from d'Alcacer. He couldn't spare any of
her attention to any other man, not the least crumb of her time, not
the least particle of her thought! He needed it all. To see it withdrawn
from him for the merest instant was irritating--seemed a disaster.

D'Alcacer, left alone, wondered at the imperious tone of Lingard's call.
To this observer of shades the fact seemed considerable. "Sheer nerves,"
he concluded, to himself. "The man is overstrung. He must have had some
sort of shock." But what could it be--he wondered to himself. In the
tense stagnation of those days of waiting the slightest tremor had an
enormous importance. D'Alcacer did not seek his camp bedstead. He didn't
even sit down. With the palms of his hands against the edge of the table
he leaned back against it. In that negligent attitude he preserved an
alert mind which for a moment wondered whether Mrs. Travers had
not spoiled Lingard a little. Yet in the suddenness of the forced
association, where, too, d'Alcacer was sure there was some moral problem
in the background, he recognized the extreme difficulty of weighing
accurately the imperious demands against the necessary reservations, the
exact proportions of boldness and caution. And d'Alcacer admired upon
the whole Mrs. Travers' cleverness.

There could be no doubt that she had the situation in her hands. That,
of course, did not mean safety. She had it in her hands as one may hold
some highly explosive and uncertain compound. D'Alcacer thought of her
with profound sympathy and with a quite unselfish interest. Sometimes
in a street we cross the path of personalities compelling sympathy and
wonder but for all that we don't follow them home. D'Alcacer refrained
from following Mrs. Travers any further. He had become suddenly aware
that Mr. Travers was sitting up on his camp bedstead. He must have done
it very suddenly. Only a moment before he had appeared plunged in
the deepest slumber, and the stillness for a long time now had been
perfectly unbroken. D'Alcacer was startled enough for an exclamation
and Mr. Travers turned his head slowly in his direction. D'Alcacer
approached the bedstead with a certain reluctance.

"Awake?" he said.

"A sudden chill," said Mr. Travers. "But I don't feel cold now. Strange!
I had the impression of an icy blast."

"Ah!" said d'Alcacer.

"Impossible, of course!" went on Mr. Travers. "This stagnating air never
moves. It clings odiously to one. What time is it?"

"Really, I don't know."

"The glass of my watch was smashed on that night when we were so
treacherously assailed by the savages on the sandbank," grumbled Mr.
Travers.

"I must say I was never so surprised in my life," confessed d'Alcacer.
"We had stopped and I was lighting a cigar, you may remember."

"No," said Mr. Travers. "I had just then pulled out my watch. Of course
it flew out of my hand but it hung by the chain. Somebody trampled on
it. The hands are broken off short. It keeps on ticking but I can't tell
the time. It's absurd. Most provoking."

"Do you mean to say," asked d'Alcacer, "that you have been winding it up
every evening?"

Mr. Travers looked up from his bedstead and he also seemed surprised.
"Why! I suppose I have." He kept silent for a while. "It isn't so
much blind habit as you may think. My habits are the outcome of strict
method. I had to order my life methodically. You know very well, my dear
d'Alcacer, that without strict method I would not have been able to get
through my work and would have had no time at all for social duties,
which, of course, are of very great importance. I may say that,
materially, method has been the foundation of my success in public life.
There were never any empty moments in my day. And now this! . . ." He
looked all round the Cage. . . . "Where's my wife?" he asked.

"I was talking to her only a moment ago," answered d'Alcacer. "I don't
know the time. My watch is on board the yacht; but it isn't late, you
know."

Mr. Travers flung off with unwonted briskness the light cotton sheet
which covered him. He buttoned hastily the tunic which he had unfastened
before lying down, and just as d'Alcacer was expecting him to swing
his feet to the deck impetuously, he lay down again on the pillow and
remained perfectly still.

D'Alcacer waited awhile and then began to pace the Cage. After a couple
of turns he stopped and said, gently:

"I am afraid, Travers, you are not very well."

"I don't know what illness is," answered the voice from the pillow to
the great relief of d'Alcacer who really had not expected an answer.
"Good health is a great asset in public life. Illness may make you miss
a unique opportunity. I was never ill."

All this came out deadened in tone, as if the speaker's face had been
buried in the pillow. D'Alcacer resumed his pacing.

"I think I asked you where my wife was," said the muffled voice.

With great presence of mind d'Alcacer kept on pacing the Cage as if
he had not heard.--"You know, I think she is mad," went on the muffled
voice. "Unless I am."

Again d'Alcacer managed not to interrupt his regular pacing. "Do you
know what I think?" he said, abruptly. "I think, Travers, that you
don't want to talk about her. I think that you don't want to talk about
anything. And to tell you the truth I don't want to, either."

D'Alcacer caught a faint sigh from the pillow and at the same time saw
a small, dim flame appear outside the Cage. And still he kept on his
pacing. Mrs. Travers and Lingard coming out of the deckhouse stopped
just outside the door and Lingard stood the deck-lamp on its roof. They
were too far from d'Alcacer to be heard, but he could make them out:
Mrs. Travers, as straight as an arrow, and the heavy bulk of the man who
faced her with a lowered head. He saw it in profile against the light
and as if deferential in its slight droop. They were looking straight at
each other. Neither of them made the slightest gesture.

"There is that in me," Lingard murmured, deeply, "which would set my
heart harder than a stone. I am King Tom, Rajah Laut, and fit to
look any man hereabouts in the face. I have my name to take care of.
Everything rests on that."

"Mr. d'Alcacer would express this by saying that everything rested on
honour," commented Mrs. Travers with lips that did not tremble, though
from time to time she could feel the accelerated beating of her heart.

"Call it what you like. It's something that a man needs to draw a free
breath. And look!--as you see me standing before you here I care for it
no longer."

"But I do care for it," retorted Mrs. Travers. "As you see me standing
here--I do care. This is something that is your very own. You have a
right to it. And I repeat I do care for it."

"Care for something of my own," murmured Lingard, very close to her
face. "Why should you care for my rights?"

"Because," she said, holding her ground though their foreheads were
nearly touching, "because if I ever get back to my life I don't want to
make it more absurd by real remorse."

Her tone was soft and Lingard received the breath of those words like a
caress on his face. D'Alcacer, in the Cage, made still another effort
to keep up his pacing. He didn't want to give Mr. Travers the slightest
excuse for sitting up again and looking round.

"That I should live to hear anybody say they cared anything for what
was mine!" whispered Lingard. "And that it should be you--you, who have
taken all hardness out of me."

"I don't want your heart to be made hard. I want it to be made firm."

"You couldn't have said anything better than what you have said just now
to make it steady," flowed the murmur of Lingard's voice with something
tender in its depth. "Has anybody ever had a friend like this?" he
exclaimed, raising his head as if taking the starry night to witness.

"And I ask myself is it possible that there should be another man on
earth that I could trust as I trust you. I say to you: Yes! Go and save
what you have a right to and don't forget to be merciful. I will not
remind you of our perfect innocence. The earth must be small indeed that
we should have blundered like this into your life. It's enough to make
one believe in fatality. But I can't find it in me to behave like a
fatalist, to sit down with folded hands. Had you been another kind of
man I might have been too hopeless or too disdainful. Do you know what
Mr. d'Alcacer calls you?"

Inside the Cage d'Alcacer, casting curious glances in their direction,
saw Lingard shake his head and thought with slight uneasiness: "He is
refusing her something."

"Mr. d'Alcacer's name for you is the 'Man of Fate'," said Mrs. Travers,
a little breathlessly.

"A mouthful. Never mind, he is a gentleman. It's what you. . . ."

"I call you all but by your Christian name," said Mrs. Travers, hastily.
"Believe me, Mr. d'Alcacer understands you."

"He is all right," interjected Lingard.

"And he is innocent. I remember what you have said--that the innocent
must take their chance. Well, then, do what is right."

"You think it would be right? You believe it? You feel it?"

"At this time, in this place, from a man like you--Yes, it is right."

Lingard thought that woman wonderfully true to him and wonderfully
fearless with herself. The necessity to take back the two captives to
the stockade was so clear and unavoidable now, that he believed nothing
on earth could have stopped him from doing so, but where was there
another woman in the world who would have taken it like this? And he
reflected that in truth and courage there is found wisdom. It seemed to
him that till Mrs. Travers came to stand by his side he had never known
what truth and courage and wisdom were. With his eyes on her face and
having been told that in her eyes he appeared worthy of being both
commanded and entreated, he felt an instant of complete content, a
moment of, as it were, perfect emotional repose.

During the silence Mrs. Travers with a quick side-glance noticed
d'Alcacer as one sees a man in a mist, his mere dark shape arrested
close to the muslin screen. She had no doubt that he was looking in
their direction and that he could see them much more plainly than she
could see him. Mrs. Travers thought suddenly how anxious he must be; and
she remembered that he had begged her for some sign, for some warning,
beforehand, at the moment of crisis. She had understood very well his
hinted request for time to get prepared. If he was to get more than a
few minutes, _this_ was the moment to make him a sign--the sign he had
suggested himself. Mrs. Travers moved back the least bit so as to let
the light fall in front of her and with a slow, distinct movement she
put her left hand to her forehead.

"Well, then," she heard Lingard's forcible murmur, "well, then, Mrs.
Travers, it must be done to-night."

One may be true, fearless, and wise, and yet catch one's breath
before the simple finality of action. Mrs. Travers caught her breath:
"To-night! To-night!" she whispered. D'Alcacer's dark and misty
silhouette became more blurred. He had seen her sign and had retreated
deeper within the Cage.

"Yes, to-night," affirmed Lingard. "Now, at once, within the hour, this
moment," he murmured, fiercely, following Mrs. Travers in her recoiling
movement. She felt her arm being seized swiftly. "Don't you see that
if it is to do any good, that if they are not to be delivered to mere
slaughter, it must be done while all is dark ashore, before an armed mob
in boats comes clamouring alongside? Yes. Before the night is an hour
older, so that I may be hammering at Belarab's gate while all the
Settlement is still asleep."

Mrs. Travers didn't dream of protesting. For the moment she was unable
to speak. This man was very fierce and just as suddenly as it had been
gripped (making her think incongruously in the midst of her agitation
that there would be certainly a bruise there in the morning) she felt
her arm released and a penitential tone come into Lingard's murmuring
voice.

"And even now it's nearly too late! The road was plain, but I saw you on
it and my heart failed me. I was there like an empty man and I dared
not face you. You must forgive me. No, I had no right to doubt you for
a moment. I feel as if I ought to go on my knees and beg your pardon for
forgetting what you are, for daring to forget."

"Why, King Tom, what is it?"

"It seems as if I had sinned," she heard him say. He seized her by the
shoulders, turned her about, moved her forward a step or two. His hands
were heavy, his force irresistible, though he himself imagined he was
handling her gently. "Look straight before you," he growled into her
ear. "Do you see anything?" Mrs. Travers, passive between the rigid
arms, could see nothing but, far off, the massed, featureless shadows of
the shore.

"No, I see nothing," she said.

"You can't be looking the right way," she heard him behind her. And now
she felt her head between Lingard's hands. He moved it the least bit to
the right. "There! See it?"

"No. What am I to look for?"

"A gleam of light," said Lingard, taking away his hands suddenly. "A
gleam that will grow into a blaze before our boat can get half way
across the lagoon."

Even as Lingard spoke Mrs. Travers caught sight of a red spark far
away. She had looked often enough at the Settlement, as on the face of
a painting on a curtain, to have its configuration fixed in her mind,
to know that it was on the beach at its end furthest from Belarab's
stockade.

"The brushwood is catching," murmured Lingard in her ear. "If they had
some dry grass the whole pile would be blazing by now."

"And this means. . . ."

"It means that the news has spread. And it is before Tengga's enclosure
on his end of the beach. That's where all the brains of the Settlement
are. It means talk and excitement and plenty of crafty words. Tengga's
fire! I tell you, Mrs. Travers, that before half an hour has passed
Daman will be there to make friends with the fat Tengga, who is ready to
say to him, 'I told you so'."

"I see," murmured Mrs. Travers. Lingard drew her gently to the rail.

"And now look over there at the other end of the beach where the shadows
are heaviest. That is Belarab's fort, his houses, his treasure, his
dependents. That's where the strength of the Settlement is. I kept it
up. I made it last. But what is it now? It's like a weapon in the hand
of a dead man. And yet it's all we have to look to, if indeed there is
still time. I swear to you I wouldn't dare land them in daylight for
fear they should be slaughtered on the beach."

"There is no time to lose," whispered Mrs. Travers, and Lingard, too,
spoke very low.

"No, not if I, too, am to keep what is my right. It's you who have said
it."

"Yes, I have said it," she whispered, without lifting her head. Lingard
made a brusque movement at her elbow and bent his head close to her
shoulder.

"And I who mistrusted you! Like Arabs do to their great men, I ought to
kiss the hem of your robe in repentance for having doubted the greatness
of your heart."

"Oh! my heart!" said Mrs. Travers, lightly, still gazing at the fire,
which had suddenly shot up to a tall blaze. "I can assure you it has
been of very little account in the world." She paused for a moment to
steady her voice, then said, firmly, "Let's get this over."

"To tell you the truth the boat has been ready for some time."

"Well, then. . . ."

"Mrs. Travers," said Lingard with an effort, "they are people of your
own kind." And suddenly he burst out: "I cannot take them ashore bound
hand and foot."

"Mr. d'Alcacer knows. You will find him ready. Ever since the beginning
he has been prepared for whatever might happen."

"He is a man," said Lingard with conviction. "But it's of the other that
I am thinking."

"Ah, the other," she repeated. "Then, what about my thoughts? Luckily we
have Mr. d'Alcacer. I shall speak to him first."

She turned away from the rail and moved toward the Cage.

"Jorgenson," the voice of Lingard resounded all along the deck, "get a
light on the gangway." Then he followed Mrs. Travers slowly.



VI

D'Alcacer, after receiving his warning, stepped back and leaned against
the edge of the table. He could not ignore in himself a certain emotion.
And indeed, when he had asked Mrs. Travers for a sign he expected to
be moved--but he had not expected the sign to come so soon. He expected
this night to pass like other nights, in broken slumbers, bodily
discomfort, and the unrest of disconnected thinking. At the same time
he was surprised at his own emotion. He had flattered himself on the
possession of more philosophy. He thought that this famous sense of
self-preservation was a queer thing, a purely animal thing. "For, as
a thinking man," he reflected, "I really ought not to care." It was
probably the unusual that affected him. Clearly. If he had been lying
seriously ill in a room in a hotel and had overheard some ominous
whispers he would not have cared in the least. Ah, but then he would
have been ill--and in illness one grows so indifferent. Illness is a
great help to unemotional behaviour, which of course is the correct
behaviour for a man of the world. He almost regretted he was not very
ill. But, then, Mr. Travers was obviously ill and it did not seem to
help him much. D'Alcacer glanced at the bedstead where Mr. Travers
preserved an immobility which struck d'Alcacer as obviously affected.
He mistrusted it. Generally he mistrusted Mr. Travers. One couldn't tell
what he would do next. Not that he could do much one way or another, but
that somehow he threatened to rob the situation of whatever dignity it
may have had as a stroke of fate, as a call on courage. Mr. d'Alcacer,
acutely observant and alert for the slightest hints, preferred to look
upon himself as the victim not of a swindle but of a rough man naively
engaged in a contest with heaven's injustice. D'Alcacer did not examine
his heart, but some lines of a French poet came into his mind, to the
effect that in all times those who fought with an unjust heaven had
possessed the secret admiration and love of men. He didn't go so far as
love but he could not deny to himself that his feeling toward Lingard
was secretly friendly and--well, appreciative. Mr. Travers sat up
suddenly. What a horrible nuisance, thought d'Alcacer, fixing his eyes
on the tips of his shoes with the hope that perhaps the other would lie
down again. Mr. Travers spoke.

"Still up, d'Alcacer?"

"I assure you it isn't late. It's dark at six, we dined before seven,
that makes the night long and I am not a very good sleeper; that is, I
cannot go to sleep till late in the night."

"I envy you," said Mr. Travers, speaking with a sort of drowsy apathy.
"I am always dropping off and the awakenings are horrible."

D'Alcacer, raising his eyes, noticed that Mrs. Travers and Lingard had
vanished from the light. They had gone to the rail where d'Alcacer
could not see them. Some pity mingled with his vexation at Mr. Travers'
snatchy wakefulness. There was something weird about the man, he
reflected. "Jorgenson," he began aloud.

"What's that?" snapped Mr. Travers.

"It's the name of that lanky old store-keeper who is always about the
decks."

"I haven't seen him. I don't see anybody. I don't know anybody. I prefer
not to notice."

"I was only going to say that he gave me a pack of cards; would you like
a game of piquet?"

"I don't think I could keep my eyes open," said Mr. Travers in an
unexpectedly confidential tone. "Isn't it funny, d'Alcacer? And then I
wake up. It's too awful."

D'Alcacer made no remark and Mr. Travers seemed not to have expected
any.

"When I said my wife was mad," he began, suddenly, causing d'Alcacer
to start, "I didn't mean it literally, of course." His tone sounded
slightly dogmatic and he didn't seem to be aware of any interval during
which he had appeared to sleep. D'Alcacer was convinced more than ever
that he had been shamming, and resigned himself wearily to listen,
folding his arms across his chest. "What I meant, really," continued Mr.
Travers, "was that she is the victim of a craze. Society is subject to
crazes, as you know very well. They are not reprehensible in themselves,
but the worst of my wife is that her crazes are never like those of the
people with whom she naturally associates. They generally run counter to
them. This peculiarity has given me some anxiety, you understand, in the
position we occupy. People will begin to say that she is eccentric. Do
you see her anywhere, d'Alcacer?"

D'Alcacer was thankful to be able to say that he didn't see Mrs.
Travers. He didn't even hear any murmurs, though he had no doubt that
everybody on board the Emma was wide awake by now. But Mr. Travers
inspired him with invincible mistrust and he thought it prudent to add:

"You forget that your wife has a room in the deckhouse."

This was as far as he would go, for he knew very well that she was not
in the deckhouse. Mr. Travers, completely convinced by the statement,
made no sound. But neither did he lie down again. D'Alcacer gave himself
up to meditation. The night seemed extremely oppressive. At Lingard's
shout for Jorgenson, that in the profound silence struck his ears
ominously, he raised his eyes and saw Mrs. Travers outside the door of
the Cage. He started forward but she was already within. He saw she was
moved. She seemed out of breath and as if unable to speak at first.

"Hadn't we better shut the door?" suggested d'Alcacer.

"Captain Lingard's coming in," she whispered to him. "He has made up his
mind."

"That's an excellent thing," commented d'Alcacer, quietly. "I conclude
from this that we shall hear something."

"You shall hear it all from me," breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"Ah!" exclaimed d'Alcacer very low.

By that time Lingard had entered, too, and the decks of the Emma were
all astir with moving figures. Jorgenson's voice was also heard giving
directions. For nearly a minute the four persons within the Cage
remained motionless. A shadowy Malay in the gangway said suddenly:
"Sudah, Tuan," and Lingard murmured, "Ready, Mrs. Travers."

She seized d'Alcacer's arm and led him to the side of the Cage furthest
from the corner in which Mr. Travers' bed was placed, while Lingard
busied himself in pricking up the wick of the Cage lantern as if it had
suddenly occurred to him that this, whatever happened, should not be a
deed of darkness. Mr. Travers did nothing but turn his head to look over
his shoulder.

"One moment," said d'Alcacer, in a low tone and smiling at Mrs. Travers'
agitation. "Before you tell me anything let me ask you: 'Have _you_ made
up your mind?'" He saw with much surprise a widening of her eyes. Was it
indignation? A pause as of suspicion fell between those two people. Then
d'Alcacer said apologetically: "Perhaps I ought not to have asked that
question," and Lingard caught Mrs. Travers' words, "Oh, I am not afraid
to answer that question."

Then their voices sank. Lingard hung the lamp up again and stood idle in
the revived light; but almost immediately he heard d'Alcacer calling him
discreetly.

"Captain Lingard!"

He moved toward them at once. At the same instant Mr. Travers' head
pivoted away from the group to its frontal position.

D'Alcacer, very serious, spoke in a familiar undertone.

"Mrs. Travers tells me that we must be delivered up to those Moors on
shore."

"Yes, there is nothing else for it," said Lingard.

"I confess I am a bit startled," said d'Alcacer; but except for a
slightly hurried utterance nobody could have guessed at anything
resembling emotion.

"I have a right to my good name," said Lingard, also very calm, while
Mrs. Travers near him, with half-veiled eyes, listened impassive like a
presiding genius.

"I wouldn't question that for a moment," conceded d'Alcacer. "A point
of honour is not to be discussed. But there is such a thing as humanity,
too. To be delivered up helplessly. . . ."

"Perhaps!" interrupted Lingard. "But you needn't feel hopeless. I am
not at liberty to give up my life for your own. Mrs. Travers knows why.
That, too, is engaged."

"Always on your honour?"

"I don't know. A promise is a promise."

"Nobody can be held to the impossible," remarked d'Alcacer.

"Impossible! What is impossible? I don't know it. I am not a man to talk
of the impossible or dodge behind it. I did not bring you here."

D'Alcacer lowered his head for a moment. "I have finished," he said,
gravely. "That much I had to say. I hope you don't think I have appeared
unduly anxious."

"It's the best policy, too." Mrs. Travers made herself heard suddenly.
Nothing of her moved but her lips, she did not even raise her eyes.
"It's the only possible policy. You believe me, Mr. d'Alcacer? . . ." He
made an almost imperceptible movement of the head. . . . "Well, then,
I put all my hope in you, Mr. d'Alcacer, to get this over as easily as
possible and save us all from some odious scene. You think perhaps that
it is I who ought to. . . ."

"No, no! I don't think so," interrupted d'Alcacer. "It would be
impossible."

"I am afraid it would," she admitted, nervously.

D'Alcacer made a gesture as if to beg her to say no more and at once
crossed over to Mr. Travers' side of the Cage. He did not want to give
himself time to think about his task. Mr. Travers was sitting up on
the camp bedstead with a light cotton sheet over his legs. He stared at
nothing, and on approaching him d'Alcacer disregarded the slight sinking
of his own heart at this aspect which seemed to be that of extreme
terror. "This is awful," he thought. The man kept as still as a hare in
its form.

The impressed d'Alcacer had to make an effort to bring himself to tap
him lightly on the shoulder.

"The moment has come, Travers, to show some fortitude," he said with
easy intimacy. Mr. Travers looked up swiftly. "I have just been talking
to your wife. She had a communication from Captain Lingard for us both.
It remains for us now to preserve as much as possible our dignity. I
hope that if necessary we will both know how to die."

In a moment of profound stillness, d'Alcacer had time to wonder whether
his face was as stony in expression as the one upturned to him. But
suddenly a smile appeared on it, which was certainly the last thing
d'Alcacer expected to see. An indubitable smile. A slightly contemptuous
smile.

"My wife has been stuffing your head with some more of her nonsense."
Mr. Travers spoke in a voice which astonished d'Alcacer as much as the
smile, a voice that was not irritable nor peevish, but had a distinct
note of indulgence. "My dear d'Alcacer, that craze has got such a hold
of her that she would tell you any sort of tale. Social impostors,
mediums, fortune-tellers, charlatans of all sorts do obtain a strange
influence over women. You have seen that sort of thing yourself. I had a
talk with her before dinner. The influence that bandit has got over her
is incredible. I really believe the fellow is half crazy himself. They
often are, you know. I gave up arguing with her. Now, what is it you
have got to tell me? But I warn you that I am not going to take it
seriously."

He rejected briskly the cotton sheet, put his feet to the ground and
buttoned his jacket. D'Alcacer, as he talked, became aware by the slight
noise behind him that Mrs. Travers and Lingard were leaving the Cage,
but he went on to the end and then waited anxiously for the answer.

"See! She has followed him out on deck," were Mr. Travers' first words.
"I hope you understand that it is a mere craze. You can't help seeing
that. Look at her costume. She simply has lost her head. Luckily the
world needn't know. But suppose that something similar had happened at
home. It would have been extremely awkward. Oh! yes, I will come. I will
go anywhere. I can't stand this hulk, those people, this infernal Cage.
I believe I should fall ill if I were to remain here."

The inward detached voice of Jorgenson made itself heard near the
gangway saying: "The boat has been waiting for this hour past, King
Tom."

"Let us make a virtue of necessity and go with a good grace," said
d'Alcacer, ready to take Mr. Travers under the arm persuasively, for he
did not know what to make of that gentleman.

But Mr. Travers seemed another man. "I am afraid, d'Alcacer, that you,
too, are not very strong-minded. I am going to take a blanket off this
bedstead. . . ." He flung it hastily over his arm and followed d'Alcacer
closely. "What I suffer mostly from, strange to say, is cold."

Mrs. Travers and Lingard were waiting near the gangway. To everybody's
extreme surprise Mr. Travers addressed his wife first.

"You were always laughing at people's crazes," was what he said, "and
now you have a craze of your own. But we won't discuss that."

D'Alcacer passed on, raising his cap to Mrs. Travers, and went down the
ship's side into the boat. Jorgenson had vanished in his own manner like
an exorcised ghost, and Lingard, stepping back, left husband and wife
face to face.

"Did you think I was going to make a fuss?" asked Mr. Travers in a very
low voice. "I assure you I would rather go than stay here. You didn't
think that? You have lost all sense of reality, of probability. I was
just thinking this evening that I would rather be anywhere than here
looking on at you. At your folly. . . ."

Mrs. Travers' loud, "Martin!" made Lingard wince, caused d'Alcacer
to lift his head down there in the boat, and even Jorgenson, forward
somewhere out of sight, ceased mumbling in his moustache. The only
person who seemed not to have heard that exclamation was Mr. Travers
himself, who continued smoothly:

". . . at the aberration of your mind, you who seemed so superior to
common credulities. You are not yourself, not at all, and some day you
will admit to me that . . . No, the best thing will be to forget it, as
you will soon see yourself. We shall never mention that subject in the
future. I am certain you will be only too glad to agree with me on that
point."

"How far ahead are you looking?" asked Mrs. Travers, finding her voice
and even the very tone in which she would have addressed him had they
been about to part in the hall of their town house. She might have been
asking him at what time he expected to be home, while a footman held the
door open and the brougham waited in the street.

"Not very far. This can't last much longer." Mr. Travers made a movement
as if to leave her exactly as though he were rather pressed to keep
an appointment. "By the by," he said, checking himself, "I suppose the
fellow understands thoroughly that we are wealthy. He could hardly doubt
that."

"It's the last thought that would enter his head," said Mrs. Travers.

"Oh, yes, just so," Mr. Travers allowed a little impatience to pierce
under his casual manner. "But I don't mind telling you that I have had
enough of this. I am prepared to make--ah!--to make concessions. A large
pecuniary sacrifice. Only the whole position is so absurd! He might
conceivably doubt my good faith. Wouldn't it be just as well if you,
with your particular influence, would hint to him that with me he would
have nothing to fear? I am a man of my word."

"That is the first thing he would naturally think of any man," said Mrs.
Travers.

"Will your eyes never be opened?" Mr. Travers began, irritably, then
gave it up. "Well, so much the better then. I give you a free hand."

"What made you change your attitude like this?" asked Mrs. Travers,
suspiciously.

"My regard for you," he answered without hesitation.

"I intended to join you in your captivity. I was just trying to persuade
him. . . ."

"I forbid you absolutely," whispered Mr. Travers, forcibly. "I am glad
to get away. I don't want to see you again till your craze is over."

She was confounded by his secret vehemence. But instantly succeeding his
fierce whisper came a short, inane society laugh and a much louder, "Not
that I attach any importance . . ."

He sprang away, as it were, from his wife, and as he went over the
gangway waved his hand to her amiably.

Lighted dimly by the lantern on the roof of the deckhouse Mrs. Travers
remained very still with lowered head and an aspect of profound
meditation. It lasted but an instant before she moved off and brushing
against Lingard passed on with downcast eyes to her deck cabin. Lingard
heard the door shut. He waited awhile, made a movement toward the
gangway but checked himself and followed Mrs. Travers into her cabin.

It was pitch dark in there. He could see absolutely nothing and was
oppressed by the profound stillness unstirred even by the sound of
breathing.

"I am going on shore," he began, breaking the black and deathlike
silence enclosing him and the invisible woman. "I wanted to say
good-bye."

"You are going on shore," repeated Mrs. Travers. Her voice was
emotionless, blank, unringing.

"Yes, for a few hours, or for life," Lingard said in measured tones. "I
may have to die with them or to die maybe for others. For you, if I
only knew how to manage it, I would want to live. I am telling you this
because it is dark. If there had been a light in here I wouldn't have
come in."

"I wish you had not," uttered the same unringing woman's voice. "You are
always coming to me with those lives and those deaths in your hand."

"Yes, it's too much for you," was Lingard's undertoned comment. "You
could be no other than true. And you are innocent! Don't wish me life,
but wish me luck, for you are innocent--and you will have to take your
chance."

"All luck to you, King Tom," he heard her say in the darkness in which
he seemed now to perceive the gleam of her hair. "I will take my chance.
And try not to come near me again for I am weary of you."

"I can well believe it," murmured Lingard, and stepped out of the cabin,
shutting the door after him gently. For half a minute, perhaps, the
stillness continued, and then suddenly the chair fell over in the
darkness. Next moment Mrs. Travers' head appeared in the light of the
lamp left on the roof of the deckhouse. Her bare arms grasped the door
posts.

"Wait a moment," she said, loudly, into the shadows of the deck. She
heard no footsteps, saw nothing moving except the vanishing white shape
of the late Captain H. C. Jorgenson, who was indifferent to the life of
men. "Wait, King Tom!" she insisted, raising her voice; then, "I didn't
mean it. Don't believe me!" she cried, recklessly.

For the second time that night a woman's voice startled the hearts of
men on board the Emma. All except the heart of old Jorgenson. The Malays
in the boat looked up from their thwarts. D'Alcacer, sitting in the
stern sheets beside Lingard, felt a sinking of his heart.

"What's this?" he exclaimed. "I heard your name on deck. You are wanted,
I think."

"Shove off," ordered Lingard, inflexibly, without even looking at
d'Alcacer. Mr. Travers was the only one who didn't seem to be aware
of anything. A long time after the boat left the Emma's side he leaned
toward d'Alcacer.

"I have a most extraordinary feeling," he said in a cautious undertone.
"I seem to be in the air--I don't know. Are we on the water, d'Alcacer?
Are you quite sure? But of course, we are on the water."

"Yes," said d'Alcacer, in the same tone. "Crossing the Styx--perhaps."
He heard Mr. Travers utter an unmoved "Very likely," which he did not
expect. Lingard, his hand on the tiller, sat like a man of stone.

"Then your point of view has changed," whispered d'Alcacer.

"I told my wife to make an offer," went on the earnest whisper of the
other man. "A sum of money. But to tell you the truth I don't believe
very much in its success."

D'Alcacer made no answer and only wondered whether he didn't like better
Mr. Travers' other, unreasonable mood. There was no denying the fact
that Mr. Travers was a troubling person. Now he suddenly gripped
d'Alcacer's fore-arm and added under his breath: "I doubt everything. I
doubt whether the offer will ever be made."

All this was not very impressive. There was something pitiful in it:
whisper, grip, shudder, as of a child frightened in the dark. But the
emotion was deep. Once more that evening, but this time aroused by the
husband's distress, d'Alcacer's wonder approached the borders of awe.



PART VI. THE CLAIM OF LIFE AND THE TOLL OF DEATH

I

"Have you got King Tom's watch in there?" said a voice that seemed not
to attach the slightest importance to the question. Jorgenson, outside
the door of Mrs. Travers' part of the deckhouse, waited for the answer.
He heard a low cry very much like a moan, the startled sound of pain
that may be sometimes heard in sick rooms. But it moved him not at all.
He would never have dreamt of opening the door unless told to do so,
in which case he would have beheld, with complete indifference, Mrs.
Travers extended on the floor with her head resting on the edge of the
camp bedstead (on which Lingard had never slept), as though she had
subsided there from a kneeling posture which is the attitude of prayer,
supplication, or defeat. The hours of the night had passed Mrs. Travers
by. After flinging herself on her knees, she didn't know why, since she
could think of nothing to pray for, had nothing to invoke, and was too
far gone for such a futile thing as despair, she had remained there till
the sense of exhaustion had grown on her to the point in which she lost
her belief in her power to rise. In a half-sitting attitude, her head
resting against the edge of the couch and her arms flung above her head,
she sank into an indifference, the mere resignation of a worn-out body
and a worn-out mind which often is the only sort of rest that comes to
people who are desperately ill and is welcome enough in a way. The voice
of Jorgenson roused her out of that state. She sat up, aching in every
limb and cold all over.

Jorgenson, behind the door, repeated with lifeless obstinacy:

"Do you see King Tom's watch in there?"

Mrs. Travers got up from the floor. She tottered, snatching at the air,
and found the back of the armchair under her hand.

"Who's there?"

She was also ready to ask: "Where am I?" but she remembered and at once
became the prey of that active dread which had been lying dormant for
a few hours in her uneasy and prostrate body. "What time is it?" she
faltered out.

"Dawn," pronounced the imperturbable voice at the door. It seemed to
her that it was a word that could make any heart sink with apprehension.
Dawn! She stood appalled. And the toneless voice outside the door
insisted:

"You must have Tom's watch there!"

"I haven't seen it," she cried as if tormented by a dream.

"Look in that desk thing. If you push open the shutter you will be able
to see."

Mrs. Travers became aware of the profound darkness of the cabin.
Jorgenson heard her staggering in there. After a moment a woman's voice,
which struck even him as strange, said in faint tones:

"I have it. It's stopped."

"It doesn't matter. I don't want to know the time. There should be a key
about. See it anywhere?"

"Yes, it's fastened to the watch," the dazed voice answered from within.
Jorgenson waited before making his request. "Will you pass it out to me?
There's precious little time left now!"

The door flew open, which was certainly something Jorgenson had not
expected. He had expected but a hand with the watch protruded through
a narrow crack, But he didn't start back or give any other sign of
surprise at seeing Mrs. Travers fully dressed. Against the faint
clearness in the frame of the open shutter she presented to him the dark
silhouette of her shoulders surmounted by a sleek head, because her
hair was still in the two plaits. To Jorgenson Mrs. Travers in her
un-European dress had always been displeasing, almost monstrous. Her
stature, her gestures, her general carriage struck his eye as
absurdly incongruous with a Malay costume, too ample, too free, too
bold--offensive. To Mrs. Travers, Jorgenson, in the dusk of the passage,
had the aspect of a dim white ghost, and he chilled her by his ghost's
aloofness.

He picked up the watch from her outspread palm without a word of thanks,
only mumbling in his moustache, "H'm, yes, that's it. I haven't yet
forgotten how to count seconds correctly, but it's better to have a
watch."

She had not the slightest notion what he meant. And she did not care.
Her mind remained confused and the sense of bodily discomfort oppressed
her. She whispered, shamefacedly, "I believe I've slept."

"I haven't," mumbled Jorgenson, growing more and more distinct to her
eyes. The brightness of the short dawn increased rapidly as if the sun
were impatient to look upon the Settlement. "No fear of that," he added,
boastfully.

It occurred to Mrs. Travers that perhaps she had not slept either. Her
state had been more like an imperfect, half-conscious, quivering death.
She shuddered at the recollection.

"What an awful night," she murmured, drearily.

There was nothing to hope for from Jorgenson. She expected him to
vanish, indifferent, like a phantom of the dead carrying off the
appropriately dead watch in his hand for some unearthly purpose.
Jorgenson didn't move. His was an insensible, almost a senseless
presence! Nothing could be extorted from it. But a wave of anguish as
confused as all her other sensations swept Mrs. Travers off her feet.

"Can't you tell me something?" she cried.

For half a minute perhaps Jorgenson made no sound; then: "For years
I have been telling anybody who cared to ask," he mumbled in his
moustache. "Telling Tom, too. And Tom knew what he wanted to do. How's
one to know what _you_ are after?"

She had never expected to hear so many words from that rigid shadow. Its
monotonous mumble was fascinating, its sudden loquacity was shocking.
And in the profound stillness that reigned outside it was as if there
had been no one left in the world with her but the phantom of that old
adventurer. He was heard again: "What I could tell you would be worse
than poison."

Mrs. Travers was not familiar with Jorgenson's consecrated phrases. The
mechanical voice, the words themselves, his air of abstraction appalled
her. And he hadn't done yet; she caught some more of his unconcerned
mumbling: "There is nothing I don't know," and the absurdity of the
statement was also appalling. Mrs. Travers gasped and with a wild little
laugh:

"Then you know why I called after King Tom last night."

He glanced away along his shoulder through the door of the deckhouse at
the growing brightness of the day. She did so, too. It was coming. It
had come! Another day! And it seemed to Mrs. Travers a worse calamity
than any discovery she had made in her life, than anything she could
have imagined to come to her. The very magnitude of horror steadied her,
seemed to calm her agitation as some kinds of fatal drugs do before they
kill. She laid a steady hand on Jorgenson's sleeve and spoke quietly,
distinctly, urgently.

"You were on deck. What I want to know is whether I was heard?"

"Yes," said Jorgenson, absently, "I heard you." Then, as if roused a
little, he added less mechanically: "The whole ship heard you."

Mrs. Travers asked herself whether perchance she had not simply
screamed. It had never occurred to her before that perhaps she had. At
the time it seemed to her she had no strength for more than a whisper.
Had she been really so loud? And the deadly chill, the night that had
gone by her had left in her body, vanished from her limbs, passed out of
her in a flush. Her face was turned away from the light, and that
fact gave her courage to continue. Moreover, the man before her was so
detached from the shames and prides and schemes of life that he seemed
not to count at all, except that somehow or other he managed at times to
catch the mere literal sense of the words addressed to him--and answer
them. And answer them! Answer unfailingly, impersonally, without any
feeling.

"You saw Tom--King Tom? Was he there? I mean just then, at the moment.
There was a light at the gangway. Was he on deck?"

"No. In the boat."

"Already? Could I have been heard in the boat down there? You say the
whole ship heard me--and I don't care. But could he hear me?"

"Was it Tom you were after?" said Jorgenson in the tone of a negligent
remark.

"Can't you answer me?" she cried, angrily.

"Tom was busy. No child's play. The boat shoved off," said Jorgenson, as
if he were merely thinking aloud.

"You won't tell me, then?" Mrs. Travers apostrophized him, fearlessly.
She was not afraid of Jorgenson. Just then she was afraid of nothing and
nobody. And Jorgenson went on thinking aloud.

"I guess he will be kept busy from now on and so shall I."

Mrs. Travers seemed ready to take by the shoulders and shake that
dead-voiced spectre till it begged for mercy. But suddenly her strong
white arms fell down by her side, the arms of an exhausted woman.

"I shall never, never find out," she whispered to herself.

She cast down her eyes in intolerable humiliation, in intolerable
desire, as though she had veiled her face. Not a sound reached the
loneliness of her thought. But when she raised her eyes again Jorgenson
was no longer standing before her.

For an instant she saw him all black in the brilliant and narrow
doorway, and the next moment he had vanished outside, as if devoured by
the hot blaze of light. The sun had risen on the Shore of Refuge.

When Mrs. Travers came out on deck herself it was as it were with a
boldly unveiled face, with wide-open and dry, sleepless eyes. Their
gaze, undismayed by the sunshine, sought the innermost heart of things
each day offered to the passion of her dread and of her impatience. The
lagoon, the beach, the colours and the shapes struck her more than ever
as a luminous painting on an immense cloth hiding the movements of an
inexplicable life. She shaded her eyes with her hand. There were figures
on the beach, moving dark dots on the white semicircle bounded by the
stockades, backed by roof ridges above the palm groves. Further back the
mass of carved white coral on the roof of the mosque shone like a white
day-star. Religion and politics--always politics! To the left, before
Tengga's enclosure, the loom of fire had changed into a pillar of smoke.
But there were some big trees over there and she couldn't tell whether
the night council had prolonged its sitting. Some vague forms were still
moving there and she could picture them to herself: Daman, the supreme
chief of sea-robbers, with a vengeful heart and the eyes of a gazelle;
Sentot, the sour fanatic with the big turban, that other saint with
a scanty loin cloth and ashes in his hair, and Tengga whom she could
imagine from hearsay, fat, good-tempered, crafty, but ready to spill
blood on his ambitious way and already bold enough to flaunt a yellow
state umbrella at the very gate of Belarab's stockade--so they said.

She saw, she imagined, she even admitted now the reality of those
things no longer a mere pageant marshalled for her vision with barbarous
splendour and savage emphasis. She questioned it no longer--but she did
not feel it in her soul any more than one feels the depth of the sea
under its peaceful glitter or the turmoil of its grey fury. Her eyes
ranged afar, unbelieving and fearful--and then all at once she became
aware of the empty Cage with its interior in disorder, the camp
bedsteads not taken away, a pillow lying on the deck, the dying flame
like a shred of dull yellow stuff inside the lamp left hanging over
the table. The whole struck her as squalid and as if already decayed,
a flimsy and idle phantasy. But Jorgenson, seated on the deck with his
back to it, was not idle. His occupation, too, seemed fantastic and so
truly childish that her heart sank at the man's utter absorption in it.
Jorgenson had before him, stretched on the deck, several bits of rather
thin and dirty-looking rope of different lengths from a couple of inches
to about a foot. He had (an idiot might have amused himself in that
way) set fire to the ends of them. They smouldered with amazing energy,
emitting now and then a splutter, and in the calm air within the
bulwarks sent up very slender, exactly parallel threads of smoke,
each with a vanishing curl at the end; and the absorption with which
Jorgenson gave himself up to that pastime was enough to shake all
confidence in his sanity.

In one half-opened hand he was holding the watch. He was also provided
with a scrap of paper and the stump of a pencil. Mrs. Travers was
confident that he did not either hear or see her.

"Captain Jorgenson, you no doubt think. . . ."

He tried to wave her away with the stump of the pencil. He did not want
to be interrupted in his strange occupation. He was playing very gravely
indeed with those bits of string. "I lighted them all together," he
murmured, keeping one eye on the dial of the watch. Just then the
shortest piece of string went out, utterly consumed. Jorgenson made
a hasty note and remained still while Mrs. Travers looked at him with
stony eyes thinking that nothing in the world was any use. The other
threads of smoke went on vanishing in spirals before the attentive
Jorgenson.

"What are you doing?" asked Mrs. Travers, drearily.

"Timing match . . . precaution. . . ."

He had never in Mrs. Travers' experience been less spectral than then.
He displayed a weakness of the flesh. He was impatient at her intrusion.
He divided his attention between the threads of smoke and the face of
the watch with such interest that the sudden reports of several guns
breaking for the first time for days the stillness of the lagoon and the
illusion of the painted scene failed to make him raise his head. He only
jerked it sideways a little. Mrs. Travers stared at the wisps of
white vapour floating above Belarab's stockade. The series of sharp
detonations ceased and their combined echoes came back over the lagoon
like a long-drawn and rushing sigh.

"What's this?" cried Mrs. Travers.

"Belarab's come home," said Jorgenson.

The last thread of smoke disappeared and Jorgenson got up. He had lost
all interest in the watch and thrust it carelessly into his pocket,
together with the bit of paper and the stump of pencil. He had resumed
his aloofness from the life of men, but approaching the bulwark he
condescended to look toward Belarab's stockade.

"Yes, he is home," he said very low.

"What's going to happen?" cried Mrs. Travers. "What's to be done?"
Jorgenson kept up his appearance of communing with himself.

"I know what to do," he mumbled.

"You are lucky," said Mrs. Travers, with intense bitterness.

It seemed to her that she was abandoned by all the world. The opposite
shore of the lagoon had resumed its aspect of a painted scene that would
never roll up to disclose the truth behind its blinding and soulless
splendour. It seemed to her that she had said her last words to all of
them: to d'Alcacer, to her husband, to Lingard himself--and that they
had all gone behind the curtain forever out of her sight. Of all the
white men Jorgenson alone was left, that man who had done with life so
completely that his mere presence robbed it of all heat and mystery,
leaving nothing but its terrible, its revolting insignificance. And Mrs.
Travers was ready for revolt. She cried with suppressed passion:

"Are you aware, Captain Jorgenson, that I am alive?"

He turned his eyes on her, and for a moment she was daunted by their
cold glassiness. But before they could drive her away, something like
the gleam of a spark gave them an instant's animation.

"I want to go and join them. I want to go ashore," she said, firmly.
"There!"

Her bare and extended arm pointed across the lagoon, and Jorgenson's
resurrected eyes glided along the white limb and wandered off into
space.

"No boat," he muttered.

"There must be a canoe. I know there is a canoe. I want it."

She stepped forward compelling, commanding, trying to concentrate in
her glance all her will power, the sense of her own right to dispose of
herself and her claim to be served to the last moment of her life. It
was as if she had done nothing. Jorgenson didn't flinch.

"Which of them are you after?" asked his blank, unringing voice.

She continued to look at him; her face had stiffened into a severe mask;
she managed to say distinctly:

"I suppose you have been asking yourself that question for some time,
Captain Jorgenson?"

"No. I am asking you now."

His face disclosed nothing to Mrs. Travers' bold and weary eyes.
"What could you do over there?" Jorgenson added as merciless, as
irrepressible, and sincere as though he were the embodiment of that
inner voice that speaks in all of us at times and, like Jorgenson, is
offensive and difficult to answer.

"Remember that I am not a shadow but a living woman still, Captain
Jorgenson. I can live and I can die. Send me over to share their fate."

"Sure you would like?" asked the roused Jorgenson in a voice that had an
unexpected living quality, a faint vibration which no man had known in
it for years. "There may be death in it," he mumbled, relapsing into
indifference.

"Who cares?" she said, recklessly. "All I want is to ask Tom a question
and hear his answer. That's what I would like. That's what I must have."



II

Along the hot and gloomy forest path, neglected, overgrown and strangled
in the fierce life of the jungle, there came a faint rustle of leaves.
Jaffir, the servant of princes, the messenger of great men, walked,
stooping, with a broad chopper in his hand. He was naked from the waist
upward, his shoulders and arms were scratched and bleeding. A multitude
of biting insects made a cloud about his head. He had lost his costly
and ancient head-kerchief, and when in a slightly wider space he stopped
in a listening attitude anybody would have taken him for a fugitive.

He waved his arms about, slapping his shoulders, the sides of his head,
his heaving flanks; then, motionless, listened again for a while. A
sound of firing, not so much made faint by distance as muffled by the
masses of foliage, reached his ears, dropping shots which he could have
counted if he had cared to. "There is fighting in the forest already,"
he thought. Then putting his head low in the tunnel of vegetation he
dashed forward out of the horrible cloud of flies, which he actually
managed for an instant to leave behind him. But it was not from the
cruelty of insects that he was flying, for no man could hope to drop
that escort, and Jaffir in his life of a faithful messenger had been
accustomed, if such an extravagant phrase may be used, to be eaten
alive. Bent nearly double he glided and dodged between the trees,
through the undergrowth, his brown body streaming with sweat, his firm
limbs gleaming like limbs of imperishable bronze through the mass
of green leaves that are forever born and forever dying. For all his
desperate haste he was no longer a fugitive; he was simply a man in a
tremendous hurry. His flight, which had begun with a bound and a rush
and a general display of great presence of mind, was a simple issue
from a critical situation. Issues from critical situations are generally
simple if one is quick enough to think of them in time. He became aware
very soon that the attempt to pursue him had been given up, but he had
taken the forest path and had kept up his pace because he had left his
Rajah and the lady Immada beset by enemies on the edge of the forest, as
good as captives to a party of Tengga's men.

Belarab's hesitation had proved too much even for Hassim's hereditary
patience in such matters. It is but becoming that weighty negotiations
should be spread over many days, that the same requests and arguments
should be repeated in the same words, at many successive interviews, and
receive the same evasive answers. Matters of state demand the dignity of
such a procedure as if time itself had to wait on the power and wisdom
of rulers. Such are the proceedings of embassies and the dignified
patience of envoys. But at this time of crisis Hassim's impatience
obtained the upper hand; and though he never departed from the tradition
of soft speech and restrained bearing while following with his sister in
the train of the pious Belarab, he had his moments of anger, of anxiety,
of despondency. His friendships, his future, his country's destinies
were at stake, while Belarab's camp wandered deviously over the back
country as if influenced by the vacillation of the ruler's thought, the
very image of uncertain fate.

Often no more than the single word "Good" was all the answer vouchsafed
to Hassim's daily speeches. The lesser men, companions of the Chief,
treated him with deference; but Hassim could feel the opposition from
the women's side of the camp working against his cause in subservience
to the mere caprice of the new wife, a girl quite gentle and kind to her
dependents, but whose imagination had run away with her completely and
had made her greedy for the loot of the yacht from mere simplicity and
innocence. What could Hassim, that stranger, wandering and poor, offer
for her acceptance? Nothing. The wealth of his far-off country was but
an idle tale, the talk of an exile looking for help.

At night Hassim had to listen to the anguished doubts of Immada, the
only companion of his life, child of the same mother, brave as a man,
but in her fears a very woman. She whispered them to him far into the
night while the camp of the great Belarab was hushed in sleep and the
fires had sunk down to mere glowing embers. Hassim soothed her gravely.
But he, too, was a native of Wajo where men are more daring and quicker
of mind than other Malays. More energetic, too, and energy does not go
without an inner fire. Hassim lost patience and one evening he declared
to his sister Immada: "To-morrow we leave this ruler without a mind and
go back to our white friend."

Therefore next morning, letting the camp move on the direct road to
the settlement, Hassim and Immada took a course of their own. It was
a lonely path between the jungle and the clearings. They had two
attendants with them, Hassim's own men, men of Wajo; and so the lady
Immada, when she had a mind to, could be carried, after the manner of
the great ladies of Wajo who need not put foot to the ground unless they
like. The lady Immada, accustomed to the hardships that are the lot
of exiles, preferred to walk, but from time to time she let herself
be carried for a short distance out of regard for the feelings of her
attendants. The party made good time during the early hours, and Hassim
expected confidently to reach before evening the shore of the lagoon
at a spot very near the stranded Emma. At noon they rested in the shade
near a dark pool within the edge of the forest; and it was there that
Jaffir met them, much to his and their surprise. It was the occasion
of a long talk. Jaffir, squatting on his heels, discoursed in measured
tones. He had entranced listeners. The story of Carter's exploit amongst
the Shoals had not reached Belarab's camp. It was a great shock to
Hassim, but the sort of half smile with which he had been listening to
Jaffir never altered its character. It was the Princess Immada who cried
out in distress and wrung her hands. A deep silence fell.

Indeed, before the fatal magnitude of the fact it seemed even to those
Malays that there was nothing to say and Jaffir, lowering his head,
respected his Prince's consternation. Then, before that feeling could
pass away from that small group of people seated round a few smouldering
sticks, the noisy approach of a large party of men made them all leap
to their feet. Before they could make another movement they perceived
themselves discovered. The men were armed as if bound on some warlike
expedition. Amongst them Sentot, in his loin cloth and with unbound wild
locks, capered and swung his arms about like the lunatic he was. The
others' astonishment made them halt, but their attitude was obviously
hostile. In the rear a portly figure flanked by two attendants carrying
swords was approaching prudently. Rajah Hassim resumed quietly his seat
on the trunk of a fallen tree, Immada rested her hand lightly on her
brother's shoulder, and Jaffir, squatting down again, looked at the
ground with all his faculties and every muscle of his body tensely on
the alert.

"Tengga's fighters," he murmured, scornfully.

In the group somebody shouted, and was answered by shouts from afar.
There could be no thought of resistance. Hassim slipped the emerald
ring from his finger stealthily and Jaffir got hold of it by an almost
imperceptible movement. The Rajah did not even look at the trusty
messenger.

"Fail not to give it to the white man," he murmured. "Thy servant hears,
O Rajah. It's a charm of great power."

The shadows were growing to the westward. Everybody was silent, and
the shifting group of armed men seemed to have drifted closer. Immada,
drawing the end of a scarf across her face, confronted the advance
with only one eye exposed. On the flank of the armed men Sentot was
performing a slow dance but he, too, seemed to have gone dumb.

"Now go," breathed out Rajah Hassim, his gaze levelled into space
immovably.

For a second or more Jaffir did not stir, then with a sudden leap from
his squatting posture he flew through the air and struck the jungle in
a great commotion of leaves, vanishing instantly like a swimmer diving
from on high. A deep murmur of surprise arose in the armed party, a
spear was thrown, a shot was fired, three or four men dashed into the
forest, but they soon returned crestfallen with apologetic smiles; while
Jaffir, striking an old path that seemed to lead in the right direction,
ran on in solitude, raising a rustle of leaves, with a naked parang in
his hand and a cloud of flies about his head. The sun declining to the
westward threw shafts of light across his dark path. He ran at a springy
half-trot, his eyes watchful, his broad chest heaving, and carrying
the emerald ring on the forefinger of a clenched hand as though he were
afraid it should slip off, fly off, be torn from him by an invisible
force, or spirited away by some enchantment. Who could tell what
might happen? There were evil forces at work in the world, powerful
incantations, horrible apparitions. The messenger of princes and of
great men, charged with the supreme appeal of his master, was afraid
in the deepening shade of the forest. Evil presences might have been
lurking in that gloom. Still the sun had not set yet. He could see its
face through the leaves as he skirted the shore of the lagoon. But what
if Allah's call should come to him suddenly and he die as he ran!

He drew a long breath on the shore of the lagoon within about a hundred
yards from the stranded bows of the Emma. The tide was out and he
walked to the end of a submerged log and sent out a hail for a boat.
Jorgenson's voice answered. The sun had sunk behind the forest belt of
the coast. All was still as far as the eye could reach over the black
water. A slight breeze came along it and Jaffir on the brink, waiting
for a canoe, shivered a little.

At the same moment Carter, exhausted by thirty hours of uninterrupted
toil at the head of whites and Malays in getting the yacht afloat,
dropped into Mrs. Travers' deck chair, on board the Hermit, said to the
devoted Wasub: "Let a good watch be kept to-night, old man," glanced
contentedly at the setting sun and fell asleep.



III

There was in the bows of the Emma an elevated grating over the heel of
her bowsprit whence the eye could take in the whole range of her
deck and see every movement of her crew. It was a spot safe from
eaves-droppers, though, of course, exposed to view. The sun had just set
on the supreme content of Carter when Jorgenson and Jaffir sat down
side by side between the knightheads of the Emma and, public but
unapproachable, impressive and secret, began to converse in low tones.

Every Wajo fugitive who manned the hulk felt the approach of a decisive
moment. Their minds were made up and their hearts beat steadily. They
were all desperate men determined to fight and to die and troubling not
about the manner of living or dying. This was not the case with Mrs.
Travers who, having shut herself up in the deckhouse, was profoundly
troubled about those very things, though she, too, felt desperate enough
to welcome almost any solution.

Of all the people on board she alone did not know anything of that
conference. In her deep and aimless thinking she had only become aware
of the absence of the slightest sound on board the Emma. Not a rustle,
not a footfall. The public view of Jorgenson and Jaffir in deep
consultation had the effect of taking all wish to move from every man.

Twilight enveloped the two figures forward while they talked, looking in
the stillness of their pose like carved figures of European and Asiatic
contrasted in intimate contact. The deepening dusk had nearly effaced
them when at last they rose without warning, as it were, and thrilling
the heart of the beholders by the sudden movement. But they did not
separate at once. They lingered in their high place as if awaiting the
fall of complete darkness, a fit ending to their mysterious communion.
Jaffir had given Jorgenson the whole story of the ring, the symbol of a
friendship matured and confirmed on the night of defeat, on the night of
flight from a far-distant land sleeping unmoved under the wrath and fire
of heaven.

"Yes, Tuan," continued Jaffir, "it was first sent out to the white man,
on a night of mortal danger, a present to remember a friend by. I was
the bearer of it then even as I am now. Then, as now, it was given to me
and I was told to save myself and hand the ring over in confirmation of
my message. I did so and that white man seemed to still the very storm
to save my Rajah. He was not one to depart and forget him whom he had
once called his friend. My message was but a message of good-bye, but
the charm of the ring was strong enough to draw all the power of that
white man to the help of my master. Now I have no words to say. Rajah
Hassim asks for nothing. But what of that? By the mercy of Allah all
things are the same, the compassion of the Most High, the power of
the ring, the heart of the white man. Nothing is changed, only the
friendship is a little older and love has grown because of the shared
dangers and long companionship. Therefore, Tuan, I have no fear. But how
am I to get the ring to the Rajah Laut? Just hand it to him. The last
breath would be time enough if they were to spear me at his feet. But
alas! the bush is full of Tengga's men, the beach is open and I could
never even hope to reach the gate."

Jorgenson, with his hands deep in the pockets of his tunic, listened,
looking down. Jaffir showed as much consternation as his nature was
capable of.

"Our refuge is with God," he murmured. "But what is to be done? Has your
wisdom no stratagem, O Tuan?"

Jorgenson did not answer. It appeared as though he had no stratagem. But
God is great and Jaffir waited on the other's immobility, anxious but
patient, perplexed yet hopeful in his grim way, while the night flowing
on from the dark forest near by hid their two figures from the sight
of observing men. Before the silence of Jorgenson Jaffir began to talk
practically. Now that Tengga had thrown off the mask Jaffir did not
think that he could land on the beach without being attacked, captured,
nay killed, since a man like he, though he could save himself by taking
flight at the order of his master, could not be expected to surrender
without a fight. He mentioned that in the exercise of his important
functions he knew how to glide like a shadow, creep like a snake, and
almost burrow his way underground. He was Jaffir who had never been
foiled. No bog, morass, great river or jungle could stop him. He would
have welcomed them. In many respects they were the friends of a crafty
messenger. But that was an open beach, and there was no other way, and
as things stood now every bush around, every tree trunk, every deep
shadow of house or fence would conceal Tengga's men or such of Daman's
infuriated partisans as had already made their way to the Settlement.
How could he hope to traverse the distance between the water's edge
and Belarab's gate which now would remain shut night and day? Not only
himself but anybody from the Emma would be sure to be rushed upon and
speared in twenty places.

He reflected for a moment in silence.

"Even you, Tuan, could not accomplish the feat."

"True," muttered Jorgenson.

When, after a period of meditation, he looked round, Jaffir was no
longer by his side. He had descended from the high place and was
probably squatting on his heels in some dark nook on the fore deck.
Jorgenson knew Jaffir too well to suppose that he would go to sleep.
He would sit there thinking himself into a state of fury, then get away
from the Emma in some way or other, go ashore and perish fighting. He
would, in fact, run amok; for it looked as if there could be no way out
of the situation. Then, of course, Lingard would know nothing of Hassim
and Immada's captivity for the ring would never reach him--the ring that
could tell its own tale. No, Lingard would know nothing. He would know
nothing about anybody outside Belarab's stockade till the end came,
whatever the end might be, for all those people that lived the life of
men. Whether to know or not to know would be good for Lingard Jorgenson
could not tell. He admitted to himself that here there was something
that he, Jorgenson, could not tell. All the possibilities were wrapped
up in doubt, uncertain, like all things pertaining to the life of men.
It was only when giving a short thought to himself that Jorgenson had no
doubt. He, of course, would know what to do.

On the thin face of that old adventurer hidden in the night not a
feature moved, not a muscle twitched, as he descended in his turn and
walked aft along the decks of the Emma. His faded eyes, which had seen
so much, did not attempt to explore the night, they never gave a glance
to the silent watchers against whom he brushed. Had a light been flashed
on him suddenly he would have appeared like a man walking in his sleep:
the somnambulist of an eternal dream. Mrs. Travers heard his footsteps
pass along the side of the deckhouse. She heard them--and let her head
fall again on her bare arms thrown over the little desk before which she
sat.

Jorgenson, standing by the taffrail, noted the faint reddish glow in the
massive blackness of the further shore. Jorgenson noted things quickly,
cursorily, perfunctorily, as phenomena unrelated to his own apparitional
existence of a visiting ghost. They were but passages in the game of men
who were still playing at life. He knew too well how much that game was
worth to be concerned about its course. He had given up the habit
of thinking for so long that the sudden resumption of it irked him
exceedingly, especially as he had to think on toward a conclusion. In
that world of eternal oblivion, of which he had tasted before Lingard
made him step back into the life of men, all things were settled
once for all. He was irritated by his own perplexity which was like a
reminder of that mortality made up of questions and passions from which
he had fancied he had freed himself forever. By a natural association
his contemptuous annoyance embraced the existence of Mrs. Travers, too,
for how could he think of Tom Lingard, of what was good or bad for King
Tom, without thinking also of that woman who had managed to put the
ghost of a spark even into his own extinguished eyes? She was of no
account; but Tom's integrity was. It was of Tom that he had to think, of
what was good or bad for Tom in that absurd and deadly game of his life.
Finally he reached the conclusion that to be given the ring would be
good for Tom Lingard. Just to be given the ring and no more. The ring
and no more.

"It will help him to make up his mind," muttered Jorgenson in his
moustache, as if compelled by an obscure conviction. It was only then
that he stirred slightly and turned away from the loom of the fires on
the distant shore. Mrs. Travers heard his footsteps passing again along
the side of the deckhouse--and this time never raised her head. That
man was sleepless, mad, childish, and inflexible. He was impossible. He
haunted the decks of that hulk aimlessly. . . .

It was, however, in pursuance of a very distinct aim that Jorgenson had
gone forward again to seek Jaffir.

The first remark he had to offer to Jaffir's consideration was that
the only person in the world who had the remotest chance of reaching
Belarab's gate on that night was that tall white woman the Rajah Laut
had brought on board, the wife of one of the captive white chiefs.
Surprise made Jaffir exclaim, but he wasn't prepared to deny that. It
was possible that for many reasons, some quite simple and others very
subtle, those sons of the Evil One belonging to Tengga and Daman would
refrain from killing a white woman walking alone from the water's
edge to Belarab's gate. Yes, it was just possible that she might walk
unharmed.

"Especially if she carried a blazing torch," muttered Jorgenson in his
moustache. He told Jaffir that she was sitting now in the dark, mourning
silently in the manner of white women. She had made a great outcry in
the morning to be allowed to join the white men on shore. He, Jorgenson,
had refused her the canoe. Ever since she had secluded herself in the
deckhouse in great distress.

Jaffir listened to it all without particular sympathy. And when
Jorgenson added, "It is in my mind, O Jaffir, to let her have her will
now," he answered by a "Yes, by Allah! let her go. What does it matter?"
of the greatest unconcern, till Jorgenson added:

"Yes. And she may carry the ring to the Rajah Laut."

Jorgenson saw Jaffir, the grim and impassive Jaffir, give a perceptible
start. It seemed at first an impossible task to persuade Jaffir to part
with the ring. The notion was too monstrous to enter his mind, to move
his heart. But at last he surrendered in an awed whisper, "God is great.
Perhaps it is her destiny."

Being a Wajo man he did not regard women as untrustworthy or unequal
to a task requiring courage and judgment. Once he got over the personal
feeling he handed the ring to Jorgenson with only one reservation, "You
know, Tuan, that she must on no account put it on her finger."

"Let her hang it round her neck," suggested Jorgenson, readily.

As Jorgenson moved toward the deckhouse it occurred to him that perhaps
now that woman Tom Lingard had taken in tow might take it into her head
to refuse to leave the Emma. This did not disturb him very much. All
those people moved in the dark. He himself at that particular moment was
moving in the dark. Beyond the simple wish to guide Lingard's thought in
the direction of Hassim and Immada, to help him to make up his mind at
last to a ruthless fidelity to his purpose Jorgenson had no other aim.
The existence of those whites had no meaning on earth. They were the
sort of people that pass without leaving footprints. That woman would
have to act in ignorance. And if she refused to go then in ignorance she
would have to stay on board. He would tell her nothing.

As a matter of fact, he discovered that Mrs. Travers would simply have
nothing to do with him. She would not listen to what he had to say. She
desired him, a mere weary voice confined in the darkness of the deck
cabin, to go away and trouble her no more. But the ghost of Jorgenson
was not easily exorcised. He, too, was a mere voice in the outer
darkness, inexorable, insisting that she should come out on deck and
listen. At last he found the right words to say.

"It is something about Tom that I want to tell you. You wish him well,
don't you?"

After this she could not refuse to come out on deck, and once there she
listened patiently to that white ghost muttering and mumbling above her
drooping head.

"It seems to me, Captain Jorgenson," she said after he had ceased,
"that you are simply trifling with me. After your behaviour to me this
morning, I can have nothing to say to you."

"I have a canoe for you now," mumbled Jorgenson.

"You have some new purpose in view now," retorted Mrs. Travers with
spirit. "But you won't make it clear to me. What is it that you have in
your mind?"

"Tom's interest."

"Are you really his friend?"

"He brought me here. You know it. He has talked a lot to you."

"He did. But I ask myself whether you are capable of being anybody's
friend."

"You ask yourself!" repeated Jorgenson, very quiet and morose. "If I am
not his friend I should like to know who is."

Mrs. Travers asked, quickly: "What's all this about a ring? What ring?"

"Tom's property. He has had it for years."

"And he gave it to you? Doesn't he care for it?"

"Don't know. It's just a thing."

"But it has a meaning as between you and him. Is that so?"

"Yes. It has. He will know what it means."

"What does it mean?"

"I am too much his friend not to hold my tongue."

"What! To me!"

"And who are you?" was Jorgenson's unexpected remark. "He has told you
too much already."

"Perhaps he has," whispered Mrs. Travers, as if to herself. "And you
want that ring to be taken to him?" she asked, in a louder tone.

"Yes. At once. For his good."

"Are you certain it is for his good? Why can't you. . . ."

She checked herself. That man was hopeless. He would never tell
anything and there was no means of compelling him. He was invulnerable,
unapproachable. . . . He was dead.

"Just give it to him," mumbled Jorgenson as though pursuing a mere fixed
idea. "Just slip it quietly into his hand. He will understand."

"What is it? Advice, warning, signal for action?"

"It may be anything," uttered Jorgenson, morosely, but as it were in a
mollified tone. "It's meant for his good."

"Oh, if I only could trust that man!" mused Mrs. Travers, half aloud.

Jorgenson's slight noise in the throat might have been taken for an
expression of sympathy. But he remained silent.

"Really, this is most extraordinary!" cried Mrs. Travers, suddenly
aroused. "Why did you come to me? Why should it be my task? Why should
you want me specially to take it to him?"

"I will tell you why," said Jorgenson's blank voice. "It's because there
is no one on board this hulk that can hope to get alive inside that
stockade. This morning you told me yourself that you were ready to
die--for Tom--or with Tom. Well, risk it then. You are the only one that
has half a chance to get through--and Tom, maybe, is waiting."

"The only one," repeated Mrs. Travers with an abrupt movement forward
and an extended hand before which Jorgenson stepped back a pace. "Risk
it! Certainly! Where's that mysterious ring?"

"I have got it in my pocket," said Jorgenson, readily; yet nearly half
a minute elapsed before Mrs. Travers felt the characteristic shape being
pressed into her half-open palm. "Don't let anybody see it," Jorgenson
admonished her in a murmur. "Hide it somewhere about you. Why not hang
it round your neck?"

Mrs. Travers' hand remained firmly closed on the ring. "Yes, that will
do," she murmured, hastily. "I'll be back in a moment. Get everything
ready." With those words she disappeared inside the deckhouse and
presently threads of light appeared in the interstices of the boards.
Mrs. Travers had lighted a candle in there. She was busy hanging that
ring round her neck. She was going. Yes--taking the risk for Tom's sake.

"Nobody can resist that man," Jorgenson muttered to himself with
increasing moroseness. "_I_ couldn't."


IV

Jorgenson, after seeing the canoe leave the ship's side, ceased to live
intellectually. There was no need for more thinking, for any display
of mental ingenuity. He had done with it all. All his notions were
perfectly fixed and he could go over them in the same ghostly way in
which he haunted the deck of the Emma. At the sight of the ring Lingard
would return to Hassim and Immada, now captives, too, though Jorgenson
certainly did not think them in any serious danger. What had happened
really was that Tengga was now holding hostages, and those Jorgenson
looked upon as Lingard's own people. They were his. He had gone in with
them deep, very deep. They had a hold and a claim on King Tom just as
many years ago people of that very race had had a hold and a claim
on him, Jorgenson. Only Tom was a much bigger man. A very big man.
Nevertheless, Jorgenson didn't see why he should escape his own
fate--Jorgenson's fate--to be absorbed, captured, made their own either
in failure or in success. It was an unavoidable fatality and Jorgenson
felt certain that the ring would compel Lingard to face it without
flinching. What he really wanted Lingard to do was to cease to take the
slightest interest in those whites--who were the sort of people that
left no footprints.

Perhaps at first sight, sending that woman to Lingard was not the best
way toward that end. Jorgenson, however, had a distinct impression in
which his morning talk with Mrs. Travers had only confirmed him, that
those two had quarrelled for good. As, indeed, was unavoidable. What did
Tom Lingard want with any woman? The only woman in Jorgenson's life had
come in by way of exchange for a lot of cotton stuffs and several
brass guns. This fact could not but affect Jorgenson's judgment since
obviously in this case such a transaction was impossible. Therefore
the case was not serious. It didn't exist. What did exist was Lingard's
relation to the Wajo exiles, a great and warlike adventure such as no
rover in those seas had ever attempted.

That Tengga was much more ready to negotiate than to fight, the old
adventurer had not the slightest doubt. How Lingard would deal with him
was not a concern of Jorgenson's. That would be easy enough. Nothing
prevented Lingard from going to see Tengga and talking to him with
authority. All that ambitious person really wanted was to have a share
in Lingard's wealth, in Lingard's power, in Lingard's friendship. A year
before Tengga had once insinuated to Jorgenson, "In what way am I less
worthy of being a friend than Belarab?"

It was a distinct overture, a disclosure of the man's innermost mind.
Jorgenson, of course, had met it with a profound silence. His task was
not diplomacy but the care of stores.

After the effort of connected mental processes in order to bring about
Mrs. Travers' departure he was anxious to dismiss the whole matter from
his mind. The last thought he gave to it was severely practical. It
occurred to him that it would be advisable to attract in some way or
other Lingard's attention to the lagoon. In the language of the sea
a single rocket is properly a signal of distress, but, in the
circumstances, a group of three sent up simultaneously would convey a
warning. He gave his orders and watched the rockets go up finely with a
trail of red sparks, a bursting of white stars high up in the air, and
three loud reports in quick succession. Then he resumed his pacing of
the whole length of the hulk, confident that after this Tom would guess
that something was up and set a close watch over the lagoon. No doubt
these mysterious rockets would have a disturbing effect on Tengga and
his friends and cause a great excitement in the Settlement; but for that
Jorgenson did not care. The Settlement was already in such a turmoil
that a little more excitement did not matter. What Jorgenson did not
expect, however, was the sound of a musket-shot fired from the jungle
facing the bows of the Emma. It caused him to stop dead short. He had
heard distinctly the bullet strike the curve of the bow forward. "Some
hot-headed ass fired that," he said to himself, contemptuously. It
simply disclosed to him the fact that he was already besieged on the
shore side and set at rest his doubts as to the length Tengga was
prepared to go. Any length! Of course there was still time for Tom to
put everything right with six words, unless . . . Jorgenson smiled,
grimly, in the dark and resumed his tireless pacing.

What amused him was to observe the fire which had been burning night
and day before Tengga's residence suddenly extinguished. He pictured
to himself the wild rush with bamboo buckets to the lagoon shore, the
confusion, the hurry and jostling in a great hissing of water midst
clouds of steam. The image of the fat Tengga's consternation appealed to
Jorgenson's sense of humour for about five seconds. Then he took up the
binoculars from the roof of the deckhouse.

The bursting of the three white stars over the lagoon had given him
a momentary glimpse of the black speck of the canoe taking over Mrs.
Travers. He couldn't find it again with the glass, it was too dark; but
the part of the shore for which it was steered would be somewhere near
the angle of Belarab's stockade nearest to the beach. This Jorgenson
could make out in the faint rosy glare of fires burning inside.
Jorgenson was certain that Lingard was looking toward the Emma through
the most convenient loophole he could find.

As obviously Mrs. Travers could not have paddled herself across, two men
were taking her over; and for the steersman she had Jaffir. Though he
had assented to Jorgenson's plan Jaffir was anxious to accompany the
ring as near as possible to its destination. Nothing but dire necessity
had induced him to part with the talisman. Crouching in the stern and
flourishing his paddle from side to side he glared at the back of the
canvas deck-chair which had been placed in the middle for Mrs. Travers.
Wrapped up in the darkness she reclined in it with her eyes closed,
faintly aware of the ring hung low on her breast. As the canoe was
rather large it was moving very slowly. The two men dipped their paddles
without a splash: and surrendering herself passively, in a temporary
relaxation of all her limbs, to this adventure Mrs. Travers had no sense
of motion at all. She, too, like Jorgenson, was tired of thinking. She
abandoned herself to the silence of that night full of roused passions
and deadly purposes. She abandoned herself to an illusory feeling; to
the impression that she was really resting. For the first time in many
days she could taste the relief of being alone. The men with her were
less than nothing. She could not speak to them; she could not understand
them; the canoe might have been moving by enchantment--if it did move
at all. Like a half-conscious sleeper she was on the verge of saying to
herself, "What a strange dream I am having."

The low tones of Jaffir's voice stole into it quietly telling the men to
cease paddling, and the long canoe came to a rest slowly, no more than
ten yards from the beach. The party had been provided with a torch which
was to be lighted before the canoe touched the shore, thus giving a
character of openness to this desperate expedition. "And if it draws
fire on us," Jaffir had commented to Jorgenson, "well, then, we shall
see whose fate it is to die on this night."

"Yes," had muttered Jorgenson. "We shall see."

Jorgenson saw at last the small light of the torch against the blackness
of the stockade. He strained his hearing for a possible volley of
musketry fire but no sound came to him over the broad surface of the
lagoon. Over there the man with the torch, the other paddler, and Jaffir
himself impelling with a gentle motion of his paddle the canoe toward
the shore, had the glistening eyeballs and the tense faces of silent
excitement. The ruddy glare smote Mrs. Travers' closed eyelids but she
didn't open her eyes till she felt the canoe touch the strand. The two
men leaped instantly out of it. Mrs. Travers rose, abruptly. Nobody made
a sound. She stumbled out of the canoe on to the beach and almost before
she had recovered her balance the torch was thrust into her hand.
The heat, the nearness of the blaze confused and blinded her till,
instinctively, she raised the torch high above her head. For a moment
she stood still, holding aloft the fierce flame from which a few sparks
were falling slowly.

A naked bronze arm lighted from above pointed out the direction and Mrs.
Travers began to walk toward the featureless black mass of the stockade.
When after a few steps she looked back over her shoulder, the lagoon,
the beach, the canoe, the men she had just left had become already
invisible. She was alone bearing up a blazing torch on an earth that was
a dumb shadow shifting under her feet. At last she reached firmer ground
and the dark length of the palisade untouched as yet by the light of the
torch seemed to her immense, intimidating. She felt ready to drop from
sheer emotion. But she moved on.

"A little more to the left," shouted a strong voice.

It vibrated through all her fibres, rousing like the call of a trumpet,
went far beyond her, filled all the space. Mrs. Travers stood still for
a moment, then casting far away from her the burning torch ran forward
blindly with her hands extended toward the great sound of Lingard's
voice, leaving behind her the light flaring and spluttering on the
ground. She stumbled and was only saved from a fall by her hands coming
in contact with the rough stakes. The stockade rose high above her
head and she clung to it with widely open arms, pressing her whole body
against the rugged surface of that enormous and unscalable palisade. She
heard through it low voices inside, heavy thuds; and felt at every blow
a slight vibration of the ground under her feet. She glanced fearfully
over her shoulder and saw nothing in the darkness but the expiring glow
of the torch she had thrown away and the sombre shimmer of the lagoon
bordering the opaque darkness of the shore. Her strained eyeballs seemed
to detect mysterious movements in the darkness and she gave way to
irresistible terror, to a shrinking agony of apprehension. Was she to be
transfixed by a broad blade, to the high, immovable wall of wood against
which she was flattening herself desperately, as though she could hope
to penetrate it by the mere force of her fear? She had no idea where
she was, but as a matter of fact she was a little to the left of the
principal gate and almost exactly under one of the loopholes of the
stockade. Her excessive anguish passed into insensibility. She ceased to
hear, to see, and even to feel the contact of the surface to which
she clung. Lingard's voice somewhere from the sky above her head was
directing her, distinct, very close, full of concern.

"You must stoop low. Lower yet."

The stagnant blood of her body began to pulsate languidly. She stooped
low--lower yet--so low that she had to sink on her knees, and then
became aware of a faint smell of wood smoke mingled with the confused
murmur of agitated voices. This came to her through an opening no higher
than her head in her kneeling posture, and no wider than the breadth of
two stakes. Lingard was saying in a tone of distress:

"I couldn't get any of them to unbar the gate."

She was unable to make a sound.--"Are you there?" Lingard asked,
anxiously, so close to her now that she seemed to feel the very breath
of his words on her face. It revived her completely; she understood what
she had to do. She put her head and shoulders through the opening, was
at once seized under the arms by an eager grip and felt herself pulled
through with an irresistible force and with such haste that her scarf
was dragged off her head, its fringes having caught in the rough timber.
The same eager grip lifted her up, stood her on her feet without her
having to make any exertion toward that end. She became aware that
Lingard was trying to say something, but she heard only a confused
stammering expressive of wonder and delight in which she caught the
words "You . . . you . . ." deliriously repeated. He didn't release his
hold of her; his helpful and irresistible grip had changed into a close
clasp, a crushing embrace, the violent taking possession by an embodied
force that had broken loose and was not to be controlled any longer.
As his great voice had done a moment before, his great strength,
too, seemed able to fill all space in its enveloping and undeniable
authority. Every time she tried instinctively to stiffen herself against
its might, it reacted, affirming its fierce will, its uplifting power.
Several times she lost the feeling of the ground and had a sensation of
helplessness without fear, of triumph without exultation. The inevitable
had come to pass. She had foreseen it--and all the time in that dark
place and against the red glow of camp fires within the stockade the
man in whose arms she struggled remained shadowy to her eyes--to her
half-closed eyes. She thought suddenly, "He will crush me to death
without knowing it."

He was like a blind force. She closed her eyes altogether. Her head fell
back a little. Not instinctively but with wilful resignation and as
it were from a sense of justice she abandoned herself to his arms. The
effect was as though she had suddenly stabbed him to the heart. He let
her go so suddenly and completely that she would have fallen down in
a heap if she had not managed to catch hold of his forearm. He seemed
prepared for it and for a moment all her weight hung on it without
moving its rigidity by a hair's breadth. Behind her Mrs. Travers heard
the heavy thud of blows on wood, the confused murmurs and movements of
men.

A voice said suddenly, "It's done," with such emphasis that though,
of course, she didn't understand the words it helped her to regain
possession of herself; and when Lingard asked her very little above a
whisper: "Why don't you say something?" she answered readily, "Let me
get my breath first."

Round them all sounds had ceased. The men had secured again the
opening through which those arms had snatched her into a moment of
self-forgetfulness which had left her out of breath but uncrushed. As
if something imperative had been satisfied she had a moment of inward
serenity, a period of peace without thought while, holding to that arm
that trembled no more than an arm of iron, she felt stealthily over the
ground for one of the sandals which she had lost. Oh, yes, there was no
doubt of it, she had been carried off the earth, without shame, without
regret. But she would not have let him know of that dropped sandal for
anything in the world. That lost sandal was as symbolic as a dropped
veil. But he did not know of it. He must never know. Where was that
thing? She felt sure that they had not moved an inch from that spot.
Presently her foot found it and still gripping Lingard's forearm she
stooped to secure it properly. When she stood up, still holding his arm,
they confronted each other, he rigid in an effort of self-command but
feeling as if the surges of the heaviest sea that he could remember in
his life were running through his heart; and the woman as if emptied
of all feeling by her experience, without thought yet, but beginning to
regain her sense of the situation and the memory of the immediate past.

"I have been watching at that loophole for an hour, ever since they came
running to me with that story of the rockets," said Lingard. "I was shut
up with Belarab then. I was looking out when the torch blazed and you
stepped ashore. I thought I was dreaming. But what could I do? I felt I
must rush to you but I dared not. That clump of palms is full of men. So
are the houses you saw that time you came ashore with me. Full of men.
Armed men. A trigger is soon pulled and when once shooting begins. . . .
And you walking in the open with that light above your head! I didn't
dare. You were safer alone. I had the strength to hold myself in and
watch you come up from the shore. No! No man that ever lived had seen
such a sight. What did you come for?"

"Didn't you expect somebody? I don't mean me, I mean a messenger?"

"No!" said Lingard, wondering at his own self-control. "Why did he let
you come?"

"You mean Captain Jorgenson? Oh, he refused at first. He said that he
had your orders."

"How on earth did you manage to get round him?" said Lingard in his
softest tones.

"I did not try," she began and checked herself. Lingard's question,
though he really didn't seem to care much about an answer, had aroused
afresh her suspicion of Jorgenson's change of front. "I didn't have
to say very much at the last," she continued, gasping yet a little and
feeling her personality, crushed to nothing in the hug of those arms,
expand again to its full significance before the attentive immobility
of that man. "Captain Jorgenson has always looked upon me as a nuisance.
Perhaps he had made up his mind to get rid of me even against your
orders. Is he quite sane?"

She released her firm hold of that iron forearm which fell slowly
by Lingard's side. She had regained fully the possession of her
personality. There remained only a fading, slightly breathless
impression of a short flight above that earth on which her feet were
firmly planted now. "And is that all?" she asked herself, not bitterly,
but with a sort of tender contempt.

"He is so sane," sounded Lingard's voice, gloomily, "that if I had
listened to him you would not have found me here."

"What do you mean by here? In this stockade?"

"Anywhere," he said.

"And what would have happened then?"

"God knows," he answered. "What would have happened if the world had not
been made in seven days? I have known you for just about that time. It
began by me coming to you at night--like a thief in the night. Where the
devil did I hear that? And that man you are married to thinks I am no
better than a thief."

"It ought to be enough for you that I never made a mistake as to what
you are, that I come to you in less than twenty-four hours after you
left me contemptuously to my distress. Don't pretend you didn't hear me
call after you. Oh, yes, you heard. The whole ship heard me for I had no
shame."

"Yes, you came," said Lingard, violently. "But have you really come? I
can't believe my eyes! Are you really here?"

"This is a dark spot, luckily," said Mrs. Travers. "But can you really
have any doubt?" she added, significantly.

He made a sudden movement toward her, betraying so much passion that
Mrs. Travers thought, "I shan't come out alive this time," and yet he
was there, motionless before her, as though he had never stirred. It
was more as though the earth had made a sudden movement under his feet
without being able to destroy his balance. But the earth under Mrs.
Travers' feet had made no movement and for a second she was overwhelmed
by wonder not at this proof of her own self-possession but at the man's
immense power over himself. If it had not been for her strange inward
exhaustion she would perhaps have surrendered to that power. But it
seemed to her that she had nothing in her worth surrendering, and it
was in a perfectly even tone that she said, "Give me your arm, Captain
Lingard. We can't stay all night on this spot."

As they moved on she thought, "There is real greatness in that man."
He was great even in his behaviour. No apologies, no explanations, no
abasement, no violence, and not even the slightest tremor of the frame
holding that bold and perplexed soul. She knew that for certain because
her fingers were resting lightly on Lingard's arm while she walked
slowly by his side as though he were taking her down to dinner. And yet
she couldn't suppose for a moment, that, like herself, he was emptied of
all emotion. She never before was so aware of him as a dangerous force.
"He is really ruthless," she thought. They had just left the shadow of
the inner defences about the gate when a slightly hoarse, apologetic
voice was heard behind them repeating insistently, what even Mrs.
Travers' ear detected to be a sort of formula. The words were: "There
is this thing--there is this thing--there is this thing." They turned
round.

"Oh, my scarf," said Mrs. Travers.

A short, squat, broad-faced young fellow having for all costume a pair
of white drawers was offering the scarf thrown over both his arms, as
if they had been sticks, and holding it respectfully as far as possible
from his person. Lingard took it from him and Mrs. Travers claimed it
at once. "Don't forget the proprieties," she said. "This is also my face
veil."

She was arranging it about her head when Lingard said, "There is no
need. I am taking you to those gentlemen."--"I will use it all the
same," said Mrs. Travers. "This thing works both ways, as a matter of
propriety or as a matter of precaution. Till I have an opportunity of
looking into a mirror nothing will persuade me that there isn't some
change in my face." Lingard swung half round and gazed down at her.
Veiled now she confronted him boldly. "Tell me, Captain Lingard, how
many eyes were looking at us a little while ago?"

"Do you care?" he asked.

"Not in the least," she said. "A million stars were looking on, too, and
what did it matter? They were not of the world I know. And it's just the
same with the eyes. They are not of the world I live in."

Lingard thought: "Nobody is." Never before had she seemed to him more
unapproachable, more different and more remote. The glow of a number of
small fires lighted the ground only, and brought out the black bulk
of men lying down in the thin drift of smoke. Only one of these fires,
rather apart and burning in front of the house which was the quarter of
the prisoners, might have been called a blaze and even that was not a
great one. It didn't penetrate the dark space between the piles and the
depth of the verandah above where only a couple of heads and the glint
of a spearhead could be seen dimly in the play of the light. But down
on the ground outside, the black shape of a man seated on a bench had
an intense relief. Another intensely black shadow threw a handful of
brushwood on the fire and went away. The man on the bench got up. It was
d'Alcacer. He let Lingard and Mrs. Travers come quite close up to him.
Extreme surprise seemed to have made him dumb.

"You didn't expect . . ." began Mrs. Travers with some embarrassment
before that mute attitude.

"I doubted my eyes," struck in d'Alcacer, who seemed embarrassed, too.
Next moment he recovered his tone and confessed simply: "At the moment
I wasn't thinking of you, Mrs. Travers." He passed his hand over his
forehead. "I hardly know what I was thinking of."

In the light of the shooting-up flame Mrs. Travers could see d'Alcacer's
face. There was no smile on it. She could not remember ever seeing him
so grave and, as it were, so distant. She abandoned Lingard's arm and
moved closer to the fire.

"I fancy you were very far away, Mr. d'Alcacer," she said.

"This is the sort of freedom of which nothing can deprive us," he
observed, looking hard at the manner in which the scarf was drawn across
Mrs. Travers' face. "It's possible I was far away," he went on, "but I
can assure you that I don't know where I was. Less than an hour ago we
had a great excitement here about some rockets, but I didn't share in
it. There was no one I could ask a question of. The captain here was,
I understood, engaged in a most momentous conversation with the king or
the governor of this place."

He addressed Lingard, directly. "May I ask whether you have reached any
conclusion as yet? That Moor is a very dilatory person, I believe."

"Any direct attack he would, of course, resist," said Lingard. "And, so
far, you are protected. But I must admit that he is rather angry with
me. He's tired of the whole business. He loves peace above anything in
the world. But I haven't finished with him yet."

"As far as I understood from what you told me before," said Mr.
d'Alcacer, with a quick side glance at Mrs. Travers' uncovered and
attentive eyes, "as far as I can see he may get all the peace he wants
at once by driving us two, I mean Mr. Travers and myself, out of the
gate on to the spears of those other enraged barbarians. And there are
some of his counsellors who advise him to do that very thing no later
than the break of day I understand."

Lingard stood for a moment perfectly motionless.

"That's about it," he said in an unemotional tone, and went away with
a heavy step without giving another look at d'Alcacer and Mrs. Travers,
who after a moment faced each other.

"You have heard?" said d'Alcacer. "Of course that doesn't affect your
fate in any way, and as to him he is much too prestigious to be killed
light-heartedly. When all this is over you will walk triumphantly on his
arm out of this stockade; for there is nothing in all this to affect his
greatness, his absolute value in the eyes of those people--and indeed in
any other eyes." D'Alcacer kept his glance averted from Mrs. Travers and
as soon as he had finished speaking busied himself in dragging the bench
a little way further from the fire. When they sat down on it he kept his
distance from Mrs. Travers. She made no sign of unveiling herself and
her eyes without a face seemed to him strangely unknown and disquieting.

"The situation in a nutshell," she said. "You have arranged it all
beautifully, even to my triumphal exit. Well, and what then? No, you
needn't answer, it has no interest. I assure you I came here not with
any notion of marching out in triumph, as you call it. I came here, to
speak in the most vulgar way, to save your skin--and mine."

Her voice came muffled to d'Alcacer's ears with a changed character,
even to the very intonation. Above the white and embroidered scarf her
eyes in the firelight transfixed him, black and so steady that even the
red sparks of the reflected glare did not move in them. He concealed the
strong impression she made. He bowed his head a little.

"I believe you know perfectly well what you are doing."

"No! I don't know," she said, more quickly than he had ever heard her
speak before. "First of all, I don't think he is so safe as you imagine.
Oh, yes, he has prestige enough, I don't question that. But you are
apportioning life and death with too much assurance. . . ."

"I know my portion," murmured d'Alcacer, gently. A moment of silence
fell in which Mrs. Travers' eyes ended by intimidating d'Alcacer,
who looked away. The flame of the fire had sunk low. In the dark
agglomeration of buildings, which might have been called Belarab's
palace, there was a certain animation, a flitting of people, voices
calling and answering, the passing to and fro of lights that would
illuminate suddenly a heavy pile, the corner of a house, the eaves of a
low-pitched roof, while in the open parts of the stockade the armed men
slept by the expiring fires.

Mrs. Travers said, suddenly, "That Jorgenson is not friendly to us."

"Possibly."

With clasped hands and leaning over his knees d'Alcacer had assented
in a very low tone. Mrs. Travers, unobserved, pressed her hands to her
breast and felt the shape of the ring, thick, heavy, set with a big
stone. It was there, secret, hung against her heart, and enigmatic. What
did it mean? What could it mean? What was the feeling it could arouse or
the action it could provoke? And she thought with compunction that she
ought to have given it to Lingard at once, without thinking, without
hesitating. "There! This is what I came for. To give you this." Yes, but
there had come an interval when she had been able to think of nothing,
and since then she had had the time to reflect--unfortunately. To
remember Jorgenson's hostile, contemptuous glance enveloping her from
head to foot at the break of a day after a night of lonely anguish. And
now while she sat there veiled from his keen sight there was that other
man, that d'Alcacer, prophesying. O yes, triumphant. She knew already
what that was. Mrs. Travers became afraid of the ring. She felt ready to
pluck it from her neck and cast it away.

"I mistrust him," she said.--"You do!" exclaimed d'Alcacer,
very low.--"I mean that Jorgenson. He seems a merciless sort of
creature."--"He is indifferent to everything," said d'Alcacer.--"It may
be a mask."--"Have you some evidence, Mrs. Travers?"

"No," said Mrs. Travers without hesitation. "I have my instinct."

D'Alcacer remained silent for a while as though he were pursuing another
train of thought altogether, then in a gentle, almost playful tone: "If
I were a woman," he said, turning to Mrs. Travers, "I would always trust
my intuition."--"If you were a woman, Mr. d'Alcacer, I would not be
speaking to you in this way because then I would be suspect to you."

The thought that before long perhaps he would be neither man nor woman
but a lump of cold clay, crossed d'Alcacer's mind, which was living,
alert, and unsubdued by the danger. He had welcomed the arrival of Mrs.
Travers simply because he had been very lonely in that stockade, Mr.
Travers having fallen into a phase of sulks complicated with shivering
fits. Of Lingard d'Alcacer had seen almost nothing since they had
landed, for the Man of Fate was extremely busy negotiating in the
recesses of Belarab's main hut; and the thought that his life was being
a matter of arduous bargaining was not agreeable to Mr. d'Alcacer. The
Chief's dependents and the armed men garrisoning the stockade paid very
little attention to him apparently, and this gave him the feeling of his
captivity being very perfect and hopeless. During the afternoon, while
pacing to and fro in the bit of shade thrown by the glorified sort of
hut inside which Mr. Travers shivered and sulked misanthropically, he
had been aware of the more distant verandahs becoming filled now and
then by the muffled forms of women of Belarab's household taking a
distant and curious view of the white man. All this was irksome. He
found his menaced life extremely difficult to get through. Yes, he
welcomed the arrival of Mrs. Travers who brought with her a tragic note
into the empty gloom.

"Suspicion is not in my nature, Mrs. Travers, I assure you, and I
hope that you on your side will never suspect either my reserve or my
frankness. I respect the mysterious nature of your conviction but hasn't
Jorgenson given you some occasion to. . ."

"He hates me," said Mrs. Travers, and frowned at d'Alcacer's incipient
smile. "It isn't a delusion on my part. The worst is that he hates me
not for myself. I believe he is completely indifferent to my existence.
Jorgenson hates me because as it were I represent you two who are in
danger, because it is you two that are the trouble and I . . . Well!"

"Yes, yes, that's certain," said d'Alcacer, hastily. "But Jorgenson is
wrong in making you the scapegoat. For if you were not here cool reason
would step in and would make Lingard pause in his passion to make a king
out of an exile. If we were murdered it would certainly make some stir
in the world in time and he would fall under the suspicion of complicity
with those wild and inhuman Moors. Who would regard the greatness of his
day-dreams, his engaged honour, his chivalrous feelings? Nothing could
save him from that suspicion. And being what he is, you understand me,
Mrs. Travers (but you know him much better than I do), it would morally
kill him."

"Heavens!" whispered Mrs. Travers. "This has never occurred to me."
Those words seemed to lose themselves in the folds of the scarf without
reaching d'Alcacer, who continued in his gentle tone:

'"However, as it is, he will be safe enough whatever happens. He will
have your testimony to clear him."

Mrs. Travers stood up, suddenly, but still careful to keep her face
covered, she threw the end of the scarf over her shoulder.

"I fear that Jorgenson," she cried with suppressed passion. "One can't
understand what that man means to do. I think him so dangerous that if I
were, for instance, entrusted with a message bearing on the situation, I
would . . . suppress it."

D'Alcacer was looking up from the seat, full of wonder. Mrs. Travers
appealed to him in a calm voice through the folds of the scarf:

"Tell me, Mr. d'Alcacer, you who can look on it calmly, wouldn't I be
right?"

"Why, has Jorgenson told you anything?"

"Directly--nothing, except a phrase or two which really I could not
understand. They seemed to have a hidden sense and he appeared to attach
some mysterious importance to them that he dared not explain to me."

"That was a risk on his part," exclaimed d'Alcacer. "And he trusted you.
Why you, I wonder!"

"Who can tell what notions he has in his head? Mr. d'Alcacer, I believe
his only object is to call Captain Lingard away from us. I understood it
only a few minutes ago. It has dawned upon me. All he wants is to call
him off."

"Call him off," repeated d'Alcacer, a little bewildered by the aroused
fire of her conviction. "I am sure I don't want him called off any more
than you do; and, frankly, I don't believe Jorgenson has any such power.
But upon the whole, and if you feel that Jorgenson has the power, I
would--yes, if I were in your place I think I would suppress anything I
could not understand."

Mrs. Travers listened to the very end. Her eyes--they appeared
incredibly sombre to d'Alcacer--seemed to watch the fall of every
deliberate word and after he had ceased they remained still for an
appreciable time. Then she turned away with a gesture that seemed to
say: "So be it."

D'Alcacer raised his voice suddenly after her. "Stay! Don't forget that
not only your husband's but my head, too, is being played at that game.
My judgment is not . . ."

She stopped for a moment and freed her lips. In the profound stillness
of the courtyard her clear voice made the shadows at the nearest fires
stir a little with low murmurs of surprise.

"Oh, yes, I remember whose heads I have to save," she cried. "But in all
the world who is there to save that man from himself?"



V

D'Alcacer sat down on the bench again. "I wonder what she knows," he
thought, "and I wonder what I have done." He wondered also how far he
had been sincere and how far affected by a very natural aversion from
being murdered obscurely by ferocious Moors with all the circumstances
of barbarity. It was a very naked death to come upon one suddenly. It
was robbed of all helpful illusions, such as the free will of a suicide,
the heroism of a warrior, or the exaltation of a martyr. "Hadn't I
better make some sort of fight of it?" he debated with himself. He saw
himself rushing at the naked spears without any enthusiasm. Or wouldn't
it be better to go forth to meet his doom (somewhere outside the
stockade on that horrible beach) with calm dignity. "Pah! I shall be
probably speared through the back in the beastliest possible fashion,"
he thought with an inward shudder. It was certainly not a shudder of
fear, for Mr. d'Alcacer attached no high value to life. It was a shudder
of disgust because Mr. d'Alcacer was a civilized man and though he had
no illusions about civilization he could not but admit the superiority
of its methods. It offered to one a certain refinement of form, a
comeliness of proceedings and definite safeguards against deadly
surprises. "How idle all this is," he thought, finally. His next thought
was that women were very resourceful. It was true, he went on meditating
with unwonted cynicism, that strictly speaking they had only one
resource but, generally, it served--it served.

He was surprised by his supremely shameless bitterness at this juncture.
It was so uncalled for. This situation was too complicated to be
entrusted to a cynical or shameless hope. There was nothing to trust to.
At this moment of his meditation he became aware of Lingard's approach.
He raised his head eagerly. D'Alcacer was not indifferent to his fate
and even to Mr. Travers' fate. He would fain learn. . . . But one look
at Lingard's face was enough. "It's no use asking him anything," he said
to himself, "for he cares for nothing just now."

Lingard sat down heavily on the other end of the bench, and d'Alcacer,
looking at his profile, confessed to himself that this was the most
masculinely good-looking face he had ever seen in his life. It was
an expressive face, too, but its present expression was also beyond
d'Alcacer's past experience. At the same time its quietness set up a
barrier against common curiosities and even common fears. No, it was
no use asking him anything. Yet something should be said to break the
spell, to call down again this man to the earth. But it was Lingard who
spoke first. "Where has Mrs. Travers gone?"

"She has gone . . . where naturally she would be anxious to go first of
all since she has managed to come to us," answered d'Alcacer, wording
his answer with the utmost regard for the delicacy of the situation.

The stillness of Lingard seemed to have grown even more impressive. He
spoke again.

"I wonder what those two can have to say to each other."

He might have been asking that of the whole darkened part of the globe,
but it was d'Alcacer who answered in his courteous tones.

"Would it surprise you very much, Captain Lingard, if I were to tell you
that those two people are quite fit to understand each other thoroughly?
Yes? It surprises you! Well, I assure you that seven thousand miles from
here nobody would wonder."

"I think I understand," said Lingard, "but don't you know the man is
light-headed? A man like that is as good as mad."

"Yes, he had been slightly delirious since seven o'clock," said
d'Alcacer. "But believe me, Captain Lingard," he continued, earnestly,
and obeying a perfectly disinterested impulse, "that even in his
delirium he is far more understandable to her and better able to
understand her than . . . anybody within a hundred miles from here."

"Ah!" said Lingard without any emotion, "so you don't wonder. You don't
see any reason for wonder."

"No, for, don't you see, I do know."

"What do you know?"

"Men and women, Captain Lingard, which you. . . ."

"I don't know any woman."

"You have spoken the strictest truth there," said d'Alcacer, and for the
first time Lingard turned his head slowly and looked at his neighbour on
the bench.

"Do you think she is as good as mad, too?" asked Lingard in a startled
voice.

D'Alcacer let escape a low exclamation. No, certainly he did not think
so. It was an original notion to suppose that lunatics had a sort of
common logic which made them understandable to each other. D'Alcacer
tried to make his voice as gentle as possible while he pursued: "No,
Captain Lingard, I believe the woman of whom we speak is and will always
remain in the fullest possession of herself."

Lingard, leaning back, clasped his hands round his knees. He seemed
not to be listening and d'Alcacer, pulling a cigarette case out of his
pocket, looked for a long time at the three cigarettes it contained. It
was the last of the provision he had on him when captured. D'Alcacer
had put himself on the strictest allowance. A cigarette was only to be
lighted on special occasions; and now there were only three left and
they had to be made to last till the end of life. They calmed, they
soothed, they gave an attitude. And only three left! One had to be
kept for the morning, to be lighted before going through the gate of
doom--the gate of Belarab's stockade. A cigarette soothed, it gave an
attitude. Was this the fitting occasion for one of the remaining two?
D'Alcacer, a true Latin, was not afraid of a little introspection. In
the pause he descended into the innermost depths of his being, then
glanced up at the night sky. Sportsman, traveller, he had often looked
up at the stars before to see how time went. It was going very slowly.
He took out a cigarette, snapped-to the case, bent down to the embers.
Then he sat up and blew out a thin cloud of smoke. The man by his side
looked with his bowed head and clasped knee like a masculine rendering
of mournful meditation. Such attitudes are met with sometimes on the
sculptures of ancient tombs. D'Alcacer began to speak:

"She is a representative woman and yet one of those of whom there are
but very few at any time in the world. Not that they are very rare but
that there is but little room on top. They are the iridescent gleams on
a hard and dark surface. For the world is hard, Captain Lingard, it is
hard, both in what it will remember and in what it will forget. It
is for such women that people toil on the ground and underground and
artists of all sorts invoke their inspiration."

Lingard seemed not to have heard a word. His chin rested on his breast.
D'Alcacer appraised the remaining length of his cigarette and went on in
an equable tone through which pierced a certain sadness:

"No, there are not many of them. And yet they are all. They decorate our
life for us. They are the gracious figures on the drab wall which lies
on this side of our common grave. They lead a sort of ritual dance, that
most of us have agreed to take seriously. It is a very binding agreement
with which sincerity and good faith and honour have nothing to do.
Very binding. Woe to him or her who breaks it. Directly they leave the
pageant they get lost."

Lingard turned his head sharply and discovered d'Alcacer looking at him
with profound attention.

"They get lost in a maze," continued d'Alcacer, quietly. "They wander in
it lamenting over themselves. I would shudder at that fate for anything
I loved. Do you know, Captain Lingard, how people lost in a maze end?"
he went on holding Lingard by a steadfast stare. "No? . . . I will
tell you then. They end by hating their very selves, and they die in
disillusion and despair."

As if afraid of the force of his words d'Alcacer laid a soothing hand
lightly on Lingard's shoulder. But Lingard continued to look into the
embers at his feet and remained insensible to the friendly touch. Yet
d'Alcacer could not imagine that he had not been heard. He folded his
arms on his breast.

"I don't know why I have been telling you all this," he said,
apologetically. "I hope I have not been intruding on your thoughts."

"I can think of nothing," Lingard declared, unexpectedly. "I only know
that your voice was friendly; and for the rest--"

"One must get through a night like this somehow," said d'Alcacer.
"The very stars seem to lag on their way. It's a common belief that a
drowning man is irresistibly compelled to review his past experience.
Just now I feel quite out of my depth, and whatever I have said has come
from my experience. I am sure you will forgive me. All that it amounts
to is this: that it is natural for us to cry for the moon but it would
be very fatal to have our cries heard. For what could any one of us do
with the moon if it were given to him? I am speaking now of us--common
mortals."

It was not immediately after d'Alcacer had ceased speaking but only
after a moment that Lingard unclasped his fingers, got up, and walked
away. D'Alcacer followed with a glance of quiet interest the big,
shadowy form till it vanished in the direction of an enormous forest
tree left in the middle of the stockade. The deepest shade of the night
was spread over the ground of Belarab's fortified courtyard. The very
embers of the fires had turned black, showing only here and there a mere
spark; and the forms of the prone sleepers could hardly be distinguished
from the hard ground on which they rested, with their arms lying
beside them on the mats. Presently Mrs. Travers appeared quite close to
d'Alcacer, who rose instantly.

"Martin is asleep," said Mrs. Travers in a tone that seemed to have
borrowed something of the mystery and quietness of the night.

"All the world's asleep," observed d'Alcacer, so low that Mrs. Travers
barely caught the words, "Except you and me, and one other who has left
me to wander about in the night."

"Was he with you? Where has he gone?"

"Where it's darkest I should think," answered d'Alcacer, secretly. "It's
no use going to look for him; but if you keep perfectly still and hold
your breath you may presently hear his footsteps."

"What did he tell you?" breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"I didn't ask him anything. I only know that something has happened
which has robbed him of his power of thinking . . . Hadn't I better go
to the hut? Don Martin ought to have someone with him when he wakes up."
Mrs. Travers remained perfectly still and even now and then held her
breath with a vague fear of hearing those footsteps wandering in the
dark. D'Alcacer had disappeared. Again Mrs. Travers held her breath. No.
Nothing. Not a sound. Only the night to her eyes seemed to have grown
darker. Was that a footstep? "Where could I hide myself?" she thought.
But she didn't move.

After leaving d'Alcacer, Lingard threading his way between the fires
found himself under the big tree, the same tree against which Daman had
been leaning on the day of the great talk when the white prisoners had
been surrendered to Lingard's keeping on definite conditions. Lingard
passed through the deep obscurity made by the outspread boughs of the
only witness left there of a past that for endless ages had seen no
mankind on this shore defended by the Shallows, around this lagoon
overshadowed by the jungle. In the calm night the old giant, without
shudders or murmurs in its enormous limbs, saw the restless man drift
through the black shade into the starlight.

In that distant part of the courtyard there were only a few sentries
who, themselves invisible, saw Lingard's white figure pace to and fro
endlessly. They knew well who that was. It was the great white man. A
very great man. A very rich man. A possessor of fire-arms, who could
dispense valuable gifts and deal deadly blows, the friend of their
Ruler, the enemy of his enemies, known to them for years and always
mysterious. At their posts, flattened against the stakes near convenient
loopholes, they cast backward glances and exchanged faint whispers from
time to time.

Lingard might have thought himself alone. He had lost touch with the
world. What he had said to d'Alcacer was perfectly true. He had no
thought. He was in the state of a man who, having cast his eyes through
the open gates of Paradise, is rendered insensible by that moment's
vision to all the forms and matters of the earth; and in the extremity
of his emotion ceases even to look upon himself but as the subject of
a sublime experience which exalts or unfits, sanctifies or damns--he
didn't know which. Every shadowy thought, every passing sensation was
like a base intrusion on that supreme memory. He couldn't bear it.

When he had tried to resume his conversation with Belarab after Mrs.
Travers' arrival he had discovered himself unable to go on. He had just
enough self-control to break off the interview in measured terms. He
pointed out the lateness of the hour, a most astonishing excuse to
people to whom time is nothing and whose life and activities are not
ruled by the clock. Indeed Lingard hardly knew what he was saying or
doing when he went out again leaving everybody dumb with astonishment
at the change in his aspect and in his behaviour. A suspicious silence
reigned for a long time in Belarab's great audience room till the Chief
dismissed everybody by two quiet words and a slight gesture.

With her chin in her hand in the pose of a sybil trying to read the
future in the glow of dying embers, Mrs. Travers, without holding
her breath, heard quite close to her the footsteps which she had been
listening for with mingled alarm, remorse, and hope.

She didn't change her attitude. The deep red glow lighted her up dimly,
her face, the white hand hanging by her side, her feet in their sandals.
The disturbing footsteps stopped close to her.

"Where have you been all this time?" she asked, without looking round.

"I don't know," answered Lingard. He was speaking the exact truth.
He didn't know. Ever since he had released that woman from his arms
everything but the vaguest notions had departed from him. Events,
necessities, things--he had lost his grip on them all. And he didn't
care. They were futile and impotent; he had no patience with them. The
offended and astonished Belarab, d'Alcacer with his kindly touch and
friendly voice, the sleeping men, the men awake, the Settlement full of
unrestful life and the restless Shallows of the coast, were removed from
him into an immensity of pitying contempt. Perhaps they existed. Perhaps
all this waited for him. Well, let all this wait; let everything wait,
till to-morrow or to the end of time, which could now come at any moment
for all he cared--but certainly till to-morrow.

"I only know," he went on with an emphasis that made Mrs. Travers raise
her head, "that wherever I go I shall carry you with me--against my
breast."

Mrs. Travers' fine ear caught the mingled tones of suppressed exultation
and dawning fear, the ardour and the faltering of those words. She was
feeling still the physical truth at the root of them so strongly that
she couldn't help saying in a dreamy whisper:

"Did you mean to crush the life out of me?"

He answered in the same tone:

"I could not have done it. You are too strong. Was I rough? I didn't
mean to be. I have been often told I didn't know my own strength. You
did not seem able to get through that opening and so I caught hold
of you. You came away in my hands quite easily. Suddenly I thought to
myself, 'now I will make sure.'"

He paused as if his breath had failed him. Mrs. Travers dared not make
the slightest movement. Still in the pose of one in quest of hidden
truth she murmured, "Make sure?"

"Yes. And now I am sure. You are here--here! Before I couldn't tell."

"Oh, you couldn't tell before," she said.

"No."

"So it was reality that you were seeking."

He repeated as if speaking to himself: "And now I am sure."

Her sandalled foot, all rosy in the glow, felt the warmth of the embers.
The tepid night had enveloped her body; and still under the impression
of his strength she gave herself up to a momentary feeling of quietude
that came about her heart as soft as the night air penetrated by the
feeble clearness of the stars. "This is a limpid soul," she thought.

"You know I always believed in you," he began again. "You know I did.
Well. I never believed in you so much as I do now, as you sit there,
just as you are, and with hardly enough light to make you out by."

It occurred to her that she had never heard a voice she liked so
well--except one. But that had been a great actor's voice; whereas this
man was nothing in the world but his very own self. He persuaded, he
moved, he disturbed, he soothed by his inherent truth. He had wanted to
make sure and he had made sure apparently; and too weary to resist
the waywardness of her thoughts Mrs. Travers reflected with a sort of
amusement that apparently he had not been disappointed. She thought, "He
believes in me. What amazing words. Of all the people that might have
believed in me I had to find this one here. He believes in me more than
in himself." A gust of sudden remorse tore her out from her quietness,
made her cry out to him:

"Captain Lingard, we forget how we have met, we forget what is going on.
We mustn't. I won't say that you placed your belief wrongly but I have
to confess something to you. I must tell you how I came here to-night.
Jorgenson . . ."

He interrupted her forcibly but without raising his voice.

"Jorgenson. Who's Jorgenson? You came to me because you couldn't help
yourself."

This took her breath away. "But I must tell you. There is something in
my coming which is not clear to me."

"You can tell me nothing that I don't know already," he said in
a pleading tone. "Say nothing. Sit still. Time enough to-morrow.
To-morrow! The night is drawing to an end and I care for nothing in the
world but you. Let me be. Give me the rest that is in you."

She had never heard such accents on his lips and she felt for him a
great and tender pity. Why not humour this mood in which he wanted to
preserve the moments that would never come to him again on this earth?
She hesitated in silence. She saw him stir in the darkness as if he
could not make up his mind to sit down on the bench. But suddenly he
scattered the embers with his foot and sank on the ground against her
feet, and she was not startled in the least to feel the weight of his
head on her knee. Mrs. Travers was not startled but she felt profoundly
moved. Why should she torment him with all those questions of freedom
and captivity, of violence and intrigue, of life and death? He was not
in a state to be told anything and it seemed to her that she did not
want to speak, that in the greatness of her compassion she simply could
not speak. All she could do for him was to rest her hand lightly on his
head and respond silently to the slight movement she felt, sigh or sob,
but a movement which suddenly immobilized her in an anxious emotion.

About the same time on the other side of the lagoon Jorgenson, raising
his eyes, noted the stars and said to himself that the night would not
last long now. He wished for daylight. He hoped that Lingard had already
done something. The blaze in Tengga's compound had been re-lighted.
Tom's power was unbounded, practically unbounded. And he was
invulnerable.

Jorgenson let his old eyes wander amongst the gleams and shadows of the
great sheet of water between him and that hostile shore and fancied he
could detect a floating shadow having the characteristic shape of a man
in a small canoe.

"O! Ya! Man!" he hailed. "What do you want?" Other eyes, too, had
detected that shadow. Low murmurs arose on the deck of the Emma. "If you
don't speak at once I shall fire," shouted Jorgenson, fiercely.

"No, white man," returned the floating shape in a solemn drawl. "I am
the bearer of friendly words. A chief's words. I come from Tengga."

"There was a bullet that came on board not a long time ago--also from
Tengga," said Jorgenson.

"That was an accident," protested the voice from the lagoon. "What else
could it be? Is there war between you and Tengga? No, no, O white man!
All Tengga desires is a long talk. He has sent me to ask you to come
ashore."

At these words Jorgenson's heart sank a little. This invitation meant
that Lingard had made no move. Was Tom asleep or altogether mad?

"The talk would be of peace," declared impressively the shadow which had
drifted much closer to the hulk now.

"It isn't for me to talk with great chiefs," Jorgenson returned,
cautiously.

"But Tengga is a friend," argued the nocturnal messenger. "And by that
fire there are other friends--your friends, the Rajah Hassim and the
lady Immada, who send you their greetings and who expect their eyes to
rest on you before sunrise."

"That's a lie," remarked Jorgenson, perfunctorily, and fell into
thought, while the shadowy bearer of words preserved a scandalized
silence, though, of course, he had not expected to be believed for a
moment. But one could never tell what a white man would believe. He
had wanted to produce the impression that Hassim and Immada were the
honoured guests of Tengga. It occurred to him suddenly that perhaps
Jorgenson didn't know anything of the capture. And he persisted.

"My words are all true, Tuan. The Rajah of Wajo and his sister are with
my master. I left them sitting by the fire on Tengga's right hand. Will
you come ashore to be welcomed amongst friends?"

Jorgenson had been reflecting profoundly. His object was to gain as much
time as possible for Lingard's interference which indeed could not fail
to be effective. But he had not the slightest wish to entrust himself to
Tengga's friendliness. Not that he minded the risk; but he did not see
the use of taking it.

"No!" he said, "I can't go ashore. We white men have ways of our own
and I am chief of this hulk. And my chief is the Rajah Laut, a white man
like myself. All the words that matter are in him and if Tengga is such
a great chief let him ask the Rajah Laut for a talk. Yes, that's the
proper thing for Tengga to do if he is such a great chief as he says."

"The Rajah Laut has made his choice. He dwells with Belarab, and with
the white people who are huddled together like trapped deer in Belarab's
stockade. Why shouldn't you meantime go over where everything is lighted
up and open and talk in friendship with Tengga's friends, whose hearts
have been made sick by many doubts; Rajah Hassim and the lady Immada and
Daman, the chief of the men of the sea, who do not know now whom they
can trust unless it be you, Tuan, the keeper of much wealth?"

The diplomatist in the small dugout paused for a moment to give special
weight to the final argument:

"Which you have no means to defend. We know how many armed men there are
with you."

"They are great fighters," Jorgenson observed, unconcernedly, spreading
his elbows on the rail and looking over at the floating black patch of
characteristic shape whence proceeded the voice of the wily envoy of
Tengga. "Each man of them is worth ten of such as you can find in the
Settlement."

"Yes, by Allah. Even worth twenty of these common people. Indeed, you
have enough with you to make a great fight but not enough for victory."

"God alone gives victory," said suddenly the voice of Jaffir, who, very
still at Jorgenson's elbow, had been listening to the conversation.

"Very true," was the answer in an extremely conventional tone. "Will you
come ashore, O white man; and be the leader of chiefs?"

"I have been that before," said Jorgenson, with great dignity, "and now
all I want is peace. But I won't come ashore amongst people whose minds
are so much troubled, till Rajah Hassim and his sister return on board
this ship and tell me the tale of their new friendship with Tengga."

His heart was sinking with every minute, the very air was growing
heavier with the sense of oncoming disaster, on that night that was
neither war nor peace and whose only voice was the voice of Tengga's
envoy, insinuating in tone though menacing in words.

"No, that cannot be," said that voice. "But, Tuan, verily Tengga himself
is ready to come on board here to talk with you. He is very ready to
come and indeed, Tuan, he means to come on board here before very long."

"Yes, with fifty war-canoes filled with the ferocious rabble of the
Shore of Refuge," Jaffir was heard commenting, sarcastically, over the
rail; and a sinister muttered "It may be so," ascended alongside from
the black water.

Jorgenson kept silent as if waiting for a supreme inspiration and
suddenly he spoke in his other-world voice: "Tell Tengga from me that as
long as he brings with him Rajah Hassim and the Rajah's sister, he and
his chief men will be welcome on deck here, no matter how many boats
come along with them. For that I do not care. You may go now."

A profound silence succeeded. It was clear that the envoy was gone,
keeping in the shadow of the shore. Jorgenson turned to Jaffir.

"Death amongst friends is but a festival," he quoted, mumbling in his
moustache.

"It is, by Allah," assented Jaffir with sombre fervour.



VI

Thirty-six hours later Carter, alone with Lingard in the cabin of the
brig, could almost feel during a pause in his talk the oppressive, the
breathless peace of the Shallows awaiting another sunset.

"I never expected to see any of you alive," Carter began in his easy
tone, but with much less carelessness in his bearing as though his days
of responsibility amongst the Shoals of the Shore of Refuge had matured
his view of the external world and of his own place therein.

"Of course not," muttered Lingard.

The listlessness of that man whom he had always seen acting under
the stress of a secret passion seemed perfectly appalling to Carter's
youthful and deliberate energy. Ever since he had found himself
again face to face with Lingard he had tried to conceal the shocking
impression with a delicacy which owed nothing to training but was as
intuitive as a child's.

While justifying to Lingard his manner of dealing with the situation
on the Shore of Refuge, he could not for the life of him help asking
himself what was this new mystery. He was also young enough to long for
a word of commendation.

"Come, Captain," he argued; "how would you have liked to come out and
find nothing but two half-burnt wrecks stuck on the sands--perhaps?"

He waited for a moment, then in sheer compassion turned away his eyes
from that fixed gaze, from that harassed face with sunk cheeks, from
that figure of indomitable strength robbed of its fire. He said to
himself: "He doesn't hear me," and raised his voice without altering its
self-contained tone:

"I was below yesterday morning when we felt the shock, but the noise
came to us only as a deep rumble. I made one jump for the companion but
that precious Shaw was before me yelling, 'Earthquake! Earthquake!' and
I am hanged if he didn't miss his footing and land down on his head at
the bottom of the stairs. I had to stop to pick him up but I got on deck
in time to see a mighty black cloud that seemed almost solid pop up from
behind the forest like a balloon. It stayed there for quite a long time.
Some of our Calashes on deck swore to me that they had seen a red flash
above the tree-tops. But that's hard to believe. I guessed at once that
something had blown up on shore. My first thought was that I would never
see you any more and I made up my mind at once to find out all the truth
you have been keeping away from me. No, sir! Don't you make a mistake! I
wasn't going to give you up, dead or alive."

He looked hard at Lingard while saying these words and saw the first
sign of animation pass over that ravaged face. He saw even its lips move
slightly; but there was no sound, and Carter looked away again.

"Perhaps you would have done better by telling me everything; but you
left me behind on my own to be your man here. I put my hand to the
work I could see before me. I am a sailor. There were two ships to look
after. And here they are both for you, fit to go or to stay, to fight or
to run, as you choose." He watched with bated breath the effort Lingard
had to make to utter the two words of the desired commendation:

"Well done!"

"And I am your man still," Carter added, impulsively, and hastened to
look away from Lingard, who had tried to smile at him and had failed.
Carter didn't know what to do next, remain in the cabin or leave that
unsupported strong man to himself. With a shyness completely foreign to
his character and which he could not understand himself, he suggested
in an engaging murmur and with an embarrassed assumption of his right to
give advice:

"Why not lie down for a bit, sir? I can attend to anything that may turn
up. You seem done up, sir."

He was facing Lingard, who stood on the other side of the table in a
leaning forward attitude propped up on rigid arms and stared fixedly at
him--perhaps? Carter felt on the verge of despair. This couldn't last.
He was relieved to see Lingard shake his head slightly.

"No, Mr. Carter. I think I will go on deck," said the Captain of the
famous brig Lightning, while his eyes roamed all over the cabin. Carter
stood aside at once, but it was some little time before Lingard made a
move.

The sun had sunk already, leaving that evening no trace of its glory on
a sky clear as crystal and on the waters without a ripple. All colour
seemed to have gone out of the world. The oncoming shadow rose as subtle
as a perfume from the black coast lying athwart the eastern semicircle;
and such was the silence within the horizon that one might have fancied
oneself come to the end of time. Black and toylike in the clear depths
and the final stillness of the evening the brig and the schooner lay
anchored in the middle of the main channel with their heads swung the
same way. Lingard, with his chin on his breast and his arms folded,
moved slowly here and there about the poop. Close and mute like his
shadow, Carter, at his elbow, followed his movements. He felt an anxious
solicitude. . . .

It was a sentiment perfectly new to him. He had never before felt this
sort of solicitude about himself or any other man. His personality was
being developed by new experience, and as he was very simple he received
the initiation with shyness and self-mistrust. He had noticed with
innocent alarm that Lingard had not looked either at the sky or over
the sea, neither at his own ship nor the schooner astern; not along the
decks, not aloft, not anywhere. He had looked at nothing! And somehow
Carter felt himself more lonely and without support than when he had
been left alone by that man in charge of two ships entangled amongst the
Shallows and environed by some sinister mystery. Since that man had come
back, instead of welcome relief Carter felt his responsibility rest on
his young shoulders with tenfold weight. His profound conviction was
that Lingard should be roused.

"Captain Lingard," he burst out in desperation; "you can't say I have
worried you very much since this morning when I received you at the
side, but I must be told something. What is it going to be with us?
Fight or run?"

Lingard stopped short and now there was no doubt in Carter's mind that
the Captain was looking at him. There was no room for any doubt before
that stern and enquiring gaze. "Aha!" thought Carter. "This has
startled him"; and feeling that his shyness had departed he pursued his
advantage. "For the fact of the matter is, sir, that, whatever happens,
unless I am to be your man you will have no officer. I had better tell
you at once that I have bundled that respectable, crazy, fat Shaw out of
the ship. He was upsetting all hands. Yesterday I told him to go and get
his dunnage together because I was going to send him aboard the yacht.
He couldn't have made more uproar about it if I had proposed to chuck
him overboard. I warned him that if he didn't go quietly I would have
him tied up like a sheep ready for slaughter. However, he went down the
ladder on his own feet, shaking his fist at me and promising to have me
hanged for a pirate some day. He can do no harm on board the yacht. And
now, sir, it's for you to give orders and not for me--thank God!"

Lingard turned away, abruptly. Carter didn't budge. After a moment he
heard himself called from the other side of the deck and obeyed with
alacrity.

"What's that story of a man you picked up on the coast last evening?"
asked Lingard in his gentlest tone. "Didn't you tell me something about
it when I came on board?"

"I tried to," said Carter, frankly. "But I soon gave it up. You didn't
seem to pay any attention to what I was saying. I thought you wanted to
be left alone for a bit. What can I know of your ways, yet, sir? Are you
aware, Captain Lingard, that since this morning I have been down five
times at the cabin door to look at you? There you sat. . . ."

He paused and Lingard said: "You have been five times down in the
cabin?"

"Yes. And the sixth time I made up my mind to make you take some notice
of me. I can't be left without orders. There are two ships to look
after, a lot of things to be done. . . ."

"There is nothing to be done," Lingard interrupted with a mere murmur
but in a tone which made Carter keep silent for a while.

"Even to know that much would have been something to go by," he ventured
at last. "I couldn't let you sit there with the sun getting pretty low
and a long night before us."

"I feel stunned yet," said Lingard, looking Carter straight in the face,
as if to watch the effect of that confession.

"Were you very near that explosion?" asked the young man with
sympathetic curiosity and seeking for some sign on Lingard's person.
But there was nothing. Not a single hair of the Captain's head seemed to
have been singed.

"Near," muttered Lingard. "It might have been my head." He pressed it
with both hands, then let them fall. "What about that man?" he asked,
brusquely. "Where did he come from? . . . I suppose he is dead now," he
added in an envious tone.

"No, sir. He must have as many lives as a cat," answered Carter. "I will
tell you how it was. As I said before I wasn't going to give you up,
dead or alive, so yesterday when the sun went down a little in the
afternoon I had two of our boats manned and pulled in shore, taking
soundings to find a passage if there was one. I meant to go back and
look for you with the brig or without the brig--but that doesn't
matter now. There were three or four floating logs in sight. One of the
Calashes in my boat made out something red on one of them. I thought it
was worth while to go and see what it was. It was that man's sarong. It
had got entangled among the branches and prevented him rolling off into
the water. I was never so glad, I assure you, as when we found out
that he was still breathing. If we could only nurse him back to life, I
thought, he could perhaps tell me a lot of things. The log on which he
hung had come out of the mouth of the creek and he couldn't have been
more than half a day on it by my calculation. I had him taken down the
main hatchway and put into a hammock in the 'tween-decks. He only just
breathed then, but some time during the night he came to himself and
got out of the hammock to lie down on a mat. I suppose he was more
comfortable that way. He recovered his speech only this morning and I
went down at once and told you of it, but you took no notice. I told you
also who he was but I don't know whether you heard me or not."

"I don't remember," said Lingard under his breath.

"They are wonderful, those Malays. This morning he was only half alive,
if that much, and now I understand he has been talking to Wasub for an
hour. Will you go down to see him, sir, or shall I send a couple of men
to carry him on deck?"

Lingard looked bewildered for a moment.

"Who on earth is he?" he asked.

"Why, it's that fellow whom you sent out, that night I met you, to catch
our first gig. What do they call him? Jaffir, I think. Hasn't he been
with you ashore, sir? Didn't he find you with the letter I gave him for
you? A most determined looking chap. I knew him again the moment we got
him off the log."

Lingard seized hold of the royal backstay within reach of his hand.
Jaffir! Jaffir! Faithful above all others; the messenger of supreme
moments; the reckless and devoted servant! Lingard felt a crushing sense
of despair. "No, I can't face this," he whispered to himself, looking
at the coast black as ink now before his eyes in the world's shadow that
was slowly encompassing the grey clearness of the Shallow Waters. "Send
Wasub to me. I am going down into the cabin."

He crossed over to the companion, then checking himself suddenly: "Was
there a boat from the yacht during the day?" he asked as if struck by
a sudden thought.--"No, sir," answered Carter. "We had no communication
with the yacht to-day."--"Send Wasub to me," repeated Lingard in a stern
voice as he went down the stairs.

The old serang coming in noiselessly saw his Captain as he had seen him
many times before, sitting under the gilt thunderbolts, apparently as
strong in his body, in his wealth, and in his knowledge of secret words
that have a power over men and elements, as ever. The old Malay squatted
down within a couple of feet from Lingard, leaned his back against
the satinwood panel of the bulkhead, then raising his old eyes with a
watchful and benevolent expression to the white man's face, clasped his
hands between his knees.

"Wasub, you have learned now everything. Is there no one left alive but
Jaffir? Are they all dead?"

"May you live!" answered Wasub; and Lingard whispered an appalled "All
dead!" to which Wasub nodded slightly twice. His cracked voice had a
lamenting intonation. "It is all true! It is all true! You are left
alone, Tuan; you are left alone!"

"It was their destiny," said Lingard at last, with forced calmness. "But
has Jaffir told you of the manner of this calamity? How is it that he
alone came out alive from it to be found by you?"

"He was told by his lord to depart and he obeyed," began Wasub, fixing
his eyes on the deck and speaking just loud enough to be heard by
Lingard, who, bending forward in his seat, shrank inwardly from every
word and yet would not have missed a single one of them for anything.

For the catastrophe had fallen on his head like a bolt from the blue in
the early morning hours of the day before. At the first break of dawn he
had been sent for to resume, his talk with Belarab. He had felt
suddenly Mrs. Travers remove her hand from his head. Her voice speaking
intimately into his ear: "Get up. There are some people coming," had
recalled him to himself. He had got up from the ground. The light was
dim, the air full of mist; and it was only gradually that he began to
make out forms above his head and about his feet: trees, houses, men
sleeping on the ground. He didn't recognize them. It was but a cruel
change of dream. Who could tell what was real in this world? He looked
about him, dazedly; he was still drunk with the deep draught of oblivion
he had conquered for himself. Yes--but it was she who had let him snatch
the cup. He looked down at the woman on the bench. She moved not. She
had remained like that, still for hours, giving him a waking dream
of rest without end, in an infinity of happiness without sound and
movement, without thought, without joy; but with an infinite ease of
content, like a world-embracing reverie breathing the air of sadness and
scented with love. For hours she had not moved.

"You are the most generous of women," he said. He bent over her. Her
eyes were wide open. Her lips felt cold. It did not shock him. After he
stood up he remained near her. Heat is a consuming thing, but she with
her cold lips seemed to him indestructible--and, perhaps, immortal!

Again he stooped, but this time it was only to kiss the fringe of her
head scarf. Then he turned away to meet the three men, who, coming round
the corner of the hut containing the prisoners, were approaching him
with measured steps. They desired his presence in the Council room.
Belarab was awake.

They also expressed their satisfaction at finding the white man awake,
because Belarab wanted to impart to him information of the greatest
importance. It seemed to Lingard that he had been awake ever since he
could remember. It was as to being alive that he felt not so sure.
He had no doubt of his existence; but was this life--this profound
indifference, this strange contempt for what his eyes could see, this
distaste for words, this unbelief in the importance of things and men?
He tried to regain possession of himself, his old self which had things
to do, words to speak as well as to hear. But it was too difficult. He
was seduced away by the tense feeling of existence far superior to
the mere consciousness of life, and which in its immensity of
contradictions, delight, dread, exultation and despair could not be
faced and yet was not to be evaded. There was no peace in it. But who
wanted peace? Surrender was better, the dreadful ease of slack limbs in
the sweep of an enormous tide and in a divine emptiness of mind. If this
was existence then he knew that he existed. And he knew that the
woman existed, too, in the sweep of the tide, without speech, without
movement, without heat! Indestructible--and, perhaps, immortal!



VII

With the sublime indifference of a man who has had a glimpse through the
open doors of Paradise and is no longer careful of mere life, Lingard
had followed Belarab's anxious messengers. The stockade was waking up
in a subdued resonance of voices. Men were getting up from the ground,
fires were being rekindled. Draped figures flitted in the mist amongst
the buildings; and through the mat wall of a bamboo house Lingard heard
the feeble wailing of a child. A day of mere life was beginning; but in
the Chief's great Council room several wax candles and a couple of cheap
European lamps kept the dawn at bay, while the morning mist which could
not be kept out made a faint reddish halo round every flame.

Belarab was not only awake, but he even looked like a man who had not
slept for a long time. The creator of the Shore of Refuge, the weary
Ruler of the Settlement, with his scorn of the unrest and folly of men,
was angry with his white friend who was always bringing his desires and
his troubles to his very door. Belarab did not want any one to die but
neither did he want any one in particular to live. What he was concerned
about was to preserve the mystery and the power of his melancholy
hesitations. These delicate things were menaced by Lingard's brusque
movements, by that passionate white man who believed in more than
one God and always seemed to doubt the power of Destiny. Belarab was
profoundly annoyed. He was also genuinely concerned, for he liked
Lingard. He liked him not only for his strength, which protected his
clear-minded scepticism from those dangers that beset all rulers, but he
liked him also for himself. That man of infinite hesitations, born from
a sort of mystic contempt for Allah's creation, yet believed absolutely
both in Lingard's power and in his boldness. Absolutely. And yet, in the
marvellous consistency of his temperament, now that the moment had come,
he dreaded to put both power and fortitude to the test.

Lingard could not know that some little time before the first break of
dawn one of Belarab's spies in the Settlement had found his way inside
the stockade at a spot remote from the lagoon, and that a very few
moments after Lingard had left the Chief in consequence of Jorgenson's
rockets, Belarab was listening to an amazing tale of Hassim and Immada's
capture and of Tengga's determination, very much strengthened by
that fact, to obtain possession of the Emma, either by force or by
negotiation, or by some crafty subterfuge in which the Rajah and
his sister could be made to play their part. In his mistrust of the
universe, which seemed almost to extend to the will of God himself,
Belarab was very much alarmed, for the material power of Daman's
piratical crowd was at Tengga's command; and who could tell whether this
Wajo Rajah would remain loyal in the circumstances? It was also very
characteristic of him whom the original settlers of the Shore of Refuge
called the Father of Safety, that he did not say anything of this to
Lingard, for he was afraid of rousing Lingard's fierce energy which
would even carry away himself and all his people and put the peace of so
many years to the sudden hazard of a battle.

Therefore Belarab set himself to persuade Lingard on general
considerations to deliver the white men, who really belonged to Daman,
to that supreme Chief of the Illanuns and by this simple proceeding
detach him completely from Tengga. Why should he, Belarab, go to war
against half the Settlement on their account? It was not necessary, it
was not reasonable. It would be even in a manner a sin to begin a strife
in a community of True Believers. Whereas with an offer like that in his
hand he could send an embassy to Tengga who would see there at once the
downfall of his purposes and the end of his hopes. At once! That moment!
. . . Afterward the question of a ransom could be arranged with Daman in
which he, Belarab, would mediate in the fullness of his recovered power,
without a rival and in the sincerity of his heart. And then, if need be,
he could put forth all his power against the chief of the sea-vagabonds
who would, as a matter of fact, be negotiating under the shadow of the
sword.

Belarab talked, low-voiced and dignified, with now and then a subtle
intonation, a persuasive inflexion or a half-melancholy smile in the
course of the argument. What encouraged him most was the changed aspect
of his white friend. The fierce power of his personality seemed to have
turned into a dream. Lingard listened, growing gradually inscrutable in
his continued silence, but remaining gentle in a sort of rapt patience
as if lapped in the wings of the Angel of Peace himself. Emboldened by
that transformation, Belarab's counsellors seated on the mats murmured
loudly their assent to the views of the Chief. Through the thickening
white mist of tropical lands, the light of the tropical day filtered
into the hall. One of the wise men got up from the floor and with
prudent fingers began extinguishing the waxlights one by one. He
hesitated to touch the lamps, the flames of which looked yellow and
cold. A puff of the morning breeze entered the great room, faint and
chill. Lingard, facing Belarab in a wooden armchair, with slack
limbs and in the divine emptiness of a mind enchanted by a glimpse of
Paradise, shuddered profoundly.

A strong voice shouted in the doorway without any ceremony and with a
sort of jeering accent:

"Tengga's boats are out in the mist."

Lingard half rose from his seat, Belarab himself could not repress a
start. Lingard's attitude was a listening one, but after a moment
of hesitation he ran out of the hall. The inside of the stockade was
beginning to buzz like a disturbed hive.

Outside Belarab's house Lingard slowed his pace. The mist still hung. A
great sustained murmur pervaded it and the blurred forms of men were all
moving outward from the centre toward the palisades. Somewhere amongst
the buildings a gong clanged. D'Alcacer's raised voice was heard:

"What is happening?"

Lingard was passing then close to the prisoners' house. There was a
group of armed men below the verandah and above their heads he saw Mrs.
Travers by the side of d'Alcacer. The fire by which Lingard had spent
the night was extinguished, its embers scattered, and the bench itself
lay overturned. Mrs. Travers must have run up on the verandah at the
first alarm. She and d'Alcacer up there seemed to dominate the tumult
which was now subsiding. Lingard noticed the scarf across Mrs. Travers'
face. D'Alcacer was bareheaded. He shouted again:

"What's the matter?"

"I am going to see," shouted Lingard back.

He resisted the impulse to join those two, dominate the tumult, let it
roll away from under his feet--the mere life of men, vain like a dream
and interfering with the tremendous sense of his own existence.
He resisted it, he could hardly have told why. Even the sense of
self-preservation had abandoned him. There was a throng of people
pressing close about him yet careful not to get in his way. Surprise,
concern, doubt were depicted on all those faces; but there were some who
observed that the great white man making his way to the lagoon side of
the stockade wore a fixed smile. He asked at large:

"Can one see any distance over the water?"

One of Belarab's headmen who was nearest to him answered:

"The mist has thickened. If you see anything, Tuan, it will be but a
shadow of things."

The four sides of the stockade had been manned by that time. Lingard,
ascending the banquette, looked out and saw the lagoon shrouded in
white, without as much as a shadow on it, and so still that not even the
sound of water lapping the shore reached his ears. He found himself in
profound accord with this blind and soundless peace.

"Has anything at all been seen?" he asked incredulously.

Four men were produced at once who had seen a dark mass of boats moving
in the light of the dawn. Others were sent for. He hardly listened to
them. His thought escaped him and he stood motionless, looking out into
the unstirring mist pervaded by the perfect silence. Presently Belarab
joined him, escorted by three grave, swarthy men, himself dark-faced,
stroking his short grey beard with impenetrable composure. He said to
Lingard, "Your white man doesn't fight," to which Lingard answered,
"There is nothing to fight against. What your people have seen, Belarab,
were indeed but shadows on the water." Belarab murmured, "You ought to
have allowed me to make friends with Daman last night."

A faint uneasiness was stealing into Lingard's breast.

A moment later d'Alcacer came up, inconspicuously watched over by two
men with lances, and to his anxious inquiry Lingard said: "I don't think
there is anything going on. Listen how still everything is. The only way
of bringing the matter to a test would be to persuade Belarab to let
his men march out and make an attack on Tengga's stronghold this moment.
Then we would learn something. But I couldn't persuade Belarab to march
out into this fog. Indeed, an expedition like this might end badly. I
myself don't believe that all Tengga's people are on the lagoon. . . .
Where is Mrs. Travers?"

The question made d'Alcacer start by its abruptness which revealed the
woman's possession of that man's mind. "She is with Don Martin, who is
better but feels very weak. If we are to be given up, he will have to
be carried out to his fate. I can depict to myself the scene. Don Martin
carried shoulder high surrounded by those barbarians with spears, and
Mrs. Travers with myself walking on each side of the stretcher. Mrs.
Travers has declared to me her intention to go out with us."

"Oh, she has declared her intention," murmured Lingard, absent-mindedly.

D'Alcacer felt himself completely abandoned by that man. And within
two paces of him he noticed the group of Belarab and his three swarthy
attendants in their white robes, preserving an air of serene detachment.
For the first time since the stranding on the coast d'Alcacer's heart
sank within him. "But perhaps," he went on, "this Moor may not in the
end insist on giving us up to a cruel death, Captain Lingard."

"He wanted to give you up in the middle of the night, a few hours ago,"
said Lingard, without even looking at d'Alcacer who raised his hands
a little and let them fall. Lingard sat down on the breech of a heavy
piece mounted on a naval carriage so as to command the lagoon. He folded
his arms on his breast. D'Alcacer asked, gently:

"We have been reprieved then?"

"No," said Lingard. "It's I who was reprieved."

A long silence followed. Along the whole line of the manned stockade the
whisperings had ceased. The vibrations of the gong had died out, too.
Only the watchers perched in the highest boughs of the big tree made a
slight rustle amongst the leaves.

"What are you thinking of, Captain Lingard?" d'Alcacer asked in a low
voice. Lingard did not change his position.

"I am trying to keep it off," he said in the same tone.

"What? Trying to keep thought off?"

"Yes."

"Is this the time for such experiments?" asked d'Alcacer.

"Why not? It's my reprieve. Don't grudge it to me, Mr. d'Alcacer."

"Upon my word I don't. But isn't it dangerous?"

"You will have to take your chance."

D'Alcacer had a moment of internal struggle. He asked himself whether he
should tell Lingard that Mrs. Travers had come to the stockade with some
sort of message from Jorgenson. He had it on the tip of his tongue
to advise Lingard to go and see Mrs. Travers and ask her point blank
whether she had anything to tell him; but before he could make up
his mind the voices of invisible men high up in the tree were heard
reporting the thinning of the fog. This caused a stir to run along the
four sides of the stockade.

Lingard felt the draught of air in his face, the motionless mist began
to drive over the palisades and, suddenly, the lagoon came into view
with a great blinding glitter of its wrinkled surface and the faint
sound of its wash rising all along the shore. A multitude of hands went
up to shade the eager eyes, and exclamations of wonder burst out from
many men at the sight of a crowd of canoes of various sizes and kinds
lying close together with the effect as of an enormous raft, a little
way off the side of the Emma. The excited voices rose higher and higher.
There was no doubt about Tengga's being on the lagoon. But what was
Jorgenson about? The Emma lay as if abandoned by her keeper and her
crew, while the mob of mixed boats seemed to be meditating an attack.

For all his determination to keep thought off to the very last possible
moment, Lingard could not defend himself from a sense of wonder and
fear. What was Jorgenson about? For a moment Lingard expected the side
of the Emma to wreath itself in puffs of smoke, but an age seemed to
elapse without the sound of a shot reaching his ears.

The boats were afraid to close. They were hanging off, irresolute; but
why did Jorgenson not put an end to their hesitation by a volley or
two of musketry if only over their heads? Through the anguish of his
perplexity Lingard found himself returning to life, to mere life with
its sense of pain and mortality, like a man awakened from a dream by a
stab in the breast. What did this silence of the Emma mean? Could she
have been already carried in the fog? But that was unthinkable. Some
sounds of resistance must have been heard. No, the boats hung off
because they knew with what desperate defence they would meet; and
perhaps Jorgenson knew very well what he was doing by holding his fire
to the very last moment and letting the craven hearts grow cold with
the fear of a murderous discharge that would have to be faced. What was
certain was that this was the time for Belarab to open the great gate
and let his men go out, display his power, sweep through the further end
of the Settlement, destroy Tengga's defences, do away once for all with
the absurd rivalry of that intriguing amateur boat-builder. Lingard
turned eagerly toward Belarab but saw the Chief busy looking across the
lagoon through a long glass resting on the shoulder of a stooping slave.
He was motionless like a carving. Suddenly he let go the long glass
which some ready hands caught as it fell and said to Lingard:

"No fight."

"How do you know?" muttered Lingard, astounded.

"There are three empty sampans alongside the ladder," said Belarab in a
just audible voice. "There is bad talk there."

"Talk? I don't understand," said Lingard, slowly.

But Belarab had turned toward his three attendants in white robes,
with shaven polls under skull-caps of plaited grass, with prayer beads
hanging from their wrists, and an air of superior calm on their dark
faces: companions of his desperate days, men of blood once and now
imperturbable in their piety and wisdom of trusted counsellors.

"This white man is being betrayed," he murmured to them with the
greatest composure.

D'Alcacer, uncomprehending, watched the scene: the Man of Fate puzzled
and fierce like a disturbed lion, the white-robed Moors, the multitude
of half-naked barbarians, squatting by the guns, standing by the
loopholes in the immobility of an arranged display. He saw Mrs. Travers
on the verandah of the prisoners' house, an anxious figure with a white
scarf over her head. Mr. Travers was no doubt too weak after his fit of
fever to come outside. If it hadn't been for that, all the whites would
have been in sight of each other at the very moment of the catastrophe
which was to give them back to the claims of their life, at the cost
of other lives sent violently out of the world. D'Alcacer heard Lingard
asking loudly for the long glass and saw Belarab make a sign with his
hand, when he felt the earth receive a violent blow from underneath.
While he staggered to it the heavens split over his head with a crash in
the lick of a red tongue of flame; and a sudden dreadful gloom fell all
round the stunned d'Alcacer, who beheld with terror the morning sun,
robbed of its rays, glow dull and brown through the sombre murk which
had taken possession of the universe. The Emma had blown up; and when
the rain of shattered timbers and mangled corpses falling into the
lagoon had ceased, the cloud of smoke hanging motionless under the livid
sun cast its shadow afar on the Shore of Refuge where all strife had
come to an end.

A great wail of terror ascended from the Settlement and was succeeded
by a profound silence. People could be seen bolting in unreasoning panic
away from the houses and into the fields. On the lagoon the raft of
boats had broken up. Some of them were sinking, others paddling away in
all directions. What was left above water of the Emma had burst into a
clear flame under the shadow of the cloud, the great smoky cloud that
hung solid and unstirring above the tops of the forest, visible for
miles up and down the coast and over the Shallows.

The first person to recover inside the stockade was Belarab himself.
Mechanically he murmured the exclamation of wonder, "God is great," and
looked at Lingard. But Lingard was not looking at him. The shock of the
explosion had robbed him of speech and movement. He stared at the Emma
blazing in a distant and insignificant flame under the sinister shadow
of the cloud created by Jorgenson's mistrust and contempt for the
life of men. Belarab turned away. His opinion had changed. He regarded
Lingard no longer as a betrayed man but the effect was the same. He was
no longer a man of any importance. What Belarab really wanted now was
to see all the white people clear out of the lagoon as soon as possible.
Presently he ordered the gate to be thrown open and his armed men poured
out to take possession of the Settlement. Later Tengga's houses were
set on fire and Belarab, mounting a fiery pony, issued forth to make a
triumphal progress surrounded by a great crowd of headmen and guards.

That night the white people left the stockade in a cortege of torch
bearers. Mr. Travers had to be carried down to the beach, where two of
Belarab's war-boats awaited their distinguished passengers. Mrs. Travers
passed through the gate on d'Alcacer's arm. Her face was half veiled.
She moved through the throng of spectators displayed in the torchlight
looking straight before her. Belarab, standing in front of a group of
headmen, pretended not to see the white people as they went by. With
Lingard he shook hands, murmuring the usual formulas of friendship; and
when he heard the great white man say, "You shall never see me again,"
he felt immensely relieved. Belarab did not want to see that white man
again, but as he responded to the pressure of Lingard's hand he had a
grave smile.

"God alone knows the future," he said.

Lingard walked to the beach by himself, feeling a stranger to all men
and abandoned by the All-Knowing God. By that time the first boat with
Mr. and Mrs. Travers had already got away out of the blood-red light
thrown by the torches upon the water. D'Alcacer and Lingard followed
in the second. Presently the dark shade of the creek, walled in by the
impenetrable forest, closed round them and the splash of the paddles
echoed in the still, damp air.

"How do you think this awful accident happened?" asked d'Alcacer, who
had been sitting silent by Lingard's side.

"What is an accident?" said Lingard with a great effort. "Where did you
hear of such a thing? Accident! Don't disturb me, Mr. d'Alcacer. I have
just come back to life and it has closed on me colder and darker than
the grave itself. Let me get used . . . I can't bear the sound of a
human voice yet."



VIII

And now, stoical in the cold and darkness of his regained life, Lingard
had to listen to the voice of Wasub telling him Jaffir's story. The
old serang's face expressed a profound dejection and there was infinite
sadness in the flowing murmur of his words.

"Yes, by Allah! They were all there: that tyrannical Tengga, noisy
like a fool; the Rajah Hassim, a ruler without a country; Daman, the
wandering chief, and the three Pangerans of the sea-robbers. They came
on board boldly, for Tuan Jorgenson had given them permission, and their
talk was that you, Tuan, were a willing captive in Belarab's stockade.
They said they had waited all night for a message of peace from you or
from Belarab. But there was nothing, and with the first sign of day they
put out on the lagoon to make friends with Tuan Jorgenson; for, they
said, you, Tuan, were as if you had not been, possessing no more power
than a dead man, the mere slave of these strange white people, and
Belarab's prisoner. Thus Tengga talked. God had taken from him all
wisdom and all fear. And then he must have thought he was safe while
Rajah Hassim and the lady Immada were on board. I tell you they sat
there in the midst of your enemies, captive! The lady Immada, with her
face covered, mourned to herself. The Rajah Hassim made a sign to Jaffir
and Jaffir came to stand by his side and talked to his lord. The main
hatch was open and many of the Illanuns crowded there to look down at
the goods that were inside the ship. They had never seen so much loot in
their lives. Jaffir and his lord could hear plainly Tuan Jorgenson and
Tengga talking together. Tengga discoursed loudly and his words were the
words of a doomed man, for he was asking Tuan Jorgenson to give up the
arms and everything that was on board the Emma to himself and to Daman.
And then, he said, 'We shall fight Belarab and make friends with these
strange white people by behaving generously to them and letting them
sail away unharmed to their own country. We don't want them here. You,
Tuan Jorgenson, are the only white man I care for.' They heard Tuan
Jorgenson say to Tengga: 'Now you have told me everything there is
in your mind you had better go ashore with your friends and return
to-morrow.' And Tengga asked: 'Why! would you fight me to-morrow rather
than live many days in peace with me?' and he laughed and slapped his
thigh. And Tuan Jorgenson answered:

"'No, I won't fight you. But even a spider will give the fly time to say
its prayers.'

"Tuan Jorgenson's voice sounded very strange and louder than ever
anybody had heard it before. O Rajah Laut, Jaffir and the white man had
been waiting, too, all night for some sign from you; a shot fired or a
signal-fire, lighted to strengthen their hearts. There had been nothing.
Rajah Hassim, whispering, ordered Jaffir to take the first opportunity
to leap overboard and take to you his message of friendship and
good-bye. Did the Rajah and Jaffir know what was coming? Who can tell?
But what else could they see than calamity for all Wajo men, whatever
Tuan Jorgenson had made up his mind to do? Jaffir prepared to obey his
lord, and yet with so many enemies' boats in the water he did not think
he would ever reach the shore; and as to yourself he was not at all sure
that you were still alive. But he said nothing of this to his Rajah.
Nobody was looking their way. Jaffir pressed his lord's hand to his
breast and waited his opportunity. The fog began to blow away and
presently everything was disclosed to the sight. Jorgenson was on his
feet, he was holding a lighted cigar between his fingers. Tengga was
sitting in front of him on one of the chairs the white people had used.
His followers were pressing round him, with Daman and Sentot, who were
muttering incantations; and even the Pangerans had moved closer to the
hatchway. Jaffir's opportunity had come but he lingered by the side
of his Rajah. In the clear air the sun shone with great force. Tuan
Jorgenson looked once more toward Belarab's stockade, O Rajah Laut! But
there was nothing there, not even a flag displayed that had not been
there before. Jaffir looked that way, too, and as he turned his head he
saw Tuan Jorgenson, in the midst of twenty spear-blades that could in an
instant have been driven into his breast, put the cigar in his mouth and
jump down the hatchway. At that moment Rajah Hassim gave Jaffir a push
toward the side and Jaffir leaped overboard.

"He was still in the water when all the world was darkened round him as
if the life of the sun had been blown out of it in a crash. A great wave
came along and washed him on shore, while pieces of wood, iron, and the
limbs of torn men were splashing round him in the water. He managed to
crawl out of the mud. Something had hit him while he was swimming and he
thought he would die. But life stirred in him. He had a message for you.
For a long time he went on crawling under the big trees on his hands
and knees, for there is no rest for a messenger till the message is
delivered. At last he found himself on the left bank of the creek.
And still he felt life stir in him. So he started to swim across, for if
you were in this world you were on the other side. While he swam he felt
his strength abandoning him. He managed to scramble on to a drifting log
and lay on it like one who is dead, till we pulled him into one of our
boats."

Wasub ceased. It seemed to Lingard that it was impossible for mortal
man to suffer more than he suffered in the succeeding moment of silence
crowded by the mute images as of universal destruction. He felt
himself gone to pieces as though the violent expression of Jorgenson's
intolerable mistrust of the life of men had shattered his soul, leaving
his body robbed of all power of resistance and of all fortitude, a prey
forever to infinite remorse and endless regrets.

"Leave me, Wasub," he said. "They are all dead--but I would sleep."

Wasub raised his dumb old eyes to the white man's face.

"Tuan, it is necessary that you should hear Jaffir," he said, patiently.

"Is he going to die?" asked Lingard in a low, cautious tone as though he
were afraid of the sound of his own voice.

"Who can tell?" Wasub's voice sounded more patient than ever. "There is
no wound on his body but, O Tuan, he does not wish to live."

"Abandoned by his God," muttered Lingard to himself.

Wasub waited a little before he went on, "And, Tuan, he has a message
for you."

"Of course. Well, I don't want to hear it."

"It is from those who will never speak to you again," Wasub persevered,
sadly. "It is a great trust. A Rajah's own words. It is difficult for
Jaffir to die. He keeps on muttering about a ring that was for you, and
that he let pass out of his care. It was a great talisman!"

"Yes. But it did not work this time. And if I go and tell Jaffir why he
will be able to tell his Rajah, O Wasub, since you say that he is going
to die. . . . I wonder where they will meet," he muttered to himself.

Once more Wasub raised his eyes to Lingard's face. "Paradise is the lot
of all True Believers," he whispered, firm in his simple faith.

The man who had been undone by a glimpse of Paradise exchanged a
profound look with the old Malay. Then he got up. On his passage to the
main hatchway the commander of the brig met no one on the decks, as if
all mankind had given him up except the old man who preceded him and
that other man dying in the deepening twilight, who was awaiting his
coming. Below, in the light of the hatchway, he saw a young Calash with
a broad yellow face and his wiry hair sticking up in stiff wisps through
the folds of his head-kerchief, holding an earthenware water-jar to the
lips of Jaffir extended on his back on a pile of mats.

A languid roll of the already glazed eyeballs, a mere stir of black
and white in the gathering dusk showed that the faithful messenger of
princes was aware of the presence of the man who had been so long known
to him and his people as the King of the Sea. Lingard knelt down close
to Jaffir's head, which rolled a little from side to side and then
became still, staring at a beam of the upper deck. Lingard bent his ear
to the dark lips. "Deliver your message" he said in a gentle tone.

"The Rajah wished to hold your hand once more," whispered Jaffir so
faintly that Lingard had to guess the words rather than hear them. "I
was to tell you," he went on--and stopped suddenly.

"What were you to tell me?"

"To forget everything," said Jaffir with a loud effort as if beginning a
long speech. After that he said nothing more till Lingard murmured, "And
the lady Immada?"

Jaffir collected all his strength. "She hoped no more," he uttered,
distinctly. "The order came to her while she mourned, veiled, apart. I
didn't even see her face."

Lingard swayed over the dying man so heavily that Wasub, standing near
by, hastened to catch him by the shoulder. Jaffir seemed unaware of
anything, and went on staring at the beam.

"Can you hear me, O Jaffir?" asked Lingard.

"I hear."

"I never had the ring. Who could bring it to me?"

"We gave it to the white woman--may Jehannum be her lot!"

"No! It shall be my lot," said Lingard with despairing force, while
Wasub raised both his hands in dismay. "For, listen, Jaffir, if she had
given the ring to me it would have been to one that was dumb, deaf, and
robbed of all courage."

It was impossible to say whether Jaffir had heard. He made no sound,
there was no change in his awful stare, but his prone body moved under
the cotton sheet as if to get further away from the white man. Lingard
got up slowly and making a sign to Wasub to remain where he was, went up
on deck without giving another glance to the dying man. Again it seemed
to him that he was pacing the quarter-deck of a deserted ship. The
mulatto steward, watching through the crack of the pantry door, saw the
Captain stagger into the cuddy and fling-to the door behind him with
a crash. For more than an hour nobody approached that closed door till
Carter coming down the companion stairs spoke without attempting to open
it.

"Are you there, sir?" The answer, "You may come in," comforted the young
man by its strong resonance. He went in.

"Well?"

"Jaffir is dead. This moment. I thought you would want to know."

Lingard looked persistently at Carter, thinking that now Jaffir was
dead there was no one left on the empty earth to speak to him a word of
reproach; no one to know the greatness of his intentions, the bond of
fidelity between him and Hassim and Immada, the depth of his affection
for those people, the earnestness of his visions, and the unbounded
trust that was his reward. By the mad scorn of Jorgenson flaming up
against the life of men, all this was as if it had never been. It had
become a secret locked up in his own breast forever.

"Tell Wasub to open one of the long-cloth bales in the hold, Mr. Carter,
and give the crew a cotton sheet to bury him decently according to their
faith. Let it be done to-night. They must have the boats, too. I suppose
they will want to take him on the sandbank."

"Yes, sir," said Carter.

"Let them have what they want, spades, torches. . . . Wasub will chant
the right words. Paradise is the lot of all True Believers. Do you
understand me, Mr. Carter? Paradise! I wonder what it will be for him!
Unless he gets messages to carry through the jungle, avoiding ambushes,
swimming in storms and knowing no rest, he won't like it."

Carter listened with an unmoved face. It seemed to him that the Captain
had forgotten his presence.

"And all the time he will be sleeping on that sandbank," Lingard began
again, sitting in his old place under the gilt thunderbolts suspended
over his head with his elbows on the table and his hands to his temples.
"If they want a board to set up at the grave let them have a piece of an
oak plank. It will stay there--till the next monsoon. Perhaps."

Carter felt uncomfortable before that tense stare which just missed
him and in that confined cabin seemed awful in its piercing and far-off
expression. But as he had not been dismissed he did not like to go away.

"Everything will be done as you wish it, sir," he said. "I suppose the
yacht will be leaving the first thing to-morrow morning, sir."

"If she doesn't we must give her a solid shot or two to liven her
up--eh, Mr. Carter?"

Carter did not know whether to smile or to look horrified. In the end he
did both, but as to saying anything he found it impossible. But Lingard
did not expect an answer.

"I believe you are going to stay with me, Mr. Carter?"

"I told you, sir, I am your man if you want me."

"The trouble is, Mr. Carter, that I am no longer the man to whom you
spoke that night in Carimata."

"Neither am I, sir, in a manner of speaking."

Lingard, relaxing the tenseness of his stare, looked at the young man,
thoughtfully.

"After all, it is the brig that will want you. She will never change.
The finest craft afloat in these seas. She will carry me about as she
did before, but . . ."

He unclasped his hands, made a sweeping gesture.

Carter gave all his naive sympathy to that man who had certainly rescued
the white people but seemed to have lost his own soul in the attempt.
Carter had heard something from Wasub. He had made out enough of this
story from the old serang's pidgin English to know that the Captain's
native friends, one of them a woman, had perished in a mysterious
catastrophe. But the why of it, and how it came about, remained still
quite incomprehensible to him. Of course, a man like the Captain would
feel terribly cut up. . . .

"You will be soon yourself again, sir," he said in the kindest possible
tone.

With the same simplicity Lingard shook his head. He was thinking of the
dead Jaffir with his last message delivered and untroubled now by all
these matters of the earth. He had been ordered to tell him to forget
everything. Lingard had an inward shudder. In the dismay of his heart he
might have believed his brig to lie under the very wing of the Angel of
Desolation--so oppressive, so final, and hopeless seemed the silence in
which he and Carter looked at each other, wistfully.

Lingard reached for a sheet of paper amongst several lying on the table,
took up a pen, hesitated a moment, and then wrote:

"Meet me at day-break on the sandbank."

He addressed the envelope to Mrs. Travers, Yacht Hermit, and pushed it
across the table.

"Send this on board the schooner at once, Mr. Carter. Wait a moment.
When our boats shove off for the sandbank have the forecastle gun fired.
I want to know when that dead man has left the ship."

He sat alone, leaning his head on his hand, listening, listening
endlessly, for the report of the gun. Would it never come? When it came
at last muffled, distant, with a slight shock through the body of the
brig he remained still with his head leaning on his hand but with a
distinct conviction, with an almost physical certitude, that under the
cotton sheet shrouding the dead man something of himself, too, had left
the ship.



IX

In a roomy cabin, furnished and fitted with austere comfort, Mr. Travers
reposed at ease in a low bed-place under a snowy white sheet and a light
silk coverlet, his head sunk in a white pillow of extreme purity. A
faint scent of lavender hung about the fresh linen. Though lying on his
back like a person who is seriously ill Mr. Travers was conscious
of nothing worse than a great fatigue. Mr. Travers' restfulness had
something faintly triumphant in it. To find himself again on board
his yacht had soothed his vanity and had revived his sense of his own
importance. He contemplated it in a distant perspective, restored to its
proper surroundings and unaffected by an adventure too extraordinary to
trouble a superior mind or even to remain in one's memory for any length
of time. He was not responsible. Like many men ambitious of
directing the affairs of a nation, Mr. Travers disliked the sense of
responsibility. He would not have been above evading it in case of need,
but with perverse loftiness he really, in his heart, scorned it. That
was the reason why he was able to lie at rest and enjoy a sense of
returning vigour. But he did not care much to talk as yet, and that was
why the silence in the stateroom had lasted for hours. The bulkhead lamp
had a green silk shade. It was unnecessary to admit for a moment the
existence of impudence or ruffianism. A discreet knocking at the cabin
door sounded deferential.

Mrs. Travers got up to see what was wanted, and returned without
uttering a single word to the folding armchair by the side of the
bed-place, with an envelope in her hand which she tore open in the
greenish light. Mr. Travers remained incurious but his wife handed to
him an unfolded sheet of paper which he condescended to hold up to his
eyes. It contained only one line of writing. He let the paper fall on
the coverlet and went on reposing as before. It was a sick man's repose.
Mrs. Travers in the armchair, with her hands on the arm-rests, had a
great dignity of attitude.

"I intend to go," she declared after a time.

"You intend to go," repeated Mr. Travers in a feeble, deliberate voice.
"Really, it doesn't matter what you decide to do. All this is of so
little importance. It seems to me that there can be no possible object."

"Perhaps not," she admitted. "But don't you think that the uttermost
farthing should always be paid?"

Mr. Travers' head rolled over on the pillow and gave a covertly scared
look at that outspoken woman. But it rolled back again at once and the
whole man remained passive, the very embodiment of helpless exhaustion.
Mrs. Travers noticed this, and had the unexpected impression that Mr.
Travers was not so ill as he looked. "He's making the most of it. It's
a matter of diplomacy," she thought. She thought this without irony,
bitterness, or disgust. Only her heart sank a little lower and she felt
that she could not remain in the cabin with that man for the rest of the
evening. For all life--yes! But not for that evening.

"It's simply monstrous," murmured the man, who was either very
diplomatic or very exhausted, in a languid manner. "There is something
abnormal in you."

Mrs. Travers got up swiftly.

"One comes across monstrous things. But I assure you that of all the
monsters that wait on what you would call a normal existence the one I
dread most is tediousness. A merciless monster without teeth or claws.
Impotent. Horrible!"

She left the stateroom, vanishing out of it with noiseless resolution.
No power on earth could have kept her in there for another minute. On
deck she found a moonless night with a velvety tepid feeling in the air,
and in the sky a mass of blurred starlight, like the tarnished tinsel of
a worn-out, very old, very tedious firmament. The usual routine of the
yacht had been already resumed, the awnings had been stretched aft, a
solitary round lamp had been hung as usual under the main boom. Out of
the deep gloom behind it d'Alcacer, a long, loose figure, lounged in the
dim light across the deck. D'Alcacer had got promptly in touch with
the store of cigarettes he owed to the Governor General's generosity. A
large, pulsating spark glowed, illuminating redly the design of his
lips under the fine dark moustache, the tip of his nose, his lean chin.
D'Alcacer reproached himself for an unwonted light-heartedness which
had somehow taken possession of him. He had not experienced that sort of
feeling for years. Reprehensible as it was he did not want anything to
disturb it. But as he could not run away openly from Mrs. Travers he
advanced to meet her.

"I do hope you have nothing to tell me," he said with whimsical
earnestness.

"I? No! Have you?"

He assured her he had not, and proffered a request. "Don't let us tell
each other anything, Mrs. Travers. Don't let us think of anything. I
believe it will be the best way to get over the evening." There was real
anxiety in his jesting tone.

"Very well," Mrs. Travers assented, seriously. "But in that case we had
better not remain together." She asked, then, d'Alcacer to go below and
sit with Mr. Travers who didn't like to be left alone. "Though he, too,
doesn't seem to want to be told anything," she added, parenthetically,
and went on: "But I must ask you something else, Mr. d'Alcacer. I
propose to sit down in this chair and go to sleep--if I can. Will you
promise to call me about five o'clock? I prefer not to speak to any one
on deck, and, moreover, I can trust you."

He bowed in silence and went away slowly. Mrs. Travers, turning her
head, perceived a steady light at the brig's yard-arm, very bright among
the tarnished stars. She walked aft and looked over the taffrail. It was
exactly like that other night. She half expected to hear presently the
low, rippling sound of an advancing boat. But the universe remained
without a sound. When she at last dropped into the deck chair she was
absolutely at the end of her power of thinking. "I suppose that's
how the condemned manage to get some sleep on the night before the
execution," she said to herself a moment before her eyelids closed as if
under a leaden hand.

She woke up, with her face wet with tears, out of a vivid dream of
Lingard in chain-mail armour and vaguely recalling a Crusader, but
bare-headed and walking away from her in the depths of an impossible
landscape. She hurried on to catch up with him but a throng of
barbarians with enormous turbans came between them at the last moment
and she lost sight of him forever in the flurry of a ghastly sand-storm.
What frightened her most was that she had not been able to see his face.
It was then that she began to cry over her hard fate. When she woke up
the tears were still rolling down her cheeks and she perceived in the
light of the deck-lamp d'Alcacer arrested a little way off.

"Did you have to speak to me?" she asked.

"No," said d'Alcacer. "You didn't give me time. When I came as far as
this I fancied I heard you sobbing. It must have been a delusion."

"Oh, no. My face is wet yet. It was a dream. I suppose it is five
o'clock. Thank you for being so punctual. I have something to do before
sunrise."

D'Alcacer moved nearer. "I know. You have decided to keep an appointment
on the sandbank. Your husband didn't utter twenty words in all these
hours but he managed to tell me that piece of news."

"I shouldn't have thought," she murmured, vaguely.

"He wanted me to understand that it had no importance," stated d'Alcacer
in a very serious tone.

"Yes. He knows what he is talking about," said Mrs. Travers in such
a bitter tone as to disconcert d'Alcacer for a moment. "I don't see a
single soul about the decks," Mrs. Travers continued, almost directly.

"The very watchmen are asleep," said d'Alcacer.

"There is nothing secret in this expedition, but I prefer not to call
any one. Perhaps you wouldn't mind pulling me off yourself in our small
boat."

It seemed to her that d'Alcacer showed some hesitation. She added: "It
has no importance, you know."

He bowed his assent and preceded her down the side in silence. When she
entered the boat he had the sculls ready and directly she sat down he
shoved off. It was so dark yet that but for the brig's yard-arm light he
could not have kept his direction. He pulled a very deliberate stroke,
looking over his shoulder frequently. It was Mrs. Travers who saw first
the faint gleam of the uncovered sandspit on the black, quiet water.

"A little more to the left," she said. "No, the other way. . . ."
D'Alcacer obeyed her directions but his stroke grew even slower than
before. She spoke again. "Don't you think that the uttermost farthing
should always be paid, Mr. d'Alcacer?"

D'Alcacer glanced over his shoulder, then: "It would be the only
honourable way. But it may be hard. Too hard for our common fearful
hearts."

"I am prepared for anything."

He ceased pulling for a moment . . . "Anything that may be found on
a sandbank," Mrs. Travers went on. "On an arid, insignificant, and
deserted sandbank."

D'Alcacer gave two strokes and ceased again.

"There is room for a whole world of suffering on a sandbank, for all the
bitterness and resentment a human soul may be made to feel."

"Yes, I suppose you would know," she whispered while he gave a stroke or
two and again glanced over his shoulder. She murmured the words:

"Bitterness, resentment," and a moment afterward became aware of the
keel of the boat running up on the sand. But she didn't move, and
d'Alcacer, too, remained seated on the thwart with the blades of his
sculls raised as if ready to drop them and back the dinghy out into deep
water at the first sign.

Mrs. Travers made no sign, but she asked, abruptly: "Mr. d'Alcacer, do
you think I shall ever come back?"

Her tone seemed to him to lack sincerity. But who could tell what
this abruptness covered--sincere fear or mere vanity? He asked himself
whether she was playing a part for his benefit, or only for herself.

"I don't think you quite understand the situation, Mrs. Travers. I
don't think you have a clear idea, either of his simplicity or of his
visionary's pride."

She thought, contemptuously, that there were other things which
d'Alcacer didn't know and surrendered to a sudden temptation to
enlighten him a little.

"You forget his capacity for passion and that his simplicity doesn't
know its own strength."

There was no mistaking the sincerity of that murmur. "She has felt it,"
d'Alcacer said to himself with absolute certitude. He wondered when,
where, how, on what occasion? Mrs. Travers stood up in the stern sheets
suddenly and d'Alcacer leaped on the sand to help her out of the boat.

"Hadn't I better hang about here to take you back again?" he suggested,
as he let go her hand.

"You mustn't!" she exclaimed, anxiously. "You must return to the yacht.
There will be plenty of light in another hour. I will come to this spot
and wave my handkerchief when I want to be taken off."

At their feet the shallow water slept profoundly, the ghostly gleam of
the sands baffled the eye by its lack of form. Far off, the growth of
bushes in the centre raised a massive black bulk against the stars to
the southward. Mrs. Travers lingered for a moment near the boat as if
afraid of the strange solitude of this lonely sandbank and of this lone
sea that seemed to fill the whole encircling universe of remote stars
and limitless shadows. "There is nobody here," she whispered to herself.

"He is somewhere about waiting for you, or I don't know the man,"
affirmed d'Alcacer in an undertone. He gave a vigorous shove which sent
the little boat into the water.

D'Alcacer was perfectly right. Lingard had come up on deck long before
Mrs. Travers woke up with her face wet with tears. The burial party had
returned hours before and the crew of the brig were plunged in
sleep, except for two watchmen, who at Lingard's appearance retreated
noiselessly from the poop. Lingard, leaning on the rail, fell into
a sombre reverie of his past. Reproachful spectres crowded the air,
animated and vocal, not in the articulate language of mortals but
assailing him with faint sobs, deep sighs, and fateful gestures. When he
came to himself and turned about they vanished, all but one dark shape
without sound or movement. Lingard looked at it with secret horror.

"Who's that?" he asked in a troubled voice.

The shadow moved closer: "It's only me, sir," said Carter, who had left
orders to be called directly the Captain was seen on deck.

"Oh, yes, I might have known," mumbled Lingard in some confusion. He
requested Carter to have a boat manned and when after a time the young
man told him that it was ready, he said "All right!" and remained
leaning on his elbow.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Carter after a longish silence, "but are
you going some distance?"

"No, I only want to be put ashore on the sandbank."

Carter was relieved to hear this, but also surprised. "There is nothing
living there, sir," he said.

"I wonder," muttered Lingard.

"But I am certain," Carter insisted. "The last of the women and children
belonging to those cut-throats were taken off by the sampans which
brought you and the yacht-party out."

He walked at Lingard's elbow to the gangway and listened to his orders.

"Directly there is enough light to see flags by, make a signal to the
schooner to heave short on her cable and loose her sails. If there
is any hanging back give them a blank gun, Mr. Carter. I will have no
shilly-shallying. If she doesn't go at the word, by heavens, I will
drive her out. I am still master here--for another day."

The overwhelming sense of immensity, of disturbing emptiness, which
affects those who walk on the sands in the midst of the sea, intimidated
Mrs. Travers. The world resembled a limitless flat shadow which was
motionless and elusive. Then against the southern stars she saw a human
form that isolated and lone appeared to her immense: the shape of a
giant outlined amongst the constellations. As it approached her
it shrank to common proportions, got clear of the stars, lost its
awesomeness, and became menacing in its ominous and silent advance. Mrs.
Travers hastened to speak.

"You have asked for me. I am come. I trust you will have no reason to
regret my obedience."

He walked up quite close to her, bent down slightly to peer into her
face. The first of the tropical dawn put its characteristic cold sheen
into the sky above the Shore of Refuge.

Mrs. Travers did not turn away her head.

"Are you looking for a change in me? No. You won't see it. Now I know
that I couldn't change even if I wanted to. I am made of clay that is
too hard."

"I am looking at you for the first time," said Lingard. "I never could
see you before. There were too many things, too many thoughts, too many
people. No, I never saw you before. But now the world is dead."

He grasped her shoulders, approaching his face close to hers. She never
flinched.

"Yes, the world is dead," she said. "Look your fill then. It won't be
for long."

He let her go as suddenly as though she had struck him. The cold white
light of the tropical dawn had crept past the zenith now and the expanse
of the shallow waters looked cold, too, without stir or ripple within
the enormous rim of the horizon where, to the west, a shadow lingered
still.

"Take my arm," he said.

She did so at once, and turning their backs on the two ships they began
to walk along the sands, but they had not made many steps when Mrs.
Travers perceived an oblong mound with a board planted upright at one
end. Mrs. Travers knew that part of the sands. It was here she used to
walk with her husband and d'Alcacer every evening after dinner,
while the yacht lay stranded and her boats were away in search of
assistance--which they had found--which they had found! This was
something that she had never seen there before. Lingard had suddenly
stopped and looked at it moodily. She pressed his arm to rouse him and
asked, "What is this?"

"This is a grave," said Lingard in a low voice, and still gazing at the
heap of sand. "I had him taken out of the ship last night. Strange," he
went on in a musing tone, "how much a grave big enough for one man only
can hold. His message was to forget everything."

"Never, never," murmured Mrs. Travers. "I wish I had been on board the
Emma. . . . You had a madman there," she cried out, suddenly. They moved
on again, Lingard looking at Mrs. Travers who was leaning on his arm.

"I wonder which of us two was mad," he said.

"I wonder you can bear to look at me," she murmured. Then Lingard spoke
again.

"I had to see you once more."

"That abominable Jorgenson," she whispered to herself.

"No, no, he gave me my chance--before he gave me up."

Mrs. Travers disengaged her arm and Lingard stopped, too, facing her in
a long silence.

"I could not refuse to meet you," said Mrs. Travers at last. "I could
not refuse you anything. You have all the right on your side and I don't
care what you do or say. But I wonder at my own courage when I think of
the confession I have to make." She advanced, laid her hand on Lingard's
shoulder and spoke earnestly. "I shuddered at the thought of meeting you
again. And now you must listen to my confession."

"Don't say a word," said Lingard in an untroubled voice and never taking
his eyes from her face. "I know already."

"You can't," she cried. Her hand slipped off his shoulder. "Then why
don't you throw me into the sea?" she asked, passionately. "Am I to live
on hating myself?"

"You mustn't!" he said with an accent of fear. "Haven't you understood
long ago that if you had given me that ring it would have been just the
same?"

"Am I to believe this? No, no! You are too generous to a mere sham. You
are the most magnanimous of men but you are throwing it away on me.
Do you think it is remorse that I feel? No. If it is anything it is
despair. But you must have known that--and yet you wanted to look at me
again."

"I told you I never had a chance before," said Lingard in an unmoved
voice. "It was only after I heard they gave you the ring that I felt the
hold you have got on me. How could I tell before? What has hate or love
to do with you and me? Hate. Love. What can touch you? For me you stand
above death itself; for I see now that as long as I live you will never
die."

They confronted each other at the southern edge of the sands as if
afloat on the open sea. The central ridge heaped up by the winds masked
from them the very mastheads of the two ships and the growing brightness
of the light only augmented the sense of their invincible solitude
in the awful serenity of the world. Mrs. Travers suddenly put her arm
across her eyes and averted her face.

Then he added:

"That's all."

Mrs. Travers let fall her arm and began to retrace her steps,
unsupported and alone. Lingard followed her on the edge of the sand
uncovered by the ebbing tide. A belt of orange light appeared in the
cold sky above the black forest of the Shore of Refuge and faded quickly
to gold that melted soon into a blinding and colourless glare. It was
not till after she had passed Jaffir's grave that Mrs. Travers stole a
backward glance and discovered that she was alone. Lingard had left her
to herself. She saw him sitting near the mound of sand, his back bowed,
his hands clasping his knees, as if he had obeyed the invincible call of
his great visions haunting the grave of the faithful messenger. Shading
her eyes with her hand Mrs. Travers watched the immobility of that man
of infinite illusions. He never moved, he never raised his head. It was
all over. He was done with her. She waited a little longer and then went
slowly on her way.

Shaw, now acting second mate of the yacht, came off with another hand
in a little boat to take Mrs. Travers on board. He stared at her like an
offended owl. How the lady could suddenly appear at sunrise waving her
handkerchief from the sandbank he could not understand. For, even if she
had managed to row herself off secretly in the dark, she could not have
sent the empty boat back to the yacht. It was to Shaw a sort of improper
miracle.

D'Alcacer hurried to the top of the side ladder and as they met on deck
Mrs. Travers astonished him by saying in a strangely provoking tone:

"You were right. I have come back." Then with a little laugh which
impressed d'Alcacer painfully she added with a nod downward, "and
Martin, too, was perfectly right. It was absolutely unimportant."

She walked on straight to the taffrail and d'Alcacer followed her aft,
alarmed at her white face, at her brusque movements, at the nervous way
in which she was fumbling at her throat. He waited discreetly till she
turned round and thrust out toward him her open palm on which he saw a
thick gold ring set with a large green stone.

"Look at this, Mr. d'Alcacer. This is the thing which I asked you
whether I should give up or conceal--the symbol of the last hour--the
call of the supreme minute. And he said it would have made no
difference! He is the most magnanimous of men and the uttermost farthing
has been paid. He has done with me. The most magnanimous . . . but there
is a grave on the sands by which I left him sitting with no glance
to spare for me. His last glance on earth! I am left with this thing.
Absolutely unimportant. A dead talisman." With a nervous jerk she flung
the ring overboard, then with a hurried entreaty to d'Alcacer, "Stay
here a moment. Don't let anybody come near us," she burst into tears and
turned her back on him.

Lingard returned on board his brig and in the early afternoon the
Lightning got under way, running past the schooner to give her a lead
through the maze of Shoals. Lingard was on deck but never looked once
at the following vessel. Directly both ships were in clear water he went
below saying to Carter: "You know what to do."

"Yes, sir," said Carter.

Shortly after his Captain had disappeared from the deck Carter laid the
main topsail to the mast. The Lightning lost her way while the schooner
with all her light kites abroad passed close under her stern holding on
her course. Mrs. Travers stood aft very rigid, gripping the rail with
both hands. The brim of her white hat was blown upward on one side and
her yachting skirt stirred in the breeze. By her side d'Alcacer waved
his hand courteously. Carter raised his cap to them.

During the afternoon he paced the poop with measured steps, with a pair
of binoculars in his hand. At last he laid the glasses down, glanced at
the compass-card and walked to the cabin skylight which was open.

"Just lost her, sir," he said. All was still down there. He raised his
voice a little:

"You told me to let you know directly I lost sight of the yacht."

The sound of a stifled groan reached the attentive Carter and a weary
voice said, "All right, I am coming."

When Lingard stepped out on the poop of the Lightning the open water
had turned purple already in the evening light, while to the east the
Shallows made a steely glitter all along the sombre line of the shore.
Lingard, with folded arms, looked over the sea. Carter approached him
and spoke quietly.

"The tide has turned and the night is coming on. Hadn't we better get
away from these Shoals, sir?"

Lingard did not stir.

"Yes, the night is coming on. You may fill the main topsail, Mr.
Carter," he said and he relapsed into silence with his eyes fixed in
the southern board where the shadows were creeping stealthily toward the
setting sun. Presently Carter stood at his elbow again.

"The brig is beginning to forge ahead, sir," he said in a warning tone.

Lingard came out of his absorption with a deep tremor of his powerful
frame like the shudder of an uprooted tree.

"How was the yacht heading when you lost sight of her?" he asked.

"South as near as possible," answered Carter. "Will you give me a course
to steer for the night, sir?"

Lingard's lips trembled before he spoke but his voice was calm.

"Steer north," he said.




                                   THE
                               SECRET AGENT
                              A SIMPLE TALE


                                    BY
                              JOSEPH CONRAD

                              SECOND EDITION

                              METHUEN & CO.,
                           36 ESSEX STREET W C.
                                  LONDON

                 _First Published_ . . . _September_ 1907

                  _Second Edition_ . . . _October_ 1907

                                    TO
                               H. G. WELLS

                   THE CHRONICLER OF MR LEWISHAM’S LOVE
                     THE BIOGRAPHER OF KIPPS AND THE
                      HISTORIAN OF THE AGES TO COME

                   THIS SIMPLE TALE OF THE XIX CENTURY
                        IS AFFECTIONATELY OFFERED




CHAPTER I


Mr Verloc, going out in the morning, left his shop nominally in charge of
his brother-in-law.  It could be done, because there was very little
business at any time, and practically none at all before the evening.  Mr
Verloc cared but little about his ostensible business.  And, moreover,
his wife was in charge of his brother-in-law.

The shop was small, and so was the house.  It was one of those grimy
brick houses which existed in large quantities before the era of
reconstruction dawned upon London.  The shop was a square box of a place,
with the front glazed in small panes.  In the daytime the door remained
closed; in the evening it stood discreetly but suspiciously ajar.

The window contained photographs of more or less undressed dancing girls;
nondescript packages in wrappers like patent medicines; closed yellow
paper envelopes, very flimsy, and marked two-and-six in heavy black
figures; a few numbers of ancient French comic publications hung across a
string as if to dry; a dingy blue china bowl, a casket of black wood,
bottles of marking ink, and rubber stamps; a few books, with titles
hinting at impropriety; a few apparently old copies of obscure
newspapers, badly printed, with titles like _The Torch_, _The
Gong_—rousing titles.  And the two gas jets inside the panes were always
turned low, either for economy’s sake or for the sake of the customers.

These customers were either very young men, who hung about the window for
a time before slipping in suddenly; or men of a more mature age, but
looking generally as if they were not in funds.  Some of that last kind
had the collars of their overcoats turned right up to their moustaches,
and traces of mud on the bottom of their nether garments, which had the
appearance of being much worn and not very valuable.  And the legs inside
them did not, as a general rule, seem of much account either.  With their
hands plunged deep in the side pockets of their coats, they dodged in
sideways, one shoulder first, as if afraid to start the bell going.

The bell, hung on the door by means of a curved ribbon of steel, was
difficult to circumvent.  It was hopelessly cracked; but of an evening,
at the slightest provocation, it clattered behind the customer with
impudent virulence.

It clattered; and at that signal, through the dusty glass door behind the
painted deal counter, Mr Verloc would issue hastily from the parlour at
the back.  His eyes were naturally heavy; he had an air of having
wallowed, fully dressed, all day on an unmade bed.  Another man would
have felt such an appearance a distinct disadvantage.  In a commercial
transaction of the retail order much depends on the seller’s engaging and
amiable aspect.  But Mr Verloc knew his business, and remained
undisturbed by any sort of æsthetic doubt about his appearance.  With a
firm, steady-eyed impudence, which seemed to hold back the threat of some
abominable menace, he would proceed to sell over the counter some object
looking obviously and scandalously not worth the money which passed in
the transaction: a small cardboard box with apparently nothing inside,
for instance, or one of those carefully closed yellow flimsy envelopes,
or a soiled volume in paper covers with a promising title.  Now and then
it happened that one of the faded, yellow dancing girls would get sold to
an amateur, as though she had been alive and young.

Sometimes it was Mrs Verloc who would appear at the call of the cracked
bell.  Winnie Verloc was a young woman with a full bust, in a tight
bodice, and with broad hips.  Her hair was very tidy.  Steady-eyed like
her husband, she preserved an air of unfathomable indifference behind the
rampart of the counter.  Then the customer of comparatively tender years
would get suddenly disconcerted at having to deal with a woman, and with
rage in his heart would proffer a request for a bottle of marking ink,
retail value sixpence (price in Verloc’s shop one-and-sixpence), which,
once outside, he would drop stealthily into the gutter.

The evening visitors—the men with collars turned up and soft hats rammed
down—nodded familiarly to Mrs Verloc, and with a muttered greeting,
lifted up the flap at the end of the counter in order to pass into the
back parlour, which gave access to a passage and to a steep flight of
stairs.  The door of the shop was the only means of entrance to the house
in which Mr Verloc carried on his business of a seller of shady wares,
exercised his vocation of a protector of society, and cultivated his
domestic virtues.  These last were pronounced.  He was thoroughly
domesticated.  Neither his spiritual, nor his mental, nor his physical
needs were of the kind to take him much abroad.  He found at home the
ease of his body and the peace of his conscience, together with Mrs
Verloc’s wifely attentions and Mrs Verloc’s mother’s deferential regard.

Winnie’s mother was a stout, wheezy woman, with a large brown face.  She
wore a black wig under a white cap.  Her swollen legs rendered her
inactive.  She considered herself to be of French descent, which might
have been true; and after a good many years of married life with a
licensed victualler of the more common sort, she provided for the years
of widowhood by letting furnished apartments for gentlemen near Vauxhall
Bridge Road in a square once of some splendour and still included in the
district of Belgravia.  This topographical fact was of some advantage in
advertising her rooms; but the patrons of the worthy widow were not
exactly of the fashionable kind.  Such as they were, her daughter Winnie
helped to look after them.  Traces of the French descent which the widow
boasted of were apparent in Winnie too.  They were apparent in the
extremely neat and artistic arrangement of her glossy dark hair.  Winnie
had also other charms: her youth; her full, rounded form; her clear
complexion; the provocation of her unfathomable reserve, which never went
so far as to prevent conversation, carried on on the lodgers’ part with
animation, and on hers with an equable amiability.  It must be that Mr
Verloc was susceptible to these fascinations.  Mr Verloc was an
intermittent patron.  He came and went without any very apparent reason.
He generally arrived in London (like the influenza) from the Continent,
only he arrived unheralded by the Press; and his visitations set in with
great severity.  He breakfasted in bed, and remained wallowing there with
an air of quiet enjoyment till noon every day—and sometimes even to a
later hour.  But when he went out he seemed to experience a great
difficulty in finding his way back to his temporary home in the
Belgravian square.  He left it late, and returned to it early—as early as
three or four in the morning; and on waking up at ten addressed Winnie,
bringing in the breakfast tray, with jocular, exhausted civility, in the
hoarse, failing tones of a man who had been talking vehemently for many
hours together.  His prominent, heavy-lidded eyes rolled sideways
amorously and languidly, the bedclothes were pulled up to his chin, and
his dark smooth moustache covered his thick lips capable of much honeyed
banter.

In Winnie’s mother’s opinion Mr Verloc was a very nice gentleman.  From
her life’s experience gathered in various “business houses” the good
woman had taken into her retirement an ideal of gentlemanliness as
exhibited by the patrons of private-saloon bars.  Mr Verloc approached
that ideal; he attained it, in fact.

“Of course, we’ll take over your furniture, mother,” Winnie had remarked.

The lodging-house was to be given up.  It seems it would not answer to
carry it on.  It would have been too much trouble for Mr Verloc.  It
would not have been convenient for his other business.  What his business
was he did not say; but after his engagement to Winnie he took the
trouble to get up before noon, and descending the basement stairs, make
himself pleasant to Winnie’s mother in the breakfast-room downstairs
where she had her motionless being.  He stroked the cat, poked the fire,
had his lunch served to him there.  He left its slightly stuffy cosiness
with evident reluctance, but, all the same, remained out till the night
was far advanced.  He never offered to take Winnie to theatres, as such a
nice gentleman ought to have done.  His evenings were occupied.  His work
was in a way political, he told Winnie once.  She would have, he warned
her, to be very nice to his political friends.

And with her straight, unfathomable glance she answered that she would be
so, of course.

How much more he told her as to his occupation it was impossible for
Winnie’s mother to discover.  The married couple took her over with the
furniture.  The mean aspect of the shop surprised her.  The change from
the Belgravian square to the narrow street in Soho affected her legs
adversely.  They became of an enormous size.  On the other hand, she
experienced a complete relief from material cares.  Her son-in-law’s
heavy good nature inspired her with a sense of absolute safety.  Her
daughter’s future was obviously assured, and even as to her son Stevie
she need have no anxiety.  She had not been able to conceal from herself
that he was a terrible encumbrance, that poor Stevie.  But in view of
Winnie’s fondness for her delicate brother, and of Mr Verloc’s kind and
generous disposition, she felt that the poor boy was pretty safe in this
rough world.  And in her heart of hearts she was not perhaps displeased
that the Verlocs had no children.  As that circumstance seemed perfectly
indifferent to Mr Verloc, and as Winnie found an object of quasi-maternal
affection in her brother, perhaps this was just as well for poor Stevie.

For he was difficult to dispose of, that boy.  He was delicate and, in a
frail way, good-looking too, except for the vacant droop of his lower
lip.  Under our excellent system of compulsory education he had learned
to read and write, notwithstanding the unfavourable aspect of the lower
lip.  But as errand-boy he did not turn out a great success.  He forgot
his messages; he was easily diverted from the straight path of duty by
the attractions of stray cats and dogs, which he followed down narrow
alleys into unsavoury courts; by the comedies of the streets, which he
contemplated open-mouthed, to the detriment of his employer’s interests;
or by the dramas of fallen horses, whose pathos and violence induced him
sometimes to shriek pierceingly in a crowd, which disliked to be
disturbed by sounds of distress in its quiet enjoyment of the national
spectacle.  When led away by a grave and protecting policeman, it would
often become apparent that poor Stevie had forgotten his address—at least
for a time.  A brusque question caused him to stutter to the point of
suffocation.  When startled by anything perplexing he used to squint
horribly.  However, he never had any fits (which was encouraging); and
before the natural outbursts of impatience on the part of his father he
could always, in his childhood’s days, run for protection behind the
short skirts of his sister Winnie.  On the other hand, he might have been
suspected of hiding a fund of reckless naughtiness.  When he had reached
the age of fourteen a friend of his late father, an agent for a foreign
preserved milk firm, having given him an opening as office-boy, he was
discovered one foggy afternoon, in his chief’s absence, busy letting off
fireworks on the staircase.  He touched off in quick succession a set of
fierce rockets, angry catherine wheels, loudly exploding squibs—and the
matter might have turned out very serious.  An awful panic spread through
the whole building.  Wild-eyed, choking clerks stampeded through the
passages full of smoke, silk hats and elderly business men could be seen
rolling independently down the stairs.  Stevie did not seem to derive any
personal gratification from what he had done.  His motives for this
stroke of originality were difficult to discover.  It was only later on
that Winnie obtained from him a misty and confused confession.  It seems
that two other office-boys in the building had worked upon his feelings
by tales of injustice and oppression till they had wrought his compassion
to the pitch of that frenzy.  But his father’s friend, of course,
dismissed him summarily as likely to ruin his business.  After that
altruistic exploit Stevie was put to help wash the dishes in the basement
kitchen, and to black the boots of the gentlemen patronising the
Belgravian mansion.  There was obviously no future in such work.  The
gentlemen tipped him a shilling now and then.  Mr Verloc showed himself
the most generous of lodgers.  But altogether all that did not amount to
much either in the way of gain or prospects; so that when Winnie
announced her engagement to Mr Verloc her mother could not help
wondering, with a sigh and a glance towards the scullery, what would
become of poor Stephen now.

It appeared that Mr Verloc was ready to take him over together with his
wife’s mother and with the furniture, which was the whole visible fortune
of the family.  Mr Verloc gathered everything as it came to his broad,
good-natured breast.  The furniture was disposed to the best advantage
all over the house, but Mrs Verloc’s mother was confined to two back
rooms on the first floor.  The luckless Stevie slept in one of them.  By
this time a growth of thin fluffy hair had come to blur, like a golden
mist, the sharp line of his small lower jaw.  He helped his sister with
blind love and docility in her household duties.  Mr Verloc thought that
some occupation would be good for him.  His spare time he occupied by
drawing circles with compass and pencil on a piece of paper.  He applied
himself to that pastime with great industry, with his elbows spread out
and bowed low over the kitchen table.  Through the open door of the
parlour at the back of the shop Winnie, his sister, glanced at him from
time to time with maternal vigilance.




CHAPTER II


Such was the house, the household, and the business Mr Verloc left behind
him on his way westward at the hour of half-past ten in the morning.  It
was unusually early for him; his whole person exhaled the charm of almost
dewy freshness; he wore his blue cloth overcoat unbuttoned; his boots
were shiny; his cheeks, freshly shaven, had a sort of gloss; and even his
heavy-lidded eyes, refreshed by a night of peaceful slumber, sent out
glances of comparative alertness.  Through the park railings these
glances beheld men and women riding in the Row, couples cantering past
harmoniously, others advancing sedately at a walk, loitering groups of
three or four, solitary horsemen looking unsociable, and solitary women
followed at a long distance by a groom with a cockade to his hat and a
leather belt over his tight-fitting coat.  Carriages went bowling by,
mostly two-horse broughams, with here and there a victoria with the skin
of some wild beast inside and a woman’s face and hat emerging above the
folded hood.  And a peculiarly London sun—against which nothing could be
said except that it looked bloodshot—glorified all this by its stare.  It
hung at a moderate elevation above Hyde Park Corner with an air of
punctual and benign vigilance.  The very pavement under Mr Verloc’s feet
had an old-gold tinge in that diffused light, in which neither wall, nor
tree, nor beast, nor man cast a shadow.  Mr Verloc was going westward
through a town without shadows in an atmosphere of powdered old gold.
There were red, coppery gleams on the roofs of houses, on the corners of
walls, on the panels of carriages, on the very coats of the horses, and
on the broad back of Mr Verloc’s overcoat, where they produced a dull
effect of rustiness.  But Mr Verloc was not in the least conscious of
having got rusty.  He surveyed through the park railings the evidences of
the town’s opulence and luxury with an approving eye.  All these people
had to be protected.  Protection is the first necessity of opulence and
luxury.  They had to be protected; and their horses, carriages, houses,
servants had to be protected; and the source of their wealth had to be
protected in the heart of the city and the heart of the country; the
whole social order favourable to their hygienic idleness had to be
protected against the shallow enviousness of unhygienic labour.  It had
to—and Mr Verloc would have rubbed his hands with satisfaction had he not
been constitutionally averse from every superfluous exertion.  His
idleness was not hygienic, but it suited him very well.  He was in a
manner devoted to it with a sort of inert fanaticism, or perhaps rather
with a fanatical inertness.  Born of industrious parents for a life of
toil, he had embraced indolence from an impulse as profound as
inexplicable and as imperious as the impulse which directs a man’s
preference for one particular woman in a given thousand.  He was too lazy
even for a mere demagogue, for a workman orator, for a leader of labour.
It was too much trouble.  He required a more perfect form of ease; or it
might have been that he was the victim of a philosophical unbelief in the
effectiveness of every human effort.  Such a form of indolence requires,
implies, a certain amount of intelligence.  Mr Verloc was not devoid of
intelligence—and at the notion of a menaced social order he would perhaps
have winked to himself if there had not been an effort to make in that
sign of scepticism.  His big, prominent eyes were not well adapted to
winking.  They were rather of the sort that closes solemnly in slumber
with majestic effect.

Undemonstrative and burly in a fat-pig style, Mr Verloc, without either
rubbing his hands with satisfaction or winking sceptically at his
thoughts, proceeded on his way.  He trod the pavement heavily with his
shiny boots, and his general get-up was that of a well-to-do mechanic in
business for himself.  He might have been anything from a picture-frame
maker to a lock-smith; an employer of labour in a small way.  But there
was also about him an indescribable air which no mechanic could have
acquired in the practice of his handicraft however dishonestly exercised:
the air common to men who live on the vices, the follies, or the baser
fears of mankind; the air of moral nihilism common to keepers of gambling
hells and disorderly houses; to private detectives and inquiry agents; to
drink sellers and, I should say, to the sellers of invigorating electric
belts and to the inventors of patent medicines.  But of that last I am
not sure, not having carried my investigations so far into the depths.
For all I know, the expression of these last may be perfectly diabolic.
I shouldn’t be surprised.  What I want to affirm is that Mr Verloc’s
expression was by no means diabolic.

Before reaching Knightsbridge, Mr Verloc took a turn to the left out of
the busy main thoroughfare, uproarious with the traffic of swaying
omnibuses and trotting vans, in the almost silent, swift flow of hansoms.
Under his hat, worn with a slight backward tilt, his hair had been
carefully brushed into respectful sleekness; for his business was with an
Embassy.  And Mr Verloc, steady like a rock—a soft kind of rock—marched
now along a street which could with every propriety be described as
private.  In its breadth, emptiness, and extent it had the majesty of
inorganic nature, of matter that never dies.  The only reminder of
mortality was a doctor’s brougham arrested in august solitude close to
the curbstone.  The polished knockers of the doors gleamed as far as the
eye could reach, the clean windows shone with a dark opaque lustre.  And
all was still.  But a milk cart rattled noisily across the distant
perspective; a butcher boy, driving with the noble recklessness of a
charioteer at Olympic Games, dashed round the corner sitting high above a
pair of red wheels.  A guilty-looking cat issuing from under the stones
ran for a while in front of Mr Verloc, then dived into another basement;
and a thick police constable, looking a stranger to every emotion, as if
he too were part of inorganic nature, surging apparently out of a
lamp-post, took not the slightest notice of Mr Verloc.  With a turn to
the left Mr Verloc pursued his way along a narrow street by the side of a
yellow wall which, for some inscrutable reason, had No. 1 Chesham Square
written on it in black letters.  Chesham Square was at least sixty yards
away, and Mr Verloc, cosmopolitan enough not to be deceived by London’s
topographical mysteries, held on steadily, without a sign of surprise or
indignation.  At last, with business-like persistency, he reached the
Square, and made diagonally for the number 10.  This belonged to an
imposing carriage gate in a high, clean wall between two houses, of which
one rationally enough bore the number 9 and the other was numbered 37;
but the fact that this last belonged to Porthill Street, a street well
known in the neighbourhood, was proclaimed by an inscription placed above
the ground-floor windows by whatever highly efficient authority is
charged with the duty of keeping track of London’s strayed houses.  Why
powers are not asked of Parliament (a short act would do) for compelling
those edifices to return where they belong is one of the mysteries of
municipal administration.  Mr Verloc did not trouble his head about it,
his mission in life being the protection of the social mechanism, not its
perfectionment or even its criticism.

It was so early that the porter of the Embassy issued hurriedly out of
his lodge still struggling with the left sleeve of his livery coat.  His
waistcoat was red, and he wore knee-breeches, but his aspect was
flustered.  Mr Verloc, aware of the rush on his flank, drove it off by
simply holding out an envelope stamped with the arms of the Embassy, and
passed on.  He produced the same talisman also to the footman who opened
the door, and stood back to let him enter the hall.

A clear fire burned in a tall fireplace, and an elderly man standing with
his back to it, in evening dress and with a chain round his neck, glanced
up from the newspaper he was holding spread out in both hands before his
calm and severe face.  He didn’t move; but another lackey, in brown
trousers and claw-hammer coat edged with thin yellow cord, approaching Mr
Verloc listened to the murmur of his name, and turning round on his heel
in silence, began to walk, without looking back once.  Mr Verloc, thus
led along a ground-floor passage to the left of the great carpeted
staircase, was suddenly motioned to enter a quite small room furnished
with a heavy writing-table and a few chairs.  The servant shut the door,
and Mr Verloc remained alone.  He did not take a seat.  With his hat and
stick held in one hand he glanced about, passing his other podgy hand
over his uncovered sleek head.

Another door opened noiselessly, and Mr Verloc immobilising his glance in
that direction saw at first only black clothes, the bald top of a head,
and a drooping dark grey whisker on each side of a pair of wrinkled
hands.  The person who had entered was holding a batch of papers before
his eyes and walked up to the table with a rather mincing step, turning
the papers over the while.  Privy Councillor Wurmt, Chancelier
d’Ambassade, was rather short-sighted.  This meritorious official laying
the papers on the table, disclosed a face of pasty complexion and of
melancholy ugliness surrounded by a lot of fine, long dark grey hairs,
barred heavily by thick and bushy eyebrows.  He put on a black-framed
pince-nez upon a blunt and shapeless nose, and seemed struck by Mr
Verloc’s appearance.  Under the enormous eyebrows his weak eyes blinked
pathetically through the glasses.

He made no sign of greeting; neither did Mr Verloc, who certainly knew
his place; but a subtle change about the general outlines of his
shoulders and back suggested a slight bending of Mr Verloc’s spine under
the vast surface of his overcoat.  The effect was of unobtrusive
deference.

“I have here some of your reports,” said the bureaucrat in an
unexpectedly soft and weary voice, and pressing the tip of his forefinger
on the papers with force.  He paused; and Mr Verloc, who had recognised
his own handwriting very well, waited in an almost breathless silence.
“We are not very satisfied with the attitude of the police here,” the
other continued, with every appearance of mental fatigue.

The shoulders of Mr Verloc, without actually moving, suggested a shrug.
And for the first time since he left his home that morning his lips
opened.

“Every country has its police,” he said philosophically.  But as the
official of the Embassy went on blinking at him steadily he felt
constrained to add: “Allow me to observe that I have no means of action
upon the police here.”

“What is desired,” said the man of papers, “is the occurrence of
something definite which should stimulate their vigilance.  That is
within your province—is it not so?”

Mr Verloc made no answer except by a sigh, which escaped him
involuntarily, for instantly he tried to give his face a cheerful
expression.  The official blinked doubtfully, as if affected by the dim
light of the room.  He repeated vaguely.

“The vigilance of the police—and the severity of the magistrates.  The
general leniency of the judicial procedure here, and the utter absence of
all repressive measures, are a scandal to Europe.  What is wished for
just now is the accentuation of the unrest—of the fermentation which
undoubtedly exists—”

“Undoubtedly, undoubtedly,” broke in Mr Verloc in a deep deferential bass
of an oratorical quality, so utterly different from the tone in which he
had spoken before that his interlocutor remained profoundly surprised.
“It exists to a dangerous degree.  My reports for the last twelve months
make it sufficiently clear.”

“Your reports for the last twelve months,” State Councillor Wurmt began
in his gentle and dispassionate tone, “have been read by me.  I failed to
discover why you wrote them at all.”

A sad silence reigned for a time.  Mr Verloc seemed to have swallowed his
tongue, and the other gazed at the papers on the table fixedly.  At last
he gave them a slight push.

“The state of affairs you expose there is assumed to exist as the first
condition of your employment.  What is required at present is not
writing, but the bringing to light of a distinct, significant fact—I
would almost say of an alarming fact.”

“I need not say that all my endeavours shall be directed to that end,” Mr
Verloc said, with convinced modulations in his conversational husky tone.
But the sense of being blinked at watchfully behind the blind glitter of
these eye-glasses on the other side of the table disconcerted him.  He
stopped short with a gesture of absolute devotion.  The useful,
hard-working, if obscure member of the Embassy had an air of being
impressed by some newly-born thought.

“You are very corpulent,” he said.

This observation, really of a psychological nature, and advanced with the
modest hesitation of an officeman more familiar with ink and paper than
with the requirements of active life, stung Mr Verloc in the manner of a
rude personal remark.  He stepped back a pace.

“Eh?  What were you pleased to say?” he exclaimed, with husky resentment.

The Chancelier d’Ambassade entrusted with the conduct of this interview
seemed to find it too much for him.

“I think,” he said, “that you had better see Mr Vladimir.  Yes, decidedly
I think you ought to see Mr Vladimir.  Be good enough to wait here,” he
added, and went out with mincing steps.

At once Mr Verloc passed his hand over his hair.  A slight perspiration
had broken out on his forehead.  He let the air escape from his pursed-up
lips like a man blowing at a spoonful of hot soup.  But when the servant
in brown appeared at the door silently, Mr Verloc had not moved an inch
from the place he had occupied throughout the interview.  He had remained
motionless, as if feeling himself surrounded by pitfalls.

He walked along a passage lighted by a lonely gas-jet, then up a flight
of winding stairs, and through a glazed and cheerful corridor on the
first floor.  The footman threw open a door, and stood aside.  The feet
of Mr Verloc felt a thick carpet.  The room was large, with three
windows; and a young man with a shaven, big face, sitting in a roomy
arm-chair before a vast mahogany writing-table, said in French to the
Chancelier d’Ambassade, who was going out with the papers in his hand:

“You are quite right, mon cher.  He’s fat—the animal.”

Mr Vladimir, First Secretary, had a drawing-room reputation as an
agreeable and entertaining man.  He was something of a favourite in
society.  His wit consisted in discovering droll connections between
incongruous ideas; and when talking in that strain he sat well forward of
his seat, with his left hand raised, as if exhibiting his funny
demonstrations between the thumb and forefinger, while his round and
clean-shaven face wore an expression of merry perplexity.

But there was no trace of merriment or perplexity in the way he looked at
Mr Verloc.  Lying far back in the deep arm-chair, with squarely spread
elbows, and throwing one leg over a thick knee, he had with his smooth
and rosy countenance the air of a preternaturally thriving baby that will
not stand nonsense from anybody.

“You understand French, I suppose?” he said.

Mr Verloc stated huskily that he did.  His whole vast bulk had a forward
inclination.  He stood on the carpet in the middle of the room, clutching
his hat and stick in one hand; the other hung lifelessly by his side.  He
muttered unobtrusively somewhere deep down in his throat something about
having done his military service in the French artillery.  At once, with
contemptuous perversity, Mr Vladimir changed the language, and began to
speak idiomatic English without the slightest trace of a foreign accent.

“Ah!  Yes.  Of course.  Let’s see.  How much did you get for obtaining
the design of the improved breech-block of their new field-gun?”

“Five years’ rigorous confinement in a fortress,” Mr Verloc answered
unexpectedly, but without any sign of feeling.

“You got off easily,” was Mr Vladimir’s comment.  “And, anyhow, it served
you right for letting yourself get caught.  What made you go in for that
sort of thing—eh?”

Mr Verloc’s husky conversational voice was heard speaking of youth, of a
fatal infatuation for an unworthy—

“Aha!  Cherchez la femme,” Mr Vladimir deigned to interrupt, unbending,
but without affability; there was, on the contrary, a touch of grimness
in his condescension.  “How long have you been employed by the Embassy
here?” he asked.

“Ever since the time of the late Baron Stott-Wartenheim,” Mr Verloc
answered in subdued tones, and protruding his lips sadly, in sign of
sorrow for the deceased diplomat.  The First Secretary observed this play
of physiognomy steadily.

“Ah! ever since.  Well!  What have you got to say for yourself?” he asked
sharply.

Mr Verloc answered with some surprise that he was not aware of having
anything special to say.  He had been summoned by a letter—And he plunged
his hand busily into the side pocket of his overcoat, but before the
mocking, cynical watchfulness of Mr Vladimir, concluded to leave it
there.

“Bah!” said that latter.  “What do you mean by getting out of condition
like this?  You haven’t got even the physique of your profession.  You—a
member of a starving proletariat—never!  You—a desperate socialist or
anarchist—which is it?”

“Anarchist,” stated Mr Verloc in a deadened tone.

“Bosh!” went on Mr Vladimir, without raising his voice.  “You startled
old Wurmt himself.  You wouldn’t deceive an idiot.  They all are that
by-the-by, but you seem to me simply impossible.  So you began your
connection with us by stealing the French gun designs.  And you got
yourself caught.  That must have been very disagreeable to our
Government.  You don’t seem to be very smart.”

Mr Verloc tried to exculpate himself huskily.

“As I’ve had occasion to observe before, a fatal infatuation for an
unworthy—”

Mr Vladimir raised a large white, plump hand.  “Ah, yes.  The unlucky
attachment—of your youth.  She got hold of the money, and then sold you
to the police—eh?”

The doleful change in Mr Verloc’s physiognomy, the momentary drooping of
his whole person, confessed that such was the regrettable case.  Mr
Vladimir’s hand clasped the ankle reposing on his knee.  The sock was of
dark blue silk.

“You see, that was not very clever of you.  Perhaps you are too
susceptible.”

Mr Verloc intimated in a throaty, veiled murmur that he was no longer
young.

“Oh!  That’s a failing which age does not cure,” Mr Vladimir remarked,
with sinister familiarity.  “But no!  You are too fat for that.  You
could not have come to look like this if you had been at all susceptible.
I’ll tell you what I think is the matter: you are a lazy fellow.  How
long have you been drawing pay from this Embassy?”

“Eleven years,” was the answer, after a moment of sulky hesitation.
“I’ve been charged with several missions to London while His Excellency
Baron Stott-Wartenheim was still Ambassador in Paris.  Then by his
Excellency’s instructions I settled down in London.  I am English.”

“You are!  Are you?  Eh?”

“A natural-born British subject,” Mr Verloc said stolidly.  “But my
father was French, and so—”

“Never mind explaining,” interrupted the other.  “I daresay you could
have been legally a Marshal of France and a Member of Parliament in
England—and then, indeed, you would have been of some use to our
Embassy.”

This flight of fancy provoked something like a faint smile on Mr Verloc’s
face.  Mr Vladimir retained an imperturbable gravity.

“But, as I’ve said, you are a lazy fellow; you don’t use your
opportunities.  In the time of Baron Stott-Wartenheim we had a lot of
soft-headed people running this Embassy.  They caused fellows of your
sort to form a false conception of the nature of a secret service fund.
It is my business to correct this misapprehension by telling you what the
secret service is not.  It is not a philanthropic institution.  I’ve had
you called here on purpose to tell you this.”

Mr Vladimir observed the forced expression of bewilderment on Verloc’s
face, and smiled sarcastically.

“I see that you understand me perfectly.  I daresay you are intelligent
enough for your work.  What we want now is activity—activity.”

On repeating this last word Mr Vladimir laid a long white forefinger on
the edge of the desk.  Every trace of huskiness disappeared from Verloc’s
voice.  The nape of his gross neck became crimson above the velvet collar
of his overcoat.  His lips quivered before they came widely open.

“If you’ll only be good enough to look up my record,” he boomed out in
his great, clear oratorical bass, “you’ll see I gave a warning only three
months ago, on the occasion of the Grand Duke Romuald’s visit to Paris,
which was telegraphed from here to the French police, and—”

“Tut, tut!” broke out Mr Vladimir, with a frowning grimace.  “The French
police had no use for your warning.  Don’t roar like this.  What the
devil do you mean?”

With a note of proud humility Mr Verloc apologised for forgetting
himself.  His voice,—famous for years at open-air meetings and at
workmen’s assemblies in large halls, had contributed, he said, to his
reputation of a good and trustworthy comrade.  It was, therefore, a part
of his usefulness.  It had inspired confidence in his principles.  “I was
always put up to speak by the leaders at a critical moment,” Mr Verloc
declared, with obvious satisfaction.  There was no uproar above which he
could not make himself heard, he added; and suddenly he made a
demonstration.

“Allow me,” he said.  With lowered forehead, without looking up, swiftly
and ponderously he crossed the room to one of the French windows.  As if
giving way to an uncontrollable impulse, he opened it a little.  Mr
Vladimir, jumping up amazed from the depths of the arm-chair, looked over
his shoulder; and below, across the courtyard of the Embassy, well beyond
the open gate, could be seen the broad back of a policeman watching idly
the gorgeous perambulator of a wealthy baby being wheeled in state across
the Square.

“Constable!” said Mr Verloc, with no more effort than if he were
whispering; and Mr Vladimir burst into a laugh on seeing the policeman
spin round as if prodded by a sharp instrument.  Mr Verloc shut the
window quietly, and returned to the middle of the room.

“With a voice like that,” he said, putting on the husky conversational
pedal, “I was naturally trusted.  And I knew what to say, too.”

Mr Vladimir, arranging his cravat, observed him in the glass over the
mantelpiece.

“I daresay you have the social revolutionary jargon by heart well
enough,” he said contemptuously.  “Vox et. . . You haven’t ever studied
Latin—have you?”

“No,” growled Mr Verloc.  “You did not expect me to know it.  I belong to
the million.  Who knows Latin?  Only a few hundred imbeciles who aren’t
fit to take care of themselves.”

For some thirty seconds longer Mr Vladimir studied in the mirror the
fleshy profile, the gross bulk, of the man behind him.  And at the same
time he had the advantage of seeing his own face, clean-shaved and round,
rosy about the gills, and with the thin sensitive lips formed exactly for
the utterance of those delicate witticisms which had made him such a
favourite in the very highest society.  Then he turned, and advanced into
the room with such determination that the very ends of his quaintly
old-fashioned bow necktie seemed to bristle with unspeakable menaces.
The movement was so swift and fierce that Mr Verloc, casting an oblique
glance, quailed inwardly.

“Aha!  You dare be impudent,” Mr Vladimir began, with an amazingly
guttural intonation not only utterly un-English, but absolutely
un-European, and startling even to Mr Verloc’s experience of cosmopolitan
slums.  “You dare!  Well, I am going to speak plain English to you.
Voice won’t do.  We have no use for your voice.  We don’t want a voice.
We want facts—startling facts—damn you,” he added, with a sort of
ferocious discretion, right into Mr Verloc’s face.

“Don’t you try to come over me with your Hyperborean manners,” Mr Verloc
defended himself huskily, looking at the carpet.  At this his
interlocutor, smiling mockingly above the bristling bow of his necktie,
switched the conversation into French.

“You give yourself for an ‘agent provocateur.’  The proper business of an
‘agent provocateur’ is to provoke.  As far as I can judge from your
record kept here, you have done nothing to earn your money for the last
three years.”

“Nothing!” exclaimed Verloc, stirring not a limb, and not raising his
eyes, but with the note of sincere feeling in his tone.  “I have several
times prevented what might have been—”

“There is a proverb in this country which says prevention is better than
cure,” interrupted Mr Vladimir, throwing himself into the arm-chair.  “It
is stupid in a general way.  There is no end to prevention.  But it is
characteristic.  They dislike finality in this country.  Don’t you be too
English.  And in this particular instance, don’t be absurd.  The evil is
already here.  We don’t want prevention—we want cure.”

He paused, turned to the desk, and turning over some papers lying there,
spoke in a changed business-like tone, without looking at Mr Verloc.

“You know, of course, of the International Conference assembled in
Milan?”

Mr Verloc intimated hoarsely that he was in the habit of reading the
daily papers.  To a further question his answer was that, of course, he
understood what he read.  At this Mr Vladimir, smiling faintly at the
documents he was still scanning one after another, murmured “As long as
it is not written in Latin, I suppose.”

“Or Chinese,” added Mr Verloc stolidly.

“H’m.  Some of your revolutionary friends’ effusions are written in a
_charabia_ every bit as incomprehensible as Chinese—”  Mr Vladimir let
fall disdainfully a grey sheet of printed matter.  “What are all these
leaflets headed F. P., with a hammer, pen, and torch crossed?  What does
it mean, this F. P.?”  Mr Verloc approached the imposing writing-table.

“The Future of the Proletariat.  It’s a society,” he explained, standing
ponderously by the side of the arm-chair, “not anarchist in principle,
but open to all shades of revolutionary opinion.”

“Are you in it?”

“One of the Vice-Presidents,” Mr Verloc breathed out heavily; and the
First Secretary of the Embassy raised his head to look at him.

“Then you ought to be ashamed of yourself,” he said incisively.  “Isn’t
your society capable of anything else but printing this prophetic bosh in
blunt type on this filthy paper eh?  Why don’t you do something?  Look
here.  I’ve this matter in hand now, and I tell you plainly that you will
have to earn your money.  The good old Stott-Wartenheim times are over.
No work, no pay.”

Mr Verloc felt a queer sensation of faintness in his stout legs.  He
stepped back one pace, and blew his nose loudly.

He was, in truth, startled and alarmed.  The rusty London sunshine
struggling clear of the London mist shed a lukewarm brightness into the
First Secretary’s private room; and in the silence Mr Verloc heard
against a window-pane the faint buzzing of a fly—his first fly of the
year—heralding better than any number of swallows the approach of spring.
The useless fussing of that tiny energetic organism affected unpleasantly
this big man threatened in his indolence.

In the pause Mr Vladimir formulated in his mind a series of disparaging
remarks concerning Mr Verloc’s face and figure.  The fellow was
unexpectedly vulgar, heavy, and impudently unintelligent.  He looked
uncommonly like a master plumber come to present his bill.  The First
Secretary of the Embassy, from his occasional excursions into the field
of American humour, had formed a special notion of that class of mechanic
as the embodiment of fraudulent laziness and incompetency.

This was then the famous and trusty secret agent, so secret that he was
never designated otherwise but by the symbol [delta] in the late Baron
Stott-Wartenheim’s official, semi-official, and confidential
correspondence; the celebrated agent [delta], whose warnings had the
power to change the schemes and the dates of royal, imperial, grand ducal
journeys, and sometimes caused them to be put off altogether!  This
fellow!  And Mr Vladimir indulged mentally in an enormous and derisive
fit of merriment, partly at his own astonishment, which he judged naive,
but mostly at the expense of the universally regretted Baron
Stott-Wartenheim.  His late Excellency, whom the august favour of his
Imperial master had imposed as Ambassador upon several reluctant
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, had enjoyed in his lifetime a fame for an
owlish, pessimistic gullibility.  His Excellency had the social
revolution on the brain.  He imagined himself to be a diplomatist set
apart by a special dispensation to watch the end of diplomacy, and pretty
nearly the end of the world, in a horrid democratic upheaval.  His
prophetic and doleful despatches had been for years the joke of Foreign
Offices.  He was said to have exclaimed on his deathbed (visited by his
Imperial friend and master): “Unhappy Europe!  Thou shalt perish by the
moral insanity of thy children!”  He was fated to be the victim of the
first humbugging rascal that came along, thought Mr Vladimir, smiling
vaguely at Mr Verloc.

“You ought to venerate the memory of Baron Stott-Wartenheim,” he
exclaimed suddenly.

The lowered physiognomy of Mr Verloc expressed a sombre and weary
annoyance.

“Permit me to observe to you,” he said, “that I came here because I was
summoned by a peremptory letter.  I have been here only twice before in
the last eleven years, and certainly never at eleven in the morning.  It
isn’t very wise to call me up like this.  There is just a chance of being
seen.  And that would be no joke for me.”

Mr Vladimir shrugged his shoulders.

“It would destroy my usefulness,” continued the other hotly.

“That’s your affair,” murmured Mr Vladimir, with soft brutality.  “When
you cease to be useful you shall cease to be employed.  Yes.  Right off.
Cut short.  You shall—” Mr Vladimir, frowning, paused, at a loss for a
sufficiently idiomatic expression, and instantly brightened up, with a
grin of beautifully white teeth.  “You shall be chucked,” he brought out
ferociously.

Once more Mr Verloc had to react with all the force of his will against
that sensation of faintness running down one’s legs which once upon a
time had inspired some poor devil with the felicitous expression: “My
heart went down into my boots.”  Mr Verloc, aware of the sensation,
raised his head bravely.

Mr Vladimir bore the look of heavy inquiry with perfect serenity.

“What we want is to administer a tonic to the Conference in Milan,” he
said airily.  “Its deliberations upon international action for the
suppression of political crime don’t seem to get anywhere.  England lags.
This country is absurd with its sentimental regard for individual
liberty.  It’s intolerable to think that all your friends have got only
to come over to—”

“In that way I have them all under my eye,” Mr Verloc interrupted
huskily.

“It would be much more to the point to have them all under lock and key.
England must be brought into line.  The imbecile bourgeoisie of this
country make themselves the accomplices of the very people whose aim is
to drive them out of their houses to starve in ditches.  And they have
the political power still, if they only had the sense to use it for their
preservation.  I suppose you agree that the middle classes are stupid?”

Mr Verloc agreed hoarsely.

“They are.”

“They have no imagination.  They are blinded by an idiotic vanity.  What
they want just now is a jolly good scare.  This is the psychological
moment to set your friends to work.  I have had you called here to
develop to you my idea.”

And Mr Vladimir developed his idea from on high, with scorn and
condescension, displaying at the same time an amount of ignorance as to
the real aims, thoughts, and methods of the revolutionary world which
filled the silent Mr Verloc with inward consternation.  He confounded
causes with effects more than was excusable; the most distinguished
propagandists with impulsive bomb throwers; assumed organisation where in
the nature of things it could not exist; spoke of the social
revolutionary party one moment as of a perfectly disciplined army, where
the word of chiefs was supreme, and at another as if it had been the
loosest association of desperate brigands that ever camped in a mountain
gorge.  Once Mr Verloc had opened his mouth for a protest, but the
raising of a shapely, large white hand arrested him.  Very soon he became
too appalled to even try to protest.  He listened in a stillness of dread
which resembled the immobility of profound attention.

“A series of outrages,” Mr Vladimir continued calmly, “executed here in
this country; not only _planned_ here—that would not do—they would not
mind.  Your friends could set half the Continent on fire without
influencing the public opinion here in favour of a universal repressive
legislation.  They will not look outside their backyard here.”

Mr Verloc cleared his throat, but his heart failed him, and he said
nothing.

“These outrages need not be especially sanguinary,” Mr Vladimir went on,
as if delivering a scientific lecture, “but they must be sufficiently
startling—effective.  Let them be directed against buildings, for
instance.  What is the fetish of the hour that all the bourgeoisie
recognise—eh, Mr Verloc?”

Mr Verloc opened his hands and shrugged his shoulders slightly.

“You are too lazy to think,” was Mr Vladimir’s comment upon that gesture.
“Pay attention to what I say.  The fetish of to-day is neither royalty
nor religion.  Therefore the palace and the church should be left alone.
You understand what I mean, Mr Verloc?”

The dismay and the scorn of Mr Verloc found vent in an attempt at levity.

“Perfectly.  But what of the Embassies?  A series of attacks on the
various Embassies,” he began; but he could not withstand the cold,
watchful stare of the First Secretary.

“You can be facetious, I see,” the latter observed carelessly.  “That’s
all right.  It may enliven your oratory at socialistic congresses.  But
this room is no place for it.  It would be infinitely safer for you to
follow carefully what I am saying.  As you are being called upon to
furnish facts instead of cock-and-bull stories, you had better try to
make your profit off what I am taking the trouble to explain to you.  The
sacrosanct fetish of to-day is science.  Why don’t you get some of your
friends to go for that wooden-faced panjandrum—eh?  Is it not part of
these institutions which must be swept away before the F. P. comes
along?”

Mr Verloc said nothing.  He was afraid to open his lips lest a groan
should escape him.

“This is what you should try for.  An attempt upon a crowned head or on a
president is sensational enough in a way, but not so much as it used to
be.  It has entered into the general conception of the existence of all
chiefs of state.  It’s almost conventional—especially since so many
presidents have been assassinated.  Now let us take an outrage upon—say a
church.  Horrible enough at first sight, no doubt, and yet not so
effective as a person of an ordinary mind might think.  No matter how
revolutionary and anarchist in inception, there would be fools enough to
give such an outrage the character of a religious manifestation.  And
that would detract from the especial alarming significance we wish to
give to the act.  A murderous attempt on a restaurant or a theatre would
suffer in the same way from the suggestion of non-political passion: the
exasperation of a hungry man, an act of social revenge.  All this is used
up; it is no longer instructive as an object lesson in revolutionary
anarchism.  Every newspaper has ready-made phrases to explain such
manifestations away.  I am about to give you the philosophy of bomb
throwing from my point of view; from the point of view you pretend to
have been serving for the last eleven years.  I will try not to talk
above your head.  The sensibilities of the class you are attacking are
soon blunted.  Property seems to them an indestructible thing.  You can’t
count upon their emotions either of pity or fear for very long.  A bomb
outrage to have any influence on public opinion now must go beyond the
intention of vengeance or terrorism.  It must be purely destructive.  It
must be that, and only that, beyond the faintest suspicion of any other
object.  You anarchists should make it clear that you are perfectly
determined to make a clean sweep of the whole social creation.  But how
to get that appallingly absurd notion into the heads of the middle
classes so that there should be no mistake?  That’s the question.  By
directing your blows at something outside the ordinary passions of
humanity is the answer.  Of course, there is art.  A bomb in the National
Gallery would make some noise.  But it would not be serious enough.  Art
has never been their fetish.  It’s like breaking a few back windows in a
man’s house; whereas, if you want to make him really sit up, you must try
at least to raise the roof.  There would be some screaming of course, but
from whom?  Artists—art critics and such like—people of no account.
Nobody minds what they say.  But there is learning—science.  Any imbecile
that has got an income believes in that.  He does not know why, but he
believes it matters somehow.  It is the sacrosanct fetish.  All the
damned professors are radicals at heart.  Let them know that their great
panjandrum has got to go too, to make room for the Future of the
Proletariat.  A howl from all these intellectual idiots is bound to help
forward the labours of the Milan Conference.  They will be writing to the
papers.  Their indignation would be above suspicion, no material
interests being openly at stake, and it will alarm every selfishness of
the class which should be impressed.  They believe that in some
mysterious way science is at the source of their material prosperity.
They do.  And the absurd ferocity of such a demonstration will affect
them more profoundly than the mangling of a whole street—or theatre—full
of their own kind.  To that last they can always say: ‘Oh! it’s mere
class hate.’  But what is one to say to an act of destructive ferocity so
absurd as to be incomprehensible, inexplicable, almost unthinkable; in
fact, mad?  Madness alone is truly terrifying, inasmuch as you cannot
placate it either by threats, persuasion, or bribes.  Moreover, I am a
civilised man.  I would never dream of directing you to organise a mere
butchery, even if I expected the best results from it.  But I wouldn’t
expect from a butchery the result I want.  Murder is always with us.  It
is almost an institution.  The demonstration must be against
learning—science.  But not every science will do.  The attack must have
all the shocking senselessness of gratuitous blasphemy.  Since bombs are
your means of expression, it would be really telling if one could throw a
bomb into pure mathematics.  But that is impossible.  I have been trying
to educate you; I have expounded to you the higher philosophy of your
usefulness, and suggested to you some serviceable arguments.  The
practical application of my teaching interests _you_ mostly.  But from
the moment I have undertaken to interview you I have also given some
attention to the practical aspect of the question.  What do you think of
having a go at astronomy?”

For sometime already Mr Verloc’s immobility by the side of the arm-chair
resembled a state of collapsed coma—a sort of passive insensibility
interrupted by slight convulsive starts, such as may be observed in the
domestic dog having a nightmare on the hearthrug.  And it was in an
uneasy doglike growl that he repeated the word:

“Astronomy.”

He had not recovered thoroughly as yet from that state of bewilderment
brought about by the effort to follow Mr Vladimir’s rapid incisive
utterance.  It had overcome his power of assimilation.  It had made him
angry.  This anger was complicated by incredulity.  And suddenly it
dawned upon him that all this was an elaborate joke.  Mr Vladimir
exhibited his white teeth in a smile, with dimples on his round, full
face posed with a complacent inclination above the bristling bow of his
neck-tie.  The favourite of intelligent society women had assumed his
drawing-room attitude accompanying the delivery of delicate witticisms.
Sitting well forward, his white hand upraised, he seemed to hold
delicately between his thumb and forefinger the subtlety of his
suggestion.

“There could be nothing better.  Such an outrage combines the greatest
possible regard for humanity with the most alarming display of ferocious
imbecility.  I defy the ingenuity of journalists to persuade their public
that any given member of the proletariat can have a personal grievance
against astronomy.  Starvation itself could hardly be dragged in
there—eh?  And there are other advantages.  The whole civilised world has
heard of Greenwich.  The very boot-blacks in the basement of Charing
Cross Station know something of it.  See?”

The features of Mr Vladimir, so well known in the best society by their
humorous urbanity, beamed with cynical self-satisfaction, which would
have astonished the intelligent women his wit entertained so exquisitely.
“Yes,” he continued, with a contemptuous smile, “the blowing up of the
first meridian is bound to raise a howl of execration.”

“A difficult business,” Mr Verloc mumbled, feeling that this was the only
safe thing to say.

“What is the matter?  Haven’t you the whole gang under your hand?  The
very pick of the basket?  That old terrorist Yundt is here.  I see him
walking about Piccadilly in his green havelock almost every day.  And
Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle—you don’t mean to say you don’t
know where he is?  Because if you don’t, I can tell you,” Mr Vladimir
went on menacingly.  “If you imagine that you are the only one on the
secret fund list, you are mistaken.”

This perfectly gratuitous suggestion caused Mr Verloc to shuffle his feet
slightly.

“And the whole Lausanne lot—eh?  Haven’t they been flocking over here at
the first hint of the Milan Conference?  This is an absurd country.”

“It will cost money,” Mr Verloc said, by a sort of instinct.

“That cock won’t fight,” Mr Vladimir retorted, with an amazingly genuine
English accent.  “You’ll get your screw every month, and no more till
something happens.  And if nothing happens very soon you won’t get even
that.  What’s your ostensible occupation?  What are you supposed to live
by?”

“I keep a shop,” answered Mr Verloc.

“A shop!  What sort of shop?”

“Stationery, newspapers.  My wife—”

“Your what?” interrupted Mr Vladimir in his guttural Central Asian tones.

“My wife.”  Mr Verloc raised his husky voice slightly.  “I am married.”

“That be damned for a yarn,” exclaimed the other in unfeigned
astonishment.  “Married!  And you a professed anarchist, too!  What is
this confounded nonsense?  But I suppose it’s merely a manner of
speaking.  Anarchists don’t marry.  It’s well known.  They can’t.  It
would be apostasy.”

“My wife isn’t one,” Mr Verloc mumbled sulkily.  “Moreover, it’s no
concern of yours.”

“Oh yes, it is,” snapped Mr Vladimir.  “I am beginning to be convinced
that you are not at all the man for the work you’ve been employed on.
Why, you must have discredited yourself completely in your own world by
your marriage.  Couldn’t you have managed without?  This is your virtuous
attachment—eh?  What with one sort of attachment and another you are
doing away with your usefulness.”

Mr Verloc, puffing out his cheeks, let the air escape violently, and that
was all.  He had armed himself with patience.  It was not to be tried
much longer.  The First Secretary became suddenly very curt, detached,
final.

“You may go now,” he said.  “A dynamite outrage must be provoked.  I give
you a month.  The sittings of the Conference are suspended.  Before it
reassembles again something must have happened here, or your connection
with us ceases.”

He changed the note once more with an unprincipled versatility.

“Think over my philosophy, Mr—Mr—Verloc,” he said, with a sort of
chaffing condescension, waving his hand towards the door.  “Go for the
first meridian.  You don’t know the middle classes as well as I do.
Their sensibilities are jaded.  The first meridian.  Nothing better, and
nothing easier, I should think.”

He had got up, and with his thin sensitive lips twitching humorously,
watched in the glass over the mantelpiece Mr Verloc backing out of the
room heavily, hat and stick in hand.  The door closed.

The footman in trousers, appearing suddenly in the corridor, let Mr
Verloc another way out and through a small door in the corner of the
courtyard.  The porter standing at the gate ignored his exit completely;
and Mr Verloc retraced the path of his morning’s pilgrimage as if in a
dream—an angry dream.  This detachment from the material world was so
complete that, though the mortal envelope of Mr Verloc had not hastened
unduly along the streets, that part of him to which it would be
unwarrantably rude to refuse immortality, found itself at the shop door
all at once, as if borne from west to east on the wings of a great wind.
He walked straight behind the counter, and sat down on a wooden chair
that stood there.  No one appeared to disturb his solitude.  Stevie, put
into a green baize apron, was now sweeping and dusting upstairs, intent
and conscientious, as though he were playing at it; and Mrs Verloc,
warned in the kitchen by the clatter of the cracked bell, had merely come
to the glazed door of the parlour, and putting the curtain aside a
little, had peered into the dim shop.  Seeing her husband sitting there
shadowy and bulky, with his hat tilted far back on his head, she had at
once returned to her stove.  An hour or more later she took the green
baize apron off her brother Stevie, and instructed him to wash his hands
and face in the peremptory tone she had used in that connection for
fifteen years or so—ever since she had, in fact, ceased to attend to the
boy’s hands and face herself.  She spared presently a glance away from
her dishing-up for the inspection of that face and those hands which
Stevie, approaching the kitchen table, offered for her approval with an
air of self-assurance hiding a perpetual residue of anxiety.  Formerly
the anger of the father was the supremely effective sanction of these
rites, but Mr Verloc’s placidity in domestic life would have made all
mention of anger incredible even to poor Stevie’s nervousness.  The
theory was that Mr Verloc would have been inexpressibly pained and
shocked by any deficiency of cleanliness at meal times.  Winnie after the
death of her father found considerable consolation in the feeling that
she need no longer tremble for poor Stevie.  She could not bear to see
the boy hurt.  It maddened her.  As a little girl she had often faced
with blazing eyes the irascible licensed victualler in defence of her
brother.  Nothing now in Mrs Verloc’s appearance could lead one to
suppose that she was capable of a passionate demonstration.

She finished her dishing-up.  The table was laid in the parlour.  Going
to the foot of the stairs, she screamed out “Mother!”  Then opening the
glazed door leading to the shop, she said quietly “Adolf!”  Mr Verloc had
not changed his position; he had not apparently stirred a limb for an
hour and a half.  He got up heavily, and came to his dinner in his
overcoat and with his hat on, without uttering a word.  His silence in
itself had nothing startlingly unusual in this household, hidden in the
shades of the sordid street seldom touched by the sun, behind the dim
shop with its wares of disreputable rubbish.  Only that day Mr Verloc’s
taciturnity was so obviously thoughtful that the two women were impressed
by it.  They sat silent themselves, keeping a watchful eye on poor
Stevie, lest he should break out into one of his fits of loquacity.  He
faced Mr Verloc across the table, and remained very good and quiet,
staring vacantly.  The endeavour to keep him from making himself
objectionable in any way to the master of the house put no inconsiderable
anxiety into these two women’s lives.  “That boy,” as they alluded to him
softly between themselves, had been a source of that sort of anxiety
almost from the very day of his birth.  The late licensed victualler’s
humiliation at having such a very peculiar boy for a son manifested
itself by a propensity to brutal treatment; for he was a person of fine
sensibilities, and his sufferings as a man and a father were perfectly
genuine.  Afterwards Stevie had to be kept from making himself a nuisance
to the single gentlemen lodgers, who are themselves a queer lot, and are
easily aggrieved.  And there was always the anxiety of his mere existence
to face.  Visions of a workhouse infirmary for her child had haunted the
old woman in the basement breakfast-room of the decayed Belgravian house.
“If you had not found such a good husband, my dear,” she used to say to
her daughter, “I don’t know what would have become of that poor boy.”

Mr Verloc extended as much recognition to Stevie as a man not
particularly fond of animals may give to his wife’s beloved cat; and this
recognition, benevolent and perfunctory, was essentially of the same
quality.  Both women admitted to themselves that not much more could be
reasonably expected.  It was enough to earn for Mr Verloc the old woman’s
reverential gratitude.  In the early days, made sceptical by the trials
of friendless life, she used sometimes to ask anxiously: “You don’t
think, my dear, that Mr Verloc is getting tired of seeing Stevie about?”
To this Winnie replied habitually by a slight toss of her head.  Once,
however, she retorted, with a rather grim pertness: “He’ll have to get
tired of me first.”  A long silence ensued.  The mother, with her feet
propped up on a stool, seemed to be trying to get to the bottom of that
answer, whose feminine profundity had struck her all of a heap.  She had
never really understood why Winnie had married Mr Verloc.  It was very
sensible of her, and evidently had turned out for the best, but her girl
might have naturally hoped to find somebody of a more suitable age.
There had been a steady young fellow, only son of a butcher in the next
street, helping his father in business, with whom Winnie had been walking
out with obvious gusto.  He was dependent on his father, it is true; but
the business was good, and his prospects excellent.  He took her girl to
the theatre on several evenings.  Then just as she began to dread to hear
of their engagement (for what could she have done with that big house
alone, with Stevie on her hands), that romance came to an abrupt end, and
Winnie went about looking very dull.  But Mr Verloc, turning up
providentially to occupy the first-floor front bedroom, there had been no
more question of the young butcher.  It was clearly providential.




CHAPTER III


“ . . . All idealisation makes life poorer.  To beautify it is to take
away its character of complexity—it is to destroy it.  Leave that to the
moralists, my boy.  History is made by men, but they do not make it in
their heads.  The ideas that are born in their consciousness play an
insignificant part in the march of events.  History is dominated and
determined by the tool and the production—by the force of economic
conditions.  Capitalism has made socialism, and the laws made by the
capitalism for the protection of property are responsible for anarchism.
No one can tell what form the social organisation may take in the future.
Then why indulge in prophetic phantasies?  At best they can only
interpret the mind of the prophet, and can have no objective value.
Leave that pastime to the moralists, my boy.”

Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle, was speaking in an even voice, a
voice that wheezed as if deadened and oppressed by the layer of fat on
his chest.  He had come out of a highly hygienic prison round like a tub,
with an enormous stomach and distended cheeks of a pale, semi-transparent
complexion, as though for fifteen years the servants of an outraged
society had made a point of stuffing him with fattening foods in a damp
and lightless cellar.  And ever since he had never managed to get his
weight down as much as an ounce.

It was said that for three seasons running a very wealthy old lady had
sent him for a cure to Marienbad—where he was about to share the public
curiosity once with a crowned head—but the police on that occasion
ordered him to leave within twelve hours.  His martyrdom was continued by
forbidding him all access to the healing waters.  But he was resigned
now.

With his elbow presenting no appearance of a joint, but more like a bend
in a dummy’s limb, thrown over the back of a chair, he leaned forward
slightly over his short and enormous thighs to spit into the grate.

“Yes!  I had the time to think things out a little,” he added without
emphasis.  “Society has given me plenty of time for meditation.”

On the other side of the fireplace, in the horse-hair arm-chair where Mrs
Verloc’s mother was generally privileged to sit, Karl Yundt giggled
grimly, with a faint black grimace of a toothless mouth.  The terrorist,
as he called himself, was old and bald, with a narrow, snow-white wisp of
a goatee hanging limply from his chin.  An extraordinary expression of
underhand malevolence survived in his extinguished eyes.  When he rose
painfully the thrusting forward of a skinny groping hand deformed by
gouty swellings suggested the effort of a moribund murderer summoning all
his remaining strength for a last stab.  He leaned on a thick stick,
which trembled under his other hand.

“I have always dreamed,” he mouthed fiercely, “of a band of men absolute
in their resolve to discard all scruples in the choice of means, strong
enough to give themselves frankly the name of destroyers, and free from
the taint of that resigned pessimism which rots the world.  No pity for
anything on earth, including themselves, and death enlisted for good and
all in the service of humanity—that’s what I would have liked to see.”

His little bald head quivered, imparting a comical vibration to the wisp
of white goatee.  His enunciation would have been almost totally
unintelligible to a stranger.  His worn-out passion, resembling in its
impotent fierceness the excitement of a senile sensualist, was badly
served by a dried throat and toothless gums which seemed to catch the tip
of his tongue.  Mr Verloc, established in the corner of the sofa at the
other end of the room, emitted two hearty grunts of assent.

The old terrorist turned slowly his head on his skinny neck from side to
side.

“And I could never get as many as three such men together.  So much for
your rotten pessimism,” he snarled at Michaelis, who uncrossed his thick
legs, similar to bolsters, and slid his feet abruptly under his chair in
sign of exasperation.

He a pessimist!  Preposterous!  He cried out that the charge was
outrageous.  He was so far from pessimism that he saw already the end of
all private property coming along logically, unavoidably, by the mere
development of its inherent viciousness.  The possessors of property had
not only to face the awakened proletariat, but they had also to fight
amongst themselves.  Yes.  Struggle, warfare, was the condition of
private ownership.  It was fatal.  Ah! he did not depend upon emotional
excitement to keep up his belief, no declamations, no anger, no visions
of blood-red flags waving, or metaphorical lurid suns of vengeance rising
above the horizon of a doomed society.  Not he!  Cold reason, he boasted,
was the basis of his optimism.  Yes, optimism—

His laborious wheezing stopped, then, after a gasp or two, he added:

“Don’t you think that, if I had not been the optimist I am, I could not
have found in fifteen years some means to cut my throat?  And, in the
last instance, there were always the walls of my cell to dash my head
against.”

The shortness of breath took all fire, all animation out of his voice;
his great, pale cheeks hung like filled pouches, motionless, without a
quiver; but in his blue eyes, narrowed as if peering, there was the same
look of confident shrewdness, a little crazy in its fixity, they must
have had while the indomitable optimist sat thinking at night in his
cell.  Before him, Karl Yundt remained standing, one wing of his faded
greenish havelock thrown back cavalierly over his shoulder.  Seated in
front of the fireplace, Comrade Ossipon, ex-medical student, the
principal writer of the F. P. leaflets, stretched out his robust legs,
keeping the soles of his boots turned up to the glow in the grate.  A
bush of crinkly yellow hair topped his red, freckled face, with a
flattened nose and prominent mouth cast in the rough mould of the negro
type.  His almond-shaped eyes leered languidly over the high cheek-bones.
He wore a grey flannel shirt, the loose ends of a black silk tie hung
down the buttoned breast of his serge coat; and his head resting on the
back of his chair, his throat largely exposed, he raised to his lips a
cigarette in a long wooden tube, puffing jets of smoke straight up at the
ceiling.

Michaelis pursued his idea—_the_ idea of his solitary reclusion—the
thought vouchsafed to his captivity and growing like a faith revealed in
visions.  He talked to himself, indifferent to the sympathy or hostility
of his hearers, indifferent indeed to their presence, from the habit he
had acquired of thinking aloud hopefully in the solitude of the four
whitewashed walls of his cell, in the sepulchral silence of the great
blind pile of bricks near a river, sinister and ugly like a colossal
mortuary for the socially drowned.

He was no good in discussion, not because any amount of argument could
shake his faith, but because the mere fact of hearing another voice
disconcerted him painfully, confusing his thoughts at once—these thoughts
that for so many years, in a mental solitude more barren than a waterless
desert, no living voice had ever combatted, commented, or approved.

No one interrupted him now, and he made again the confession of his
faith, mastering him irresistible and complete like an act of grace: the
secret of fate discovered in the material side of life; the economic
condition of the world responsible for the past and shaping the future;
the source of all history, of all ideas, guiding the mental development
of mankind and the very impulses of their passion—

A harsh laugh from Comrade Ossipon cut the tirade dead short in a sudden
faltering of the tongue and a bewildered unsteadiness of the apostle’s
mildly exalted eyes.  He closed them slowly for a moment, as if to
collect his routed thoughts.  A silence fell; but what with the two
gas-jets over the table and the glowing grate the little parlour behind
Mr Verloc’s shop had become frightfully hot.  Mr Verloc, getting off the
sofa with ponderous reluctance, opened the door leading into the kitchen
to get more air, and thus disclosed the innocent Stevie, seated very good
and quiet at a deal table, drawing circles, circles, circles; innumerable
circles, concentric, eccentric; a coruscating whirl of circles that by
their tangled multitude of repeated curves, uniformity of form, and
confusion of intersecting lines suggested a rendering of cosmic chaos,
the symbolism of a mad art attempting the inconceivable.  The artist
never turned his head; and in all his soul’s application to the task his
back quivered, his thin neck, sunk into a deep hollow at the base of the
skull, seemed ready to snap.

Mr Verloc, after a grunt of disapproving surprise, returned to the sofa.
Alexander Ossipon got up, tall in his threadbare blue serge suit under
the low ceiling, shook off the stiffness of long immobility, and strolled
away into the kitchen (down two steps) to look over Stevie’s shoulder.
He came back, pronouncing oracularly: “Very good.  Very characteristic,
perfectly typical.”

“What’s very good?” grunted inquiringly Mr Verloc, settled again in the
corner of the sofa.  The other explained his meaning negligently, with a
shade of condescension and a toss of his head towards the kitchen:

“Typical of this form of degeneracy—these drawings, I mean.”

“You would call that lad a degenerate, would you?” mumbled Mr Verloc.

Comrade Alexander Ossipon—nicknamed the Doctor, ex-medical student
without a degree; afterwards wandering lecturer to working-men’s
associations upon the socialistic aspects of hygiene; author of a popular
quasi-medical study (in the form of a cheap pamphlet seized promptly by
the police) entitled “The Corroding Vices of the Middle Classes”; special
delegate of the more or less mysterious Red Committee, together with Karl
Yundt and Michaelis for the work of literary propaganda—turned upon the
obscure familiar of at least two Embassies that glance of insufferable,
hopelessly dense sufficiency which nothing but the frequentation of
science can give to the dulness of common mortals.

“That’s what he may be called scientifically.  Very good type too,
altogether, of that sort of degenerate.  It’s enough to glance at the
lobes of his ears.  If you read Lombroso—”

Mr Verloc, moody and spread largely on the sofa, continued to look down
the row of his waistcoat buttons; but his cheeks became tinged by a faint
blush.  Of late even the merest derivative of the word science (a term in
itself inoffensive and of indefinite meaning) had the curious power of
evoking a definitely offensive mental vision of Mr Vladimir, in his body
as he lived, with an almost supernatural clearness.  And this phenomenon,
deserving justly to be classed amongst the marvels of science, induced in
Mr Verloc an emotional state of dread and exasperation tending to express
itself in violent swearing.  But he said nothing.  It was Karl Yundt who
was heard, implacable to his last breath.

“Lombroso is an ass.”

Comrade Ossipon met the shock of this blasphemy by an awful, vacant
stare.  And the other, his extinguished eyes without gleams blackening
the deep shadows under the great, bony forehead, mumbled, catching the
tip of his tongue between his lips at every second word as though he were
chewing it angrily:

“Did you ever see such an idiot?  For him the criminal is the prisoner.
Simple, is it not?  What about those who shut him up there—forced him in
there?  Exactly.  Forced him in there.  And what is crime?  Does he know
that, this imbecile who has made his way in this world of gorged fools by
looking at the ears and teeth of a lot of poor, luckless devils?  Teeth
and ears mark the criminal?  Do they?  And what about the law that marks
him still better—the pretty branding instrument invented by the overfed
to protect themselves against the hungry?  Red-hot applications on their
vile skins—hey?  Can’t you smell and hear from here the thick hide of the
people burn and sizzle?  That’s how criminals are made for your Lombrosos
to write their silly stuff about.”

The knob of his stick and his legs shook together with passion, whilst
the trunk, draped in the wings of the havelock, preserved his historic
attitude of defiance.  He seemed to sniff the tainted air of social
cruelty, to strain his ear for its atrocious sounds.  There was an
extraordinary force of suggestion in this posturing.  The all but
moribund veteran of dynamite wars had been a great actor in his
time—actor on platforms, in secret assemblies, in private interviews.
The famous terrorist had never in his life raised personally as much as
his little finger against the social edifice.  He was no man of action;
he was not even an orator of torrential eloquence, sweeping the masses
along in the rushing noise and foam of a great enthusiasm.  With a more
subtle intention, he took the part of an insolent and venomous evoker of
sinister impulses which lurk in the blind envy and exasperated vanity of
ignorance, in the suffering and misery of poverty, in all the hopeful and
noble illusions of righteous anger, pity, and revolt.  The shadow of his
evil gift clung to him yet like the smell of a deadly drug in an old vial
of poison, emptied now, useless, ready to be thrown away upon the
rubbish-heap of things that had served their time.

Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle, smiled vaguely with his glued
lips; his pasty moon face drooped under the weight of melancholy assent.
He had been a prisoner himself.  His own skin had sizzled under the
red-hot brand, he murmured softly.  But Comrade Ossipon, nicknamed the
Doctor, had got over the shock by that time.

“You don’t understand,” he began disdainfully, but stopped short,
intimidated by the dead blackness of the cavernous eyes in the face
turned slowly towards him with a blind stare, as if guided only by the
sound.  He gave the discussion up, with a slight shrug of the shoulders.

Stevie, accustomed to move about disregarded, had got up from the kitchen
table, carrying off his drawing to bed with him.  He had reached the
parlour door in time to receive in full the shock of Karl Yundt’s
eloquent imagery.  The sheet of paper covered with circles dropped out of
his fingers, and he remained staring at the old terrorist, as if rooted
suddenly to the spot by his morbid horror and dread of physical pain.
Stevie knew very well that hot iron applied to one’s skin hurt very much.
His scared eyes blazed with indignation: it would hurt terribly.  His
mouth dropped open.

Michaelis by staring unwinkingly at the fire had regained that sentiment
of isolation necessary for the continuity of his thought.  His optimism
had begun to flow from his lips.  He saw Capitalism doomed in its cradle,
born with the poison of the principle of competition in its system.  The
great capitalists devouring the little capitalists, concentrating the
power and the tools of production in great masses, perfecting industrial
processes, and in the madness of self-aggrandisement only preparing,
organising, enriching, making ready the lawful inheritance of the
suffering proletariat.  Michaelis pronounced the great word
“Patience”—and his clear blue glance, raised to the low ceiling of Mr
Verloc’s parlour, had a character of seraphic trustfulness.  In the
doorway Stevie, calmed, seemed sunk in hebetude.

Comrade Ossipon’s face twitched with exasperation.

“Then it’s no use doing anything—no use whatever.”

“I don’t say that,” protested Michaelis gently.  His vision of truth had
grown so intense that the sound of a strange voice failed to rout it this
time.  He continued to look down at the red coals.  Preparation for the
future was necessary, and he was willing to admit that the great change
would perhaps come in the upheaval of a revolution.  But he argued that
revolutionary propaganda was a delicate work of high conscience.  It was
the education of the masters of the world.  It should be as careful as
the education given to kings.  He would have it advance its tenets
cautiously, even timidly, in our ignorance of the effect that may be
produced by any given economic change upon the happiness, the morals, the
intellect, the history of mankind.  For history is made with tools, not
with ideas; and everything is changed by economic conditions—art,
philosophy, love, virtue—truth itself!

The coals in the grate settled down with a slight crash; and Michaelis,
the hermit of visions in the desert of a penitentiary, got up
impetuously.  Round like a distended balloon, he opened his short, thick
arms, as if in a pathetically hopeless attempt to embrace and hug to his
breast a self-regenerated universe.  He gasped with ardour.

“The future is as certain as the past—slavery, feudalism, individualism,
collectivism.  This is the statement of a law, not an empty prophecy.”

The disdainful pout of Comrade Ossipon’s thick lips accentuated the negro
type of his face.

“Nonsense,” he said calmly enough.  “There is no law and no certainty.
The teaching propaganda be hanged.  What the people knows does not
matter, were its knowledge ever so accurate.  The only thing that matters
to us is the emotional state of the masses.  Without emotion there is no
action.”

He paused, then added with modest firmness:

“I am speaking now to you scientifically—scientifically—Eh?  What did you
say, Verloc?”

“Nothing,” growled from the sofa Mr Verloc, who, provoked by the
abhorrent sound, had merely muttered a “Damn.”

The venomous spluttering of the old terrorist without teeth was heard.

“Do you know how I would call the nature of the present economic
conditions?  I would call it cannibalistic.  That’s what it is!  They are
nourishing their greed on the quivering flesh and the warm blood of the
people—nothing else.”

Stevie swallowed the terrifying statement with an audible gulp, and at
once, as though it had been swift poison, sank limply in a sitting
posture on the steps of the kitchen door.

Michaelis gave no sign of having heard anything.  His lips seemed glued
together for good; not a quiver passed over his heavy cheeks.  With
troubled eyes he looked for his round, hard hat, and put it on his round
head.  His round and obese body seemed to float low between the chairs
under the sharp elbow of Karl Yundt.  The old terrorist, raising an
uncertain and clawlike hand, gave a swaggering tilt to a black felt
sombrero shading the hollows and ridges of his wasted face.  He got in
motion slowly, striking the floor with his stick at every step.  It was
rather an affair to get him out of the house because, now and then, he
would stop, as if to think, and did not offer to move again till impelled
forward by Michaelis.  The gentle apostle grasped his arm with brotherly
care; and behind them, his hands in his pockets, the robust Ossipon
yawned vaguely.  A blue cap with a patent leather peak set well at the
back of his yellow bush of hair gave him the aspect of a Norwegian sailor
bored with the world after a thundering spree.  Mr Verloc saw his guests
off the premises, attending them bareheaded, his heavy overcoat hanging
open, his eyes on the ground.

He closed the door behind their backs with restrained violence, turned
the key, shot the bolt.  He was not satisfied with his friends.  In the
light of Mr Vladimir’s philosophy of bomb throwing they appeared
hopelessly futile.  The part of Mr Verloc in revolutionary politics
having been to observe, he could not all at once, either in his own home
or in larger assemblies, take the initiative of action.  He had to be
cautious.  Moved by the just indignation of a man well over forty,
menaced in what is dearest to him—his repose and his security—he asked
himself scornfully what else could have been expected from such a lot,
this Karl Yundt, this Michaelis—this Ossipon.

Pausing in his intention to turn off the gas burning in the middle of the
shop, Mr Verloc descended into the abyss of moral reflections.  With the
insight of a kindred temperament he pronounced his verdict.  A lazy
lot—this Karl Yundt, nursed by a blear-eyed old woman, a woman he had
years ago enticed away from a friend, and afterwards had tried more than
once to shake off into the gutter.  Jolly lucky for Yundt that she had
persisted in coming up time after time, or else there would have been no
one now to help him out of the ’bus by the Green Park railings, where
that spectre took its constitutional crawl every fine morning.  When that
indomitable snarling old witch died the swaggering spectre would have to
vanish too—there would be an end to fiery Karl Yundt.  And Mr Verloc’s
morality was offended also by the optimism of Michaelis, annexed by his
wealthy old lady, who had taken lately to sending him to a cottage she
had in the country.  The ex-prisoner could moon about the shady lanes for
days together in a delicious and humanitarian idleness.  As to Ossipon,
that beggar was sure to want for nothing as long as there were silly
girls with savings-bank books in the world.  And Mr Verloc,
temperamentally identical with his associates, drew fine distinctions in
his mind on the strength of insignificant differences.  He drew them with
a certain complacency, because the instinct of conventional
respectability was strong within him, being only overcome by his dislike
of all kinds of recognised labour—a temperamental defect which he shared
with a large proportion of revolutionary reformers of a given social
state.  For obviously one does not revolt against the advantages and
opportunities of that state, but against the price which must be paid for
the same in the coin of accepted morality, self-restraint, and toil.  The
majority of revolutionists are the enemies of discipline and fatigue
mostly.  There are natures too, to whose sense of justice the price
exacted looms up monstrously enormous, odious, oppressive, worrying,
humiliating, extortionate, intolerable.  Those are the fanatics.  The
remaining portion of social rebels is accounted for by vanity, the mother
of all noble and vile illusions, the companion of poets, reformers,
charlatans, prophets, and incendiaries.

Lost for a whole minute in the abyss of meditation, Mr Verloc did not
reach the depth of these abstract considerations.  Perhaps he was not
able.  In any case he had not the time.  He was pulled up painfully by
the sudden recollection of Mr Vladimir, another of his associates, whom
in virtue of subtle moral affinities he was capable of judging correctly.
He considered him as dangerous.  A shade of envy crept into his thoughts.
Loafing was all very well for these fellows, who knew not Mr Vladimir,
and had women to fall back upon; whereas he had a woman to provide for—

At this point, by a simple association of ideas, Mr Verloc was brought
face to face with the necessity of going to bed some time or other that
evening.  Then why not go now—at once?  He sighed.  The necessity was not
so normally pleasurable as it ought to have been for a man of his age and
temperament.  He dreaded the demon of sleeplessness, which he felt had
marked him for its own.  He raised his arm, and turned off the flaring
gas-jet above his head.

A bright band of light fell through the parlour door into the part of the
shop behind the counter.  It enabled Mr Verloc to ascertain at a glance
the number of silver coins in the till.  These were but few; and for the
first time since he opened his shop he took a commercial survey of its
value.  This survey was unfavourable.  He had gone into trade for no
commercial reasons.  He had been guided in the selection of this peculiar
line of business by an instinctive leaning towards shady transactions,
where money is picked up easily.  Moreover, it did not take him out of
his own sphere—the sphere which is watched by the police.  On the
contrary, it gave him a publicly confessed standing in that sphere, and
as Mr Verloc had unconfessed relations which made him familiar with yet
careless of the police, there was a distinct advantage in such a
situation.  But as a means of livelihood it was by itself insufficient.

He took the cash-box out of the drawer, and turning to leave the shop,
became aware that Stevie was still downstairs.

What on earth is he doing there?  Mr Verloc asked himself.  What’s the
meaning of these antics?  He looked dubiously at his brother-in-law, but
he did not ask him for information.  Mr Verloc’s intercourse with Stevie
was limited to the casual mutter of a morning, after breakfast, “My
boots,” and even that was more a communication at large of a need than a
direct order or request.  Mr Verloc perceived with some surprise that he
did not know really what to say to Stevie.  He stood still in the middle
of the parlour, and looked into the kitchen in silence.  Nor yet did he
know what would happen if he did say anything.  And this appeared very
queer to Mr Verloc in view of the fact, borne upon him suddenly, that he
had to provide for this fellow too.  He had never given a moment’s
thought till then to that aspect of Stevie’s existence.

Positively he did not know how to speak to the lad.  He watched him
gesticulating and murmuring in the kitchen.  Stevie prowled round the
table like an excited animal in a cage.  A tentative “Hadn’t you better
go to bed now?” produced no effect whatever; and Mr Verloc, abandoning
the stony contemplation of his brother-in-law’s behaviour, crossed the
parlour wearily, cash-box in hand.  The cause of the general lassitude he
felt while climbing the stairs being purely mental, he became alarmed by
its inexplicable character.  He hoped he was not sickening for anything.
He stopped on the dark landing to examine his sensations.  But a slight
and continuous sound of snoring pervading the obscurity interfered with
their clearness.  The sound came from his mother-in-law’s room.  Another
one to provide for, he thought—and on this thought walked into the
bedroom.

Mrs Verloc had fallen asleep with the lamp (no gas was laid upstairs)
turned up full on the table by the side of the bed.  The light thrown
down by the shade fell dazzlingly on the white pillow sunk by the weight
of her head reposing with closed eyes and dark hair done up in several
plaits for the night.  She woke up with the sound of her name in her
ears, and saw her husband standing over her.

“Winnie!  Winnie!”

At first she did not stir, lying very quiet and looking at the cash-box
in Mr Verloc’s hand.  But when she understood that her brother was
“capering all over the place downstairs” she swung out in one sudden
movement on to the edge of the bed.  Her bare feet, as if poked through
the bottom of an unadorned, sleeved calico sack buttoned tightly at neck
and wrists, felt over the rug for the slippers while she looked upward
into her husband’s face.

“I don’t know how to manage him,” Mr Verloc explained peevishly.  “Won’t
do to leave him downstairs alone with the lights.”

She said nothing, glided across the room swiftly, and the door closed
upon her white form.

Mr Verloc deposited the cash-box on the night table, and began the
operation of undressing by flinging his overcoat on to a distant chair.
His coat and waistcoat followed.  He walked about the room in his
stockinged feet, and his burly figure, with the hands worrying nervously
at his throat, passed and repassed across the long strip of looking-glass
in the door of his wife’s wardrobe.  Then after slipping his braces off
his shoulders he pulled up violently the venetian blind, and leaned his
forehead against the cold window-pane—a fragile film of glass stretched
between him and the enormity of cold, black, wet, muddy, inhospitable
accumulation of bricks, slates, and stones, things in themselves unlovely
and unfriendly to man.

Mr Verloc felt the latent unfriendliness of all out of doors with a force
approaching to positive bodily anguish.  There is no occupation that
fails a man more completely than that of a secret agent of police.  It’s
like your horse suddenly falling dead under you in the midst of an
uninhabited and thirsty plain.  The comparison occurred to Mr Verloc
because he had sat astride various army horses in his time, and had now
the sensation of an incipient fall.  The prospect was as black as the
window-pane against which he was leaning his forehead.  And suddenly the
face of Mr Vladimir, clean-shaved and witty, appeared enhaloed in the
glow of its rosy complexion like a sort of pink seal, impressed on the
fatal darkness.

This luminous and mutilated vision was so ghastly physically that Mr
Verloc started away from the window, letting down the venetian blind with
a great rattle.  Discomposed and speechless with the apprehension of more
such visions, he beheld his wife re-enter the room and get into bed in a
calm business-like manner which made him feel hopelessly lonely in the
world.  Mrs Verloc expressed her surprise at seeing him up yet.

“I don’t feel very well,” he muttered, passing his hands over his moist
brow.

“Giddiness?”

“Yes.  Not at all well.”

Mrs Verloc, with all the placidity of an experienced wife, expressed a
confident opinion as to the cause, and suggested the usual remedies; but
her husband, rooted in the middle of the room, shook his lowered head
sadly.

“You’ll catch cold standing there,” she observed.

Mr Verloc made an effort, finished undressing, and got into bed.  Down
below in the quiet, narrow street measured footsteps approached the
house, then died away unhurried and firm, as if the passer-by had started
to pace out all eternity, from gas-lamp to gas-lamp in a night without
end; and the drowsy ticking of the old clock on the landing became
distinctly audible in the bedroom.

Mrs Verloc, on her back, and staring at the ceiling, made a remark.

“Takings very small to-day.”

Mr Verloc, in the same position, cleared his throat as if for an
important statement, but merely inquired:

“Did you turn off the gas downstairs?”

“Yes; I did,” answered Mrs Verloc conscientiously.  “That poor boy is in
a very excited state to-night,” she murmured, after a pause which lasted
for three ticks of the clock.

Mr Verloc cared nothing for Stevie’s excitement, but he felt horribly
wakeful, and dreaded facing the darkness and silence that would follow
the extinguishing of the lamp.  This dread led him to make the remark
that Stevie had disregarded his suggestion to go to bed.  Mrs Verloc,
falling into the trap, started to demonstrate at length to her husband
that this was not “impudence” of any sort, but simply “excitement.”
There was no young man of his age in London more willing and docile than
Stephen, she affirmed; none more affectionate and ready to please, and
even useful, as long as people did not upset his poor head.  Mrs Verloc,
turning towards her recumbent husband, raised herself on her elbow, and
hung over him in her anxiety that he should believe Stevie to be a useful
member of the family.  That ardour of protecting compassion exalted
morbidly in her childhood by the misery of another child tinged her
sallow cheeks with a faint dusky blush, made her big eyes gleam under the
dark lids.  Mrs Verloc then looked younger; she looked as young as Winnie
used to look, and much more animated than the Winnie of the Belgravian
mansion days had ever allowed herself to appear to gentlemen lodgers.  Mr
Verloc’s anxieties had prevented him from attaching any sense to what his
wife was saying.  It was as if her voice were talking on the other side
of a very thick wall.  It was her aspect that recalled him to himself.

He appreciated this woman, and the sentiment of this appreciation,
stirred by a display of something resembling emotion, only added another
pang to his mental anguish.  When her voice ceased he moved uneasily, and
said:

“I haven’t been feeling well for the last few days.”

He might have meant this as an opening to a complete confidence; but Mrs
Verloc laid her head on the pillow again, and staring upward, went on:

“That boy hears too much of what is talked about here.  If I had known
they were coming to-night I would have seen to it that he went to bed at
the same time I did.  He was out of his mind with something he overheard
about eating people’s flesh and drinking blood.  What’s the good of
talking like that?”

There was a note of indignant scorn in her voice.  Mr Verloc was fully
responsive now.

“Ask Karl Yundt,” he growled savagely.

Mrs Verloc, with great decision, pronounced Karl Yundt “a disgusting old
man.”  She declared openly her affection for Michaelis.  Of the robust
Ossipon, in whose presence she always felt uneasy behind an attitude of
stony reserve, she said nothing whatever.  And continuing to talk of that
brother, who had been for so many years an object of care and fears:

“He isn’t fit to hear what’s said here.  He believes it’s all true.  He
knows no better.  He gets into his passions over it.”

Mr Verloc made no comment.

“He glared at me, as if he didn’t know who I was, when I went downstairs.
His heart was going like a hammer.  He can’t help being excitable.  I
woke mother up, and asked her to sit with him till he went to sleep.  It
isn’t his fault.  He’s no trouble when he’s left alone.”

Mr Verloc made no comment.

“I wish he had never been to school,” Mrs Verloc began again brusquely.
“He’s always taking away those newspapers from the window to read.  He
gets a red face poring over them.  We don’t get rid of a dozen numbers in
a month.  They only take up room in the front window.  And Mr Ossipon
brings every week a pile of these F. P. tracts to sell at a halfpenny
each.  I wouldn’t give a halfpenny for the whole lot.  It’s silly
reading—that’s what it is.  There’s no sale for it.  The other day Stevie
got hold of one, and there was a story in it of a German soldier officer
tearing half-off the ear of a recruit, and nothing was done to him for
it.  The brute!  I couldn’t do anything with Stevie that afternoon.  The
story was enough, too, to make one’s blood boil.  But what’s the use of
printing things like that?  We aren’t German slaves here, thank God.
It’s not our business—is it?”

Mr Verloc made no reply.

“I had to take the carving knife from the boy,” Mrs Verloc continued, a
little sleepily now.  “He was shouting and stamping and sobbing.  He
can’t stand the notion of any cruelty.  He would have stuck that officer
like a pig if he had seen him then.  It’s true, too!  Some people don’t
deserve much mercy.”  Mrs Verloc’s voice ceased, and the expression of
her motionless eyes became more and more contemplative and veiled during
the long pause.  “Comfortable, dear?” she asked in a faint, far-away
voice.  “Shall I put out the light now?”

The dreary conviction that there was no sleep for him held Mr Verloc mute
and hopelessly inert in his fear of darkness.  He made a great effort.

“Yes.  Put it out,” he said at last in a hollow tone.




CHAPTER IV


Most of the thirty or so little tables covered by red cloths with a white
design stood ranged at right angles to the deep brown wainscoting of the
underground hall.  Bronze chandeliers with many globes depended from the
low, slightly vaulted ceiling, and the fresco paintings ran flat and dull
all round the walls without windows, representing scenes of the chase and
of outdoor revelry in mediæval costumes.  Varlets in green jerkins
brandished hunting knives and raised on high tankards of foaming beer.

“Unless I am very much mistaken, you are the man who would know the
inside of this confounded affair,” said the robust Ossipon, leaning over,
his elbows far out on the table and his feet tucked back completely under
his chair.  His eyes stared with wild eagerness.

An upright semi-grand piano near the door, flanked by two palms in pots,
executed suddenly all by itself a valse tune with aggressive virtuosity.
The din it raised was deafening.  When it ceased, as abruptly as it had
started, the be-spectacled, dingy little man who faced Ossipon behind a
heavy glass mug full of beer emitted calmly what had the sound of a
general proposition.

“In principle what one of us may or may not know as to any given fact
can’t be a matter for inquiry to the others.”

“Certainly not,” Comrade Ossipon agreed in a quiet undertone.  “In
principle.”

With his big florid face held between his hands he continued to stare
hard, while the dingy little man in spectacles coolly took a drink of
beer and stood the glass mug back on the table.  His flat, large ears
departed widely from the sides of his skull, which looked frail enough
for Ossipon to crush between thumb and forefinger; the dome of the
forehead seemed to rest on the rim of the spectacles; the flat cheeks, of
a greasy, unhealthy complexion, were merely smudged by the miserable
poverty of a thin dark whisker.  The lamentable inferiority of the whole
physique was made ludicrous by the supremely self-confident bearing of
the individual.  His speech was curt, and he had a particularly
impressive manner of keeping silent.

Ossipon spoke again from between his hands in a mutter.

“Have you been out much to-day?”

“No.  I stayed in bed all the morning,” answered the other.  “Why?”

“Oh!  Nothing,” said Ossipon, gazing earnestly and quivering inwardly
with the desire to find out something, but obviously intimidated by the
little man’s overwhelming air of unconcern.  When talking with this
comrade—which happened but rarely—the big Ossipon suffered from a sense
of moral and even physical insignificance.  However, he ventured another
question.  “Did you walk down here?”

“No; omnibus,” the little man answered readily enough.  He lived far away
in Islington, in a small house down a shabby street, littered with straw
and dirty paper, where out of school hours a troop of assorted children
ran and squabbled with a shrill, joyless, rowdy clamour.  His single back
room, remarkable for having an extremely large cupboard, he rented
furnished from two elderly spinsters, dressmakers in a humble way with a
clientele of servant girls mostly.  He had a heavy padlock put on the
cupboard, but otherwise he was a model lodger, giving no trouble, and
requiring practically no attendance.  His oddities were that he insisted
on being present when his room was being swept, and that when he went out
he locked his door, and took the key away with him.

Ossipon had a vision of these round black-rimmed spectacles progressing
along the streets on the top of an omnibus, their self-confident glitter
falling here and there on the walls of houses or lowered upon the heads
of the unconscious stream of people on the pavements.  The ghost of a
sickly smile altered the set of Ossipon’s thick lips at the thought of
the walls nodding, of people running for life at the sight of those
spectacles.  If they had only known!  What a panic!  He murmured
interrogatively: “Been sitting long here?”

“An hour or more,” answered the other negligently, and took a pull at the
dark beer.  All his movements—the way he grasped the mug, the act of
drinking, the way he set the heavy glass down and folded his arms—had a
firmness, an assured precision which made the big and muscular Ossipon,
leaning forward with staring eyes and protruding lips, look the picture
of eager indecision.

“An hour,” he said.  “Then it may be you haven’t heard yet the news I’ve
heard just now—in the street.  Have you?”

The little man shook his head negatively the least bit.  But as he gave
no indication of curiosity Ossipon ventured to add that he had heard it
just outside the place.  A newspaper boy had yelled the thing under his
very nose, and not being prepared for anything of that sort, he was very
much startled and upset.  He had to come in there with a dry mouth.  “I
never thought of finding you here,” he added, murmuring steadily, with
his elbows planted on the table.

“I come here sometimes,” said the other, preserving his provoking
coolness of demeanour.

“It’s wonderful that you of all people should have heard nothing of it,”
the big Ossipon continued.  His eyelids snapped nervously upon the
shining eyes.  “You of all people,” he repeated tentatively.  This
obvious restraint argued an incredible and inexplicable timidity of the
big fellow before the calm little man, who again lifted the glass mug,
drank, and put it down with brusque and assured movements.  And that was
all.

Ossipon after waiting for something, word or sign, that did not come,
made an effort to assume a sort of indifference.

“Do you,” he said, deadening his voice still more, “give your stuff to
anybody who’s up to asking you for it?”

“My absolute rule is never to refuse anybody—as long as I have a pinch by
me,” answered the little man with decision.

“That’s a principle?” commented Ossipon.

“It’s a principle.”

“And you think it’s sound?”

The large round spectacles, which gave a look of staring self-confidence
to the sallow face, confronted Ossipon like sleepless, unwinking orbs
flashing a cold fire.

“Perfectly.  Always.  Under every circumstance.  What could stop me?  Why
should I not?  Why should I think twice about it?”

Ossipon gasped, as it were, discreetly.

“Do you mean to say you would hand it over to a ‘teck’ if one came to ask
you for your wares?”

The other smiled faintly.

“Let them come and try it on, and you will see,” he said.  “They know me,
but I know also every one of them.  They won’t come near me—not they.”

His thin livid lips snapped together firmly.  Ossipon began to argue.

“But they could send someone—rig a plant on you.  Don’t you see?  Get the
stuff from you in that way, and then arrest you with the proof in their
hands.”

“Proof of what?  Dealing in explosives without a licence perhaps.”  This
was meant for a contemptuous jeer, though the expression of the thin,
sickly face remained unchanged, and the utterance was negligent.  “I
don’t think there’s one of them anxious to make that arrest.  I don’t
think they could get one of them to apply for a warrant.  I mean one of
the best.  Not one.”

“Why?” Ossipon asked.

“Because they know very well I take care never to part with the last
handful of my wares.  I’ve it always by me.”  He touched the breast of
his coat lightly.  “In a thick glass flask,” he added.

“So I have been told,” said Ossipon, with a shade of wonder in his voice.
“But I didn’t know if—”

“They know,” interrupted the little man crisply, leaning against the
straight chair back, which rose higher than his fragile head.  “I shall
never be arrested.  The game isn’t good enough for any policeman of them
all.  To deal with a man like me you require sheer, naked, inglorious
heroism.”  Again his lips closed with a self-confident snap.  Ossipon
repressed a movement of impatience.

“Or recklessness—or simply ignorance,” he retorted.  “They’ve only to get
somebody for the job who does not know you carry enough stuff in your
pocket to blow yourself and everything within sixty yards of you to
pieces.”

“I never affirmed I could not be eliminated,” rejoined the other.  “But
that wouldn’t be an arrest.  Moreover, it’s not so easy as it looks.”

“Bah!” Ossipon contradicted.  “Don’t be too sure of that.  What’s to
prevent half-a-dozen of them jumping upon you from behind in the street?
With your arms pinned to your sides you could do nothing—could you?”

“Yes; I could.  I am seldom out in the streets after dark,” said the
little man impassively, “and never very late.  I walk always with my
right hand closed round the india-rubber ball which I have in my trouser
pocket.  The pressing of this ball actuates a detonator inside the flask
I carry in my pocket.  It’s the principle of the pneumatic instantaneous
shutter for a camera lens.  The tube leads up—”

With a swift disclosing gesture he gave Ossipon a glimpse of an
india-rubber tube, resembling a slender brown worm, issuing from the
armhole of his waistcoat and plunging into the inner breast pocket of his
jacket.  His clothes, of a nondescript brown mixture, were threadbare and
marked with stains, dusty in the folds, with ragged button-holes.  “The
detonator is partly mechanical, partly chemical,” he explained, with
casual condescension.

“It is instantaneous, of course?” murmured Ossipon, with a slight
shudder.

“Far from it,” confessed the other, with a reluctance which seemed to
twist his mouth dolorously.  “A full twenty seconds must elapse from the
moment I press the ball till the explosion takes place.”

“Phew!” whistled Ossipon, completely appalled.  “Twenty seconds!
Horrors!  You mean to say that you could face that?  I should go crazy—”

“Wouldn’t matter if you did.  Of course, it’s the weak point of this
special system, which is only for my own use.  The worst is that the
manner of exploding is always the weak point with us.  I am trying to
invent a detonator that would adjust itself to all conditions of action,
and even to unexpected changes of conditions.  A variable and yet
perfectly precise mechanism.  A really intelligent detonator.”

“Twenty seconds,” muttered Ossipon again.  “Ough!  And then—”

With a slight turn of the head the glitter of the spectacles seemed to
gauge the size of the beer saloon in the basement of the renowned Silenus
Restaurant.

“Nobody in this room could hope to escape,” was the verdict of that
survey.  “Nor yet this couple going up the stairs now.”

The piano at the foot of the staircase clanged through a mazurka with
brazen impetuosity, as though a vulgar and impudent ghost were showing
off.  The keys sank and rose mysteriously.  Then all became still.  For a
moment Ossipon imagined the overlighted place changed into a dreadful
black hole belching horrible fumes choked with ghastly rubbish of smashed
brickwork and mutilated corpses.  He had such a distinct perception of
ruin and death that he shuddered again.  The other observed, with an air
of calm sufficiency:

“In the last instance it is character alone that makes for one’s safety.
There are very few people in the world whose character is as well
established as mine.”

“I wonder how you managed it,” growled Ossipon.

“Force of personality,” said the other, without raising his voice; and
coming from the mouth of that obviously miserable organism the assertion
caused the robust Ossipon to bite his lower lip.  “Force of personality,”
he repeated, with ostentatious calm.  “I have the means to make myself
deadly, but that by itself, you understand, is absolutely nothing in the
way of protection.  What is effective is the belief those people have in
my will to use the means.  That’s their impression.  It is absolute.
Therefore I am deadly.”

“There are individuals of character amongst that lot too,” muttered
Ossipon ominously.

“Possibly.  But it is a matter of degree obviously, since, for instance,
I am not impressed by them.  Therefore they are inferior.  They cannot be
otherwise.  Their character is built upon conventional morality.  It
leans on the social order.  Mine stands free from everything artificial.
They are bound in all sorts of conventions.  They depend on life, which,
in this connection, is a historical fact surrounded by all sorts of
restraints and considerations, a complex organised fact open to attack at
every point; whereas I depend on death, which knows no restraint and
cannot be attacked.  My superiority is evident.”

“This is a transcendental way of putting it,” said Ossipon, watching the
cold glitter of the round spectacles.  “I’ve heard Karl Yundt say much
the same thing not very long ago.”

“Karl Yundt,” mumbled the other contemptuously, “the delegate of the
International Red Committee, has been a posturing shadow all his life.
There are three of you delegates, aren’t there?  I won’t define the other
two, as you are one of them.  But what you say means nothing.  You are
the worthy delegates for revolutionary propaganda, but the trouble is not
only that you are as unable to think independently as any respectable
grocer or journalist of them all, but that you have no character
whatever.”

Ossipon could not restrain a start of indignation.

“But what do you want from us?” he exclaimed in a deadened voice.  “What
is it you are after yourself?”

“A perfect detonator,” was the peremptory answer.  “What are you making
that face for?  You see, you can’t even bear the mention of something
conclusive.”

“I am not making a face,” growled the annoyed Ossipon bearishly.

“You revolutionists,” the other continued, with leisurely
self-confidence, “are the slaves of the social convention, which is
afraid of you; slaves of it as much as the very police that stands up in
the defence of that convention.  Clearly you are, since you want to
revolutionise it.  It governs your thought, of course, and your action
too, and thus neither your thought nor your action can ever be
conclusive.”  He paused, tranquil, with that air of close, endless
silence, then almost immediately went on.  “You are not a bit better than
the forces arrayed against you—than the police, for instance.  The other
day I came suddenly upon Chief Inspector Heat at the corner of Tottenham
Court Road.  He looked at me very steadily.  But I did not look at him.
Why should I give him more than a glance?  He was thinking of many
things—of his superiors, of his reputation, of the law courts, of his
salary, of newspapers—of a hundred things.  But I was thinking of my
perfect detonator only.  He meant nothing to me.  He was as insignificant
as—I can’t call to mind anything insignificant enough to compare him
with—except Karl Yundt perhaps.  Like to like.  The terrorist and the
policeman both come from the same basket.  Revolution, legality—counter
moves in the same game; forms of idleness at bottom identical.  He plays
his little game—so do you propagandists.  But I don’t play; I work
fourteen hours a day, and go hungry sometimes.  My experiments cost money
now and again, and then I must do without food for a day or two.  You’re
looking at my beer.  Yes.  I have had two glasses already, and shall have
another presently.  This is a little holiday, and I celebrate it alone.
Why not?  I’ve the grit to work alone, quite alone, absolutely alone.
I’ve worked alone for years.”

Ossipon’s face had turned dusky red.

“At the perfect detonator—eh?” he sneered, very low.

“Yes,” retorted the other.  “It is a good definition.  You couldn’t find
anything half so precise to define the nature of your activity with all
your committees and delegations.  It is I who am the true propagandist.”

“We won’t discuss that point,” said Ossipon, with an air of rising above
personal considerations.  “I am afraid I’ll have to spoil your holiday
for you, though.  There’s a man blown up in Greenwich Park this morning.”

“How do you know?”

“They have been yelling the news in the streets since two o’clock.  I
bought the paper, and just ran in here.  Then I saw you sitting at this
table.  I’ve got it in my pocket now.”

He pulled the newspaper out.  It was a good-sized rosy sheet, as if
flushed by the warmth of its own convictions, which were optimistic.  He
scanned the pages rapidly.

“Ah!  Here it is.  Bomb in Greenwich Park.  There isn’t much so far.
Half-past eleven.  Foggy morning.  Effects of explosion felt as far as
Romney Road and Park Place.  Enormous hole in the ground under a tree
filled with smashed roots and broken branches.  All round fragments of a
man’s body blown to pieces.  That’s all.  The rest’s mere newspaper gup.
No doubt a wicked attempt to blow up the Observatory, they say.  H’m.
That’s hardly credible.”

He looked at the paper for a while longer in silence, then passed it to
the other, who after gazing abstractedly at the print laid it down
without comment.

It was Ossipon who spoke first—still resentful.

“The fragments of only _one_ man, you note.  Ergo: blew _himself_ up.
That spoils your day off for you—don’t it?  Were you expecting that sort
of move?  I hadn’t the slightest idea—not the ghost of a notion of
anything of the sort being planned to come off here—in this country.
Under the present circumstances it’s nothing short of criminal.”

The little man lifted his thin black eyebrows with dispassionate scorn.

“Criminal!  What is that?  What _is_ crime?  What can be the meaning of
such an assertion?”

“How am I to express myself?  One must use the current words,” said
Ossipon impatiently.  “The meaning of this assertion is that this
business may affect our position very adversely in this country.  Isn’t
that crime enough for you?  I am convinced you have been giving away some
of your stuff lately.”

Ossipon stared hard.  The other, without flinching, lowered and raised
his head slowly.

“You have!” burst out the editor of the F. P. leaflets in an intense
whisper.  “No!  And are you really handing it over at large like this,
for the asking, to the first fool that comes along?”

“Just so!  The condemned social order has not been built up on paper and
ink, and I don’t fancy that a combination of paper and ink will ever put
an end to it, whatever you may think.  Yes, I would give the stuff with
both hands to every man, woman, or fool that likes to come along.  I know
what you are thinking about.  But I am not taking my cue from the Red
Committee.  I would see you all hounded out of here, or arrested—or
beheaded for that matter—without turning a hair.  What happens to us as
individuals is not of the least consequence.”

He spoke carelessly, without heat, almost without feeling, and Ossipon,
secretly much affected, tried to copy this detachment.

“If the police here knew their business they would shoot you full of
holes with revolvers, or else try to sand-bag you from behind in broad
daylight.”

The little man seemed already to have considered that point of view in
his dispassionate self-confident manner.

“Yes,” he assented with the utmost readiness.  “But for that they would
have to face their own institutions.  Do you see?  That requires uncommon
grit.  Grit of a special kind.”

Ossipon blinked.

“I fancy that’s exactly what would happen to you if you were to set up
your laboratory in the States.  They don’t stand on ceremony with their
institutions there.”

“I am not likely to go and see.  Otherwise your remark is just,” admitted
the other.  “They have more character over there, and their character is
essentially anarchistic.  Fertile ground for us, the States—very good
ground.  The great Republic has the root of the destructive matter in
her.  The collective temperament is lawless.  Excellent.  They may shoot
us down, but—”

“You are too transcendental for me,” growled Ossipon, with moody concern.

“Logical,” protested the other.  “There are several kinds of logic.  This
is the enlightened kind.  America is all right.  It is this country that
is dangerous, with her idealistic conception of legality.  The social
spirit of this people is wrapped up in scrupulous prejudices, and that is
fatal to our work.  You talk of England being our only refuge!  So much
the worse.  Capua!  What do we want with refuges?  Here you talk, print,
plot, and do nothing.  I daresay it’s very convenient for such Karl
Yundts.”

He shrugged his shoulders slightly, then added with the same leisurely
assurance: “To break up the superstition and worship of legality should
be our aim.  Nothing would please me more than to see Inspector Heat and
his likes take to shooting us down in broad daylight with the approval of
the public.  Half our battle would be won then; the disintegration of the
old morality would have set in in its very temple.  That is what you
ought to aim at.  But you revolutionists will never understand that.  You
plan the future, you lose yourselves in reveries of economical systems
derived from what is; whereas what’s wanted is a clean sweep and a clear
start for a new conception of life.  That sort of future will take care
of itself if you will only make room for it.  Therefore I would shovel my
stuff in heaps at the corners of the streets if I had enough for that;
and as I haven’t, I do my best by perfecting a really dependable
detonator.”

Ossipon, who had been mentally swimming in deep waters, seized upon the
last word as if it were a saving plank.

“Yes.  Your detonators.  I shouldn’t wonder if it weren’t one of your
detonators that made a clean sweep of the man in the park.”

A shade of vexation darkened the determined sallow face confronting
Ossipon.

“My difficulty consists precisely in experimenting practically with the
various kinds.  They must be tried after all.  Besides—”

Ossipon interrupted.

“Who could that fellow be?  I assure you that we in London had no
knowledge—Couldn’t you describe the person you gave the stuff to?”

The other turned his spectacles upon Ossipon like a pair of searchlights.

“Describe him,” he repeated slowly.  “I don’t think there can be the
slightest objection now.  I will describe him to you in one word—Verloc.”

Ossipon, whom curiosity had lifted a few inches off his seat, dropped
back, as if hit in the face.

“Verloc!  Impossible.”

The self-possessed little man nodded slightly once.

“Yes.  He’s the person.  You can’t say that in this case I was giving my
stuff to the first fool that came along.  He was a prominent member of
the group as far as I understand.”

“Yes,” said Ossipon.  “Prominent.  No, not exactly.  He was the centre
for general intelligence, and usually received comrades coming over here.
More useful than important.  Man of no ideas.  Years ago he used to speak
at meetings—in France, I believe.  Not very well, though.  He was trusted
by such men as Latorre, Moser and all that old lot.  The only talent he
showed really was his ability to elude the attentions of the police
somehow.  Here, for instance, he did not seem to be looked after very
closely.  He was regularly married, you know.  I suppose it’s with her
money that he started that shop.  Seemed to make it pay, too.”

Ossipon paused abruptly, muttered to himself “I wonder what that woman
will do now?” and fell into thought.

The other waited with ostentatious indifference.  His parentage was
obscure, and he was generally known only by his nickname of Professor.
His title to that designation consisted in his having been once assistant
demonstrator in chemistry at some technical institute.  He quarrelled
with the authorities upon a question of unfair treatment.  Afterwards he
obtained a post in the laboratory of a manufactory of dyes.  There too he
had been treated with revolting injustice.  His struggles, his
privations, his hard work to raise himself in the social scale, had
filled him with such an exalted conviction of his merits that it was
extremely difficult for the world to treat him with justice—the standard
of that notion depending so much upon the patience of the individual.
The Professor had genius, but lacked the great social virtue of
resignation.

“Intellectually a nonentity,” Ossipon pronounced aloud, abandoning
suddenly the inward contemplation of Mrs Verloc’s bereaved person and
business.  “Quite an ordinary personality.  You are wrong in not keeping
more in touch with the comrades, Professor,” he added in a reproving
tone.  “Did he say anything to you—give you some idea of his intentions?
I hadn’t seen him for a month.  It seems impossible that he should be
gone.”

“He told me it was going to be a demonstration against a building,” said
the Professor.  “I had to know that much to prepare the missile.  I
pointed out to him that I had hardly a sufficient quantity for a
completely destructive result, but he pressed me very earnestly to do my
best.  As he wanted something that could be carried openly in the hand, I
proposed to make use of an old one-gallon copal varnish can I happened to
have by me.  He was pleased at the idea.  It gave me some trouble,
because I had to cut out the bottom first and solder it on again
afterwards.  When prepared for use, the can enclosed a wide-mouthed,
well-corked jar of thick glass packed around with some wet clay and
containing sixteen ounces of X2 green powder.  The detonator was
connected with the screw top of the can.  It was ingenious—a combination
of time and shock.  I explained the system to him.  It was a thin tube of
tin enclosing a—”

Ossipon’s attention had wandered.

“What do you think has happened?” he interrupted.

“Can’t tell.  Screwed the top on tight, which would make the connection,
and then forgot the time.  It was set for twenty minutes.  On the other
hand, the time contact being made, a sharp shock would bring about the
explosion at once.  He either ran the time too close, or simply let the
thing fall.  The contact was made all right—that’s clear to me at any
rate.  The system’s worked perfectly.  And yet you would think that a
common fool in a hurry would be much more likely to forget to make the
contact altogether.  I was worrying myself about that sort of failure
mostly.  But there are more kinds of fools than one can guard against.
You can’t expect a detonator to be absolutely fool-proof.”

He beckoned to a waiter.  Ossipon sat rigid, with the abstracted gaze of
mental travail.  After the man had gone away with the money he roused
himself, with an air of profound dissatisfaction.

“It’s extremely unpleasant for me,” he mused.  “Karl has been in bed with
bronchitis for a week.  There’s an even chance that he will never get up
again.  Michaelis’s luxuriating in the country somewhere.  A fashionable
publisher has offered him five hundred pounds for a book.  It will be a
ghastly failure.  He has lost the habit of consecutive thinking in
prison, you know.”

The Professor on his feet, now buttoning his coat, looked about him with
perfect indifference.

“What are you going to do?” asked Ossipon wearily.  He dreaded the blame
of the Central Red Committee, a body which had no permanent place of
abode, and of whose membership he was not exactly informed.  If this
affair eventuated in the stoppage of the modest subsidy allotted to the
publication of the F. P. pamphlets, then indeed he would have to regret
Verloc’s inexplicable folly.

“Solidarity with the extremest form of action is one thing, and silly
recklessness is another,” he said, with a sort of moody brutality.  “I
don’t know what came to Verloc.  There’s some mystery there.  However,
he’s gone.  You may take it as you like, but under the circumstances the
only policy for the militant revolutionary group is to disclaim all
connection with this damned freak of yours.  How to make the disclaimer
convincing enough is what bothers me.”

The little man on his feet, buttoned up and ready to go, was no taller
than the seated Ossipon.  He levelled his spectacles at the latter’s face
point-blank.

“You might ask the police for a testimonial of good conduct.  They know
where every one of you slept last night.  Perhaps if you asked them they
would consent to publish some sort of official statement.”

“No doubt they are aware well enough that we had nothing to do with
this,” mumbled Ossipon bitterly.  “What they will say is another thing.”
He remained thoughtful, disregarding the short, owlish, shabby figure
standing by his side.  “I must lay hands on Michaelis at once, and get
him to speak from his heart at one of our gatherings.  The public has a
sort of sentimental regard for that fellow.  His name is known.  And I am
in touch with a few reporters on the big dailies.  What he would say
would be utter bosh, but he has a turn of talk that makes it go down all
the same.”

“Like treacle,” interjected the Professor, rather low, keeping an
impassive expression.

The perplexed Ossipon went on communing with himself half audibly, after
the manner of a man reflecting in perfect solitude.

“Confounded ass!  To leave such an imbecile business on my hands.  And I
don’t even know if—”

He sat with compressed lips.  The idea of going for news straight to the
shop lacked charm.  His notion was that Verloc’s shop might have been
turned already into a police trap.  They will be bound to make some
arrests, he thought, with something resembling virtuous indignation, for
the even tenor of his revolutionary life was menaced by no fault of his.
And yet unless he went there he ran the risk of remaining in ignorance of
what perhaps it would be very material for him to know.  Then he
reflected that, if the man in the park had been so very much blown to
pieces as the evening papers said, he could not have been identified.
And if so, the police could have no special reason for watching Verloc’s
shop more closely than any other place known to be frequented by marked
anarchists—no more reason, in fact, than for watching the doors of the
Silenus.  There would be a lot of watching all round, no matter where he
went.  Still—

“I wonder what I had better do now?” he muttered, taking counsel with
himself.

A rasping voice at his elbow said, with sedate scorn:

“Fasten yourself upon the woman for all she’s worth.”

After uttering these words the Professor walked away from the table.
Ossipon, whom that piece of insight had taken unawares, gave one
ineffectual start, and remained still, with a helpless gaze, as though
nailed fast to the seat of his chair.  The lonely piano, without as much
as a music stool to help it, struck a few chords courageously, and
beginning a selection of national airs, played him out at last to the
tune of “Blue Bells of Scotland.”  The painfully detached notes grew
faint behind his back while he went slowly upstairs, across the hall, and
into the street.

In front of the great doorway a dismal row of newspaper sellers standing
clear of the pavement dealt out their wares from the gutter.  It was a
raw, gloomy day of the early spring; and the grimy sky, the mud of the
streets, the rags of the dirty men, harmonised excellently with the
eruption of the damp, rubbishy sheets of paper soiled with printers’ ink.
The posters, maculated with filth, garnished like tapestry the sweep of
the curbstone.  The trade in afternoon papers was brisk, yet, in
comparison with the swift, constant march of foot traffic, the effect was
of indifference, of a disregarded distribution.  Ossipon looked hurriedly
both ways before stepping out into the cross-currents, but the Professor
was already out of sight.




CHAPTER V


The Professor had turned into a street to the left, and walked along,
with his head carried rigidly erect, in a crowd whose every individual
almost overtopped his stunted stature.  It was vain to pretend to himself
that he was not disappointed.  But that was mere feeling; the stoicism of
his thought could not be disturbed by this or any other failure.  Next
time, or the time after next, a telling stroke would be
delivered—something really startling—a blow fit to open the first crack
in the imposing front of the great edifice of legal conceptions
sheltering the atrocious injustice of society.  Of humble origin, and
with an appearance really so mean as to stand in the way of his
considerable natural abilities, his imagination had been fired early by
the tales of men rising from the depths of poverty to positions of
authority and affluence.  The extreme, almost ascetic purity of his
thought, combined with an astounding ignorance of worldly conditions, had
set before him a goal of power and prestige to be attained without the
medium of arts, graces, tact, wealth—by sheer weight of merit alone.  On
that view he considered himself entitled to undisputed success.  His
father, a delicate dark enthusiast with a sloping forehead, had been an
itinerant and rousing preacher of some obscure but rigid Christian sect—a
man supremely confident in the privileges of his righteousness.  In the
son, individualist by temperament, once the science of colleges had
replaced thoroughly the faith of conventicles, this moral attitude
translated itself into a frenzied puritanism of ambition.  He nursed it
as something secularly holy.  To see it thwarted opened his eyes to the
true nature of the world, whose morality was artificial, corrupt, and
blasphemous.  The way of even the most justifiable revolutions is
prepared by personal impulses disguised into creeds.  The Professor’s
indignation found in itself a final cause that absolved him from the sin
of turning to destruction as the agent of his ambition.  To destroy
public faith in legality was the imperfect formula of his pedantic
fanaticism; but the subconscious conviction that the framework of an
established social order cannot be effectually shattered except by some
form of collective or individual violence was precise and correct.  He
was a moral agent—that was settled in his mind.  By exercising his agency
with ruthless defiance he procured for himself the appearances of power
and personal prestige.  That was undeniable to his vengeful bitterness.
It pacified its unrest; and in their own way the most ardent of
revolutionaries are perhaps doing no more but seeking for peace in common
with the rest of mankind—the peace of soothed vanity, of satisfied
appetites, or perhaps of appeased conscience.

Lost in the crowd, miserable and undersized, he meditated confidently on
his power, keeping his hand in the left pocket of his trousers, grasping
lightly the india-rubber ball, the supreme guarantee of his sinister
freedom; but after a while he became disagreeably affected by the sight
of the roadway thronged with vehicles and of the pavement crowded with
men and women.  He was in a long, straight street, peopled by a mere
fraction of an immense multitude; but all round him, on and on, even to
the limits of the horizon hidden by the enormous piles of bricks, he felt
the mass of mankind mighty in its numbers.  They swarmed numerous like
locusts, industrious like ants, thoughtless like a natural force, pushing
on blind and orderly and absorbed, impervious to sentiment, to logic, to
terror too perhaps.

That was the form of doubt he feared most.  Impervious to fear!  Often
while walking abroad, when he happened also to come out of himself, he
had such moments of dreadful and sane mistrust of mankind.  What if
nothing could move them?  Such moments come to all men whose ambition
aims at a direct grasp upon humanity—to artists, politicians, thinkers,
reformers, or saints.  A despicable emotional state this, against which
solitude fortifies a superior character; and with severe exultation the
Professor thought of the refuge of his room, with its padlocked cupboard,
lost in a wilderness of poor houses, the hermitage of the perfect
anarchist.  In order to reach sooner the point where he could take his
omnibus, he turned brusquely out of the populous street into a narrow and
dusky alley paved with flagstones.  On one side the low brick houses had
in their dusty windows the sightless, moribund look of incurable
decay—empty shells awaiting demolition.  From the other side life had not
departed wholly as yet.  Facing the only gas-lamp yawned the cavern of a
second-hand furniture dealer, where, deep in the gloom of a sort of
narrow avenue winding through a bizarre forest of wardrobes, with an
undergrowth tangle of table legs, a tall pier-glass glimmered like a pool
of water in a wood.  An unhappy, homeless couch, accompanied by two
unrelated chairs, stood in the open.  The only human being making use of
the alley besides the Professor, coming stalwart and erect from the
opposite direction, checked his swinging pace suddenly.

“Hallo!” he said, and stood a little on one side watchfully.

The Professor had already stopped, with a ready half turn which brought
his shoulders very near the other wall.  His right hand fell lightly on
the back of the outcast couch, the left remained purposefully plunged
deep in the trousers pocket, and the roundness of the heavy rimmed
spectacles imparted an owlish character to his moody, unperturbed face.

It was like a meeting in a side corridor of a mansion full of life.  The
stalwart man was buttoned up in a dark overcoat, and carried an umbrella.
His hat, tilted back, uncovered a good deal of forehead, which appeared
very white in the dusk.  In the dark patches of the orbits the eyeballs
glimmered piercingly.  Long, drooping moustaches, the colour of ripe
corn, framed with their points the square block of his shaved chin.

“I am not looking for you,” he said curtly.

The Professor did not stir an inch.  The blended noises of the enormous
town sank down to an inarticulate low murmur.  Chief Inspector Heat of
the Special Crimes Department changed his tone.

“Not in a hurry to get home?” he asked, with mocking simplicity.

The unwholesome-looking little moral agent of destruction exulted
silently in the possession of personal prestige, keeping in check this
man armed with the defensive mandate of a menaced society.  More
fortunate than Caligula, who wished that the Roman Senate had only one
head for the better satisfaction of his cruel lust, he beheld in that one
man all the forces he had set at defiance: the force of law, property,
oppression, and injustice.  He beheld all his enemies, and fearlessly
confronted them all in a supreme satisfaction of his vanity.  They stood
perplexed before him as if before a dreadful portent.  He gloated
inwardly over the chance of this meeting affirming his superiority over
all the multitude of mankind.

It was in reality a chance meeting.  Chief Inspector Heat had had a
disagreeably busy day since his department received the first telegram
from Greenwich a little before eleven in the morning.  First of all, the
fact of the outrage being attempted less than a week after he had assured
a high official that no outbreak of anarchist activity was to be
apprehended was sufficiently annoying.  If he ever thought himself safe
in making a statement, it was then.  He had made that statement with
infinite satisfaction to himself, because it was clear that the high
official desired greatly to hear that very thing.  He had affirmed that
nothing of the sort could even be thought of without the department being
aware of it within twenty-four hours; and he had spoken thus in his
consciousness of being the great expert of his department.  He had gone
even so far as to utter words which true wisdom would have kept back.
But Chief Inspector Heat was not very wise—at least not truly so.  True
wisdom, which is not certain of anything in this world of contradictions,
would have prevented him from attaining his present position.  It would
have alarmed his superiors, and done away with his chances of promotion.
His promotion had been very rapid.

“There isn’t one of them, sir, that we couldn’t lay our hands on at any
time of night and day.  We know what each of them is doing hour by hour,”
he had declared.  And the high official had deigned to smile.  This was
so obviously the right thing to say for an officer of Chief Inspector
Heat’s reputation that it was perfectly delightful.  The high official
believed the declaration, which chimed in with his idea of the fitness of
things.  His wisdom was of an official kind, or else he might have
reflected upon a matter not of theory but of experience that in the
close-woven stuff of relations between conspirator and police there occur
unexpected solutions of continuity, sudden holes in space and time.  A
given anarchist may be watched inch by inch and minute by minute, but a
moment always comes when somehow all sight and touch of him are lost for
a few hours, during which something (generally an explosion) more or less
deplorable does happen.  But the high official, carried away by his sense
of the fitness of things, had smiled, and now the recollection of that
smile was very annoying to Chief Inspector Heat, principal expert in
anarchist procedure.

This was not the only circumstance whose recollection depressed the usual
serenity of the eminent specialist.  There was another dating back only
to that very morning.  The thought that when called urgently to his
Assistant Commissioner’s private room he had been unable to conceal his
astonishment was distinctly vexing.  His instinct of a successful man had
taught him long ago that, as a general rule, a reputation is built on
manner as much as on achievement.  And he felt that his manner when
confronted with the telegram had not been impressive.  He had opened his
eyes widely, and had exclaimed “Impossible!” exposing himself thereby to
the unanswerable retort of a finger-tip laid forcibly on the telegram
which the Assistant Commissioner, after reading it aloud, had flung on
the desk.  To be crushed, as it were, under the tip of a forefinger was
an unpleasant experience.  Very damaging, too!  Furthermore, Chief
Inspector Heat was conscious of not having mended matters by allowing
himself to express a conviction.

“One thing I can tell you at once: none of our lot had anything to do
with this.”

He was strong in his integrity of a good detective, but he saw now that
an impenetrably attentive reserve towards this incident would have served
his reputation better.  On the other hand, he admitted to himself that it
was difficult to preserve one’s reputation if rank outsiders were going
to take a hand in the business.  Outsiders are the bane of the police as
of other professions.  The tone of the Assistant Commissioner’s remarks
had been sour enough to set one’s teeth on edge.

And since breakfast Chief Inspector Heat had not managed to get anything
to eat.

Starting immediately to begin his investigation on the spot, he had
swallowed a good deal of raw, unwholesome fog in the park.  Then he had
walked over to the hospital; and when the investigation in Greenwich was
concluded at last he had lost his inclination for food.  Not accustomed,
as the doctors are, to examine closely the mangled remains of human
beings, he had been shocked by the sight disclosed to his view when a
waterproof sheet had been lifted off a table in a certain apartment of
the hospital.

Another waterproof sheet was spread over that table in the manner of a
table-cloth, with the corners turned up over a sort of mound—a heap of
rags, scorched and bloodstained, half concealing what might have been an
accumulation of raw material for a cannibal feast.  It required
considerable firmness of mind not to recoil before that sight.  Chief
Inspector Heat, an efficient officer of his department, stood his ground,
but for a whole minute he did not advance.  A local constable in uniform
cast a sidelong glance, and said, with stolid simplicity:

“He’s all there.  Every bit of him.  It was a job.”

He had been the first man on the spot after the explosion.  He mentioned
the fact again.  He had seen something like a heavy flash of lightning in
the fog.  At that time he was standing at the door of the King William
Street Lodge talking to the keeper.  The concussion made him tingle all
over.  He ran between the trees towards the Observatory.  “As fast as my
legs would carry me,” he repeated twice.

Chief Inspector Heat, bending forward over the table in a gingerly and
horrified manner, let him run on.  The hospital porter and another man
turned down the corners of the cloth, and stepped aside.  The Chief
Inspector’s eyes searched the gruesome detail of that heap of mixed
things, which seemed to have been collected in shambles and rag shops.

“You used a shovel,” he remarked, observing a sprinkling of small gravel,
tiny brown bits of bark, and particles of splintered wood as fine as
needles.

“Had to in one place,” said the stolid constable.  “I sent a keeper to
fetch a spade.  When he heard me scraping the ground with it he leaned
his forehead against a tree, and was as sick as a dog.”

The Chief Inspector, stooping guardedly over the table, fought down the
unpleasant sensation in his throat.  The shattering violence of
destruction which had made of that body a heap of nameless fragments
affected his feelings with a sense of ruthless cruelty, though his reason
told him the effect must have been as swift as a flash of lightning.  The
man, whoever he was, had died instantaneously; and yet it seemed
impossible to believe that a human body could have reached that state of
disintegration without passing through the pangs of inconceivable agony.
No physiologist, and still less of a metaphysician, Chief Inspector Heat
rose by the force of sympathy, which is a form of fear, above the vulgar
conception of time.  Instantaneous!  He remembered all he had ever read
in popular publications of long and terrifying dreams dreamed in the
instant of waking; of the whole past life lived with frightful intensity
by a drowning man as his doomed head bobs up, streaming, for the last
time.  The inexplicable mysteries of conscious existence beset Chief
Inspector Heat till he evolved a horrible notion that ages of atrocious
pain and mental torture could be contained between two successive winks
of an eye.  And meantime the Chief Inspector went on, peering at the
table with a calm face and the slightly anxious attention of an indigent
customer bending over what may be called the by-products of a butcher’s
shop with a view to an inexpensive Sunday dinner.  All the time his
trained faculties of an excellent investigator, who scorns no chance of
information, followed the self-satisfied, disjointed loquacity of the
constable.

“A fair-haired fellow,” the last observed in a placid tone, and paused.
“The old woman who spoke to the sergeant noticed a fair-haired fellow
coming out of Maze Hill Station.”  He paused.  “And he was a fair-haired
fellow.  She noticed two men coming out of the station after the uptrain
had gone on,” he continued slowly.  “She couldn’t tell if they were
together.  She took no particular notice of the big one, but the other
was a fair, slight chap, carrying a tin varnish can in one hand.”  The
constable ceased.

“Know the woman?” muttered the Chief Inspector, with his eyes fixed on
the table, and a vague notion in his mind of an inquest to be held
presently upon a person likely to remain for ever unknown.

“Yes.  She’s housekeeper to a retired publican, and attends the chapel in
Park Place sometimes,” the constable uttered weightily, and paused, with
another oblique glance at the table.

Then suddenly: “Well, here he is—all of him I could see.  Fair.
Slight—slight enough.  Look at that foot there.  I picked up the legs
first, one after another.  He was that scattered you didn’t know where to
begin.”

The constable paused; the least flicker of an innocent self-laudatory
smile invested his round face with an infantile expression.

“Stumbled,” he announced positively.  “I stumbled once myself, and
pitched on my head too, while running up.  Them roots do stick out all
about the place.  Stumbled against the root of a tree and fell, and that
thing he was carrying must have gone off right under his chest, I
expect.”

The echo of the words “Person unknown” repeating itself in his inner
consciousness bothered the Chief Inspector considerably.  He would have
liked to trace this affair back to its mysterious origin for his own
information.  He was professionally curious.  Before the public he would
have liked to vindicate the efficiency of his department by establishing
the identity of that man.  He was a loyal servant.  That, however,
appeared impossible.  The first term of the problem was unreadable—lacked
all suggestion but that of atrocious cruelty.

Overcoming his physical repugnance, Chief Inspector Heat stretched out
his hand without conviction for the salving of his conscience, and took
up the least soiled of the rags.  It was a narrow strip of velvet with a
larger triangular piece of dark blue cloth hanging from it.  He held it
up to his eyes; and the police constable spoke.

“Velvet collar.  Funny the old woman should have noticed the velvet
collar.  Dark blue overcoat with a velvet collar, she has told us.  He
was the chap she saw, and no mistake.  And here he is all complete,
velvet collar and all.  I don’t think I missed a single piece as big as a
postage stamp.”

At this point the trained faculties of the Chief Inspector ceased to hear
the voice of the constable.  He moved to one of the windows for better
light.  His face, averted from the room, expressed a startled intense
interest while he examined closely the triangular piece of broad-cloth.
By a sudden jerk he detached it, and _only_ after stuffing it into his
pocket turned round to the room, and flung the velvet collar back on the
table—

“Cover up,” he directed the attendants curtly, without another look, and,
saluted by the constable, carried off his spoil hastily.

A convenient train whirled him up to town, alone and pondering deeply, in
a third-class compartment.  That singed piece of cloth was incredibly
valuable, and he could not defend himself from astonishment at the casual
manner it had come into his possession.  It was as if Fate had thrust
that clue into his hands.  And after the manner of the average man, whose
ambition is to command events, he began to mistrust such a gratuitous and
accidental success—just because it seemed forced upon him.  The practical
value of success depends not a little on the way you look at it.  But
Fate looks at nothing.  It has no discretion.  He no longer considered it
eminently desirable all round to establish publicly the identity of the
man who had blown himself up that morning with such horrible
completeness.  But he was not certain of the view his department would
take.  A department is to those it employs a complex personality with
ideas and even fads of its own.  It depends on the loyal devotion of its
servants, and the devoted loyalty of trusted servants is associated with
a certain amount of affectionate contempt, which keeps it sweet, as it
were.  By a benevolent provision of Nature no man is a hero to his valet,
or else the heroes would have to brush their own clothes.  Likewise no
department appears perfectly wise to the intimacy of its workers.  A
department does not know so much as some of its servants.  Being a
dispassionate organism, it can never be perfectly informed.  It would not
be good for its efficiency to know too much.  Chief Inspector Heat got
out of the train in a state of thoughtfulness entirely untainted with
disloyalty, but not quite free of that jealous mistrust which so often
springs on the ground of perfect devotion, whether to women or to
institutions.

It was in this mental disposition, physically very empty, but still
nauseated by what he had seen, that he had come upon the Professor.
Under these conditions which make for irascibility in a sound, normal
man, this meeting was specially unwelcome to Chief Inspector Heat.  He
had not been thinking of the Professor; he had not been thinking of any
individual anarchist at all.  The complexion of that case had somehow
forced upon him the general idea of the absurdity of things human, which
in the abstract is sufficiently annoying to an unphilosophical
temperament, and in concrete instances becomes exasperating beyond
endurance.  At the beginning of his career Chief Inspector Heat had been
concerned with the more energetic forms of thieving.  He had gained his
spurs in that sphere, and naturally enough had kept for it, after his
promotion to another department, a feeling not very far removed from
affection.  Thieving was not a sheer absurdity.  It was a form of human
industry, perverse indeed, but still an industry exercised in an
industrious world; it was work undertaken for the same reason as the work
in potteries, in coal mines, in fields, in tool-grinding shops.  It was
labour, whose practical difference from the other forms of labour
consisted in the nature of its risk, which did not lie in ankylosis, or
lead poisoning, or fire-damp, or gritty dust, but in what may be briefly
defined in its own special phraseology as “Seven years hard.”  Chief
Inspector Heat was, of course, not insensible to the gravity of moral
differences.  But neither were the thieves he had been looking after.
They submitted to the severe sanctions of a morality familiar to Chief
Inspector Heat with a certain resignation.

They were his fellow-citizens gone wrong because of imperfect education,
Chief Inspector Heat believed; but allowing for that difference, he could
understand the mind of a burglar, because, as a matter of fact, the mind
and the instincts of a burglar are of the same kind as the mind and the
instincts of a police officer.  Both recognise the same conventions, and
have a working knowledge of each other’s methods and of the routine of
their respective trades.  They understand each other, which is
advantageous to both, and establishes a sort of amenity in their
relations.  Products of the same machine, one classed as useful and the
other as noxious, they take the machine for granted in different ways,
but with a seriousness essentially the same.  The mind of Chief Inspector
Heat was inaccessible to ideas of revolt.  But his thieves were not
rebels.  His bodily vigour, his cool inflexible manner, his courage and
his fairness, had secured for him much respect and some adulation in the
sphere of his early successes.  He had felt himself revered and admired.
And Chief Inspector Heat, arrested within six paces of the anarchist
nick-named the Professor, gave a thought of regret to the world of
thieves—sane, without morbid ideals, working by routine, respectful of
constituted authorities, free from all taint of hate and despair.

After paying this tribute to what is normal in the constitution of
society (for the idea of thieving appeared to his instinct as normal as
the idea of property), Chief Inspector Heat felt very angry with himself
for having stopped, for having spoken, for having taken that way at all
on the ground of it being a short cut from the station to the
headquarters.  And he spoke again in his big authoritative voice, which,
being moderated, had a threatening character.

“You are not wanted, I tell you,” he repeated.

The anarchist did not stir.  An inward laugh of derision uncovered not
only his teeth but his gums as well, shook him all over, without the
slightest sound.  Chief Inspector Heat was led to add, against his better
judgment:

“Not yet.  When I want you I will know where to find you.”

Those were perfectly proper words, within the tradition and suitable to
his character of a police officer addressing one of his special flock.
But the reception they got departed from tradition and propriety.  It was
outrageous.  The stunted, weakly figure before him spoke at last.

“I’ve no doubt the papers would give you an obituary notice then.  You
know best what that would be worth to you.  I should think you can
imagine easily the sort of stuff that would be printed.  But you may be
exposed to the unpleasantness of being buried together with me, though I
suppose your friends would make an effort to sort us out as much as
possible.”

With all his healthy contempt for the spirit dictating such speeches, the
atrocious allusiveness of the words had its effect on Chief Inspector
Heat.  He had too much insight, and too much exact information as well,
to dismiss them as rot.  The dusk of this narrow lane took on a sinister
tint from the dark, frail little figure, its back to the wall, and
speaking with a weak, self-confident voice.  To the vigorous, tenacious
vitality of the Chief Inspector, the physical wretchedness of that being,
so obviously not fit to live, was ominous; for it seemed to him that if
he had the misfortune to be such a miserable object he would not have
cared how soon he died.  Life had such a strong hold upon him that a
fresh wave of nausea broke out in slight perspiration upon his brow.  The
murmur of town life, the subdued rumble of wheels in the two invisible
streets to the right and left, came through the curve of the sordid lane
to his ears with a precious familiarity and an appealing sweetness.  He
was human.  But Chief Inspector Heat was also a man, and he could not let
such words pass.

“All this is good to frighten children with,” he said.  “I’ll have you
yet.”

It was very well said, without scorn, with an almost austere quietness.

“Doubtless,” was the answer; “but there’s no time like the present,
believe me.  For a man of real convictions this is a fine opportunity of
self-sacrifice.  You may not find another so favourable, so humane.
There isn’t even a cat near us, and these condemned old houses would make
a good heap of bricks where you stand.  You’ll never get me at so little
cost to life and property, which you are paid to protect.”

“You don’t know who you’re speaking to,” said Chief Inspector Heat
firmly.  “If I were to lay my hands on you now I would be no better than
yourself.”

“Ah!  The game!’

“You may be sure our side will win in the end.  It may yet be necessary
to make people believe that some of you ought to be shot at sight like
mad dogs.  Then that will be the game.  But I’ll be damned if I know what
yours is.  I don’t believe you know yourselves.  You’ll never get
anything by it.”

“Meantime it’s you who get something from it—so far.  And you get it
easily, too.  I won’t speak of your salary, but haven’t you made your
name simply by not understanding what we are after?”

“What are you after, then?” asked Chief Inspector Heat, with scornful
haste, like a man in a hurry who perceives he is wasting his time.

The perfect anarchist answered by a smile which did not part his thin
colourless lips; and the celebrated Chief Inspector felt a sense of
superiority which induced him to raise a warning finger.

“Give it up—whatever it is,” he said in an admonishing tone, but not so
kindly as if he were condescending to give good advice to a cracksman of
repute.  “Give it up.  You’ll find we are too many for you.”

The fixed smile on the Professor’s lips wavered, as if the mocking spirit
within had lost its assurance.  Chief Inspector Heat went on:

“Don’t you believe me eh?  Well, you’ve only got to look about you.  We
are.  And anyway, you’re not doing it well.  You’re always making a mess
of it.  Why, if the thieves didn’t know their work better they would
starve.”

The hint of an invincible multitude behind that man’s back roused a
sombre indignation in the breast of the Professor.  He smiled no longer
his enigmatic and mocking smile.  The resisting power of numbers, the
unattackable stolidity of a great multitude, was the haunting fear of his
sinister loneliness.  His lips trembled for some time before he managed
to say in a strangled voice:

“I am doing my work better than you’re doing yours.”

“That’ll do now,” interrupted Chief Inspector Heat hurriedly; and the
Professor laughed right out this time.  While still laughing he moved on;
but he did not laugh long.  It was a sad-faced, miserable little man who
emerged from the narrow passage into the bustle of the broad
thoroughfare.  He walked with the nerveless gait of a tramp going on,
still going on, indifferent to rain or sun in a sinister detachment from
the aspects of sky and earth.  Chief Inspector Heat, on the other hand,
after watching him for a while, stepped out with the purposeful briskness
of a man disregarding indeed the inclemencies of the weather, but
conscious of having an authorised mission on this earth and the moral
support of his kind.  All the inhabitants of the immense town, the
population of the whole country, and even the teeming millions struggling
upon the planet, were with him—down to the very thieves and mendicants.
Yes, the thieves themselves were sure to be with him in his present work.
The consciousness of universal support in his general activity heartened
him to grapple with the particular problem.

The problem immediately before the Chief Inspector was that of managing
the Assistant Commissioner of his department, his immediate superior.
This is the perennial problem of trusty and loyal servants; anarchism
gave it its particular complexion, but nothing more.  Truth to say, Chief
Inspector Heat thought but little of anarchism.  He did not attach undue
importance to it, and could never bring himself to consider it seriously.
It had more the character of disorderly conduct; disorderly without the
human excuse of drunkenness, which at any rate implies good feeling and
an amiable leaning towards festivity.  As criminals, anarchists were
distinctly no class—no class at all.  And recalling the Professor, Chief
Inspector Heat, without checking his swinging pace, muttered through his
teeth:

“Lunatic.”

Catching thieves was another matter altogether.  It had that quality of
seriousness belonging to every form of open sport where the best man wins
under perfectly comprehensible rules.  There were no rules for dealing
with anarchists.  And that was distasteful to the Chief Inspector.  It
was all foolishness, but that foolishness excited the public mind,
affected persons in high places, and touched upon international
relations.  A hard, merciless contempt settled rigidly on the Chief
Inspector’s face as he walked on.  His mind ran over all the anarchists
of his flock.  Not one of them had half the spunk of this or that burglar
he had known.  Not half—not one-tenth.

At headquarters the Chief Inspector was admitted at once to the Assistant
Commissioner’s private room.  He found him, pen in hand, bent over a
great table bestrewn with papers, as if worshipping an enormous double
inkstand of bronze and crystal.  Speaking tubes resembling snakes were
tied by the heads to the back of the Assistant Commissioner’s wooden
arm-chair, and their gaping mouths seemed ready to bite his elbows.  And
in this attitude he raised only his eyes, whose lids were darker than his
face and very much creased.  The reports had come in: every anarchist had
been exactly accounted for.

After saying this he lowered his eyes, signed rapidly two single sheets
of paper, and only then laid down his pen, and sat well back, directing
an inquiring gaze at his renowned subordinate.  The Chief Inspector stood
it well, deferential but inscrutable.

“I daresay you were right,” said the Assistant Commissioner, “in telling
me at first that the London anarchists had nothing to do with this.  I
quite appreciate the excellent watch kept on them by your men.  On the
other hand, this, for the public, does not amount to more than a
confession of ignorance.”

The Assistant Commissioner’s delivery was leisurely, as it were cautious.
His thought seemed to rest poised on a word before passing to another, as
though words had been the stepping-stones for his intellect picking its
way across the waters of error.  “Unless you have brought something
useful from Greenwich,” he added.

The Chief Inspector began at once the account of his investigation in a
clear matter-of-fact manner.  His superior turning his chair a little,
and crossing his thin legs, leaned sideways on his elbow, with one hand
shading his eyes.  His listening attitude had a sort of angular and
sorrowful grace.  Gleams as of highly burnished silver played on the
sides of his ebony black head when he inclined it slowly at the end.

Chief Inspector Heat waited with the appearance of turning over in his
mind all he had just said, but, as a matter of fact, considering the
advisability of saying something more.  The Assistant Commissioner cut
his hesitation short.

“You believe there were two men?” he asked, without uncovering his eyes.

The Chief Inspector thought it more than probable.  In his opinion, the
two men had parted from each other within a hundred yards from the
Observatory walls.  He explained also how the other man could have got
out of the park speedily without being observed.  The fog, though not
very dense, was in his favour.  He seemed to have escorted the other to
the spot, and then to have left him there to do the job single-handed.
Taking the time those two were seen coming out of Maze Hill Station by
the old woman, and the time when the explosion was heard, the Chief
Inspector thought that the other man might have been actually at the
Greenwich Park Station, ready to catch the next train up, at the moment
his comrade was destroying himself so thoroughly.

“Very thoroughly—eh?” murmured the Assistant Commissioner from under the
shadow of his hand.

The Chief Inspector in a few vigorous words described the aspect of the
remains.  “The coroner’s jury will have a treat,” he added grimly.

The Assistant Commissioner uncovered his eyes.

“We shall have nothing to tell them,” he remarked languidly.

He looked up, and for a time watched the markedly non-committal attitude
of his Chief Inspector.  His nature was one that is not easily accessible
to illusions.  He knew that a department is at the mercy of its
subordinate officers, who have their own conceptions of loyalty.  His
career had begun in a tropical colony.  He had liked his work there.  It
was police work.  He had been very successful in tracking and breaking up
certain nefarious secret societies amongst the natives.  Then he took his
long leave, and got married rather impulsively.  It was a good match from
a worldly point of view, but his wife formed an unfavourable opinion of
the colonial climate on hearsay evidence.  On the other hand, she had
influential connections.  It was an excellent match.  But he did not like
the work he had to do now.  He felt himself dependent on too many
subordinates and too many masters.  The near presence of that strange
emotional phenomenon called public opinion weighed upon his spirits, and
alarmed him by its irrational nature.  No doubt that from ignorance he
exaggerated to himself its power for good and evil—especially for evil;
and the rough east winds of the English spring (which agreed with his
wife) augmented his general mistrust of men’s motives and of the
efficiency of their organisation.  The futility of office work especially
appalled him on those days so trying to his sensitive liver.

He got up, unfolding himself to his full height, and with a heaviness of
step remarkable in so slender a man, moved across the room to the window.
The panes streamed with rain, and the short street he looked down into
lay wet and empty, as if swept clear suddenly by a great flood.  It was a
very trying day, choked in raw fog to begin with, and now drowned in cold
rain.  The flickering, blurred flames of gas-lamps seemed to be
dissolving in a watery atmosphere.  And the lofty pretensions of a
mankind oppressed by the miserable indignities of the weather appeared as
a colossal and hopeless vanity deserving of scorn, wonder, and
compassion.

“Horrible, horrible!” thought the Assistant Commissioner to himself, with
his face near the window-pane.  “We have been having this sort of thing
now for ten days; no, a fortnight—a fortnight.”  He ceased to think
completely for a time.  That utter stillness of his brain lasted about
three seconds.  Then he said perfunctorily: “You have set inquiries on
foot for tracing that other man up and down the line?”

He had no doubt that everything needful had been done.  Chief Inspector
Heat knew, of course, thoroughly the business of man-hunting.  And these
were the routine steps, too, that would be taken as a matter of course by
the merest beginner.  A few inquiries amongst the ticket collectors and
the porters of the two small railway stations would give additional
details as to the appearance of the two men; the inspection of the
collected tickets would show at once where they came from that morning.
It was elementary, and could not have been neglected.  Accordingly the
Chief Inspector answered that all this had been done directly the old
woman had come forward with her deposition.  And he mentioned the name of
a station.  “That’s where they came from, sir,” he went on.  “The porter
who took the tickets at Maze Hill remembers two chaps answering to the
description passing the barrier.  They seemed to him two respectable
working men of a superior sort—sign painters or house decorators.  The
big man got out of a third-class compartment backward, with a bright tin
can in his hand.  On the platform he gave it to carry to the fair young
fellow who followed him.  All this agrees exactly with what the old woman
told the police sergeant in Greenwich.”

The Assistant Commissioner, still with his face turned to the window,
expressed his doubt as to these two men having had anything to do with
the outrage.  All this theory rested upon the utterances of an old
charwoman who had been nearly knocked down by a man in a hurry.  Not a
very substantial authority indeed, unless on the ground of sudden
inspiration, which was hardly tenable.

“Frankly now, could she have been really inspired?” he queried, with
grave irony, keeping his back to the room, as if entranced by the
contemplation of the town’s colossal forms half lost in the night.  He
did not even look round when he heard the mutter of the word
“Providential” from the principal subordinate of his department, whose
name, printed sometimes in the papers, was familiar to the great public
as that of one of its zealous and hard-working protectors.  Chief
Inspector Heat raised his voice a little.

“Strips and bits of bright tin were quite visible to me,” he said.
“That’s a pretty good corroboration.”

“And these men came from that little country station,” the Assistant
Commissioner mused aloud, wondering.  He was told that such was the name
on two tickets out of three given up out of that train at Maze Hill.  The
third person who got out was a hawker from Gravesend well known to the
porters.  The Chief Inspector imparted that information in a tone of
finality with some ill humour, as loyal servants will do in the
consciousness of their fidelity and with the sense of the value of their
loyal exertions.  And still the Assistant Commissioner did not turn away
from the darkness outside, as vast as a sea.

“Two foreign anarchists coming from that place,” he said, apparently to
the window-pane.  “It’s rather unaccountable.”’

“Yes, sir.  But it would be still more unaccountable if that Michaelis
weren’t staying in a cottage in the neighbourhood.”

At the sound of that name, falling unexpectedly into this annoying
affair, the Assistant Commissioner dismissed brusquely the vague
remembrance of his daily whist party at his club.  It was the most
comforting habit of his life, in a mainly successful display of his skill
without the assistance of any subordinate.  He entered his club to play
from five to seven, before going home to dinner, forgetting for those two
hours whatever was distasteful in his life, as though the game were a
beneficent drug for allaying the pangs of moral discontent.  His partners
were the gloomily humorous editor of a celebrated magazine; a silent,
elderly barrister with malicious little eyes; and a highly martial,
simple-minded old Colonel with nervous brown hands.  They were his club
acquaintances merely.  He never met them elsewhere except at the
card-table.  But they all seemed to approach the game in the spirit of
co-sufferers, as if it were indeed a drug against the secret ills of
existence; and every day as the sun declined over the countless roofs of
the town, a mellow, pleasurable impatience, resembling the impulse of a
sure and profound friendship, lightened his professional labours.  And
now this pleasurable sensation went out of him with something resembling
a physical shock, and was replaced by a special kind of interest in his
work of social protection—an improper sort of interest, which may be
defined best as a sudden and alert mistrust of the weapon in his hand.




CHAPTER VI


The lady patroness of Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle of
humanitarian hopes, was one of the most influential and distinguished
connections of the Assistant Commissioner’s wife, whom she called Annie,
and treated still rather as a not very wise and utterly inexperienced
young girl.  But she had consented to accept him on a friendly footing,
which was by no means the case with all of his wife’s influential
connections.  Married young and splendidly at some remote epoch of the
past, she had had for a time a close view of great affairs and even of
some great men.  She herself was a great lady.  Old now in the number of
her years, she had that sort of exceptional temperament which defies time
with scornful disregard, as if it were a rather vulgar convention
submitted to by the mass of inferior mankind.  Many other conventions
easier to set aside, alas! failed to obtain her recognition, also on
temperamental grounds—either because they bored her, or else because they
stood in the way of her scorns and sympathies.  Admiration was a
sentiment unknown to her (it was one of the secret griefs of her most
noble husband against her)—first, as always more or less tainted with
mediocrity, and next as being in a way an admission of inferiority.  And
both were frankly inconceivable to her nature.  To be fearlessly
outspoken in her opinions came easily to her, since she judged solely
from the standpoint of her social position.  She was equally untrammelled
in her actions; and as her tactfulness proceeded from genuine humanity,
her bodily vigour remained remarkable and her superiority was serene and
cordial, three generations had admired her infinitely, and the last she
was likely to see had pronounced her a wonderful woman.  Meantime
intelligent, with a sort of lofty simplicity, and curious at heart, but
not like many women merely of social gossip, she amused her age by
attracting within her ken through the power of her great, almost
historical, social prestige everything that rose above the dead level of
mankind, lawfully or unlawfully, by position, wit, audacity, fortune or
misfortune.  Royal Highnesses, artists, men of science, young statesmen,
and charlatans of all ages and conditions, who, unsubstantial and light,
bobbing up like corks, show best the direction of the surface currents,
had been welcomed in that house, listened to, penetrated, understood,
appraised, for her own edification.  In her own words, she liked to watch
what the world was coming to.  And as she had a practical mind her
judgment of men and things, though based on special prejudices, was
seldom totally wrong, and almost never wrong-headed.  Her drawing-room
was probably the only place in the wide world where an Assistant
Commissioner of Police could meet a convict liberated on a
ticket-of-leave on other than professional and official ground.  Who had
brought Michaelis there one afternoon the Assistant Commissioner did not
remember very well.  He had a notion it must have been a certain Member
of Parliament of illustrious parentage and unconventional sympathies,
which were the standing joke of the comic papers.  The notabilities and
even the simple notorieties of the day brought each other freely to that
temple of an old woman’s not ignoble curiosity.  You never could guess
whom you were likely to come upon being received in semi-privacy within
the faded blue silk and gilt frame screen, making a cosy nook for a couch
and a few arm-chairs in the great drawing-room, with its hum of voices
and the groups of people seated or standing in the light of six tall
windows.

Michaelis had been the object of a revulsion of popular sentiment, the
same sentiment which years ago had applauded the ferocity of the life
sentence passed upon him for complicity in a rather mad attempt to rescue
some prisoners from a police van.  The plan of the conspirators had been
to shoot down the horses and overpower the escort.  Unfortunately, one of
the police constables got shot too.  He left a wife and three small
children, and the death of that man aroused through the length and
breadth of a realm for whose defence, welfare, and glory men die every
day as matter of duty, an outburst of furious indignation, of a raging
implacable pity for the victim.  Three ring-leaders got hanged.
Michaelis, young and slim, locksmith by trade, and great frequenter of
evening schools, did not even know that anybody had been killed, his part
with a few others being to force open the door at the back of the special
conveyance.  When arrested he had a bunch of skeleton keys in one pocket,
a heavy chisel in another, and a short crowbar in his hand: neither more
nor less than a burglar.  But no burglar would have received such a heavy
sentence.  The death of the constable had made him miserable at heart,
but the failure of the plot also.  He did not conceal either of these
sentiments from his empanelled countrymen, and that sort of compunction
appeared shockingly imperfect to the crammed court.  The judge on passing
sentence commented feelingly upon the depravity and callousness of the
young prisoner.

That made the groundless fame of his condemnation; the fame of his
release was made for him on no better grounds by people who wished to
exploit the sentimental aspect of his imprisonment either for purposes of
their own or for no intelligible purpose.  He let them do so in the
innocence of his heart and the simplicity of his mind.  Nothing that
happened to him individually had any importance.  He was like those
saintly men whose personality is lost in the contemplation of their
faith.  His ideas were not in the nature of convictions.  They were
inaccessible to reasoning.  They formed in all their contradictions and
obscurities an invincible and humanitarian creed, which he confessed
rather than preached, with an obstinate gentleness, a smile of pacific
assurance on his lips, and his candid blue eyes cast down because the
sight of faces troubled his inspiration developed in solitude.  In that
characteristic attitude, pathetic in his grotesque and incurable obesity
which he had to drag like a galley slave’s bullet to the end of his days,
the Assistant Commissioner of Police beheld the ticket-of-leave apostle
filling a privileged arm-chair within the screen.  He sat there by the
head of the old lady’s couch, mild-voiced and quiet, with no more
self-consciousness than a very small child, and with something of a
child’s charm—the appealing charm of trustfulness.  Confident of the
future, whose secret ways had been revealed to him within the four walls
of a well-known penitentiary, he had no reason to look with suspicion
upon anybody.  If he could not give the great and curious lady a very
definite idea as to what the world was coming to, he had managed without
effort to impress her by his unembittered faith, by the sterling quality
of his optimism.

A certain simplicity of thought is common to serene souls at both ends of
the social scale.  The great lady was simple in her own way.  His views
and beliefs had nothing in them to shock or startle her, since she judged
them from the standpoint of her lofty position.  Indeed, her sympathies
were easily accessible to a man of that sort.  She was not an exploiting
capitalist herself; she was, as it were, above the play of economic
conditions.  And she had a great capacity of pity for the more obvious
forms of common human miseries, precisely because she was such a complete
stranger to them that she had to translate her conception into terms of
mental suffering before she could grasp the notion of their cruelty.  The
Assistant Commissioner remembered very well the conversation between
these two.  He had listened in silence.  It was something as exciting in
a way, and even touching in its foredoomed futility, as the efforts at
moral intercourse between the inhabitants of remote planets.  But this
grotesque incarnation of humanitarian passion appealed somehow, to one’s
imagination.  At last Michaelis rose, and taking the great lady’s
extended hand, shook it, retained it for a moment in his great cushioned
palm with unembarrassed friendliness, and turned upon the semi-private
nook of the drawing-room his back, vast and square, and as if distended
under the short tweed jacket.  Glancing about in serene benevolence, he
waddled along to the distant door between the knots of other visitors.
The murmur of conversations paused on his passage.  He smiled innocently
at a tall, brilliant girl, whose eyes met his accidentally, and went out
unconscious of the glances following him across the room.  Michaelis’
first appearance in the world was a success—a success of esteem unmarred
by a single murmur of derision.  The interrupted conversations were
resumed in their proper tone, grave or light.  Only a well-set-up,
long-limbed, active-looking man of forty talking with two ladies near a
window remarked aloud, with an unexpected depth of feeling: “Eighteen
stone, I should say, and not five foot six.  Poor fellow!  It’s
terrible—terrible.”

The lady of the house, gazing absently at the Assistant Commissioner,
left alone with her on the private side of the screen, seemed to be
rearranging her mental impressions behind her thoughtful immobility of a
handsome old face.  Men with grey moustaches and full, healthy, vaguely
smiling countenances approached, circling round the screen; two mature
women with a matronly air of gracious resolution; a clean-shaved
individual with sunken cheeks, and dangling a gold-mounted eyeglass on a
broad black ribbon with an old-world, dandified effect.  A silence
deferential, but full of reserves, reigned for a moment, and then the
great lady exclaimed, not with resentment, but with a sort of protesting
indignation:

“And that officially is supposed to be a revolutionist!  What nonsense.”
She looked hard at the Assistant Commissioner, who murmured
apologetically:

“Not a dangerous one perhaps.”

“Not dangerous—I should think not indeed.  He is a mere believer.  It’s
the temperament of a saint,” declared the great lady in a firm tone.
“And they kept him shut up for twenty years.  One shudders at the
stupidity of it.  And now they have let him out everybody belonging to
him is gone away somewhere or dead.  His parents are dead; the girl he
was to marry has died while he was in prison; he has lost the skill
necessary for his manual occupation.  He told me all this himself with
the sweetest patience; but then, he said, he had had plenty of time to
think out things for himself.  A pretty compensation!  If that’s the
stuff revolutionists are made of some of us may well go on their knees to
them,” she continued in a slightly bantering voice, while the banal
society smiles hardened on the worldly faces turned towards her with
conventional deference.  “The poor creature is obviously no longer in a
position to take care of himself.  Somebody will have to look after him a
little.”

“He should be recommended to follow a treatment of some sort,” the
soldierly voice of the active-looking man was heard advising earnestly
from a distance.  He was in the pink of condition for his age, and even
the texture of his long frock coat had a character of elastic soundness,
as if it were a living tissue.  “The man is virtually a cripple,” he
added with unmistakable feeling.

Other voices, as if glad of the opening, murmured hasty compassion.
“Quite startling,” “Monstrous,” “Most painful to see.”  The lank man,
with the eyeglass on a broad ribbon, pronounced mincingly the word
“Grotesque,” whose justness was appreciated by those standing near him.
They smiled at each other.

The Assistant Commissioner had expressed no opinion either then or later,
his position making it impossible for him to ventilate any independent
view of a ticket-of-leave convict.  But, in truth, he shared the view of
his wife’s friend and patron that Michaelis was a humanitarian
sentimentalist, a little mad, but upon the whole incapable of hurting a
fly intentionally.  So when that name cropped up suddenly in this vexing
bomb affair he realised all the danger of it for the ticket-of-leave
apostle, and his mind reverted at once to the old lady’s well-established
infatuation.  Her arbitrary kindness would not brook patiently any
interference with Michaelis’ freedom.  It was a deep, calm, convinced
infatuation.  She had not only felt him to be inoffensive, but she had
said so, which last by a confusion of her absolutist mind became a sort
of incontrovertible demonstration.  It was as if the monstrosity of the
man, with his candid infant’s eyes and a fat angelic smile, had
fascinated her.  She had come to believe almost his theory of the future,
since it was not repugnant to her prejudices.  She disliked the new
element of plutocracy in the social compound, and industrialism as a
method of human development appeared to her singularly repulsive in its
mechanical and unfeeling character.  The humanitarian hopes of the mild
Michaelis tended not towards utter destruction, but merely towards the
complete economic ruin of the system.  And she did not really see where
was the moral harm of it.  It would do away with all the multitude of the
“parvenus,” whom she disliked and mistrusted, not because they had
arrived anywhere (she denied that), but because of their profound
unintelligence of the world, which was the primary cause of the crudity
of their perceptions and the aridity of their hearts.  With the
annihilation of all capital they would vanish too; but universal ruin
(providing it was universal, as it was revealed to Michaelis) would leave
the social values untouched.  The disappearance of the last piece of
money could not affect people of position.  She could not conceive how it
could affect her position, for instance.  She had developed these
discoveries to the Assistant Commissioner with all the serene
fearlessness of an old woman who had escaped the blight of indifference.
He had made for himself the rule to receive everything of that sort in a
silence which he took care from policy and inclination not to make
offensive.  He had an affection for the aged disciple of Michaelis, a
complex sentiment depending a little on her prestige, on her personality,
but most of all on the instinct of flattered gratitude.  He felt himself
really liked in her house.  She was kindness personified.  And she was
practically wise too, after the manner of experienced women.  She made
his married life much easier than it would have been without her
generously full recognition of his rights as Annie’s husband.  Her
influence upon his wife, a woman devoured by all sorts of small
selfishnesses, small envies, small jealousies, was excellent.
Unfortunately, both her kindness and her wisdom were of unreasonable
complexion, distinctly feminine, and difficult to deal with.  She
remained a perfect woman all along her full tale of years, and not as
some of them do become—a sort of slippery, pestilential old man in
petticoats.  And it was as of a woman that he thought of her—the
specially choice incarnation of the feminine, wherein is recruited the
tender, ingenuous, and fierce bodyguard for all sorts of men who talk
under the influence of an emotion, true or fraudulent; for preachers,
seers, prophets, or reformers.

Appreciating the distinguished and good friend of his wife, and himself,
in that way, the Assistant Commissioner became alarmed at the convict
Michaelis’ possible fate.  Once arrested on suspicion of being in some
way, however remote, a party to this outrage, the man could hardly escape
being sent back to finish his sentence at least.  And that would kill
him; he would never come out alive.  The Assistant Commissioner made a
reflection extremely unbecoming his official position without being
really creditable to his humanity.

“If the fellow is laid hold of again,” he thought, “she will never
forgive me.”

The frankness of such a secretly outspoken thought could not go without
some derisive self-criticism.  No man engaged in a work he does not like
can preserve many saving illusions about himself.  The distaste, the
absence of glamour, extend from the occupation to the personality.  It is
only when our appointed activities seem by a lucky accident to obey the
particular earnestness of our temperament that we can taste the comfort
of complete self-deception.  The Assistant Commissioner did not like his
work at home.  The police work he had been engaged on in a distant part
of the globe had the saving character of an irregular sort of warfare or
at least the risk and excitement of open-air sport.  His real abilities,
which were mainly of an administrative order, were combined with an
adventurous disposition.  Chained to a desk in the thick of four millions
of men, he considered himself the victim of an ironic fate—the same, no
doubt, which had brought about his marriage with a woman exceptionally
sensitive in the matter of colonial climate, besides other limitations
testifying to the delicacy of her nature—and her tastes.  Though he
judged his alarm sardonically he did not dismiss the improper thought
from his mind.  The instinct of self-preservation was strong within him.
On the contrary, he repeated it mentally with profane emphasis and a
fuller precision: “Damn it!  If that infernal Heat has his way the
fellow’ll die in prison smothered in his fat, and she’ll never forgive
me.”

His black, narrow figure, with the white band of the collar under the
silvery gleams on the close-cropped hair at the back of the head,
remained motionless.  The silence had lasted such a long time that Chief
Inspector Heat ventured to clear his throat.  This noise produced its
effect.  The zealous and intelligent officer was asked by his superior,
whose back remained turned to him immovably:

“You connect Michaelis with this affair?”

Chief Inspector Heat was very positive, but cautious.

“Well, sir,” he said, “we have enough to go upon.  A man like that has no
business to be at large, anyhow.”

“You will want some conclusive evidence,” came the observation in a
murmur.

Chief Inspector Heat raised his eyebrows at the black, narrow back, which
remained obstinately presented to his intelligence and his zeal.

“There will be no difficulty in getting up sufficient evidence against
_him_,” he said, with virtuous complacency.  “You may trust me for that,
sir,” he added, quite unnecessarily, out of the fulness of his heart; for
it seemed to him an excellent thing to have that man in hand to be thrown
down to the public should it think fit to roar with any special
indignation in this case.  It was impossible to say yet whether it would
roar or not.  That in the last instance depended, of course, on the
newspaper press.  But in any case, Chief Inspector Heat, purveyor of
prisons by trade, and a man of legal instincts, did logically believe
that incarceration was the proper fate for every declared enemy of the
law.  In the strength of that conviction he committed a fault of tact.
He allowed himself a little conceited laugh, and repeated:

“Trust me for that, sir.”

This was too much for the forced calmness under which the Assistant
Commissioner had for upwards of eighteen months concealed his irritation
with the system and the subordinates of his office.  A square peg forced
into a round hole, he had felt like a daily outrage that long established
smooth roundness into which a man of less sharply angular shape would
have fitted himself, with voluptuous acquiescence, after a shrug or two.
What he resented most was just the necessity of taking so much on trust.
At the little laugh of Chief Inspector Heat’s he spun swiftly on his
heels, as if whirled away from the window-pane by an electric shock.  He
caught on the latter’s face not only the complacency proper to the
occasion lurking under the moustache, but the vestiges of experimental
watchfulness in the round eyes, which had been, no doubt, fastened on his
back, and now met his glance for a second before the intent character of
their stare had the time to change to a merely startled appearance.

The Assistant Commissioner of Police had really some qualifications for
his post.  Suddenly his suspicion was awakened.  It is but fair to say
that his suspicions of the police methods (unless the police happened to
be a semi-military body organised by himself) was not difficult to
arouse.  If it ever slumbered from sheer weariness, it was but lightly;
and his appreciation of Chief Inspector Heat’s zeal and ability, moderate
in itself, excluded all notion of moral confidence.  “He’s up to
something,” he exclaimed mentally, and at once became angry.  Crossing
over to his desk with headlong strides, he sat down violently.  “Here I
am stuck in a litter of paper,” he reflected, with unreasonable
resentment, “supposed to hold all the threads in my hands, and yet I can
but hold what is put in my hand, and nothing else.  And they can fasten
the other ends of the threads where they please.”

He raised his head, and turned towards his subordinate a long, meagre
face with the accentuated features of an energetic Don Quixote.

“Now what is it you’ve got up your sleeve?”

The other stared.  He stared without winking in a perfect immobility of
his round eyes, as he was used to stare at the various members of the
criminal class when, after being duly cautioned, they made their
statements in the tones of injured innocence, or false simplicity, or
sullen resignation.  But behind that professional and stony fixity there
was some surprise too, for in such a tone, combining nicely the note of
contempt and impatience, Chief Inspector Heat, the right-hand man of the
department, was not used to be addressed.  He began in a procrastinating
manner, like a man taken unawares by a new and unexpected experience.

“What I’ve got against that man Michaelis you mean, sir?”

The Assistant Commissioner watched the bullet head; the points of that
Norse rover’s moustache, falling below the line of the heavy jaw; the
whole full and pale physiognomy, whose determined character was marred by
too much flesh; at the cunning wrinkles radiating from the outer corners
of the eyes—and in that purposeful contemplation of the valuable and
trusted officer he drew a conviction so sudden that it moved him like an
inspiration.

“I have reason to think that when you came into this room,” he said in
measured tones, “it was not Michaelis who was in your mind; not
principally—perhaps not at all.”

“You have reason to think, sir?” muttered Chief Inspector Heat, with
every appearance of astonishment, which up to a certain point was genuine
enough.  He had discovered in this affair a delicate and perplexing side,
forcing upon the discoverer a certain amount of insincerity—that sort of
insincerity which, under the names of skill, prudence, discretion, turns
up at one point or another in most human affairs.  He felt at the moment
like a tight-rope artist might feel if suddenly, in the middle of the
performance, the manager of the Music Hall were to rush out of the proper
managerial seclusion and begin to shake the rope.  Indignation, the sense
of moral insecurity engendered by such a treacherous proceeding joined to
the immediate apprehension of a broken neck, would, in the colloquial
phrase, put him in a state.  And there would be also some scandalised
concern for his art too, since a man must identify himself with something
more tangible than his own personality, and establish his pride
somewhere, either in his social position, or in the quality of the work
he is obliged to do, or simply in the superiority of the idleness he may
be fortunate enough to enjoy.

“Yes,” said the Assistant Commissioner; “I have.  I do not mean to say
that you have not thought of Michaelis at all.  But you are giving the
fact you’ve mentioned a prominence which strikes me as not quite candid,
Inspector Heat.  If that is really the track of discovery, why haven’t
you followed it up at once, either personally or by sending one of your
men to that village?”

“Do you think, sir, I have failed in my duty there?” the Chief Inspector
asked, in a tone which he sought to make simply reflective.  Forced
unexpectedly to concentrate his faculties upon the task of preserving his
balance, he had seized upon that point, and exposed himself to a rebuke;
for, the Assistant Commissioner frowning slightly, observed that this was
a very improper remark to make.

“But since you’ve made it,” he continued coldly, “I’ll tell you that this
is not my meaning.”

He paused, with a straight glance of his sunken eyes which was a full
equivalent of the unspoken termination “and you know it.”  The head of
the so-called Special Crimes Department debarred by his position from
going out of doors personally in quest of secrets locked up in guilty
breasts, had a propensity to exercise his considerable gifts for the
detection of incriminating truth upon his own subordinates.  That
peculiar instinct could hardly be called a weakness.  It was natural.  He
was a born detective.  It had unconsciously governed his choice of a
career, and if it ever failed him in life it was perhaps in the one
exceptional circumstance of his marriage—which was also natural.  It fed,
since it could not roam abroad, upon the human material which was brought
to it in its official seclusion.  We can never cease to be ourselves.

His elbow on the desk, his thin legs crossed, and nursing his cheek in
the palm of his meagre hand, the Assistant Commissioner in charge of the
Special Crimes branch was getting hold of the case with growing interest.
His Chief Inspector, if not an absolutely worthy foeman of his
penetration, was at any rate the most worthy of all within his reach.  A
mistrust of established reputations was strictly in character with the
Assistant Commissioner’s ability as detector.  His memory evoked a
certain old fat and wealthy native chief in the distant colony whom it
was a tradition for the successive Colonial Governors to trust and make
much of as a firm friend and supporter of the order and legality
established by white men; whereas, when examined sceptically, he was
found out to be principally his own good friend, and nobody else’s.  Not
precisely a traitor, but still a man of many dangerous reservations in
his fidelity, caused by a due regard for his own advantage, comfort, and
safety.  A fellow of some innocence in his naive duplicity, but none the
less dangerous.  He took some finding out.  He was physically a big man,
too, and (allowing for the difference of colour, of course) Chief
Inspector Heat’s appearance recalled him to the memory of his superior.
It was not the eyes nor yet the lips exactly.  It was bizarre.  But does
not Alfred Wallace relate in his famous book on the Malay Archipelago
how, amongst the Aru Islanders, he discovered in an old and naked savage
with a sooty skin a peculiar resemblance to a dear friend at home?

For the first time since he took up his appointment the Assistant
Commissioner felt as if he were going to do some real work for his
salary.  And that was a pleasurable sensation.  “I’ll turn him inside out
like an old glove,” thought the Assistant Commissioner, with his eyes
resting pensively upon Chief Inspector Heat.

“No, that was not my thought,” he began again.  “There is no doubt about
you knowing your business—no doubt at all; and that’s precisely why I—”
He stopped short, and changing his tone: “What could you bring up against
Michaelis of a definite nature?  I mean apart from the fact that the two
men under suspicion—you’re certain there were two of them—came last from
a railway station within three miles of the village where Michaelis is
living now.”

“This by itself is enough for us to go upon, sir, with that sort of man,”
said the Chief Inspector, with returning composure.  The slight approving
movement of the Assistant Commissioner’s head went far to pacify the
resentful astonishment of the renowned officer.  For Chief Inspector Heat
was a kind man, an excellent husband, a devoted father; and the public
and departmental confidence he enjoyed acting favourably upon an amiable
nature, disposed him to feel friendly towards the successive Assistant
Commissioners he had seen pass through that very room.  There had been
three in his time.  The first one, a soldierly, abrupt, red-faced person,
with white eyebrows and an explosive temper, could be managed with a
silken thread.  He left on reaching the age limit.  The second, a perfect
gentleman, knowing his own and everybody else’s place to a nicety, on
resigning to take up a higher appointment out of England got decorated
for (really) Inspector Heat’s services.  To work with him had been a
pride and a pleasure.  The third, a bit of a dark horse from the first,
was at the end of eighteen months something of a dark horse still to the
department.  Upon the whole Chief Inspector Heat believed him to be in
the main harmless—odd-looking, but harmless.  He was speaking now, and
the Chief Inspector listened with outward deference (which means nothing,
being a matter of duty) and inwardly with benevolent toleration.

“Michaelis reported himself before leaving London for the country?”

“Yes, sir.  He did.”

“And what may he be doing there?” continued the Assistant Commissioner,
who was perfectly informed on that point.  Fitted with painful tightness
into an old wooden arm-chair, before a worm-eaten oak table in an
upstairs room of a four-roomed cottage with a roof of moss-grown tiles,
Michaelis was writing night and day in a shaky, slanting hand that
“Autobiography of a Prisoner” which was to be like a book of Revelation
in the history of mankind.  The conditions of confined space, seclusion,
and solitude in a small four-roomed cottage were favourable to his
inspiration.  It was like being in prison, except that one was never
disturbed for the odious purpose of taking exercise according to the
tyrannical regulations of his old home in the penitentiary.  He could not
tell whether the sun still shone on the earth or not.  The perspiration
of the literary labour dropped from his brow.  A delightful enthusiasm
urged him on.  It was the liberation of his inner life, the letting out
of his soul into the wide world.  And the zeal of his guileless vanity
(first awakened by the offer of five hundred pounds from a publisher)
seemed something predestined and holy.

“It would be, of course, most desirable to be informed exactly,” insisted
the Assistant Commissioner uncandidly.

Chief Inspector Heat, conscious of renewed irritation at this display of
scrupulousness, said that the county police had been notified from the
first of Michaelis’ arrival, and that a full report could be obtained in
a few hours.  A wire to the superintendent—

Thus he spoke, rather slowly, while his mind seemed already to be
weighing the consequences.  A slight knitting of the brow was the outward
sign of this.  But he was interrupted by a question.

“You’ve sent that wire already?”

“No, sir,” he answered, as if surprised.

The Assistant Commissioner uncrossed his legs suddenly.  The briskness of
that movement contrasted with the casual way in which he threw out a
suggestion.

“Would you think that Michaelis had anything to do with the preparation
of that bomb, for instance?”

The Chief Inspector assumed a reflective manner.

“I wouldn’t say so.  There’s no necessity to say anything at present.  He
associates with men who are classed as dangerous.  He was made a delegate
of the Red Committee less than a year after his release on licence.  A
sort of compliment, I suppose.”

And the Chief Inspector laughed a little angrily, a little scornfully.
With a man of that sort scrupulousness was a misplaced and even an
illegal sentiment.  The celebrity bestowed upon Michaelis on his release
two years ago by some emotional journalists in want of special copy had
rankled ever since in his breast.  It was perfectly legal to arrest that
man on the barest suspicion.  It was legal and expedient on the face of
it.  His two former chiefs would have seen the point at once; whereas
this one, without saying either yes or no, sat there, as if lost in a
dream.  Moreover, besides being legal and expedient, the arrest of
Michaelis solved a little personal difficulty which worried Chief
Inspector Heat somewhat.  This difficulty had its bearing upon his
reputation, upon his comfort, and even upon the efficient performance of
his duties.  For, if Michaelis no doubt knew something about this
outrage, the Chief Inspector was fairly certain that he did not know too
much.  This was just as well.  He knew much less—the Chief Inspector was
positive—than certain other individuals he had in his mind, but whose
arrest seemed to him inexpedient, besides being a more complicated
matter, on account of the rules of the game.  The rules of the game did
not protect so much Michaelis, who was an ex-convict.  It would be stupid
not to take advantage of legal facilities, and the journalists who had
written him up with emotional gush would be ready to write him down with
emotional indignation.

This prospect, viewed with confidence, had the attraction of a personal
triumph for Chief Inspector Heat.  And deep down in his blameless bosom
of an average married citizen, almost unconscious but potent
nevertheless, the dislike of being compelled by events to meddle with the
desperate ferocity of the Professor had its say.  This dislike had been
strengthened by the chance meeting in the lane.  The encounter did not
leave behind with Chief Inspector Heat that satisfactory sense of
superiority the members of the police force get from the unofficial but
intimate side of their intercourse with the criminal classes, by which
the vanity of power is soothed, and the vulgar love of domination over
our fellow-creatures is flattered as worthily as it deserves.

The perfect anarchist was not recognised as a fellow-creature by Chief
Inspector Heat.  He was impossible—a mad dog to be left alone.  Not that
the Chief Inspector was afraid of him; on the contrary, he meant to have
him some day.  But not yet; he meant to get hold of him in his own time,
properly and effectively according to the rules of the game.  The present
was not the right time for attempting that feat, not the right time for
many reasons, personal and of public service.  This being the strong
feeling of Inspector Heat, it appeared to him just and proper that this
affair should be shunted off its obscure and inconvenient track, leading
goodness knows where, into a quiet (and lawful) siding called Michaelis.
And he repeated, as if reconsidering the suggestion conscientiously:

“The bomb.  No, I would not say that exactly.  We may never find that
out.  But it’s clear that he is connected with this in some way, which we
can find out without much trouble.”

His countenance had that look of grave, overbearing indifference once
well known and much dreaded by the better sort of thieves.  Chief
Inspector Heat, though what is called a man, was not a smiling animal.
But his inward state was that of satisfaction at the passively receptive
attitude of the Assistant Commissioner, who murmured gently:

“And you really think that the investigation should be made in that
direction?”

“I do, sir.”

“Quite convinced?

“I am, sir.  That’s the true line for us to take.”

The Assistant Commissioner withdrew the support of his hand from his
reclining head with a suddenness that, considering his languid attitude,
seemed to menace his whole person with collapse.  But, on the contrary,
he sat up, extremely alert, behind the great writing-table on which his
hand had fallen with the sound of a sharp blow.

“What I want to know is what put it out of your head till now.”

“Put it out of my head,” repeated the Chief Inspector very slowly.

“Yes.  Till you were called into this room—you know.”

The Chief Inspector felt as if the air between his clothing and his skin
had become unpleasantly hot.  It was the sensation of an unprecedented
and incredible experience.

“Of course,” he said, exaggerating the deliberation of his utterance to
the utmost limits of possibility, “if there is a reason, of which I know
nothing, for not interfering with the convict Michaelis, perhaps it’s
just as well I didn’t start the county police after him.”

This took such a long time to say that the unflagging attention of the
Assistant Commissioner seemed a wonderful feat of endurance.  His retort
came without delay.

“No reason whatever that I know of.  Come, Chief Inspector, this
finessing with me is highly improper on your part—highly improper.  And
it’s also unfair, you know.  You shouldn’t leave me to puzzle things out
for myself like this.  Really, I am surprised.”

He paused, then added smoothly: “I need scarcely tell you that this
conversation is altogether unofficial.”

These words were far from pacifying the Chief Inspector.  The indignation
of a betrayed tight-rope performer was strong within him.  In his pride
of a trusted servant he was affected by the assurance that the rope was
not shaken for the purpose of breaking his neck, as by an exhibition of
impudence.  As if anybody were afraid!  Assistant Commissioners come and
go, but a valuable Chief Inspector is not an ephemeral office phenomenon.
He was not afraid of getting a broken neck.  To have his performance
spoiled was more than enough to account for the glow of honest
indignation.  And as thought is no respecter of persons, the thought of
Chief Inspector Heat took a threatening and prophetic shape.  “You, my
boy,” he said to himself, keeping his round and habitually roving eyes
fastened upon the Assistant Commissioner’s face—“you, my boy, you don’t
know your place, and your place won’t know you very long either, I bet.”

As if in provoking answer to that thought, something like the ghost of an
amiable smile passed on the lips of the Assistant Commissioner.  His
manner was easy and business-like while he persisted in administering
another shake to the tight rope.

“Let us come now to what you have discovered on the spot, Chief
Inspector,” he said.

“A fool and his job are soon parted,” went on the train of prophetic
thought in Chief Inspector Heat’s head.  But it was immediately followed
by the reflection that a higher official, even when “fired out” (this was
the precise image), has still the time as he flies through the door to
launch a nasty kick at the shin-bones of a subordinate.  Without
softening very much the basilisk nature of his stare, he said
impassively:

“We are coming to that part of my investigation, sir.”

“That’s right.  Well, what have you brought away from it?”

The Chief Inspector, who had made up his mind to jump off the rope, came
to the ground with gloomy frankness.

“I’ve brought away an address,” he said, pulling out of his pocket
without haste a singed rag of dark blue cloth.  “This belongs to the
overcoat the fellow who got himself blown to pieces was wearing.  Of
course, the overcoat may not have been his, and may even have been
stolen.  But that’s not at all probable if you look at this.”

The Chief Inspector, stepping up to the table, smoothed out carefully the
rag of blue cloth.  He had picked it up from the repulsive heap in the
mortuary, because a tailor’s name is found sometimes under the collar.
It is not often of much use, but still—He only half expected to find
anything useful, but certainly he did not expect to find—not under the
collar at all, but stitched carefully on the under side of the lapel—a
square piece of calico with an address written on it in marking ink.

The Chief Inspector removed his smoothing hand.

“I carried it off with me without anybody taking notice,” he said.  “I
thought it best.  It can always be produced if required.”

The Assistant Commissioner, rising a little in his chair, pulled the
cloth over to his side of the table.  He sat looking at it in silence.
Only the number 32 and the name of Brett Street were written in marking
ink on a piece of calico slightly larger than an ordinary cigarette
paper.  He was genuinely surprised.

“Can’t understand why he should have gone about labelled like this,” he
said, looking up at Chief Inspector Heat.  “It’s a most extraordinary
thing.”

“I met once in the smoking-room of a hotel an old gentleman who went
about with his name and address sewn on in all his coats in case of an
accident or sudden illness,” said the Chief Inspector.  “He professed to
be eighty-four years old, but he didn’t look his age.  He told me he was
also afraid of losing his memory suddenly, like those people he has been
reading of in the papers.”

A question from the Assistant Commissioner, who wanted to know what was
No. 32 Brett Street, interrupted that reminiscence abruptly.  The Chief
Inspector, driven down to the ground by unfair artifices, had elected to
walk the path of unreserved openness.  If he believed firmly that to know
too much was not good for the department, the judicious holding back of
knowledge was as far as his loyalty dared to go for the good of the
service.  If the Assistant Commissioner wanted to mismanage this affair
nothing, of course, could prevent him.  But, on his own part, he now saw
no reason for a display of alacrity.  So he answered concisely:

“It’s a shop, sir.”

The Assistant Commissioner, with his eyes lowered on the rag of blue
cloth, waited for more information.  As that did not come he proceeded to
obtain it by a series of questions propounded with gentle patience.  Thus
he acquired an idea of the nature of Mr Verloc’s commerce, of his
personal appearance, and heard at last his name.  In a pause the
Assistant Commissioner raised his eyes, and discovered some animation on
the Chief Inspector’s face.  They looked at each other in silence.

“Of course,” said the latter, “the department has no record of that man.”

“Did any of my predecessors have any knowledge of what you have told me
now?” asked the Assistant Commissioner, putting his elbows on the table
and raising his joined hands before his face, as if about to offer
prayer, only that his eyes had not a pious expression.

“No, sir; certainly not.  What would have been the object?  That sort of
man could never be produced publicly to any good purpose.  It was
sufficient for me to know who he was, and to make use of him in a way
that could be used publicly.”

“And do you think that sort of private knowledge consistent with the
official position you occupy?”

“Perfectly, sir.  I think it’s quite proper.  I will take the liberty to
tell you, sir, that it makes me what I am—and I am looked upon as a man
who knows his work.  It’s a private affair of my own.  A personal friend
of mine in the French police gave me the hint that the fellow was an
Embassy spy.  Private friendship, private information, private use of
it—that’s how I look upon it.”

The Assistant Commissioner after remarking to himself that the mental
state of the renowned Chief Inspector seemed to affect the outline of his
lower jaw, as if the lively sense of his high professional distinction
had been located in that part of his anatomy, dismissed the point for the
moment with a calm “I see.”  Then leaning his cheek on his joined hands:

“Well then—speaking privately if you like—how long have you been in
private touch with this Embassy spy?”

To this inquiry the private answer of the Chief Inspector, so private
that it was never shaped into audible words, was:

“Long before you were even thought of for your place here.”

The so-to-speak public utterance was much more precise.

“I saw him for the first time in my life a little more than seven years
ago, when two Imperial Highnesses and the Imperial Chancellor were on a
visit here.  I was put in charge of all the arrangements for looking
after them.  Baron Stott-Wartenheim was Ambassador then.  He was a very
nervous old gentleman.  One evening, three days before the Guildhall
Banquet, he sent word that he wanted to see me for a moment.  I was
downstairs, and the carriages were at the door to take the Imperial
Highnesses and the Chancellor to the opera.  I went up at once.  I found
the Baron walking up and down his bedroom in a pitiable state of
distress, squeezing his hands together.  He assured me he had the fullest
confidence in our police and in my abilities, but he had there a man just
come over from Paris whose information could be trusted implicity.  He
wanted me to hear what that man had to say.  He took me at once into a
dressing-room next door, where I saw a big fellow in a heavy overcoat
sitting all alone on a chair, and holding his hat and stick in one hand.
The Baron said to him in French ‘Speak, my friend.’  The light in that
room was not very good.  I talked with him for some five minutes perhaps.
He certainly gave me a piece of very startling news.  Then the Baron took
me aside nervously to praise him up to me, and when I turned round again
I discovered that the fellow had vanished like a ghost.  Got up and
sneaked out down some back stairs, I suppose.  There was no time to run
after him, as I had to hurry off after the Ambassador down the great
staircase, and see the party started safe for the opera.  However, I
acted upon the information that very night.  Whether it was perfectly
correct or not, it did look serious enough.  Very likely it saved us from
an ugly trouble on the day of the Imperial visit to the City.

“Some time later, a month or so after my promotion to Chief Inspector, my
attention was attracted to a big burly man, I thought I had seen
somewhere before, coming out in a hurry from a jeweller’s shop in the
Strand.  I went after him, as it was on my way towards Charing Cross, and
there seeing one of our detectives across the road, I beckoned him over,
and pointed out the fellow to him, with instructions to watch his
movements for a couple of days, and then report to me.  No later than
next afternoon my man turned up to tell me that the fellow had married
his landlady’s daughter at a registrar’s office that very day at 11.30
a.m., and had gone off with her to Margate for a week.  Our man had seen
the luggage being put on the cab.  There were some old Paris labels on
one of the bags.  Somehow I couldn’t get the fellow out of my head, and
the very next time I had to go to Paris on service I spoke about him to
that friend of mine in the Paris police.  My friend said: ‘From what you
tell me I think you must mean a rather well-known hanger-on and emissary
of the Revolutionary Red Committee.  He says he is an Englishman by
birth.  We have an idea that he has been for a good few years now a
secret agent of one of the foreign Embassies in London.’  This woke up my
memory completely.  He was the vanishing fellow I saw sitting on a chair
in Baron Stott-Wartenheim’s bathroom.  I told my friend that he was quite
right.  The fellow was a secret agent to my certain knowledge.
Afterwards my friend took the trouble to ferret out the complete record
of that man for me.  I thought I had better know all there was to know;
but I don’t suppose you want to hear his history now, sir?”

The Assistant Commissioner shook his supported head.  “The history of
your relations with that useful personage is the only thing that matters
just now,” he said, closing slowly his weary, deep-set eyes, and then
opening them swiftly with a greatly refreshed glance.

“There’s nothing official about them,” said the Chief Inspector bitterly.
“I went into his shop one evening, told him who I was, and reminded him
of our first meeting.  He didn’t as much as twitch an eyebrow.  He said
that he was married and settled now, and that all he wanted was not to be
interfered in his little business.  I took it upon myself to promise him
that, as long as he didn’t go in for anything obviously outrageous, he
would be left alone by the police.  That was worth something to him,
because a word from us to the Custom-House people would have been enough
to get some of these packages he gets from Paris and Brussels opened in
Dover, with confiscation to follow for certain, and perhaps a prosecution
as well at the end of it.”

“That’s a very precarious trade,” murmured the Assistant Commissioner.
“Why did he go in for that?”

The Chief Inspector raised scornful eyebrows dispassionately.

“Most likely got a connection—friends on the Continent—amongst people who
deal in such wares.  They would be just the sort he would consort with.
He’s a lazy dog, too—like the rest of them.”

“What do you get from him in exchange for your protection?”

The Chief Inspector was not inclined to enlarge on the value of Mr
Verloc’s services.

“He would not be much good to anybody but myself.  One has got to know a
good deal beforehand to make use of a man like that.  I can understand
the sort of hint he can give.  And when I want a hint he can generally
furnish it to me.”

The Chief Inspector lost himself suddenly in a discreet reflective mood;
and the Assistant Commissioner repressed a smile at the fleeting thought
that the reputation of Chief Inspector Heat might possibly have been made
in a great part by the Secret Agent Verloc.

“In a more general way of being of use, all our men of the Special Crimes
section on duty at Charing Cross and Victoria have orders to take careful
notice of anybody they may see with him.  He meets the new arrivals
frequently, and afterwards keeps track of them.  He seems to have been
told off for that sort of duty.  When I want an address in a hurry, I can
always get it from him.  Of course, I know how to manage our relations.
I haven’t seen him to speak to three times in the last two years.  I drop
him a line, unsigned, and he answers me in the same way at my private
address.”

From time to time the Assistant Commissioner gave an almost imperceptible
nod.  The Chief Inspector added that he did not suppose Mr Verloc to be
deep in the confidence of the prominent members of the Revolutionary
International Council, but that he was generally trusted of that there
could be no doubt.  “Whenever I’ve had reason to think there was
something in the wind,” he concluded, “I’ve always found he could tell me
something worth knowing.”

The Assistant Commissioner made a significant remark.

“He failed you this time.”

“Neither had I wind of anything in any other way,” retorted Chief
Inspector Heat.  “I asked him nothing, so he could tell me nothing.  He
isn’t one of our men.  It isn’t as if he were in our pay.”

“No,” muttered the Assistant Commissioner.  “He’s a spy in the pay of a
foreign government.  We could never confess to him.”

“I must do my work in my own way,” declared the Chief Inspector.  “When
it comes to that I would deal with the devil himself, and take the
consequences.  There are things not fit for everybody to know.”

“Your idea of secrecy seems to consist in keeping the chief of your
department in the dark.  That’s stretching it perhaps a little too far,
isn’t it?  He lives over his shop?”

“Who—Verloc?  Oh yes.  He lives over his shop.  The wife’s mother, I
fancy, lives with them.”

“Is the house watched?”

“Oh dear, no.  It wouldn’t do.  Certain people who come there are
watched.  My opinion is that he knows nothing of this affair.”

“How do you account for this?”  The Assistant Commissioner nodded at the
cloth rag lying before him on the table.

“I don’t account for it at all, sir.  It’s simply unaccountable.  It
can’t be explained by what I know.”  The Chief Inspector made those
admissions with the frankness of a man whose reputation is established as
if on a rock.  “At any rate not at this present moment.  I think that the
man who had most to do with it will turn out to be Michaelis.”

“You do?”

“Yes, sir; because I can answer for all the others.”

“What about that other man supposed to have escaped from the park?”

“I should think he’s far away by this time,” opined the Chief Inspector.

The Assistant Commissioner looked hard at him, and rose suddenly, as
though having made up his mind to some course of action.  As a matter of
fact, he had that very moment succumbed to a fascinating temptation.  The
Chief Inspector heard himself dismissed with instructions to meet his
superior early next morning for further consultation upon the case.  He
listened with an impenetrable face, and walked out of the room with
measured steps.

Whatever might have been the plans of the Assistant Commissioner they had
nothing to do with that desk work, which was the bane of his existence
because of its confined nature and apparent lack of reality.  It could
not have had, or else the general air of alacrity that came upon the
Assistant Commissioner would have been inexplicable.  As soon as he was
left alone he looked for his hat impulsively, and put it on his head.
Having done that, he sat down again to reconsider the whole matter.  But
as his mind was already made up, this did not take long.  And before
Chief Inspector Heat had gone very far on the way home, he also left the
building.




CHAPTER VII


The Assistant Commissioner walked along a short and narrow street like a
wet, muddy trench, then crossing a very broad thoroughfare entered a
public edifice, and sought speech with a young private secretary (unpaid)
of a great personage.

This fair, smooth-faced young man, whose symmetrically arranged hair gave
him the air of a large and neat schoolboy, met the Assistant
Commissioner’s request with a doubtful look, and spoke with bated breath.

“Would he see you?  I don’t know about that.  He has walked over from the
House an hour ago to talk with the permanent Under-Secretary, and now
he’s ready to walk back again.  He might have sent for him; but he does
it for the sake of a little exercise, I suppose.  It’s all the exercise
he can find time for while this session lasts.  I don’t complain; I
rather enjoy these little strolls.  He leans on my arm, and doesn’t open
his lips.  But, I say, he’s very tired, and—well—not in the sweetest of
tempers just now.”

“It’s in connection with that Greenwich affair.”

“Oh!  I say!  He’s very bitter against you people.  But I will go and
see, if you insist.”

“Do.  That’s a good fellow,” said the Assistant Commissioner.

The unpaid secretary admired this pluck.  Composing for himself an
innocent face, he opened a door, and went in with the assurance of a nice
and privileged child.  And presently he reappeared, with a nod to the
Assistant Commissioner, who passing through the same door left open for
him, found himself with the great personage in a large room.

Vast in bulk and stature, with a long white face, which, broadened at the
base by a big double chin, appeared egg-shaped in the fringe of thin
greyish whisker, the great personage seemed an expanding man.
Unfortunate from a tailoring point of view, the cross-folds in the middle
of a buttoned black coat added to the impression, as if the fastenings of
the garment were tried to the utmost.  From the head, set upward on a
thick neck, the eyes, with puffy lower lids, stared with a haughty droop
on each side of a hooked aggressive nose, nobly salient in the vast pale
circumference of the face.  A shiny silk hat and a pair of worn gloves
lying ready on the end of a long table looked expanded too, enormous.

He stood on the hearthrug in big, roomy boots, and uttered no word of
greeting.

“I would like to know if this is the beginning of another dynamite
campaign,” he asked at once in a deep, very smooth voice.  “Don’t go into
details.  I have no time for that.”

The Assistant Commissioner’s figure before this big and rustic Presence
had the frail slenderness of a reed addressing an oak.  And indeed the
unbroken record of that man’s descent surpassed in the number of
centuries the age of the oldest oak in the country.

“No.  As far as one can be positive about anything I can assure you that
it is not.”

“Yes.  But your idea of assurances over there,” said the great man, with
a contemptuous wave of his hand towards a window giving on the broad
thoroughfare, “seems to consist mainly in making the Secretary of State
look a fool.  I have been told positively in this very room less than a
month ago that nothing of the sort was even possible.”

The Assistant Commissioner glanced in the direction of the window calmly.

“You will allow me to remark, Sir Ethelred, that so far I have had no
opportunity to give you assurances of any kind.”

The haughty droop of the eyes was focussed now upon the Assistant
Commissioner.

“True,” confessed the deep, smooth voice.  “I sent for Heat.  You are
still rather a novice in your new berth.  And how are you getting on over
there?”

“I believe I am learning something every day.”

“Of course, of course.  I hope you will get on.”

“Thank you, Sir Ethelred.  I’ve learned something to-day, and even within
the last hour or so.  There is much in this affair of a kind that does
not meet the eye in a usual anarchist outrage, even if one looked into it
as deep as can be.  That’s why I am here.”

The great man put his arms akimbo, the backs of his big hands resting on
his hips.

“Very well.  Go on.  Only no details, pray.  Spare me the details.”

“You shall not be troubled with them, Sir Ethelred,” the Assistant
Commissioner began, with a calm and untroubled assurance.  While he was
speaking the hands on the face of the clock behind the great man’s back—a
heavy, glistening affair of massive scrolls in the same dark marble as
the mantelpiece, and with a ghostly, evanescent tick—had moved through
the space of seven minutes.  He spoke with a studious fidelity to a
parenthetical manner, into which every little fact—that is, every
detail—fitted with delightful ease.  Not a murmur nor even a movement
hinted at interruption.  The great Personage might have been the statue
of one of his own princely ancestors stripped of a crusader’s war
harness, and put into an ill-fitting frock coat.  The Assistant
Commissioner felt as though he were at liberty to talk for an hour.  But
he kept his head, and at the end of the time mentioned above he broke off
with a sudden conclusion, which, reproducing the opening statement,
pleasantly surprised Sir Ethelred by its apparent swiftness and force.

“The kind of thing which meets us under the surface of this affair,
otherwise without gravity, is unusual—in this precise form at least—and
requires special treatment.”

The tone of Sir Ethelred was deepened, full of conviction.

“I should think so—involving the Ambassador of a foreign power!”

“Oh!  The Ambassador!” protested the other, erect and slender, allowing
himself a mere half smile.  “It would be stupid of me to advance anything
of the kind.  And it is absolutely unnecessary, because if I am right in
my surmises, whether ambassador or hall porter it’s a mere detail.”

Sir Ethelred opened a wide mouth, like a cavern, into which the hooked
nose seemed anxious to peer; there came from it a subdued rolling sound,
as from a distant organ with the scornful indignation stop.

“No!  These people are too impossible.  What do they mean by importing
their methods of Crim-Tartary here?  A Turk would have more decency.”

“You forget, Sir Ethelred, that strictly speaking we know nothing
positively—as yet.”

“No!  But how would you define it?  Shortly?”

“Barefaced audacity amounting to childishness of a peculiar sort.”

“We can’t put up with the innocence of nasty little children,” said the
great and expanded personage, expanding a little more, as it were.  The
haughty drooping glance struck crushingly the carpet at the Assistant
Commissioner’s feet.  “They’ll have to get a hard rap on the knuckles
over this affair.  We must be in a position to—What is your general idea,
stated shortly?  No need to go into details.”

“No, Sir Ethelred.  In principle, I should lay it down that the existence
of secret agents should not be tolerated, as tending to augment the
positive dangers of the evil against which they are used.  That the spy
will fabricate his information is a mere commonplace.  But in the sphere
of political and revolutionary action, relying partly on violence, the
professional spy has every facility to fabricate the very facts
themselves, and will spread the double evil of emulation in one
direction, and of panic, hasty legislation, unreflecting hate, on the
other.  However, this is an imperfect world—”

The deep-voiced Presence on the hearthrug, motionless, with big elbows
stuck out, said hastily:

“Be lucid, please.”

“Yes, Sir Ethelred—An imperfect world.  Therefore directly the character
of this affair suggested itself to me, I thought it should be dealt with
with special secrecy, and ventured to come over here.”

“That’s right,” approved the great Personage, glancing down complacently
over his double chin.  “I am glad there’s somebody over at your shop who
thinks that the Secretary of State may be trusted now and then.”

The Assistant Commissioner had an amused smile.

“I was really thinking that it might be better at this stage for Heat to
be replaced by—”

“What!  Heat?  An ass—eh?” exclaimed the great man, with distinct
animosity.

“Not at all.  Pray, Sir Ethelred, don’t put that unjust interpretation on
my remarks.”

“Then what?  Too clever by half?”

“Neither—at least not as a rule.  All the grounds of my surmises I have
from him.  The only thing I’ve discovered by myself is that he has been
making use of that man privately.  Who could blame him?  He’s an old
police hand.  He told me virtually that he must have tools to work with.
It occurred to me that this tool should be surrendered to the Special
Crimes division as a whole, instead of remaining the private property of
Chief Inspector Heat.  I extend my conception of our departmental duties
to the suppression of the secret agent.  But Chief Inspector Heat is an
old departmental hand.  He would accuse me of perverting its morality and
attacking its efficiency.  He would define it bitterly as protection
extended to the criminal class of revolutionists.  It would mean just
that to him.”

“Yes.  But what do you mean?”

“I mean to say, first, that there’s but poor comfort in being able to
declare that any given act of violence—damaging property or destroying
life—is not the work of anarchism at all, but of something else
altogether—some species of authorised scoundrelism.  This, I fancy, is
much more frequent than we suppose.  Next, it’s obvious that the
existence of these people in the pay of foreign governments destroys in a
measure the efficiency of our supervision.  A spy of that sort can afford
to be more reckless than the most reckless of conspirators.  His
occupation is free from all restraint.  He’s without as much faith as is
necessary for complete negation, and without that much law as is implied
in lawlessness.  Thirdly, the existence of these spies amongst the
revolutionary groups, which we are reproached for harbouring here, does
away with all certitude.  You have received a reassuring statement from
Chief Inspector Heat some time ago.  It was by no means groundless—and
yet this episode happens.  I call it an episode, because this affair, I
make bold to say, is episodic; it is no part of any general scheme,
however wild.  The very peculiarities which surprise and perplex Chief
Inspector Heat establish its character in my eyes.  I am keeping clear of
details, Sir Ethelred.”

The Personage on the hearthrug had been listening with profound
attention.

“Just so.  Be as concise as you can.”

The Assistant Commissioner intimated by an earnest deferential gesture
that he was anxious to be concise.

“There is a peculiar stupidity and feebleness in the conduct of this
affair which gives me excellent hopes of getting behind it and finding
there something else than an individual freak of fanaticism.  For it is a
planned thing, undoubtedly.  The actual perpetrator seems to have been
led by the hand to the spot, and then abandoned hurriedly to his own
devices.  The inference is that he was imported from abroad for the
purpose of committing this outrage.  At the same time one is forced to
the conclusion that he did not know enough English to ask his way, unless
one were to accept the fantastic theory that he was a deaf mute.  I
wonder now—But this is idle.  He has destroyed himself by an accident,
obviously.  Not an extraordinary accident.  But an extraordinary little
fact remains: the address on his clothing discovered by the merest
accident, too.  It is an incredible little fact, so incredible that the
explanation which will account for it is bound to touch the bottom of
this affair.  Instead of instructing Heat to go on with this case, my
intention is to seek this explanation personally—by myself, I mean—where
it may be picked up.  That is in a certain shop in Brett Street, and on
the lips of a certain secret agent once upon a time the confidential and
trusted spy of the late Baron Stott-Wartenheim, Ambassador of a Great
Power to the Court of St James.”

The Assistant Commissioner paused, then added: “Those fellows are a
perfect pest.”  In order to raise his drooping glance to the speaker’s
face, the Personage on the hearthrug had gradually tilted his head
farther back, which gave him an aspect of extraordinary haughtiness.

“Why not leave it to Heat?”

“Because he is an old departmental hand.  They have their own morality.
My line of inquiry would appear to him an awful perversion of duty.  For
him the plain duty is to fasten the guilt upon as many prominent
anarchists as he can on some slight indications he had picked up in the
course of his investigation on the spot; whereas I, he would say, am bent
upon vindicating their innocence.  I am trying to be as lucid as I can in
presenting this obscure matter to you without details.”

“He would, would he?” muttered the proud head of Sir Ethelred from its
lofty elevation.

“I am afraid so—with an indignation and disgust of which you or I can
have no idea.  He’s an excellent servant.  We must not put an undue
strain on his loyalty.  That’s always a mistake.  Besides, I want a free
hand—a freer hand than it would be perhaps advisable to give Chief
Inspector Heat.  I haven’t the slightest wish to spare this man Verloc.
He will, I imagine, be extremely startled to find his connection with
this affair, whatever it may be, brought home to him so quickly.
Frightening him will not be very difficult.  But our true objective lies
behind him somewhere.  I want your authority to give him such assurances
of personal safety as I may think proper.”

“Certainly,” said the Personage on the hearthrug.  “Find out as much as
you can; find it out in your own way.”

“I must set about it without loss of time, this very evening,” said the
Assistant Commissioner.

Sir Ethelred shifted one hand under his coat tails, and tilting back his
head, looked at him steadily.

“We’ll have a late sitting to-night,” he said.  “Come to the House with
your discoveries if we are not gone home.  I’ll warn Toodles to look out
for you.  He’ll take you into my room.”

The numerous family and the wide connections of the youthful-looking
Private Secretary cherished for him the hope of an austere and exalted
destiny.  Meantime the social sphere he adorned in his hours of idleness
chose to pet him under the above nickname.  And Sir Ethelred, hearing it
on the lips of his wife and girls every day (mostly at breakfast-time),
had conferred upon it the dignity of unsmiling adoption.

The Assistant Commissioner was surprised and gratified extremely.

“I shall certainly bring my discoveries to the House on the chance of you
having the time to—”

“I won’t have the time,” interrupted the great Personage.  “But I will
see you.  I haven’t the time now—And you are going yourself?”

“Yes, Sir Ethelred.  I think it the best way.”

The Personage had tilted his head so far back that, in order to keep the
Assistant Commissioner under his observation, he had to nearly close his
eyes.

“H’m.  Ha!  And how do you propose—Will you assume a disguise?”

“Hardly a disguise!  I’ll change my clothes, of course.”

“Of course,” repeated the great man, with a sort of absent-minded
loftiness.  He turned his big head slowly, and over his shoulder gave a
haughty oblique stare to the ponderous marble timepiece with the sly,
feeble tick.  The gilt hands had taken the opportunity to steal through
no less than five and twenty minutes behind his back.

The Assistant Commissioner, who could not see them, grew a little nervous
in the interval.  But the great man presented to him a calm and
undismayed face.

“Very well,” he said, and paused, as if in deliberate contempt of the
official clock.  “But what first put you in motion in this direction?”

“I have been always of opinion,” began the Assistant Commissioner.

“Ah.  Yes!  Opinion.  That’s of course.  But the immediate motive?”

“What shall I say, Sir Ethelred?  A new man’s antagonism to old methods.
A desire to know something at first hand.  Some impatience.  It’s my old
work, but the harness is different.  It has been chafing me a little in
one or two tender places.”

“I hope you’ll get on over there,” said the great man kindly, extending
his hand, soft to the touch, but broad and powerful like the hand of a
glorified farmer.  The Assistant Commissioner shook it, and withdrew.

In the outer room Toodles, who had been waiting perched on the edge of a
table, advanced to meet him, subduing his natural buoyancy.

“Well?  Satisfactory?” he asked, with airy importance.

“Perfectly.  You’ve earned my undying gratitude,” answered the Assistant
Commissioner, whose long face looked wooden in contrast with the peculiar
character of the other’s gravity, which seemed perpetually ready to break
into ripples and chuckles.

“That’s all right.  But seriously, you can’t imagine how irritated he is
by the attacks on his Bill for the Nationalisation of Fisheries.  They
call it the beginning of social revolution.  Of course, it is a
revolutionary measure.  But these fellows have no decency.  The personal
attacks—”

“I read the papers,” remarked the Assistant Commissioner.

“Odious?  Eh?  And you have no notion what a mass of work he has got to
get through every day.  He does it all himself.  Seems unable to trust
anyone with these Fisheries.”

“And yet he’s given a whole half hour to the consideration of my very
small sprat,” interjected the Assistant Commissioner.

“Small!  Is it?  I’m glad to hear that.  But it’s a pity you didn’t keep
away, then.  This fight takes it out of him frightfully.  The man’s
getting exhausted.  I feel it by the way he leans on my arm as we walk
over.  And, I say, is he safe in the streets?  Mullins has been marching
his men up here this afternoon.  There’s a constable stuck by every
lamp-post, and every second person we meet between this and Palace Yard
is an obvious ‘tec.’  It will get on his nerves presently.  I say, these
foreign scoundrels aren’t likely to throw something at him—are they?  It
would be a national calamity.  The country can’t spare him.”

“Not to mention yourself.  He leans on your arm,” suggested the Assistant
Commissioner soberly.  “You would both go.”

“It would be an easy way for a young man to go down into history?  Not so
many British Ministers have been assassinated as to make it a minor
incident.  But seriously now—”

“I am afraid that if you want to go down into history you’ll have to do
something for it.  Seriously, there’s no danger whatever for both of you
but from overwork.”

The sympathetic Toodles welcomed this opening for a chuckle.

“The Fisheries won’t kill me.  I am used to late hours,” he declared,
with ingenuous levity.  But, feeling an instant compunction, he began to
assume an air of statesman-like moodiness, as one draws on a glove.  “His
massive intellect will stand any amount of work.  It’s his nerves that I
am afraid of.  The reactionary gang, with that abusive brute Cheeseman at
their head, insult him every night.”

“If he will insist on beginning a revolution!” murmured the Assistant
Commissioner.

“The time has come, and he is the only man great enough for the work,”
protested the revolutionary Toodles, flaring up under the calm,
speculative gaze of the Assistant Commissioner.  Somewhere in a corridor
a distant bell tinkled urgently, and with devoted vigilance the young man
pricked up his ears at the sound.  “He’s ready to go now,” he exclaimed
in a whisper, snatched up his hat, and vanished from the room.

The Assistant Commissioner went out by another door in a less elastic
manner.  Again he crossed the wide thoroughfare, walked along a narrow
street, and re-entered hastily his own departmental buildings.  He kept
up this accelerated pace to the door of his private room.  Before he had
closed it fairly his eyes sought his desk.  He stood still for a moment,
then walked up, looked all round on the floor, sat down in his chair,
rang a bell, and waited.

“Chief Inspector Heat gone yet?”

“Yes, sir.  Went away half-an-hour ago.”

He nodded.  “That will do.”  And sitting still, with his hat pushed off
his forehead, he thought that it was just like Heat’s confounded cheek to
carry off quietly the only piece of material evidence.  But he thought
this without animosity.  Old and valued servants will take liberties.
The piece of overcoat with the address sewn on was certainly not a thing
to leave about.  Dismissing from his mind this manifestation of Chief
Inspector Heat’s mistrust, he wrote and despatched a note to his wife,
charging her to make his apologies to Michaelis’ great lady, with whom
they were engaged to dine that evening.

The short jacket and the low, round hat he assumed in a sort of curtained
alcove containing a washstand, a row of wooden pegs and a shelf, brought
out wonderfully the length of his grave, brown face.  He stepped back
into the full light of the room, looking like the vision of a cool,
reflective Don Quixote, with the sunken eyes of a dark enthusiast and a
very deliberate manner.  He left the scene of his daily labours quickly
like an unobtrusive shadow.  His descent into the street was like the
descent into a slimy aquarium from which the water had been run off.  A
murky, gloomy dampness enveloped him.  The walls of the houses were wet,
the mud of the roadway glistened with an effect of phosphorescence, and
when he emerged into the Strand out of a narrow street by the side of
Charing Cross Station the genius of the locality assimilated him.  He
might have been but one more of the queer foreign fish that can be seen
of an evening about there flitting round the dark corners.

He came to a stand on the very edge of the pavement, and waited.  His
exercised eyes had made out in the confused movements of lights and
shadows thronging the roadway the crawling approach of a hansom.  He gave
no sign; but when the low step gliding along the curbstone came to his
feet he dodged in skilfully in front of the big turning wheel, and spoke
up through the little trap door almost before the man gazing supinely
ahead from his perch was aware of having been boarded by a fare.

It was not a long drive.  It ended by signal abruptly, nowhere in
particular, between two lamp-posts before a large drapery establishment—a
long range of shops already lapped up in sheets of corrugated iron for
the night.  Tendering a coin through the trap door the fare slipped out
and away, leaving an effect of uncanny, eccentric ghastliness upon the
driver’s mind.  But the size of the coin was satisfactory to his touch,
and his education not being literary, he remained untroubled by the fear
of finding it presently turned to a dead leaf in his pocket.  Raised
above the world of fares by the nature of his calling, he contemplated
their actions with a limited interest.  The sharp pulling of his horse
right round expressed his philosophy.

Meantime the Assistant Commissioner was already giving his order to a
waiter in a little Italian restaurant round the corner—one of those traps
for the hungry, long and narrow, baited with a perspective of mirrors and
white napery; without air, but with an atmosphere of their own—an
atmosphere of fraudulent cookery mocking an abject mankind in the most
pressing of its miserable necessities.  In this immoral atmosphere the
Assistant Commissioner, reflecting upon his enterprise, seemed to lose
some more of his identity.  He had a sense of loneliness, of evil
freedom.  It was rather pleasant.  When, after paying for his short meal,
he stood up and waited for his change, he saw himself in the sheet of
glass, and was struck by his foreign appearance.  He contemplated his own
image with a melancholy and inquisitive gaze, then by sudden inspiration
raised the collar of his jacket.  This arrangement appeared to him
commendable, and he completed it by giving an upward twist to the ends of
his black moustache.  He was satisfied by the subtle modification of his
personal aspect caused by these small changes.  “That’ll do very well,”
he thought.  “I’ll get a little wet, a little splashed—”

He became aware of the waiter at his elbow and of a small pile of silver
coins on the edge of the table before him.  The waiter kept one eye on
it, while his other eye followed the long back of a tall, not very young
girl, who passed up to a distant table looking perfectly sightless and
altogether unapproachable.  She seemed to be a habitual customer.

On going out the Assistant Commissioner made to himself the observation
that the patrons of the place had lost in the frequentation of fraudulent
cookery all their national and private characteristics.  And this was
strange, since the Italian restaurant is such a peculiarly British
institution.  But these people were as denationalised as the dishes set
before them with every circumstance of unstamped respectability.  Neither
was their personality stamped in any way, professionally, socially or
racially.  They seemed created for the Italian restaurant, unless the
Italian restaurant had been perchance created for them.  But that last
hypothesis was unthinkable, since one could not place them anywhere
outside those special establishments.  One never met these enigmatical
persons elsewhere.  It was impossible to form a precise idea what
occupations they followed by day and where they went to bed at night.
And he himself had become unplaced.  It would have been impossible for
anybody to guess his occupation.  As to going to bed, there was a doubt
even in his own mind.  Not indeed in regard to his domicile itself, but
very much so in respect of the time when he would be able to return
there.  A pleasurable feeling of independence possessed him when he heard
the glass doors swing to behind his back with a sort of imperfect baffled
thud.  He advanced at once into an immensity of greasy slime and damp
plaster interspersed with lamps, and enveloped, oppressed, penetrated,
choked, and suffocated by the blackness of a wet London night, which is
composed of soot and drops of water.

Brett Street was not very far away.  It branched off, narrow, from the
side of an open triangular space surrounded by dark and mysterious
houses, temples of petty commerce emptied of traders for the night.  Only
a fruiterer’s stall at the corner made a violent blaze of light and
colour.  Beyond all was black, and the few people passing in that
direction vanished at one stride beyond the glowing heaps of oranges and
lemons.  No footsteps echoed.  They would never be heard of again.  The
adventurous head of the Special Crimes Department watched these
disappearances from a distance with an interested eye.  He felt
light-hearted, as though he had been ambushed all alone in a jungle many
thousands of miles away from departmental desks and official inkstands.
This joyousness and dispersion of thought before a task of some
importance seems to prove that this world of ours is not such a very
serious affair after all.  For the Assistant Commissioner was not
constitutionally inclined to levity.

The policeman on the beat projected his sombre and moving form against
the luminous glory of oranges and lemons, and entered Brett Street
without haste.  The Assistant Commissioner, as though he were a member of
the criminal classes, lingered out of sight, awaiting his return.  But
this constable seemed to be lost for ever to the force.  He never
returned: must have gone out at the other end of Brett Street.

The Assistant Commissioner, reaching this conclusion, entered the street
in his turn, and came upon a large van arrested in front of the dimly lit
window-panes of a carter’s eating-house.  The man was refreshing himself
inside, and the horses, their big heads lowered to the ground, fed out of
nose-bags steadily.  Farther on, on the opposite side of the street,
another suspect patch of dim light issued from Mr Verloc’s shop front,
hung with papers, heaving with vague piles of cardboard boxes and the
shapes of books.  The Assistant Commissioner stood observing it across
the roadway.  There could be no mistake.  By the side of the front
window, encumbered by the shadows of nondescript things, the door,
standing ajar, let escape on the pavement a narrow, clear streak of
gas-light within.

Behind the Assistant Commissioner the van and horses, merged into one
mass, seemed something alive—a square-backed black monster blocking half
the street, with sudden iron-shod stampings, fierce jingles, and heavy,
blowing sighs.  The harshly festive, ill-omened glare of a large and
prosperous public-house faced the other end of Brett Street across a wide
road.  This barrier of blazing lights, opposing the shadows gathered
about the humble abode of Mr Verloc’s domestic happiness, seemed to drive
the obscurity of the street back upon itself, make it more sullen,
brooding, and sinister.




CHAPTER VIII


Having infused by persistent importunities some sort of heat into the
chilly interest of several licensed victuallers (the acquaintances once
upon a time of her late unlucky husband), Mrs Verloc’s mother had at last
secured her admission to certain almshouses founded by a wealthy
innkeeper for the destitute widows of the trade.

This end, conceived in the astuteness of her uneasy heart, the old woman
had pursued with secrecy and determination.  That was the time when her
daughter Winnie could not help passing a remark to Mr Verloc that “mother
has been spending half-crowns and five shillings almost every day this
last week in cab fares.”  But the remark was not made grudgingly.  Winnie
respected her mother’s infirmities.  She was only a little surprised at
this sudden mania for locomotion.  Mr Verloc, who was sufficiently
magnificent in his way, had grunted the remark impatiently aside as
interfering with his meditations.  These were frequent, deep, and
prolonged; they bore upon a matter more important than five shillings.
Distinctly more important, and beyond all comparison more difficult to
consider in all its aspects with philosophical serenity.

Her object attained in astute secrecy, the heroic old woman had made a
clean breast of it to Mrs Verloc.  Her soul was triumphant and her heart
tremulous.  Inwardly she quaked, because she dreaded and admired the
calm, self-contained character of her daughter Winnie, whose displeasure
was made redoubtable by a diversity of dreadful silences.  But she did
not allow her inward apprehensions to rob her of the advantage of
venerable placidity conferred upon her outward person by her triple chin,
the floating ampleness of her ancient form, and the impotent condition of
her legs.

The shock of the information was so unexpected that Mrs Verloc, against
her usual practice when addressed, interrupted the domestic occupation
she was engaged upon.  It was the dusting of the furniture in the parlour
behind the shop.  She turned her head towards her mother.

“Whatever did you want to do that for?” she exclaimed, in scandalised
astonishment.

The shock must have been severe to make her depart from that distant and
uninquiring acceptance of facts which was her force and her safeguard in
life.

“Weren’t you made comfortable enough here?”

She had lapsed into these inquiries, but next moment she saved the
consistency of her conduct by resuming her dusting, while the old woman
sat scared and dumb under her dingy white cap and lustreless dark wig.

Winnie finished the chair, and ran the duster along the mahogany at the
back of the horse-hair sofa on which Mr Verloc loved to take his ease in
hat and overcoat.  She was intent on her work, but presently she
permitted herself another question.

“How in the world did you manage it, mother?”

As not affecting the inwardness of things, which it was Mrs Verloc’s
principle to ignore, this curiosity was excusable.  It bore merely on the
methods.  The old woman welcomed it eagerly as bringing forward something
that could be talked about with much sincerity.

She favoured her daughter by an exhaustive answer, full of names and
enriched by side comments upon the ravages of time as observed in the
alteration of human countenances.  The names were principally the names
of licensed victuallers—“poor daddy’s friends, my dear.”  She enlarged
with special appreciation on the kindness and condescension of a large
brewer, a Baronet and an M. P., the Chairman of the Governors of the
Charity.  She expressed herself thus warmly because she had been allowed
to interview by appointment his Private Secretary—“a very polite
gentleman, all in black, with a gentle, sad voice, but so very, very thin
and quiet.  He was like a shadow, my dear.”

Winnie, prolonging her dusting operations till the tale was told to the
end, walked out of the parlour into the kitchen (down two steps) in her
usual manner, without the slightest comment.

Shedding a few tears in sign of rejoicing at her daughter’s mansuetude in
this terrible affair, Mrs Verloc’s mother gave play to her astuteness in
the direction of her furniture, because it was her own; and sometimes she
wished it hadn’t been.  Heroism is all very well, but there are
circumstances when the disposal of a few tables and chairs, brass
bedsteads, and so on, may be big with remote and disastrous consequences.
She required a few pieces herself, the Foundation which, after many
importunities, had gathered her to its charitable breast, giving nothing
but bare planks and cheaply papered bricks to the objects of its
solicitude.  The delicacy guiding her choice to the least valuable and
most dilapidated articles passed unacknowledged, because Winnie’s
philosophy consisted in not taking notice of the inside of facts; she
assumed that mother took what suited her best.  As to Mr Verloc, his
intense meditation, like a sort of Chinese wall, isolated him completely
from the phenomena of this world of vain effort and illusory appearances.

Her selection made, the disposal of the rest became a perplexing question
in a particular way.  She was leaving it in Brett Street, of course.  But
she had two children.  Winnie was provided for by her sensible union with
that excellent husband, Mr Verloc.  Stevie was destitute—and a little
peculiar.  His position had to be considered before the claims of legal
justice and even the promptings of partiality.  The possession of the
furniture would not be in any sense a provision.  He ought to have it—the
poor boy.  But to give it to him would be like tampering with his
position of complete dependence.  It was a sort of claim which she feared
to weaken.  Moreover, the susceptibilities of Mr Verloc would perhaps not
brook being beholden to his brother-in-law for the chairs he sat on.  In
a long experience of gentlemen lodgers, Mrs Verloc’s mother had acquired
a dismal but resigned notion of the fantastic side of human nature.  What
if Mr Verloc suddenly took it into his head to tell Stevie to take his
blessed sticks somewhere out of that?  A division, on the other hand,
however carefully made, might give some cause of offence to Winnie.  No,
Stevie must remain destitute and dependent.  And at the moment of leaving
Brett Street she had said to her daughter: “No use waiting till I am
dead, is there?  Everything I leave here is altogether your own now, my
dear.”

Winnie, with her hat on, silent behind her mother’s back, went on
arranging the collar of the old woman’s cloak.  She got her hand-bag, an
umbrella, with an impassive face.  The time had come for the expenditure
of the sum of three-and-sixpence on what might well be supposed the last
cab drive of Mrs Verloc’s mother’s life.  They went out at the shop door.

The conveyance awaiting them would have illustrated the proverb that
“truth can be more cruel than caricature,” if such a proverb existed.
Crawling behind an infirm horse, a metropolitan hackney carriage drew up
on wobbly wheels and with a maimed driver on the box.  This last
peculiarity caused some embarrassment.  Catching sight of a hooked iron
contrivance protruding from the left sleeve of the man’s coat, Mrs
Verloc’s mother lost suddenly the heroic courage of these days.  She
really couldn’t trust herself.  “What do you think, Winnie?”  She hung
back.  The passionate expostulations of the big-faced cabman seemed to be
squeezed out of a blocked throat.  Leaning over from his box, he
whispered with mysterious indignation.  What was the matter now?  Was it
possible to treat a man so?  His enormous and unwashed countenance flamed
red in the muddy stretch of the street.  Was it likely they would have
given him a licence, he inquired desperately, if—

The police constable of the locality quieted him by a friendly glance;
then addressing himself to the two women without marked consideration,
said:

“He’s been driving a cab for twenty years.  I never knew him to have an
accident.”

“Accident!” shouted the driver in a scornful whisper.

The policeman’s testimony settled it.  The modest assemblage of seven
people, mostly under age, dispersed.  Winnie followed her mother into the
cab.  Stevie climbed on the box.  His vacant mouth and distressed eyes
depicted the state of his mind in regard to the transactions which were
taking place.  In the narrow streets the progress of the journey was made
sensible to those within by the near fronts of the houses gliding past
slowly and shakily, with a great rattle and jingling of glass, as if
about to collapse behind the cab; and the infirm horse, with the harness
hung over his sharp backbone flapping very loose about his thighs,
appeared to be dancing mincingly on his toes with infinite patience.
Later on, in the wider space of Whitehall, all visual evidences of motion
became imperceptible.  The rattle and jingle of glass went on
indefinitely in front of the long Treasury building—and time itself
seemed to stand still.

At last Winnie observed: “This isn’t a very good horse.”

Her eyes gleamed in the shadow of the cab straight ahead, immovable.  On
the box, Stevie shut his vacant mouth first, in order to ejaculate
earnestly: “Don’t.”

The driver, holding high the reins twisted around the hook, took no
notice.  Perhaps he had not heard.  Stevie’s breast heaved.

“Don’t whip.”

The man turned slowly his bloated and sodden face of many colours
bristling with white hairs.  His little red eyes glistened with moisture.
His big lips had a violet tint.  They remained closed.  With the dirty
back of his whip-hand he rubbed the stubble sprouting on his enormous
chin.

“You mustn’t,” stammered out Stevie violently.  “It hurts.”

“Mustn’t whip,” queried the other in a thoughtful whisper, and
immediately whipped.  He did this, not because his soul was cruel and his
heart evil, but because he had to earn his fare.  And for a time the
walls of St Stephen’s, with its towers and pinnacles, contemplated in
immobility and silence a cab that jingled.  It rolled too, however.  But
on the bridge there was a commotion.  Stevie suddenly proceeded to get
down from the box.  There were shouts on the pavement, people ran
forward, the driver pulled up, whispering curses of indignation and
astonishment.  Winnie lowered the window, and put her head out, white as
a ghost.  In the depths of the cab, her mother was exclaiming, in tones
of anguish: “Is that boy hurt?  Is that boy hurt?”

Stevie was not hurt, he had not even fallen, but excitement as usual had
robbed him of the power of connected speech.  He could do no more than
stammer at the window.  “Too heavy.  Too heavy.”  Winnie put out her hand
on to his shoulder.

“Stevie!  Get up on the box directly, and don’t try to get down again.”

“No.  No.  Walk.  Must walk.”

In trying to state the nature of that necessity he stammered himself into
utter incoherence.  No physical impossibility stood in the way of his
whim.  Stevie could have managed easily to keep pace with the infirm,
dancing horse without getting out of breath.  But his sister withheld her
consent decisively.  “The idea!  Whoever heard of such a thing!  Run
after a cab!”  Her mother, frightened and helpless in the depths of the
conveyance, entreated: “Oh, don’t let him, Winnie.  He’ll get lost.
Don’t let him.”

“Certainly not.  What next!  Mr Verloc will be sorry to hear of this
nonsense, Stevie,—I can tell you.  He won’t be happy at all.”

The idea of Mr Verloc’s grief and unhappiness acting as usual powerfully
upon Stevie’s fundamentally docile disposition, he abandoned all
resistance, and climbed up again on the box, with a face of despair.

The cabby turned at him his enormous and inflamed countenance
truculently.  “Don’t you go for trying this silly game again, young
fellow.”

After delivering himself thus in a stern whisper, strained almost to
extinction, he drove on, ruminating solemnly.  To his mind the incident
remained somewhat obscure.  But his intellect, though it had lost its
pristine vivacity in the benumbing years of sedentary exposure to the
weather, lacked not independence or sanity.  Gravely he dismissed the
hypothesis of Stevie being a drunken young nipper.

Inside the cab the spell of silence, in which the two women had endured
shoulder to shoulder the jolting, rattling, and jingling of the journey,
had been broken by Stevie’s outbreak.  Winnie raised her voice.

“You’ve done what you wanted, mother.  You’ll have only yourself to thank
for it if you aren’t happy afterwards.  And I don’t think you’ll be.
That I don’t.  Weren’t you comfortable enough in the house?  Whatever
people’ll think of us—you throwing yourself like this on a Charity?”

“My dear,” screamed the old woman earnestly above the noise, “you’ve been
the best of daughters to me.  As to Mr Verloc—there—”

Words failing her on the subject of Mr Verloc’s excellence, she turned
her old tearful eyes to the roof of the cab.  Then she averted her head
on the pretence of looking out of the window, as if to judge of their
progress.  It was insignificant, and went on close to the curbstone.
Night, the early dirty night, the sinister, noisy, hopeless and rowdy
night of South London, had overtaken her on her last cab drive.  In the
gas-light of the low-fronted shops her big cheeks glowed with an orange
hue under a black and mauve bonnet.

Mrs Verloc’s mother’s complexion had become yellow by the effect of age
and from a natural predisposition to biliousness, favoured by the trials
of a difficult and worried existence, first as wife, then as widow.  It
was a complexion, that under the influence of a blush would take on an
orange tint.  And this woman, modest indeed but hardened in the fires of
adversity, of an age, moreover, when blushes are not expected, had
positively blushed before her daughter.  In the privacy of a
four-wheeler, on her way to a charity cottage (one of a row) which by the
exiguity of its dimensions and the simplicity of its accommodation, might
well have been devised in kindness as a place of training for the still
more straitened circumstances of the grave, she was forced to hid from
her own child a blush of remorse and shame.

Whatever people will think?  She knew very well what they did think, the
people Winnie had in her mind—the old friends of her husband, and others
too, whose interest she had solicited with such flattering success.  She
had not known before what a good beggar she could be.  But she guessed
very well what inference was drawn from her application.  On account of
that shrinking delicacy, which exists side by side with aggressive
brutality in masculine nature, the inquiries into her circumstances had
not been pushed very far.  She had checked them by a visible compression
of the lips and some display of an emotion determined to be eloquently
silent.  And the men would become suddenly incurious, after the manner of
their kind.  She congratulated herself more than once on having nothing
to do with women, who being naturally more callous and avid of details,
would have been anxious to be exactly informed by what sort of unkind
conduct her daughter and son-in-law had driven her to that sad extremity.
It was only before the Secretary of the great brewer M. P. and Chairman
of the Charity, who, acting for his principal, felt bound to be
conscientiously inquisitive as to the real circumstances of the
applicant, that she had burst into tears outright and aloud, as a
cornered woman will weep.  The thin and polite gentleman, after
contemplating her with an air of being “struck all of a heap,” abandoned
his position under the cover of soothing remarks.  She must not distress
herself.  The deed of the Charity did not absolutely specify “childless
widows.”  In fact, it did not by any means disqualify her.  But the
discretion of the Committee must be an informed discretion.  One could
understand very well her unwillingness to be a burden, etc. etc.
Thereupon, to his profound disappointment, Mrs Verloc’s mother wept some
more with an augmented vehemence.

The tears of that large female in a dark, dusty wig, and ancient silk
dress festooned with dingy white cotton lace, were the tears of genuine
distress.  She had wept because she was heroic and unscrupulous and full
of love for both her children.  Girls frequently get sacrificed to the
welfare of the boys.  In this case she was sacrificing Winnie.  By the
suppression of truth she was slandering her.  Of course, Winnie was
independent, and need not care for the opinion of people that she would
never see and who would never see her; whereas poor Stevie had nothing in
the world he could call his own except his mother’s heroism and
unscrupulousness.

The first sense of security following on Winnie’s marriage wore off in
time (for nothing lasts), and Mrs Verloc’s mother, in the seclusion of
the back bedroom, had recalled the teaching of that experience which the
world impresses upon a widowed woman.  But she had recalled it without
vain bitterness; her store of resignation amounted almost to dignity.
She reflected stoically that everything decays, wears out, in this world;
that the way of kindness should be made easy to the well disposed; that
her daughter Winnie was a most devoted sister, and a very self-confident
wife indeed.  As regards Winnie’s sisterly devotion, her stoicism
flinched.  She excepted that sentiment from the rule of decay affecting
all things human and some things divine.  She could not help it; not to
do so would have frightened her too much.  But in considering the
conditions of her daughter’s married state, she rejected firmly all
flattering illusions.  She took the cold and reasonable view that the
less strain put on Mr Verloc’s kindness the longer its effects were
likely to last.  That excellent man loved his wife, of course, but he
would, no doubt, prefer to keep as few of her relations as was consistent
with the proper display of that sentiment.  It would be better if its
whole effect were concentrated on poor Stevie.  And the heroic old woman
resolved on going away from her children as an act of devotion and as a
move of deep policy.

The “virtue” of this policy consisted in this (Mrs Verloc’s mother was
subtle in her way), that Stevie’s moral claim would be strengthened.  The
poor boy—a good, useful boy, if a little peculiar—had not a sufficient
standing.  He had been taken over with his mother, somewhat in the same
way as the furniture of the Belgravian mansion had been taken over, as if
on the ground of belonging to her exclusively.  What will happen, she
asked herself (for Mrs Verloc’s mother was in a measure imaginative),
when I die?  And when she asked herself that question it was with dread.
It was also terrible to think that she would not then have the means of
knowing what happened to the poor boy.  But by making him over to his
sister, by going thus away, she gave him the advantage of a directly
dependent position.  This was the more subtle sanction of Mrs Verloc’s
mother’s heroism and unscrupulousness.  Her act of abandonment was really
an arrangement for settling her son permanently in life.  Other people
made material sacrifices for such an object, she in that way.  It was the
only way.  Moreover, she would be able to see how it worked.  Ill or well
she would avoid the horrible incertitude on the death-bed.  But it was
hard, hard, cruelly hard.

The cab rattled, jingled, jolted; in fact, the last was quite
extraordinary.  By its disproportionate violence and magnitude it
obliterated every sensation of onward movement; and the effect was of
being shaken in a stationary apparatus like a mediæval device for the
punishment of crime, or some very newfangled invention for the cure of a
sluggish liver.  It was extremely distressing; and the raising of Mrs
Verloc’s mother’s voice sounded like a wail of pain.

“I know, my dear, you’ll come to see me as often as you can spare the
time.  Won’t you?”

“Of course,” answered Winnie shortly, staring straight before her.

And the cab jolted in front of a steamy, greasy shop in a blaze of gas
and in the smell of fried fish.

The old woman raised a wail again.

“And, my dear, I must see that poor boy every Sunday.  He won’t mind
spending the day with his old mother—”

Winnie screamed out stolidly:

“Mind!  I should think not.  That poor boy will miss you something cruel.
I wish you had thought a little of that, mother.”

Not think of it!  The heroic woman swallowed a playful and inconvenient
object like a billiard ball, which had tried to jump out of her throat.
Winnie sat mute for a while, pouting at the front of the cab, then
snapped out, which was an unusual tone with her:

“I expect I’ll have a job with him at first, he’ll be that restless—”

“Whatever you do, don’t let him worry your husband, my dear.”

Thus they discussed on familiar lines the bearings of a new situation.
And the cab jolted.  Mrs Verloc’s mother expressed some misgivings.
Could Stevie be trusted to come all that way alone?  Winnie maintained
that he was much less “absent-minded” now.  They agreed as to that.  It
could not be denied.  Much less—hardly at all.  They shouted at each
other in the jingle with comparative cheerfulness.  But suddenly the
maternal anxiety broke out afresh.  There were two omnibuses to take, and
a short walk between.  It was too difficult!  The old woman gave way to
grief and consternation.

Winnie stared forward.

“Don’t you upset yourself like this, mother.  You must see him, of
course.”

“No, my dear.  I’ll try not to.”

She mopped her streaming eyes.

“But you can’t spare the time to come with him, and if he should forget
himself and lose his way and somebody spoke to him sharply, his name and
address may slip his memory, and he’ll remain lost for days and days—”

The vision of a workhouse infirmary for poor Stevie—if only during
inquiries—wrung her heart.  For she was a proud woman.  Winnie’s stare
had grown hard, intent, inventive.

“I can’t bring him to you myself every week,” she cried.  “But don’t you
worry, mother.  I’ll see to it that he don’t get lost for long.”

They felt a peculiar bump; a vision of brick pillars lingered before the
rattling windows of the cab; a sudden cessation of atrocious jolting and
uproarious jingling dazed the two women.  What had happened?  They sat
motionless and scared in the profound stillness, till the door came open,
and a rough, strained whispering was heard:

“Here you are!”

A range of gabled little houses, each with one dim yellow window, on the
ground floor, surrounded the dark open space of a grass plot planted with
shrubs and railed off from the patchwork of lights and shadows in the
wide road, resounding with the dull rumble of traffic.  Before the door
of one of these tiny houses—one without a light in the little downstairs
window—the cab had come to a standstill.  Mrs Verloc’s mother got out
first, backwards, with a key in her hand.  Winnie lingered on the
flagstone path to pay the cabman.  Stevie, after helping to carry inside
a lot of small parcels, came out and stood under the light of a gas-lamp
belonging to the Charity.  The cabman looked at the pieces of silver,
which, appearing very minute in his big, grimy palm, symbolised the
insignificant results which reward the ambitious courage and toil of a
mankind whose day is short on this earth of evil.

He had been paid decently—four one-shilling pieces—and he contemplated
them in perfect stillness, as if they had been the surprising terms of a
melancholy problem.  The slow transfer of that treasure to an inner
pocket demanded much laborious groping in the depths of decayed clothing.
His form was squat and without flexibility.  Stevie, slender, his
shoulders a little up, and his hands thrust deep in the side pockets of
his warm overcoat, stood at the edge of the path, pouting.

The cabman, pausing in his deliberate movements, seemed struck by some
misty recollection.

“Oh!  ’Ere you are, young fellow,” he whispered.  “You’ll know him
again—won’t you?”

Stevie was staring at the horse, whose hind quarters appeared unduly
elevated by the effect of emaciation.  The little stiff tail seemed to
have been fitted in for a heartless joke; and at the other end the thin,
flat neck, like a plank covered with old horse-hide, drooped to the
ground under the weight of an enormous bony head.  The ears hung at
different angles, negligently; and the macabre figure of that mute
dweller on the earth steamed straight up from ribs and backbone in the
muggy stillness of the air.

The cabman struck lightly Stevie’s breast with the iron hook protruding
from a ragged, greasy sleeve.

“Look ’ere, young feller.  ’Ow’d _you_ like to sit behind this ’oss up to
two o’clock in the morning p’raps?”

Stevie looked vacantly into the fierce little eyes with red-edged lids.

“He ain’t lame,” pursued the other, whispering with energy.  “He ain’t
got no sore places on ’im.  ’Ere he is.  ’Ow would _you_ like—”

His strained, extinct voice invested his utterance with a character of
vehement secrecy.  Stevie’s vacant gaze was changing slowly into dread.

“You may well look!  Till three and four o’clock in the morning.  Cold
and ’ungry.  Looking for fares.  Drunks.”

His jovial purple cheeks bristled with white hairs; and like Virgil’s
Silenus, who, his face smeared with the juice of berries, discoursed of
Olympian Gods to the innocent shepherds of Sicily, he talked to Stevie of
domestic matters and the affairs of men whose sufferings are great and
immortality by no means assured.

“I am a night cabby, I am,” he whispered, with a sort of boastful
exasperation.  “I’ve got to take out what they will blooming well give me
at the yard.  I’ve got my missus and four kids at ’ome.”

The monstrous nature of that declaration of paternity seemed to strike
the world dumb.  A silence reigned during which the flanks of the old
horse, the steed of apocalyptic misery, smoked upwards in the light of
the charitable gas-lamp.

The cabman grunted, then added in his mysterious whisper:

“This ain’t an easy world.”  Stevie’s face had been twitching for some
time, and at last his feelings burst out in their usual concise form.

“Bad!  Bad!”

His gaze remained fixed on the ribs of the horse, self-conscious and
sombre, as though he were afraid to look about him at the badness of the
world.  And his slenderness, his rosy lips and pale, clear complexion,
gave him the aspect of a delicate boy, notwithstanding the fluffy growth
of golden hair on his cheeks.  He pouted in a scared way like a child.
The cabman, short and broad, eyed him with his fierce little eyes that
seemed to smart in a clear and corroding liquid.

“’Ard on ’osses, but dam’ sight ’arder on poor chaps like me,” he wheezed
just audibly.

“Poor!  Poor!” stammered out Stevie, pushing his hands deeper into his
pockets with convulsive sympathy.  He could say nothing; for the
tenderness to all pain and all misery, the desire to make the horse happy
and the cabman happy, had reached the point of a bizarre longing to take
them to bed with him.  And that, he knew, was impossible.  For Stevie was
not mad.  It was, as it were, a symbolic longing; and at the same time it
was very distinct, because springing from experience, the mother of
wisdom.  Thus when as a child he cowered in a dark corner scared,
wretched, sore, and miserable with the black, black misery of the soul,
his sister Winnie used to come along, and carry him off to bed with her,
as into a heaven of consoling peace.  Stevie, though apt to forget mere
facts, such as his name and address for instance, had a faithful memory
of sensations.  To be taken into a bed of compassion was the supreme
remedy, with the only one disadvantage of being difficult of application
on a large scale.  And looking at the cabman, Stevie perceived this
clearly, because he was reasonable.

The cabman went on with his leisurely preparations as if Stevie had not
existed.  He made as if to hoist himself on the box, but at the last
moment from some obscure motive, perhaps merely from disgust with
carriage exercise, desisted.  He approached instead the motionless
partner of his labours, and stooping to seize the bridle, lifted up the
big, weary head to the height of his shoulder with one effort of his
right arm, like a feat of strength.

“Come on,” he whispered secretly.

Limping, he led the cab away.  There was an air of austerity in this
departure, the scrunched gravel of the drive crying out under the slowly
turning wheels, the horse’s lean thighs moving with ascetic deliberation
away from the light into the obscurity of the open space bordered dimly
by the pointed roofs and the feebly shining windows of the little
alms-houses.  The plaint of the gravel travelled slowly all round the
drive.  Between the lamps of the charitable gateway the slow cortege
reappeared, lighted up for a moment, the short, thick man limping busily,
with the horse’s head held aloft in his fist, the lank animal walking in
stiff and forlorn dignity, the dark, low box on wheels rolling behind
comically with an air of waddling.  They turned to the left.  There was a
pub down the street, within fifty yards of the gate.

Stevie left alone beside the private lamp-post of the Charity, his hands
thrust deep into his pockets, glared with vacant sulkiness.  At the
bottom of his pockets his incapable weak hands were clinched hard into a
pair of angry fists.  In the face of anything which affected directly or
indirectly his morbid dread of pain, Stevie ended by turning vicious.  A
magnanimous indignation swelled his frail chest to bursting, and caused
his candid eyes to squint.  Supremely wise in knowing his own
powerlessness, Stevie was not wise enough to restrain his passions.  The
tenderness of his universal charity had two phases as indissolubly joined
and connected as the reverse and obverse sides of a medal.  The anguish
of immoderate compassion was succeeded by the pain of an innocent but
pitiless rage.  Those two states expressing themselves outwardly by the
same signs of futile bodily agitation, his sister Winnie soothed his
excitement without ever fathoming its twofold character.  Mrs Verloc
wasted no portion of this transient life in seeking for fundamental
information.  This is a sort of economy having all the appearances and
some of the advantages of prudence.  Obviously it may be good for one not
to know too much.  And such a view accords very well with constitutional
indolence.

On that evening on which it may be said that Mrs Verloc’s mother having
parted for good from her children had also departed this life, Winnie
Verloc did not investigate her brother’s psychology.  The poor boy was
excited, of course.  After once more assuring the old woman on the
threshold that she would know how to guard against the risk of Stevie
losing himself for very long on his pilgrimages of filial piety, she took
her brother’s arm to walk away.  Stevie did not even mutter to himself,
but with the special sense of sisterly devotion developed in her earliest
infancy, she felt that the boy was very much excited indeed.  Holding
tight to his arm, under the appearance of leaning on it, she thought of
some words suitable to the occasion.

“Now, Stevie, you must look well after me at the crossings, and get first
into the ’bus, like a good brother.”

This appeal to manly protection was received by Stevie with his usual
docility.  It flattered him.  He raised his head and threw out his chest.

“Don’t be nervous, Winnie.  Mustn’t be nervous!  ’Bus all right,” he
answered in a brusque, slurring stammer partaking of the timorousness of
a child and the resolution of a man.  He advanced fearlessly with the
woman on his arm, but his lower lip dropped.  Nevertheless, on the
pavement of the squalid and wide thoroughfare, whose poverty in all the
amenities of life stood foolishly exposed by a mad profusion of
gas-lights, their resemblance to each other was so pronounced as to
strike the casual passers-by.

Before the doors of the public-house at the corner, where the profusion
of gas-light reached the height of positive wickedness, a four-wheeled
cab standing by the curbstone with no one on the box, seemed cast out
into the gutter on account of irremediable decay.  Mrs Verloc recognised
the conveyance.  Its aspect was so profoundly lamentable, with such a
perfection of grotesque misery and weirdness of macabre detail, as if it
were the Cab of Death itself, that Mrs Verloc, with that ready compassion
of a woman for a horse (when she is not sitting behind him), exclaimed
vaguely:

“Poor brute!”

Hanging back suddenly, Stevie inflicted an arresting jerk upon his
sister.

“Poor!  Poor!” he ejaculated appreciatively.  “Cabman poor too.  He told
me himself.”

The contemplation of the infirm and lonely steed overcame him.  Jostled,
but obstinate, he would remain there, trying to express the view newly
opened to his sympathies of the human and equine misery in close
association.  But it was very difficult.  “Poor brute, poor people!” was
all he could repeat.  It did not seem forcible enough, and he came to a
stop with an angry splutter: “Shame!”  Stevie was no master of phrases,
and perhaps for that very reason his thoughts lacked clearness and
precision.  But he felt with greater completeness and some profundity.
That little word contained all his sense of indignation and horror at one
sort of wretchedness having to feed upon the anguish of the other—at the
poor cabman beating the poor horse in the name, as it were, of his poor
kids at home.  And Stevie knew what it was to be beaten.  He knew it from
experience.  It was a bad world.  Bad!  Bad!

Mrs Verloc, his only sister, guardian, and protector, could not pretend
to such depths of insight.  Moreover, she had not experienced the magic
of the cabman’s eloquence.  She was in the dark as to the inwardness of
the word “Shame.”  And she said placidly:

“Come along, Stevie.  You can’t help that.”

The docile Stevie went along; but now he went along without pride,
shamblingly, and muttering half words, and even words that would have
been whole if they had not been made up of halves that did not belong to
each other.  It was as though he had been trying to fit all the words he
could remember to his sentiments in order to get some sort of
corresponding idea.  And, as a matter of fact, he got it at last.  He
hung back to utter it at once.

“Bad world for poor people.”

Directly he had expressed that thought he became aware that it was
familiar to him already in all its consequences.  This circumstance
strengthened his conviction immensely, but also augmented his
indignation.  Somebody, he felt, ought to be punished for it—punished
with great severity.  Being no sceptic, but a moral creature, he was in a
manner at the mercy of his righteous passions.

“Beastly!” he added concisely.

It was clear to Mrs Verloc that he was greatly excited.

“Nobody can help that,” she said.  “Do come along.  Is that the way
you’re taking care of me?”

Stevie mended his pace obediently.  He prided himself on being a good
brother.  His morality, which was very complete, demanded that from him.
Yet he was pained at the information imparted by his sister Winnie who
was good.  Nobody could help that!  He came along gloomily, but presently
he brightened up.  Like the rest of mankind, perplexed by the mystery of
the universe, he had his moments of consoling trust in the organised
powers of the earth.

“Police,” he suggested confidently.

“The police aren’t for that,” observed Mrs Verloc cursorily, hurrying on
her way.

Stevie’s face lengthened considerably.  He was thinking.  The more
intense his thinking, the slacker was the droop of his lower jaw.

And it was with an aspect of hopeless vacancy that he gave up his
intellectual enterprise.

“Not for that?” he mumbled, resigned but surprised.  “Not for that?”  He
had formed for himself an ideal conception of the metropolitan police as
a sort of benevolent institution for the suppression of evil.  The notion
of benevolence especially was very closely associated with his sense of
the power of the men in blue.  He had liked all police constables
tenderly, with a guileless trustfulness.  And he was pained.  He was
irritated, too, by a suspicion of duplicity in the members of the force.
For Stevie was frank and as open as the day himself.  What did they mean
by pretending then?  Unlike his sister, who put her trust in face values,
he wished to go to the bottom of the matter.  He carried on his inquiry
by means of an angry challenge.

“What for are they then, Winn?  What are they for?  Tell me.”

Winnie disliked controversy.  But fearing most a fit of black depression
consequent on Stevie missing his mother very much at first, she did not
altogether decline the discussion.  Guiltless of all irony, she answered
yet in a form which was not perhaps unnatural in the wife of Mr Verloc,
Delegate of the Central Red Committee, personal friend of certain
anarchists, and a votary of social revolution.

“Don’t you know what the police are for, Stevie?  They are there so that
them as have nothing shouldn’t take anything away from them who have.”

She avoided using the verb “to steal,” because it always made her brother
uncomfortable.  For Stevie was delicately honest.  Certain simple
principles had been instilled into him so anxiously (on account of his
“queerness”) that the mere names of certain transgressions filled him
with horror.  He had been always easily impressed by speeches.  He was
impressed and startled now, and his intelligence was very alert.

“What?” he asked at once anxiously.  “Not even if they were hungry?
Mustn’t they?”

The two had paused in their walk.

“Not if they were ever so,” said Mrs Verloc, with the equanimity of a
person untroubled by the problem of the distribution of wealth, and
exploring the perspective of the roadway for an omnibus of the right
colour.  “Certainly not.  But what’s the use of talking about all that?
You aren’t ever hungry.”

She cast a swift glance at the boy, like a young man, by her side.  She
saw him amiable, attractive, affectionate, and only a little, a very
little, peculiar.  And she could not see him otherwise, for he was
connected with what there was of the salt of passion in her tasteless
life—the passion of indignation, of courage, of pity, and even of
self-sacrifice.  She did not add: “And you aren’t likely ever to be as
long as I live.”  But she might very well have done so, since she had
taken effectual steps to that end.  Mr Verloc was a very good husband.
It was her honest impression that nobody could help liking the boy.  She
cried out suddenly:

“Quick, Stevie.  Stop that green ’bus.”

And Stevie, tremulous and important with his sister Winnie on his arm,
flung up the other high above his head at the approaching ’bus, with
complete success.

An hour afterwards Mr Verloc raised his eyes from a newspaper he was
reading, or at any rate looking at, behind the counter, and in the
expiring clatter of the door-bell beheld Winnie, his wife, enter and
cross the shop on her way upstairs, followed by Stevie, his
brother-in-law.  The sight of his wife was agreeable to Mr Verloc.  It
was his idiosyncrasy.  The figure of his brother-in-law remained
imperceptible to him because of the morose thoughtfulness that lately had
fallen like a veil between Mr Verloc and the appearances of the world of
senses.  He looked after his wife fixedly, without a word, as though she
had been a phantom.  His voice for home use was husky and placid, but now
it was heard not at all.  It was not heard at supper, to which he was
called by his wife in the usual brief manner: “Adolf.”  He sat down to
consume it without conviction, wearing his hat pushed far back on his
head.  It was not devotion to an outdoor life, but the frequentation of
foreign cafés which was responsible for that habit, investing with a
character of unceremonious impermanency Mr Verloc’s steady fidelity to
his own fireside.  Twice at the clatter of the cracked bell he arose
without a word, disappeared into the shop, and came back silently.
During these absences Mrs Verloc, becoming acutely aware of the vacant
place at her right hand, missed her mother very much, and stared stonily;
while Stevie, from the same reason, kept on shuffling his feet, as though
the floor under the table were uncomfortably hot.  When Mr Verloc
returned to sit in his place, like the very embodiment of silence, the
character of Mrs Verloc’s stare underwent a subtle change, and Stevie
ceased to fidget with his feet, because of his great and awed regard for
his sister’s husband.  He directed at him glances of respectful
compassion.  Mr Verloc was sorry.  His sister Winnie had impressed upon
him (in the omnibus) that Mr Verloc would be found at home in a state of
sorrow, and must not be worried.  His father’s anger, the irritability of
gentlemen lodgers, and Mr Verloc’s predisposition to immoderate grief,
had been the main sanctions of Stevie’s self-restraint.  Of these
sentiments, all easily provoked, but not always easy to understand, the
last had the greatest moral efficiency—because Mr Verloc was _good_.  His
mother and his sister had established that ethical fact on an unshakable
foundation.  They had established, erected, consecrated it behind Mr
Verloc’s back, for reasons that had nothing to do with abstract morality.
And Mr Verloc was not aware of it.  It is but bare justice to him to say
that he had no notion of appearing good to Stevie.  Yet so it was.  He
was even the only man so qualified in Stevie’s knowledge, because the
gentlemen lodgers had been too transient and too remote to have anything
very distinct about them but perhaps their boots; and as regards the
disciplinary measures of his father, the desolation of his mother and
sister shrank from setting up a theory of goodness before the victim.  It
would have been too cruel.  And it was even possible that Stevie would
not have believed them.  As far as Mr Verloc was concerned, nothing could
stand in the way of Stevie’s belief.  Mr Verloc was obviously yet
mysteriously _good_.  And the grief of a good man is august.

Stevie gave glances of reverential compassion to his brother-in-law.  Mr
Verloc was sorry.  The brother of Winnie had never before felt himself in
such close communion with the mystery of that man’s goodness.  It was an
understandable sorrow.  And Stevie himself was sorry.  He was very sorry.
The same sort of sorrow.  And his attention being drawn to this
unpleasant state, Stevie shuffled his feet.  His feelings were habitually
manifested by the agitation of his limbs.

“Keep your feet quiet, dear,” said Mrs Verloc, with authority and
tenderness; then turning towards her husband in an indifferent voice, the
masterly achievement of instinctive tact: “Are you going out to-night?”
she asked.

The mere suggestion seemed repugnant to Mr Verloc.  He shook his head
moodily, and then sat still with downcast eyes, looking at the piece of
cheese on his plate for a whole minute.  At the end of that time he got
up, and went out—went right out in the clatter of the shop-door bell.  He
acted thus inconsistently, not from any desire to make himself
unpleasant, but because of an unconquerable restlessness.  It was no
earthly good going out.  He could not find anywhere in London what he
wanted.  But he went out.  He led a cortege of dismal thoughts along dark
streets, through lighted streets, in and out of two flash bars, as if in
a half-hearted attempt to make a night of it, and finally back again to
his menaced home, where he sat down fatigued behind the counter, and they
crowded urgently round him, like a pack of hungry black hounds.  After
locking up the house and putting out the gas he took them upstairs with
him—a dreadful escort for a man going to bed.  His wife had preceded him
some time before, and with her ample form defined vaguely under the
counterpane, her head on the pillow, and a hand under the cheek offered
to his distraction the view of early drowsiness arguing the possession of
an equable soul.  Her big eyes stared wide open, inert and dark against
the snowy whiteness of the linen.  She did not move.

She had an equable soul.  She felt profoundly that things do not stand
much looking into.  She made her force and her wisdom of that instinct.
But the taciturnity of Mr Verloc had been lying heavily upon her for a
good many days.  It was, as a matter of fact, affecting her nerves.
Recumbent and motionless, she said placidly:

“You’ll catch cold walking about in your socks like this.”

This speech, becoming the solicitude of the wife and the prudence of the
woman, took Mr Verloc unawares.  He had left his boots downstairs, but he
had forgotten to put on his slippers, and he had been turning about the
bedroom on noiseless pads like a bear in a cage.  At the sound of his
wife’s voice he stopped and stared at her with a somnambulistic,
expressionless gaze so long that Mrs Verloc moved her limbs slightly
under the bed-clothes.  But she did not move her black head sunk in the
white pillow one hand under her cheek and the big, dark, unwinking eyes.

Under her husband’s expressionless stare, and remembering her mother’s
empty room across the landing, she felt an acute pang of loneliness.  She
had never been parted from her mother before.  They had stood by each
other.  She felt that they had, and she said to herself that now mother
was gone—gone for good.  Mrs Verloc had no illusions.  Stevie remained,
however.  And she said:

“Mother’s done what she wanted to do.  There’s no sense in it that I can
see.  I’m sure she couldn’t have thought you had enough of her.  It’s
perfectly wicked, leaving us like that.”

Mr Verloc was not a well-read person; his range of allusive phrases was
limited, but there was a peculiar aptness in circumstances which made him
think of rats leaving a doomed ship.  He very nearly said so.  He had
grown suspicious and embittered.  Could it be that the old woman had such
an excellent nose?  But the unreasonableness of such a suspicion was
patent, and Mr Verloc held his tongue.  Not altogether, however.  He
muttered heavily:

“Perhaps it’s just as well.”

He began to undress.  Mrs Verloc kept very still, perfectly still, with
her eyes fixed in a dreamy, quiet stare.  And her heart for the fraction
of a second seemed to stand still too.  That night she was “not quite
herself,” as the saying is, and it was borne upon her with some force
that a simple sentence may hold several diverse meanings—mostly
disagreeable.  How was it just as well?  And why?  But she did not allow
herself to fall into the idleness of barren speculation.  She was rather
confirmed in her belief that things did not stand being looked into.
Practical and subtle in her way, she brought Stevie to the front without
loss of time, because in her the singleness of purpose had the unerring
nature and the force of an instinct.

“What I am going to do to cheer up that boy for the first few days I’m
sure I don’t know.  He’ll be worrying himself from morning till night
before he gets used to mother being away.  And he’s such a good boy.  I
couldn’t do without him.”

Mr Verloc went on divesting himself of his clothing with the unnoticing
inward concentration of a man undressing in the solitude of a vast and
hopeless desert.  For thus inhospitably did this fair earth, our common
inheritance, present itself to the mental vision of Mr Verloc.  All was
so still without and within that the lonely ticking of the clock on the
landing stole into the room as if for the sake of company.

Mr Verloc, getting into bed on his own side, remained prone and mute
behind Mrs Verloc’s back.  His thick arms rested abandoned on the outside
of the counterpane like dropped weapons, like discarded tools.  At that
moment he was within a hair’s breadth of making a clean breast of it all
to his wife.  The moment seemed propitious.  Looking out of the corners
of his eyes, he saw her ample shoulders draped in white, the back of her
head, with the hair done for the night in three plaits tied up with black
tapes at the ends.  And he forbore.  Mr Verloc loved his wife as a wife
should be loved—that is, maritally, with the regard one has for one’s
chief possession.  This head arranged for the night, those ample
shoulders, had an aspect of familiar sacredness—the sacredness of
domestic peace.  She moved not, massive and shapeless like a recumbent
statue in the rough; he remembered her wide-open eyes looking into the
empty room.  She was mysterious, with the mysteriousness of living
beings.  The far-famed secret agent [delta] of the late Baron
Stott-Wartenheim’s alarmist despatches was not the man to break into such
mysteries.  He was easily intimidated.  And he was also indolent, with
the indolence which is so often the secret of good nature.  He forbore
touching that mystery out of love, timidity, and indolence.  There would
be always time enough.  For several minutes he bore his sufferings
silently in the drowsy silence of the room.  And then he disturbed it by
a resolute declaration.

“I am going on the Continent to-morrow.”

His wife might have fallen asleep already.  He could not tell.  As a
matter of fact, Mrs Verloc had heard him.  Her eyes remained very wide
open, and she lay very still, confirmed in her instinctive conviction
that things don’t bear looking into very much.  And yet it was nothing
very unusual for Mr Verloc to take such a trip.  He renewed his stock
from Paris and Brussels.  Often he went over to make his purchases
personally.  A little select connection of amateurs was forming around
the shop in Brett Street, a secret connection eminently proper for any
business undertaken by Mr Verloc, who, by a mystic accord of temperament
and necessity, had been set apart to be a secret agent all his life.

He waited for a while, then added: “I’ll be away a week or perhaps a
fortnight.  Get Mrs Neale to come for the day.”

Mrs Neale was the charwoman of Brett Street.  Victim of her marriage with
a debauched joiner, she was oppressed by the needs of many infant
children.  Red-armed, and aproned in coarse sacking up to the arm-pits,
she exhaled the anguish of the poor in a breath of soap-suds and rum, in
the uproar of scrubbing, in the clatter of tin pails.

Mrs Verloc, full of deep purpose, spoke in the tone of the shallowest
indifference.

“There is no need to have the woman here all day.  I shall do very well
with Stevie.”

She let the lonely clock on the landing count off fifteen ticks into the
abyss of eternity, and asked:

“Shall I put the light out?”

Mr Verloc snapped at his wife huskily.

“Put it out.”




CHAPTER IX


Mr Verloc returning from the Continent at the end of ten days, brought
back a mind evidently unrefreshed by the wonders of foreign travel and a
countenance unlighted by the joys of home-coming.  He entered in the
clatter of the shop bell with an air of sombre and vexed exhaustion.  His
bag in hand, his head lowered, he strode straight behind the counter, and
let himself fall into the chair, as though he had tramped all the way
from Dover.  It was early morning.  Stevie, dusting various objects
displayed in the front windows, turned to gape at him with reverence and
awe.

“Here!” said Mr Verloc, giving a slight kick to the gladstone bag on the
floor; and Stevie flung himself upon it, seized it, bore it off with
triumphant devotion.  He was so prompt that Mr Verloc was distinctly
surprised.

Already at the clatter of the shop bell Mrs Neale, blackleading the
parlour grate, had looked through the door, and rising from her knees had
gone, aproned, and grimy with everlasting toil, to tell Mrs Verloc in the
kitchen that “there was the master come back.”

Winnie came no farther than the inner shop door.

“You’ll want some breakfast,” she said from a distance.

Mr Verloc moved his hands slightly, as if overcome by an impossible
suggestion.  But once enticed into the parlour he did not reject the food
set before him.  He ate as if in a public place, his hat pushed off his
forehead, the skirts of his heavy overcoat hanging in a triangle on each
side of the chair.  And across the length of the table covered with brown
oil-cloth Winnie, his wife, talked evenly at him the wifely talk, as
artfully adapted, no doubt, to the circumstances of this return as the
talk of Penelope to the return of the wandering Odysseus.  Mrs Verloc,
however, had done no weaving during her husband’s absence.  But she had
had all the upstairs room cleaned thoroughly, had sold some wares, had
seen Mr Michaelis several times.  He had told her the last time that he
was going away to live in a cottage in the country, somewhere on the
London, Chatham, and Dover line.  Karl Yundt had come too, once, led
under the arm by that “wicked old housekeeper of his.”  He was “a
disgusting old man.”  Of Comrade Ossipon, whom she had received curtly,
entrenched behind the counter with a stony face and a faraway gaze, she
said nothing, her mental reference to the robust anarchist being marked
by a short pause, with the faintest possible blush.  And bringing in her
brother Stevie as soon as she could into the current of domestic events,
she mentioned that the boy had moped a good deal.

“It’s all along of mother leaving us like this.”

Mr Verloc neither said, “Damn!” nor yet “Stevie be hanged!”  And Mrs
Verloc, not let into the secret of his thoughts, failed to appreciate the
generosity of this restraint.

“It isn’t that he doesn’t work as well as ever,” she continued.  “He’s
been making himself very useful.  You’d think he couldn’t do enough for
us.”

Mr Verloc directed a casual and somnolent glance at Stevie, who sat on
his right, delicate, pale-faced, his rosy mouth open vacantly.  It was
not a critical glance.  It had no intention.  And if Mr Verloc thought
for a moment that his wife’s brother looked uncommonly useless, it was
only a dull and fleeting thought, devoid of that force and durability
which enables sometimes a thought to move the world.  Leaning back, Mr
Verloc uncovered his head.  Before his extended arm could put down the
hat Stevie pounced upon it, and bore it off reverently into the kitchen.
And again Mr Verloc was surprised.

“You could do anything with that boy, Adolf,” Mrs Verloc said, with her
best air of inflexible calmness.  “He would go through fire for you.
He—”

She paused attentive, her ear turned towards the door of the kitchen.

There Mrs Neale was scrubbing the floor.  At Stevie’s appearance she
groaned lamentably, having observed that he could be induced easily to
bestow for the benefit of her infant children the shilling his sister
Winnie presented him with from time to time.  On all fours amongst the
puddles, wet and begrimed, like a sort of amphibious and domestic animal
living in ash-bins and dirty water, she uttered the usual exordium: “It’s
all very well for you, kept doing nothing like a gentleman.”  And she
followed it with the everlasting plaint of the poor, pathetically
mendacious, miserably authenticated by the horrible breath of cheap rum
and soap-suds.  She scrubbed hard, snuffling all the time, and talking
volubly.  And she was sincere.  And on each side of her thin red nose her
bleared, misty eyes swam in tears, because she felt really the want of
some sort of stimulant in the morning.

In the parlour Mrs Verloc observed, with knowledge:

“There’s Mrs Neale at it again with her harrowing tales about her little
children.  They can’t be all so little as she makes them out.  Some of
them must be big enough by now to try to do something for themselves.  It
only makes Stevie angry.”

These words were confirmed by a thud as of a fist striking the kitchen
table.  In the normal evolution of his sympathy Stevie had become angry
on discovering that he had no shilling in his pocket.  In his inability
to relieve at once Mrs Neale’s “little ’uns’” privations, he felt that
somebody should be made to suffer for it.  Mrs Verloc rose, and went into
the kitchen to “stop that nonsense.”  And she did it firmly but gently.
She was well aware that directly Mrs Neale received her money she went
round the corner to drink ardent spirits in a mean and musty
public-house—the unavoidable station on the _via dolorosa_ of her life.
Mrs Verloc’s comment upon this practice had an unexpected profundity, as
coming from a person disinclined to look under the surface of things.
“Of course, what is she to do to keep up?  If I were like Mrs Neale I
expect I wouldn’t act any different.”

In the afternoon of the same day, as Mr Verloc, coming with a start out
of the last of a long series of dozes before the parlour fire, declared
his intention of going out for a walk, Winnie said from the shop:

“I wish you would take that boy out with you, Adolf.”

For the third time that day Mr Verloc was surprised.  He stared stupidly
at his wife.  She continued in her steady manner.  The boy, whenever he
was not doing anything, moped in the house.  It made her uneasy; it made
her nervous, she confessed.  And that from the calm Winnie sounded like
exaggeration.  But, in truth, Stevie moped in the striking fashion of an
unhappy domestic animal.  He would go up on the dark landing, to sit on
the floor at the foot of the tall clock, with his knees drawn up and his
head in his hands.  To come upon his pallid face, with its big eyes
gleaming in the dusk, was discomposing; to think of him up there was
uncomfortable.

Mr Verloc got used to the startling novelty of the idea.  He was fond of
his wife as a man should be—that is, generously.  But a weighty objection
presented itself to his mind, and he formulated it.

“He’ll lose sight of me perhaps, and get lost in the street,” he said.

Mrs Verloc shook her head competently.

“He won’t.  You don’t know him.  That boy just worships you.  But if you
should miss him—”

Mrs Verloc paused for a moment, but only for a moment.

“You just go on, and have your walk out.  Don’t worry.  He’ll be all
right.  He’s sure to turn up safe here before very long.”

This optimism procured for Mr Verloc his fourth surprise of the day.

“Is he?” he grunted doubtfully.  But perhaps his brother-in-law was not
such an idiot as he looked.  His wife would know best.  He turned away
his heavy eyes, saying huskily: “Well, let him come along, then,” and
relapsed into the clutches of black care, that perhaps prefers to sit
behind a horseman, but knows also how to tread close on the heels of
people not sufficiently well off to keep horses—like Mr Verloc, for
instance.

Winnie, at the shop door, did not see this fatal attendant upon Mr
Verloc’s walks.  She watched the two figures down the squalid street, one
tall and burly, the other slight and short, with a thin neck, and the
peaked shoulders raised slightly under the large semi-transparent ears.
The material of their overcoats was the same, their hats were black and
round in shape.  Inspired by the similarity of wearing apparel, Mrs
Verloc gave rein to her fancy.

“Might be father and son,” she said to herself.  She thought also that Mr
Verloc was as much of a father as poor Stevie ever had in his life.  She
was aware also that it was her work.  And with peaceful pride she
congratulated herself on a certain resolution she had taken a few years
before.  It had cost her some effort, and even a few tears.

She congratulated herself still more on observing in the course of days
that Mr Verloc seemed to be taking kindly to Stevie’s companionship.
Now, when ready to go out for his walk, Mr Verloc called aloud to the
boy, in the spirit, no doubt, in which a man invites the attendance of
the household dog, though, of course, in a different manner.  In the
house Mr Verloc could be detected staring curiously at Stevie a good
deal.  His own demeanour had changed.  Taciturn still, he was not so
listless.  Mrs Verloc thought that he was rather jumpy at times.  It
might have been regarded as an improvement.  As to Stevie, he moped no
longer at the foot of the clock, but muttered to himself in corners
instead in a threatening tone.  When asked “What is it you’re saying,
Stevie?” he merely opened his mouth, and squinted at his sister.  At odd
times he clenched his fists without apparent cause, and when discovered
in solitude would be scowling at the wall, with the sheet of paper and
the pencil given him for drawing circles lying blank and idle on the
kitchen table.  This was a change, but it was no improvement.  Mrs Verloc
including all these vagaries under the general definition of excitement,
began to fear that Stevie was hearing more than was good for him of her
husband’s conversations with his friends.  During his “walks” Mr Verloc,
of course, met and conversed with various persons.  It could hardly be
otherwise.  His walks were an integral part of his outdoor activities,
which his wife had never looked deeply into.  Mrs Verloc felt that the
position was delicate, but she faced it with the same impenetrable
calmness which impressed and even astonished the customers of the shop
and made the other visitors keep their distance a little wonderingly.
No!  She feared that there were things not good for Stevie to hear of,
she told her husband.  It only excited the poor boy, because he could not
help them being so.  Nobody could.

It was in the shop.  Mr Verloc made no comment.  He made no retort, and
yet the retort was obvious.  But he refrained from pointing out to his
wife that the idea of making Stevie the companion of his walks was her
own, and nobody else’s.  At that moment, to an impartial observer, Mr
Verloc would have appeared more than human in his magnanimity.  He took
down a small cardboard box from a shelf, peeped in to see that the
contents were all right, and put it down gently on the counter.  Not till
that was done did he break the silence, to the effect that most likely
Stevie would profit greatly by being sent out of town for a while; only
he supposed his wife could not get on without him.

“Could not get on without him!” repeated Mrs Verloc slowly.  “I couldn’t
get on without him if it were for his good!  The idea!  Of course, I can
get on without him.  But there’s nowhere for him to go.”

Mr Verloc got out some brown paper and a ball of string; and meanwhile he
muttered that Michaelis was living in a little cottage in the country.
Michaelis wouldn’t mind giving Stevie a room to sleep in.  There were no
visitors and no talk there.  Michaelis was writing a book.

Mrs Verloc declared her affection for Michaelis; mentioned her abhorrence
of Karl Yundt, “nasty old man”; and of Ossipon she said nothing.  As to
Stevie, he could be no other than very pleased.  Mr Michaelis was always
so nice and kind to him.  He seemed to like the boy.  Well, the boy was a
good boy.

“You too seem to have grown quite fond of him of late,” she added, after
a pause, with her inflexible assurance.

Mr Verloc tying up the cardboard box into a parcel for the post, broke
the string by an injudicious jerk, and muttered several swear words
confidentially to himself.  Then raising his tone to the usual husky
mutter, he announced his willingness to take Stevie into the country
himself, and leave him all safe with Michaelis.

He carried out this scheme on the very next day.  Stevie offered no
objection.  He seemed rather eager, in a bewildered sort of way.  He
turned his candid gaze inquisitively to Mr Verloc’s heavy countenance at
frequent intervals, especially when his sister was not looking at him.
His expression was proud, apprehensive, and concentrated, like that of a
small child entrusted for the first time with a box of matches and the
permission to strike a light.  But Mrs Verloc, gratified by her brother’s
docility, recommended him not to dirty his clothes unduly in the country.
At this Stevie gave his sister, guardian and protector a look, which for
the first time in his life seemed to lack the quality of perfect
childlike trustfulness.  It was haughtily gloomy.  Mrs Verloc smiled.

“Goodness me!  You needn’t be offended.  You know you do get yourself
very untidy when you get a chance, Stevie.”

Mr Verloc was already gone some way down the street.

Thus in consequence of her mother’s heroic proceedings, and of her
brother’s absence on this villegiature, Mrs Verloc found herself oftener
than usual all alone not only in the shop, but in the house.  For Mr
Verloc had to take his walks.  She was alone longer than usual on the day
of the attempted bomb outrage in Greenwich Park, because Mr Verloc went
out very early that morning and did not come back till nearly dusk.  She
did not mind being alone.  She had no desire to go out.  The weather was
too bad, and the shop was cosier than the streets.  Sitting behind the
counter with some sewing, she did not raise her eyes from her work when
Mr Verloc entered in the aggressive clatter of the bell.  She had
recognised his step on the pavement outside.

She did not raise her eyes, but as Mr Verloc, silent, and with his hat
rammed down upon his forehead, made straight for the parlour door, she
said serenely:

“What a wretched day.  You’ve been perhaps to see Stevie?”

“No!  I haven’t,” said Mr Verloc softly, and slammed the glazed parlour
door behind him with unexpected energy.

For some time Mrs Verloc remained quiescent, with her work dropped in her
lap, before she put it away under the counter and got up to light the
gas.  This done, she went into the parlour on her way to the kitchen.  Mr
Verloc would want his tea presently.  Confident of the power of her
charms, Winnie did not expect from her husband in the daily intercourse
of their married life a ceremonious amenity of address and courtliness of
manner; vain and antiquated forms at best, probably never very exactly
observed, discarded nowadays even in the highest spheres, and always
foreign to the standards of her class.  She did not look for courtesies
from him.  But he was a good husband, and she had a loyal respect for his
rights.

Mrs Verloc would have gone through the parlour and on to her domestic
duties in the kitchen with the perfect serenity of a woman sure of the
power of her charms.  But a slight, very slight, and rapid rattling sound
grew upon her hearing.  Bizarre and incomprehensible, it arrested Mrs
Verloc’s attention.  Then as its character became plain to the ear she
stopped short, amazed and concerned.  Striking a match on the box she
held in her hand, she turned on and lighted, above the parlour table, one
of the two gas-burners, which, being defective, first whistled as if
astonished, and then went on purring comfortably like a cat.

Mr Verloc, against his usual practice, had thrown off his overcoat.  It
was lying on the sofa.  His hat, which he must also have thrown off,
rested overturned under the edge of the sofa.  He had dragged a chair in
front of the fireplace, and his feet planted inside the fender, his head
held between his hands, he was hanging low over the glowing grate.  His
teeth rattled with an ungovernable violence, causing his whole enormous
back to tremble at the same rate.  Mrs Verloc was startled.

“You’ve been getting wet,” she said.

“Not very,” Mr Verloc managed to falter out, in a profound shudder.  By a
great effort he suppressed the rattling of his teeth.

“I’ll have you laid up on my hands,” she said, with genuine uneasiness.

“I don’t think so,” remarked Mr Verloc, snuffling huskily.

He had certainly contrived somehow to catch an abominable cold between
seven in the morning and five in the afternoon.  Mrs Verloc looked at his
bowed back.

“Where have you been to-day?” she asked.

“Nowhere,” answered Mr Verloc in a low, choked nasal tone.  His attitude
suggested aggrieved sulks or a severe headache.  The unsufficiency and
uncandidness of his answer became painfully apparent in the dead silence
of the room.  He snuffled apologetically, and added: “I’ve been to the
bank.”

Mrs Verloc became attentive.

“You have!” she said dispassionately.  “What for?”

Mr Verloc mumbled, with his nose over the grate, and with marked
unwillingness.

“Draw the money out!”

“What do you mean?  All of it?”

“Yes.  All of it.”

Mrs Verloc spread out with care the scanty table-cloth, got two knives
and two forks out of the table drawer, and suddenly stopped in her
methodical proceedings.

“What did you do that for?”

“May want it soon,” snuffled vaguely Mr Verloc, who was coming to the end
of his calculated indiscretions.

“I don’t know what you mean,” remarked his wife in a tone perfectly
casual, but standing stock still between the table and the cupboard.

“You know you can trust me,” Mr Verloc remarked to the grate, with hoarse
feeling.

Mrs Verloc turned slowly towards the cupboard, saying with deliberation:

“Oh yes.  I can trust you.”

And she went on with her methodical proceedings.  She laid two plates,
got the bread, the butter, going to and fro quietly between the table and
the cupboard in the peace and silence of her home.  On the point of
taking out the jam, she reflected practically: “He will be feeling
hungry, having been away all day,” and she returned to the cupboard once
more to get the cold beef.  She set it under the purring gas-jet, and
with a passing glance at her motionless husband hugging the fire, she
went (down two steps) into the kitchen.  It was only when coming back,
carving knife and fork in hand, that she spoke again.

“If I hadn’t trusted you I wouldn’t have married you.”

Bowed under the overmantel, Mr Verloc, holding his head in both hands,
seemed to have gone to sleep.  Winnie made the tea, and called out in an
undertone:

“Adolf.”

Mr Verloc got up at once, and staggered a little before he sat down at
the table.  His wife examining the sharp edge of the carving knife,
placed it on the dish, and called his attention to the cold beef.  He
remained insensible to the suggestion, with his chin on his breast.

“You should feed your cold,” Mrs Verloc said dogmatically.

He looked up, and shook his head.  His eyes were bloodshot and his face
red.  His fingers had ruffled his hair into a dissipated untidiness.
Altogether he had a disreputable aspect, expressive of the discomfort,
the irritation and the gloom following a heavy debauch.  But Mr Verloc
was not a debauched man.  In his conduct he was respectable.  His
appearance might have been the effect of a feverish cold.  He drank three
cups of tea, but abstained from food entirely.  He recoiled from it with
sombre aversion when urged by Mrs Verloc, who said at last:

“Aren’t your feet wet?  You had better put on your slippers.  You aren’t
going out any more this evening.”

Mr Verloc intimated by morose grunts and signs that his feet were not
wet, and that anyhow he did not care.  The proposal as to slippers was
disregarded as beneath his notice.  But the question of going out in the
evening received an unexpected development.  It was not of going out in
the evening that Mr Verloc was thinking.  His thoughts embraced a vaster
scheme.  From moody and incomplete phrases it became apparent that Mr
Verloc had been considering the expediency of emigrating.  It was not
very clear whether he had in his mind France or California.

The utter unexpectedness, improbability, and inconceivableness of such an
event robbed this vague declaration of all its effect.  Mrs Verloc, as
placidly as if her husband had been threatening her with the end of the
world, said:

“The idea!”

Mr Verloc declared himself sick and tired of everything, and besides—She
interrupted him.

“You’ve a bad cold.”

It was indeed obvious that Mr Verloc was not in his usual state,
physically and even mentally.  A sombre irresolution held him silent for
a while.  Then he murmured a few ominous generalities on the theme of
necessity.

“Will have to,” repeated Winnie, sitting calmly back, with folded arms,
opposite her husband.  “I should like to know who’s to make you.  You
ain’t a slave.  No one need be a slave in this country—and don’t you make
yourself one.”  She paused, and with invincible and steady candour.  “The
business isn’t so bad,” she went on.  “You’ve a comfortable home.”

She glanced all round the parlour, from the corner cupboard to the good
fire in the grate.  Ensconced cosily behind the shop of doubtful wares,
with the mysteriously dim window, and its door suspiciously ajar in the
obscure and narrow street, it was in all essentials of domestic propriety
and domestic comfort a respectable home.  Her devoted affection missed
out of it her brother Stevie, now enjoying a damp villegiature in the
Kentish lanes under the care of Mr Michaelis.  She missed him poignantly,
with all the force of her protecting passion.  This was the boy’s home
too—the roof, the cupboard, the stoked grate.  On this thought Mrs Verloc
rose, and walking to the other end of the table, said in the fulness of
her heart:

“And you are not tired of me.”

Mr Verloc made no sound.  Winnie leaned on his shoulder from behind, and
pressed her lips to his forehead.  Thus she lingered.  Not a whisper
reached them from the outside world.

The sound of footsteps on the pavement died out in the discreet dimness
of the shop.  Only the gas-jet above the table went on purring equably in
the brooding silence of the parlour.

During the contact of that unexpected and lingering kiss Mr Verloc,
gripping with both hands the edges of his chair, preserved a hieratic
immobility.  When the pressure was removed he let go the chair, rose, and
went to stand before the fireplace.  He turned no longer his back to the
room.  With his features swollen and an air of being drugged, he followed
his wife’s movements with his eyes.

Mrs Verloc went about serenely, clearing up the table.  Her tranquil
voice commented the idea thrown out in a reasonable and domestic tone.
It wouldn’t stand examination.  She condemned it from every point of
view.  But her only real concern was Stevie’s welfare.  He appeared to
her thought in that connection as sufficiently “peculiar” not to be taken
rashly abroad.  And that was all.  But talking round that vital point,
she approached absolute vehemence in her delivery.  Meanwhile, with
brusque movements, she arrayed herself in an apron for the washing up of
cups.  And as if excited by the sound of her uncontradicted voice, she
went so far as to say in a tone almost tart:

“If you go abroad you’ll have to go without me.”

“You know I wouldn’t,” said Mr Verloc huskily, and the unresonant voice
of his private life trembled with an enigmatical emotion.

Already Mrs Verloc was regretting her words.  They had sounded more
unkind than she meant them to be.  They had also the unwisdom of
unnecessary things.  In fact, she had not meant them at all.  It was a
sort of phrase that is suggested by the demon of perverse inspiration.
But she knew a way to make it as if it had not been.

She turned her head over her shoulder and gave that man planted heavily
in front of the fireplace a glance, half arch, half cruel, out of her
large eyes—a glance of which the Winnie of the Belgravian mansion days
would have been incapable, because of her respectability and her
ignorance.  But the man was her husband now, and she was no longer
ignorant.  She kept it on him for a whole second, with her grave face
motionless like a mask, while she said playfully:

“You couldn’t.  You would miss me too much.”

Mr Verloc started forward.

“Exactly,” he said in a louder tone, throwing his arms out and making a
step towards her.  Something wild and doubtful in his expression made it
appear uncertain whether he meant to strangle or to embrace his wife.
But Mrs Verloc’s attention was called away from that manifestation by the
clatter of the shop bell.

“Shop, Adolf.  You go.”

He stopped, his arms came down slowly.

“You go,” repeated Mrs Verloc.  “I’ve got my apron on.”

Mr Verloc obeyed woodenly, stony-eyed, and like an automaton whose face
had been painted red.  And this resemblance to a mechanical figure went
so far that he had an automaton’s absurd air of being aware of the
machinery inside of him.

He closed the parlour door, and Mrs Verloc moving briskly, carried the
tray into the kitchen.  She washed the cups and some other things before
she stopped in her work to listen.  No sound reached her.  The customer
was a long time in the shop.  It was a customer, because if he had not
been Mr Verloc would have taken him inside.  Undoing the strings of her
apron with a jerk, she threw it on a chair, and walked back to the
parlour slowly.

At that precise moment Mr Verloc entered from the shop.

He had gone in red.  He came out a strange papery white.  His face,
losing its drugged, feverish stupor, had in that short time acquired a
bewildered and harassed expression.  He walked straight to the sofa, and
stood looking down at his overcoat lying there, as though he were afraid
to touch it.

“What’s the matter?” asked Mrs Verloc in a subdued voice.  Through the
door left ajar she could see that the customer was not gone yet.

“I find I’ll have to go out this evening,” said Mr Verloc.  He did not
attempt to pick up his outer garment.

Without a word Winnie made for the shop, and shutting the door after her,
walked in behind the counter.  She did not look overtly at the customer
till she had established herself comfortably on the chair.  But by that
time she had noted that he was tall and thin, and wore his moustaches
twisted up.  In fact, he gave the sharp points a twist just then.  His
long, bony face rose out of a turned-up collar.  He was a little
splashed, a little wet.  A dark man, with the ridge of the cheek-bone
well defined under the slightly hollow temple.  A complete stranger.  Not
a customer either.

Mrs Verloc looked at him placidly.

“You came over from the Continent?” she said after a time.

The long, thin stranger, without exactly looking at Mrs Verloc, answered
only by a faint and peculiar smile.

Mrs Verloc’s steady, incurious gaze rested on him.

“You understand English, don’t you?”

“Oh yes.  I understand English.”

There was nothing foreign in his accent, except that he seemed in his
slow enunciation to be taking pains with it.  And Mrs Verloc, in her
varied experience, had come to the conclusion that some foreigners could
speak better English than the natives.  She said, looking at the door of
the parlour fixedly:

“You don’t think perhaps of staying in England for good?”

The stranger gave her again a silent smile.  He had a kindly mouth and
probing eyes.  And he shook his head a little sadly, it seemed.

“My husband will see you through all right.  Meantime for a few days you
couldn’t do better than take lodgings with Mr Giugliani.  Continental
Hotel it’s called.  Private.  It’s quiet.  My husband will take you
there.”

“A good idea,” said the thin, dark man, whose glance had hardened
suddenly.

“You knew Mr Verloc before—didn’t you?  Perhaps in France?”

“I have heard of him,” admitted the visitor in his slow, painstaking
tone, which yet had a certain curtness of intention.

There was a pause.  Then he spoke again, in a far less elaborate manner.

“Your husband has not gone out to wait for me in the street by chance?”

“In the street!” repeated Mrs Verloc, surprised.  “He couldn’t.  There’s
no other door to the house.”

For a moment she sat impassive, then left her seat to go and peep through
the glazed door.  Suddenly she opened it, and disappeared into the
parlour.

Mr Verloc had done no more than put on his overcoat.  But why he should
remain afterwards leaning over the table propped up on his two arms as
though he were feeling giddy or sick, she could not understand.  “Adolf,”
she called out half aloud; and when he had raised himself:

“Do you know that man?” she asked rapidly.

“I’ve heard of him,” whispered uneasily Mr Verloc, darting a wild glance
at the door.

Mrs Verloc’s fine, incurious eyes lighted up with a flash of abhorrence.

“One of Karl Yundt’s friends—beastly old man.”

“No!  No!” protested Mr Verloc, busy fishing for his hat.  But when he
got it from under the sofa he held it as if he did not know the use of a
hat.

“Well—he’s waiting for you,” said Mrs Verloc at last.  “I say, Adolf, he
ain’t one of them Embassy people you have been bothered with of late?”

“Bothered with Embassy people,” repeated Mr Verloc, with a heavy start of
surprise and fear.  “Who’s been talking to you of the Embassy people?”

“Yourself.”

“I!  I!  Talked of the Embassy to you!”

Mr Verloc seemed scared and bewildered beyond measure.  His wife
explained:

“You’ve been talking a little in your sleep of late, Adolf.”

“What—what did I say?  What do you know?”

“Nothing much.  It seemed mostly nonsense.  Enough to let me guess that
something worried you.”

Mr Verloc rammed his hat on his head.  A crimson flood of anger ran over
his face.

“Nonsense—eh?  The Embassy people!  I would cut their hearts out one
after another.  But let them look out.  I’ve got a tongue in my head.”

He fumed, pacing up and down between the table and the sofa, his open
overcoat catching against the angles.  The red flood of anger ebbed out,
and left his face all white, with quivering nostrils.  Mrs Verloc, for
the purposes of practical existence, put down these appearances to the
cold.

“Well,” she said, “get rid of the man, whoever he is, as soon as you can,
and come back home to me.  You want looking after for a day or two.”

Mr Verloc calmed down, and, with resolution imprinted on his pale face,
had already opened the door, when his wife called him back in a whisper:

“Adolf!  Adolf!”  He came back startled.  “What about that money you drew
out?” she asked.  “You’ve got it in your pocket?  Hadn’t you better—”

Mr Verloc gazed stupidly into the palm of his wife’s extended hand for
some time before he slapped his brow.

“Money!  Yes!  Yes!  I didn’t know what you meant.”

He drew out of his breast pocket a new pigskin pocket-book.  Mrs Verloc
received it without another word, and stood still till the bell,
clattering after Mr Verloc and Mr Verloc’s visitor, had quieted down.
Only then she peeped in at the amount, drawing the notes out for the
purpose.  After this inspection she looked round thoughtfully, with an
air of mistrust in the silence and solitude of the house.  This abode of
her married life appeared to her as lonely and unsafe as though it had
been situated in the midst of a forest.  No receptacle she could think of
amongst the solid, heavy furniture seemed other but flimsy and
particularly tempting to her conception of a house-breaker.  It was an
ideal conception, endowed with sublime faculties and a miraculous
insight.  The till was not to be thought of.  It was the first spot a
thief would make for.  Mrs Verloc unfastening hastily a couple of hooks,
slipped the pocket-book under the bodice of her dress.  Having thus
disposed of her husband’s capital, she was rather glad to hear the
clatter of the door bell, announcing an arrival.  Assuming the fixed,
unabashed stare and the stony expression reserved for the casual
customer, she walked in behind the counter.

A man standing in the middle of the shop was inspecting it with a swift,
cool, all-round glance.  His eyes ran over the walls, took in the
ceiling, noted the floor—all in a moment.  The points of a long fair
moustache fell below the line of the jaw.  He smiled the smile of an old
if distant acquaintance, and Mrs Verloc remembered having seen him
before.  Not a customer.  She softened her “customer stare” to mere
indifference, and faced him across the counter.

He approached, on his side, confidentially, but not too markedly so.

“Husband at home, Mrs Verloc?” he asked in an easy, full tone.

“No.  He’s gone out.”

“I am sorry for that.  I’ve called to get from him a little private
information.”

This was the exact truth.  Chief Inspector Heat had been all the way
home, and had even gone so far as to think of getting into his slippers,
since practically he was, he told himself, chucked out of that case.  He
indulged in some scornful and in a few angry thoughts, and found the
occupation so unsatisfactory that he resolved to seek relief out of
doors.  Nothing prevented him paying a friendly call to Mr Verloc,
casually as it were.  It was in the character of a private citizen that
walking out privately he made use of his customary conveyances.  Their
general direction was towards Mr Verloc’s home.  Chief Inspector Heat
respected his own private character so consistently that he took especial
pains to avoid all the police constables on point and patrol duty in the
vicinity of Brett Street.  This precaution was much more necessary for a
man of his standing than for an obscure Assistant Commissioner.  Private
Citizen Heat entered the street, manoeuvring in a way which in a member
of the criminal classes would have been stigmatised as slinking.  The
piece of cloth picked up in Greenwich was in his pocket.  Not that he had
the slightest intention of producing it in his private capacity.  On the
contrary, he wanted to know just what Mr Verloc would be disposed to say
voluntarily.  He hoped Mr Verloc’s talk would be of a nature to
incriminate Michaelis.  It was a conscientiously professional hope in the
main, but not without its moral value.  For Chief Inspector Heat was a
servant of justice.  Finding Mr Verloc from home, he felt disappointed.

“I would wait for him a little if I were sure he wouldn’t be long,” he
said.

Mrs Verloc volunteered no assurance of any kind.

“The information I need is quite private,” he repeated.  “You understand
what I mean?  I wonder if you could give me a notion where he’s gone to?”

Mrs Verloc shook her head.

“Can’t say.”

She turned away to range some boxes on the shelves behind the counter.
Chief Inspector Heat looked at her thoughtfully for a time.

“I suppose you know who I am?” he said.

Mrs Verloc glanced over her shoulder.  Chief Inspector Heat was amazed at
her coolness.

“Come!  You know I am in the police,” he said sharply.

“I don’t trouble my head much about it,” Mrs Verloc remarked, returning
to the ranging of her boxes.

“My name is Heat.  Chief Inspector Heat of the Special Crimes section.”

Mrs Verloc adjusted nicely in its place a small cardboard box, and
turning round, faced him again, heavy-eyed, with idle hands hanging down.
A silence reigned for a time.

“So your husband went out a quarter of an hour ago!  And he didn’t say
when he would be back?”

“He didn’t go out alone,” Mrs Verloc let fall negligently.

“A friend?”

Mrs Verloc touched the back of her hair.  It was in perfect order.

“A stranger who called.”

“I see.  What sort of man was that stranger?  Would you mind telling me?”

Mrs Verloc did not mind.  And when Chief Inspector Heat heard of a man
dark, thin, with a long face and turned up moustaches, he gave signs of
perturbation, and exclaimed:

“Dash me if I didn’t think so!  He hasn’t lost any time.”

He was intensely disgusted in the secrecy of his heart at the unofficial
conduct of his immediate chief.  But he was not quixotic.  He lost all
desire to await Mr Verloc’s return.  What they had gone out for he did
not know, but he imagined it possible that they would return together.
The case is not followed properly, it’s being tampered with, he thought
bitterly.

“I am afraid I haven’t time to wait for your husband,” he said.

Mrs Verloc received this declaration listlessly.  Her detachment had
impressed Chief Inspector Heat all along.  At this precise moment it
whetted his curiosity.  Chief Inspector Heat hung in the wind, swayed by
his passions like the most private of citizens.

“I think,” he said, looking at her steadily, “that you could give me a
pretty good notion of what’s going on if you liked.”

Forcing her fine, inert eyes to return his gaze, Mrs Verloc murmured:

“Going on!  What _is_ going on?”

“Why, the affair I came to talk about a little with your husband.”

That day Mrs Verloc had glanced at a morning paper as usual.  But she had
not stirred out of doors.  The newsboys never invaded Brett Street.  It
was not a street for their business.  And the echo of their cries
drifting along the populous thoroughfares, expired between the dirty
brick walls without reaching the threshold of the shop.  Her husband had
not brought an evening paper home.  At any rate she had not seen it.  Mrs
Verloc knew nothing whatever of any affair.  And she said so, with a
genuine note of wonder in her quiet voice.

Chief Inspector Heat did not believe for a moment in so much ignorance.
Curtly, without amiability, he stated the bare fact.

Mrs Verloc turned away her eyes.

“I call it silly,” she pronounced slowly.  She paused.  “We ain’t
downtrodden slaves here.”

The Chief Inspector waited watchfully.  Nothing more came.

“And your husband didn’t mention anything to you when he came home?”

Mrs Verloc simply turned her face from right to left in sign of negation.
A languid, baffling silence reigned in the shop.  Chief Inspector Heat
felt provoked beyond endurance.

“There was another small matter,” he began in a detached tone, “which I
wanted to speak to your husband about.  There came into our hands
a—a—what we believe is—a stolen overcoat.”

Mrs Verloc, with her mind specially aware of thieves that evening,
touched lightly the bosom of her dress.

“We have lost no overcoat,” she said calmly.

“That’s funny,” continued Private Citizen Heat.  “I see you keep a lot of
marking ink here—”

He took up a small bottle, and looked at it against the gas-jet in the
middle of the shop.

“Purple—isn’t it?” he remarked, setting it down again.  “As I said, it’s
strange.  Because the overcoat has got a label sewn on the inside with
your address written in marking ink.”

Mrs Verloc leaned over the counter with a low exclamation.

“That’s my brother’s, then.”

“Where’s your brother?  Can I see him?” asked the Chief Inspector
briskly.  Mrs Verloc leaned a little more over the counter.

“No.  He isn’t here.  I wrote that label myself.”

“Where’s your brother now?”

“He’s been away living with—a friend—in the country.”

“The overcoat comes from the country.  And what’s the name of the
friend?”

“Michaelis,” confessed Mrs Verloc in an awed whisper.

The Chief Inspector let out a whistle.  His eyes snapped.

“Just so.  Capital.  And your brother now, what’s he like—a sturdy,
darkish chap—eh?”

“Oh no,” exclaimed Mrs Verloc fervently.  “That must be the thief.
Stevie’s slight and fair.”

“Good,” said the Chief Inspector in an approving tone.  And while Mrs
Verloc, wavering between alarm and wonder, stared at him, he sought for
information.  Why have the address sewn like this inside the coat?  And
he heard that the mangled remains he had inspected that morning with
extreme repugnance were those of a youth, nervous, absent-minded,
peculiar, and also that the woman who was speaking to him had had the
charge of that boy since he was a baby.

“Easily excitable?” he suggested.

“Oh yes.  He is.  But how did he come to lose his coat—”

Chief Inspector Heat suddenly pulled out a pink newspaper he had bought
less than half-an-hour ago.  He was interested in horses.  Forced by his
calling into an attitude of doubt and suspicion towards his
fellow-citizens, Chief Inspector Heat relieved the instinct of credulity
implanted in the human breast by putting unbounded faith in the sporting
prophets of that particular evening publication.  Dropping the extra
special on to the counter, he plunged his hand again into his pocket, and
pulling out the piece of cloth fate had presented him with out of a heap
of things that seemed to have been collected in shambles and rag shops,
he offered it to Mrs Verloc for inspection.

“I suppose you recognise this?”

She took it mechanically in both her hands.  Her eyes seemed to grow
bigger as she looked.

“Yes,” she whispered, then raised her head, and staggered backward a
little.

“Whatever for is it torn out like this?”

The Chief Inspector snatched across the counter the cloth out of her
hands, and she sat heavily on the chair.  He thought: identification’s
perfect.  And in that moment he had a glimpse into the whole amazing
truth.  Verloc was the “other man.”

“Mrs Verloc,” he said, “it strikes me that you know more of this bomb
affair than even you yourself are aware of.”

Mrs Verloc sat still, amazed, lost in boundless astonishment.  What was
the connection?  And she became so rigid all over that she was not able
to turn her head at the clatter of the bell, which caused the private
investigator Heat to spin round on his heel.  Mr Verloc had shut the
door, and for a moment the two men looked at each other.

Mr Verloc, without looking at his wife, walked up to the Chief Inspector,
who was relieved to see him return alone.

“You here!” muttered Mr Verloc heavily.  “Who are you after?”

“No one,” said Chief Inspector Heat in a low tone.  “Look here, I would
like a word or two with you.”

Mr Verloc, still pale, had brought an air of resolution with him.  Still
he didn’t look at his wife.  He said:

“Come in here, then.”  And he led the way into the parlour.

The door was hardly shut when Mrs Verloc, jumping up from the chair, ran
to it as if to fling it open, but instead of doing so fell on her knees,
with her ear to the keyhole.  The two men must have stopped directly they
were through, because she heard plainly the Chief Inspector’s voice,
though she could not see his finger pressed against her husband’s breast
emphatically.

“You are the other man, Verloc.  Two men were seen entering the park.”

And the voice of Mr Verloc said:

“Well, take me now.  What’s to prevent you?  You have the right.”

“Oh no!  I know too well who you have been giving yourself away to.
He’ll have to manage this little affair all by himself.  But don’t you
make a mistake, it’s I who found you out.”

Then she heard only muttering.  Inspector Heat must have been showing to
Mr Verloc the piece of Stevie’s overcoat, because Stevie’s sister,
guardian, and protector heard her husband a little louder.

“I never noticed that she had hit upon that dodge.”

Again for a time Mrs Verloc heard nothing but murmurs, whose
mysteriousness was less nightmarish to her brain than the horrible
suggestions of shaped words.  Then Chief Inspector Heat, on the other
side of the door, raised his voice.

“You must have been mad.”

And Mr Verloc’s voice answered, with a sort of gloomy fury:

“I have been mad for a month or more, but I am not mad now.  It’s all
over.  It shall all come out of my head, and hang the consequences.”

There was a silence, and then Private Citizen Heat murmured:

“What’s coming out?”

“Everything,” exclaimed the voice of Mr Verloc, and then sank very low.

After a while it rose again.

“You have known me for several years now, and you’ve found me useful,
too.  You know I was a straight man.  Yes, straight.”

This appeal to old acquaintance must have been extremely distasteful to
the Chief Inspector.

His voice took on a warning note.

“Don’t you trust so much to what you have been promised.  If I were you I
would clear out.  I don’t think we will run after you.”

Mr Verloc was heard to laugh a little.

“Oh yes; you hope the others will get rid of me for you—don’t you?  No,
no; you don’t shake me off now.  I have been a straight man to those
people too long, and now everything must come out.”

“Let it come out, then,” the indifferent voice of Chief Inspector Heat
assented.  “But tell me now how did you get away.”

“I was making for Chesterfield Walk,” Mrs Verloc heard her husband’s
voice, “when I heard the bang.  I started running then.  Fog.  I saw no
one till I was past the end of George Street.  Don’t think I met anyone
till then.”

“So easy as that!” marvelled the voice of Chief Inspector Heat.  “The
bang startled you, eh?”

“Yes; it came too soon,” confessed the gloomy, husky voice of Mr Verloc.

Mrs Verloc pressed her ear to the keyhole; her lips were blue, her hands
cold as ice, and her pale face, in which the two eyes seemed like two
black holes, felt to her as if it were enveloped in flames.

On the other side of the door the voices sank very low.  She caught words
now and then, sometimes in her husband’s voice, sometimes in the smooth
tones of the Chief Inspector.  She heard this last say:

“We believe he stumbled against the root of a tree?”

There was a husky, voluble murmur, which lasted for some time, and then
the Chief Inspector, as if answering some inquiry, spoke emphatically.

“Of course.  Blown to small bits: limbs, gravel, clothing, bones,
splinters—all mixed up together.  I tell you they had to fetch a shovel
to gather him up with.”

Mrs Verloc sprang up suddenly from her crouching position, and stopping
her ears, reeled to and fro between the counter and the shelves on the
wall towards the chair.  Her crazed eyes noted the sporting sheet left by
the Chief Inspector, and as she knocked herself against the counter she
snatched it up, fell into the chair, tore the optimistic, rosy sheet
right across in trying to open it, then flung it on the floor.  On the
other side of the door, Chief Inspector Heat was saying to Mr Verloc, the
secret agent:

“So your defence will be practically a full confession?”

“It will.  I am going to tell the whole story.”

“You won’t be believed as much as you fancy you will.”

And the Chief Inspector remained thoughtful.  The turn this affair was
taking meant the disclosure of many things—the laying waste of fields of
knowledge, which, cultivated by a capable man, had a distinct value for
the individual and for the society.  It was sorry, sorry meddling.  It
would leave Michaelis unscathed; it would drag to light the Professor’s
home industry; disorganise the whole system of supervision; make no end
of a row in the papers, which, from that point of view, appeared to him
by a sudden illumination as invariably written by fools for the reading
of imbeciles.  Mentally he agreed with the words Mr Verloc let fall at
last in answer to his last remark.

“Perhaps not.  But it will upset many things.  I have been a straight
man, and I shall keep straight in this—”

“If they let you,” said the Chief Inspector cynically.  “You will be
preached to, no doubt, before they put you into the dock.  And in the end
you may yet get let in for a sentence that will surprise you.  I wouldn’t
trust too much the gentleman who’s been talking to you.”

Mr Verloc listened, frowning.

“My advice to you is to clear out while you may.  I have no instructions.
There are some of them,” continued Chief Inspector Heat, laying a
peculiar stress on the word “them,” “who think you are already out of the
world.”

“Indeed!” Mr Verloc was moved to say.  Though since his return from
Greenwich he had spent most of his time sitting in the tap-room of an
obscure little public-house, he could hardly have hoped for such
favourable news.

“That’s the impression about you.”  The Chief Inspector nodded at him.
“Vanish.  Clear out.”

“Where to?” snarled Mr Verloc.  He raised his head, and gazing at the
closed door of the parlour, muttered feelingly: “I only wish you would
take me away to-night.  I would go quietly.”

“I daresay,” assented sardonically the Chief Inspector, following the
direction of his glance.

The brow of Mr Verloc broke into slight moisture.  He lowered his husky
voice confidentially before the unmoved Chief Inspector.

“The lad was half-witted, irresponsible.  Any court would have seen that
at once.  Only fit for the asylum.  And that was the worst that would’ve
happened to him if—”

The Chief Inspector, his hand on the door handle, whispered into Mr
Verloc’s face.

“He may’ve been half-witted, but you must have been crazy.  What drove
you off your head like this?”

Mr Verloc, thinking of Mr Vladimir, did not hesitate in the choice of
words.

“A Hyperborean swine,” he hissed forcibly.  “A what you might call a—a
gentleman.”

The Chief Inspector, steady-eyed, nodded briefly his comprehension, and
opened the door.  Mrs Verloc, behind the counter, might have heard but
did not see his departure, pursued by the aggressive clatter of the bell.
She sat at her post of duty behind the counter.  She sat rigidly erect in
the chair with two dirty pink pieces of paper lying spread out at her
feet.  The palms of her hands were pressed convulsively to her face, with
the tips of the fingers contracted against the forehead, as though the
skin had been a mask which she was ready to tear off violently.  The
perfect immobility of her pose expressed the agitation of rage and
despair, all the potential violence of tragic passions, better than any
shallow display of shrieks, with the beating of a distracted head against
the walls, could have done.  Chief Inspector Heat, crossing the shop at
his busy, swinging pace, gave her only a cursory glance.  And when the
cracked bell ceased to tremble on its curved ribbon of steel nothing
stirred near Mrs Verloc, as if her attitude had the locking power of a
spell.  Even the butterfly-shaped gas flames posed on the ends of the
suspended T-bracket burned without a quiver.  In that shop of shady wares
fitted with deal shelves painted a dull brown, which seemed to devour the
sheen of the light, the gold circlet of the wedding ring on Mrs Verloc’s
left hand glittered exceedingly with the untarnished glory of a piece
from some splendid treasure of jewels, dropped in a dust-bin.




CHAPTER X


The Assistant Commissioner, driven rapidly in a hansom from the
neighbourhood of Soho in the direction of Westminster, got out at the
very centre of the Empire on which the sun never sets.  Some stalwart
constables, who did not seem particularly impressed by the duty of
watching the august spot, saluted him.  Penetrating through a portal by
no means lofty into the precincts of the House which is _the_ House, _par
excellence_ in the minds of many millions of men, he was met at last by
the volatile and revolutionary Toodles.

That neat and nice young man concealed his astonishment at the early
appearance of the Assistant Commissioner, whom he had been told to look
out for some time about midnight.  His turning up so early he concluded
to be the sign that things, whatever they were, had gone wrong.  With an
extremely ready sympathy, which in nice youngsters goes often with a
joyous temperament, he felt sorry for the great Presence he called “The
Chief,” and also for the Assistant Commissioner, whose face appeared to
him more ominously wooden than ever before, and quite wonderfully long.
“What a queer, foreign-looking chap he is,” he thought to himself,
smiling from a distance with friendly buoyancy.  And directly they came
together he began to talk with the kind intention of burying the
awkwardness of failure under a heap of words.  It looked as if the great
assault threatened for that night were going to fizzle out.  An inferior
henchman of “that brute Cheeseman” was up boring mercilessly a very thin
House with some shamelessly cooked statistics.  He, Toodles, hoped he
would bore them into a count out every minute.  But then he might be only
marking time to let that guzzling Cheeseman dine at his leisure.  Anyway,
the Chief could not be persuaded to go home.

“He will see you at once, I think.  He’s sitting all alone in his room
thinking of all the fishes of the sea,” concluded Toodles airily.  “Come
along.”

Notwithstanding the kindness of his disposition, the young private
secretary (unpaid) was accessible to the common failings of humanity.  He
did not wish to harrow the feelings of the Assistant Commissioner, who
looked to him uncommonly like a man who has made a mess of his job.  But
his curiosity was too strong to be restrained by mere compassion.  He
could not help, as they went along, to throw over his shoulder lightly:

“And your sprat?”

“Got him,” answered the Assistant Commissioner with a concision which did
not mean to be repellent in the least.

“Good.  You’ve no idea how these great men dislike to be disappointed in
small things.”

After this profound observation the experienced Toodles seemed to
reflect.  At any rate he said nothing for quite two seconds.  Then:

“I’m glad.  But—I say—is it really such a very small thing as you make it
out?”

“Do you know what may be done with a sprat?” the Assistant Commissioner
asked in his turn.

“He’s sometimes put into a sardine box,” chuckled Toodles, whose
erudition on the subject of the fishing industry was fresh and, in
comparison with his ignorance of all other industrial matters, immense.
“There are sardine canneries on the Spanish coast which—”

The Assistant Commissioner interrupted the apprentice statesman.

“Yes.  Yes.  But a sprat is also thrown away sometimes in order to catch
a whale.”

“A whale.  Phew!” exclaimed Toodles, with bated breath.  “You’re after a
whale, then?”

“Not exactly.  What I am after is more like a dog-fish.  You don’t know
perhaps what a dog-fish is like.”

“Yes; I do.  We’re buried in special books up to our necks—whole shelves
full of them—with plates. . . . It’s a noxious, rascally-looking,
altogether detestable beast, with a sort of smooth face and moustaches.”

“Described to a T,” commended the Assistant Commissioner.  “Only mine is
clean-shaven altogether.  You’ve seen him.  It’s a witty fish.”

“I have seen him!” said Toodles incredulously.  “I can’t conceive where I
could have seen him.”

“At the Explorers, I should say,” dropped the Assistant Commissioner
calmly.  At the name of that extremely exclusive club Toodles looked
scared, and stopped short.

“Nonsense,” he protested, but in an awe-struck tone.  “What do you mean?
A member?”

“Honorary,” muttered the Assistant Commissioner through his teeth.

“Heavens!”

Toodles looked so thunderstruck that the Assistant Commissioner smiled
faintly.

“That’s between ourselves strictly,” he said.

“That’s the beastliest thing I’ve ever heard in my life,” declared
Toodles feebly, as if astonishment had robbed him of all his buoyant
strength in a second.

The Assistant Commissioner gave him an unsmiling glance.  Till they came
to the door of the great man’s room, Toodles preserved a scandalised and
solemn silence, as though he were offended with the Assistant
Commissioner for exposing such an unsavoury and disturbing fact.  It
revolutionised his idea of the Explorers’ Club’s extreme selectness, of
its social purity.  Toodles was revolutionary only in politics; his
social beliefs and personal feelings he wished to preserve unchanged
through all the years allotted to him on this earth which, upon the
whole, he believed to be a nice place to live on.

He stood aside.

“Go in without knocking,” he said.

Shades of green silk fitted low over all the lights imparted to the room
something of a forest’s deep gloom.  The haughty eyes were physically the
great man’s weak point.  This point was wrapped up in secrecy.  When an
opportunity offered, he rested them conscientiously.

The Assistant Commissioner entering saw at first only a big pale hand
supporting a big head, and concealing the upper part of a big pale face.
An open despatch-box stood on the writing-table near a few oblong sheets
of paper and a scattered handful of quill pens.  There was absolutely
nothing else on the large flat surface except a little bronze statuette
draped in a toga, mysteriously watchful in its shadowy immobility.  The
Assistant Commissioner, invited to take a chair, sat down.  In the dim
light, the salient points of his personality, the long face, the black
hair, his lankness, made him look more foreign than ever.

The great man manifested no surprise, no eagerness, no sentiment
whatever.  The attitude in which he rested his menaced eyes was
profoundly meditative.  He did not alter it the least bit.  But his tone
was not dreamy.

“Well!  What is it that you’ve found out already?  You came upon
something unexpected on the first step.”

“Not exactly unexpected, Sir Ethelred.  What I mainly came upon was a
psychological state.”

The Great Presence made a slight movement.  “You must be lucid, please.”

“Yes, Sir Ethelred.  You know no doubt that most criminals at some time
or other feel an irresistible need of confessing—of making a clean breast
of it to somebody—to anybody.  And they do it often to the police.  In
that Verloc whom Heat wished so much to screen I’ve found a man in that
particular psychological state.  The man, figuratively speaking, flung
himself on my breast.  It was enough on my part to whisper to him who I
was and to add ‘I know that you are at the bottom of this affair.’  It
must have seemed miraculous to him that we should know already, but he
took it all in the stride.  The wonderfulness of it never checked him for
a moment.  There remained for me only to put to him the two questions:
Who put you up to it? and Who was the man who did it?  He answered the
first with remarkable emphasis.  As to the second question, I gather that
the fellow with the bomb was his brother-in-law—quite a lad—a weak-minded
creature. . . . It is rather a curious affair—too long perhaps to state
fully just now.”

“What then have you learned?” asked the great man.

“First, I’ve learned that the ex-convict Michaelis had nothing to do with
it, though indeed the lad had been living with him temporarily in the
country up to eight o’clock this morning.  It is more than likely that
Michaelis knows nothing of it to this moment.”

“You are positive as to that?” asked the great man.

“Quite certain, Sir Ethelred.  This fellow Verloc went there this
morning, and took away the lad on the pretence of going out for a walk in
the lanes.  As it was not the first time that he did this, Michaelis
could not have the slightest suspicion of anything unusual.  For the
rest, Sir Ethelred, the indignation of this man Verloc had left nothing
in doubt—nothing whatever.  He had been driven out of his mind almost by
an extraordinary performance, which for you or me it would be difficult
to take as seriously meant, but which produced a great impression
obviously on him.”

The Assistant Commissioner then imparted briefly to the great man, who
sat still, resting his eyes under the screen of his hand, Mr Verloc’s
appreciation of Mr Vladimir’s proceedings and character.  The Assistant
Commissioner did not seem to refuse it a certain amount of competency.
But the great personage remarked:

“All this seems very fantastic.”

“Doesn’t it?  One would think a ferocious joke.  But our man took it
seriously, it appears.  He felt himself threatened.  In the time, you
know, he was in direct communication with old Stott-Wartenheim himself,
and had come to regard his services as indispensable.  It was an
extremely rude awakening.  I imagine that he lost his head.  He became
angry and frightened.  Upon my word, my impression is that he thought
these Embassy people quite capable not only to throw him out but, to give
him away too in some manner or other—”

“How long were you with him,” interrupted the Presence from behind his
big hand.

“Some forty minutes, Sir Ethelred, in a house of bad repute called
Continental Hotel, closeted in a room which by-the-by I took for the
night.  I found him under the influence of that reaction which follows
the effort of crime.  The man cannot be defined as a hardened criminal.
It is obvious that he did not plan the death of that wretched lad—his
brother-in-law.  That was a shock to him—I could see that.  Perhaps he is
a man of strong sensibilities.  Perhaps he was even fond of the lad—who
knows?  He might have hoped that the fellow would get clear away; in
which case it would have been almost impossible to bring this thing home
to anyone.  At any rate he risked consciously nothing more but arrest for
him.”

The Assistant Commissioner paused in his speculations to reflect for a
moment.

“Though how, in that last case, he could hope to have his own share in
the business concealed is more than I can tell,” he continued, in his
ignorance of poor Stevie’s devotion to Mr Verloc (who was _good_), and of
his truly peculiar dumbness, which in the old affair of fireworks on the
stairs had for many years resisted entreaties, coaxing, anger, and other
means of investigation used by his beloved sister.  For Stevie was loyal.
. . .  “No, I can’t imagine.  It’s possible that he never thought of that
at all.  It sounds an extravagant way of putting it, Sir Ethelred, but
his state of dismay suggested to me an impulsive man who, after
committing suicide with the notion that it would end all his troubles,
had discovered that it did nothing of the kind.”

The Assistant Commissioner gave this definition in an apologetic voice.
But in truth there is a sort of lucidity proper to extravagant language,
and the great man was not offended.  A slight jerky movement of the big
body half lost in the gloom of the green silk shades, of the big head
leaning on the big hand, accompanied an intermittent stifled but powerful
sound.  The great man had laughed.

“What have you done with him?”

The Assistant Commissioner answered very readily:

“As he seemed very anxious to get back to his wife in the shop I let him
go, Sir Ethelred.”

“You did?  But the fellow will disappear.”

“Pardon me.  I don’t think so.  Where could he go to?  Moreover, you must
remember that he has got to think of the danger from his comrades too.
He’s there at his post.  How could he explain leaving it?  But even if
there were no obstacles to his freedom of action he would do nothing.  At
present he hasn’t enough moral energy to take a resolution of any sort.
Permit me also to point out that if I had detained him we would have been
committed to a course of action on which I wished to know your precise
intentions first.”

The great personage rose heavily, an imposing shadowy form in the
greenish gloom of the room.

“I’ll see the Attorney-General to-night, and will send for you to-morrow
morning.  Is there anything more you’d wish to tell me now?”

The Assistant Commissioner had stood up also, slender and flexible.

“I think not, Sir Ethelred, unless I were to enter into details which—”

“No.  No details, please.”

The great shadowy form seemed to shrink away as if in physical dread of
details; then came forward, expanded, enormous, and weighty, offering a
large hand.  “And you say that this man has got a wife?”

“Yes, Sir Ethelred,” said the Assistant Commissioner, pressing
deferentially the extended hand.  “A genuine wife and a genuinely,
respectably, marital relation.  He told me that after his interview at
the Embassy he would have thrown everything up, would have tried to sell
his shop, and leave the country, only he felt certain that his wife would
not even hear of going abroad.  Nothing could be more characteristic of
the respectable bond than that,” went on, with a touch of grimness, the
Assistant Commissioner, whose own wife too had refused to hear of going
abroad.  “Yes, a genuine wife.  And the victim was a genuine
brother-in-law.  From a certain point of view we are here in the presence
of a domestic drama.”

The Assistant Commissioner laughed a little; but the great man’s thoughts
seemed to have wandered far away, perhaps to the questions of his
country’s domestic policy, the battle-ground of his crusading valour
against the paynim Cheeseman.  The Assistant Commissioner withdrew
quietly, unnoticed, as if already forgotten.

He had his own crusading instincts.  This affair, which, in one way or
another, disgusted Chief Inspector Heat, seemed to him a providentially
given starting-point for a crusade.  He had it much at heart to begin.
He walked slowly home, meditating that enterprise on the way, and
thinking over Mr Verloc’s psychology in a composite mood of repugnance
and satisfaction.  He walked all the way home.  Finding the drawing-room
dark, he went upstairs, and spent some time between the bedroom and the
dressing-room, changing his clothes, going to and fro with the air of a
thoughtful somnambulist.  But he shook it off before going out again to
join his wife at the house of the great lady patroness of Michaelis.

He knew he would be welcomed there.  On entering the smaller of the two
drawing-rooms he saw his wife in a small group near the piano.  A
youngish composer in pass of becoming famous was discoursing from a music
stool to two thick men whose backs looked old, and three slender women
whose backs looked young.  Behind the screen the great lady had only two
persons with her: a man and a woman, who sat side by side on arm-chairs
at the foot of her couch.  She extended her hand to the Assistant
Commissioner.

“I never hoped to see you here to-night.  Annie told me—”

“Yes.  I had no idea myself that my work would be over so soon.”

The Assistant Commissioner added in a low tone: “I am glad to tell you
that Michaelis is altogether clear of this—”

The patroness of the ex-convict received this assurance indignantly.

“Why?  Were your people stupid enough to connect him with—”

“Not stupid,” interrupted the Assistant Commissioner, contradicting
deferentially.  “Clever enough—quite clever enough for that.”

A silence fell.  The man at the foot of the couch had stopped speaking to
the lady, and looked on with a faint smile.

“I don’t know whether you ever met before,” said the great lady.

Mr Vladimir and the Assistant Commissioner, introduced, acknowledged each
other’s existence with punctilious and guarded courtesy.

“He’s been frightening me,” declared suddenly the lady who sat by the
side of Mr Vladimir, with an inclination of the head towards that
gentleman.  The Assistant Commissioner knew the lady.

“You do not look frightened,” he pronounced, after surveying her
conscientiously with his tired and equable gaze.  He was thinking
meantime to himself that in this house one met everybody sooner or later.
Mr Vladimir’s rosy countenance was wreathed in smiles, because he was
witty, but his eyes remained serious, like the eyes of convinced man.

“Well, he tried to at least,” amended the lady.

“Force of habit perhaps,” said the Assistant Commissioner, moved by an
irresistible inspiration.

“He has been threatening society with all sorts of horrors,” continued
the lady, whose enunciation was caressing and slow, “apropos of this
explosion in Greenwich Park.  It appears we all ought to quake in our
shoes at what’s coming if those people are not suppressed all over the
world.  I had no idea this was such a grave affair.”

Mr Vladimir, affecting not to listen, leaned towards the couch, talking
amiably in subdued tones, but he heard the Assistant Commissioner say:

“I’ve no doubt that Mr Vladimir has a very precise notion of the true
importance of this affair.”

Mr Vladimir asked himself what that confounded and intrusive policeman
was driving at.  Descended from generations victimised by the instruments
of an arbitrary power, he was racially, nationally, and individually
afraid of the police.  It was an inherited weakness, altogether
independent of his judgment, of his reason, of his experience.  He was
born to it.  But that sentiment, which resembled the irrational horror
some people have of cats, did not stand in the way of his immense
contempt for the English police.  He finished the sentence addressed to
the great lady, and turned slightly in his chair.

“You mean that we have a great experience of these people.  Yes; indeed,
we suffer greatly from their activity, while you”—Mr Vladimir hesitated
for a moment, in smiling perplexity—“while you suffer their presence
gladly in your midst,” he finished, displaying a dimple on each
clean-shaven cheek.  Then he added more gravely: “I may even say—because
you do.”

When Mr Vladimir ceased speaking the Assistant Commissioner lowered his
glance, and the conversation dropped.  Almost immediately afterwards Mr
Vladimir took leave.

Directly his back was turned on the couch the Assistant Commissioner rose
too.

“I thought you were going to stay and take Annie home,” said the lady
patroness of Michaelis.

“I find that I’ve yet a little work to do to-night.”

“In connection—?”

“Well, yes—in a way.”

“Tell me, what is it really—this horror?”

“It’s difficult to say what it is, but it may yet be a _cause célèbre_,”
said the Assistant Commissioner.

He left the drawing-room hurriedly, and found Mr Vladimir still in the
hall, wrapping up his throat carefully in a large silk handkerchief.
Behind him a footman waited, holding his overcoat.  Another stood ready
to open the door.  The Assistant Commissioner was duly helped into his
coat, and let out at once.  After descending the front steps he stopped,
as if to consider the way he should take.  On seeing this through the
door held open, Mr Vladimir lingered in the hall to get out a cigar and
asked for a light.  It was furnished to him by an elderly man out of
livery with an air of calm solicitude.  But the match went out; the
footman then closed the door, and Mr Vladimir lighted his large Havana
with leisurely care.

When at last he got out of the house, he saw with disgust the “confounded
policeman” still standing on the pavement.

“Can he be waiting for me,” thought Mr Vladimir, looking up and down for
some signs of a hansom.  He saw none.  A couple of carriages waited by
the curbstone, their lamps blazing steadily, the horses standing
perfectly still, as if carved in stone, the coachmen sitting motionless
under the big fur capes, without as much as a quiver stirring the white
thongs of their big whips.  Mr Vladimir walked on, and the “confounded
policeman” fell into step at his elbow.  He said nothing.  At the end of
the fourth stride Mr Vladimir felt infuriated and uneasy.  This could not
last.

“Rotten weather,” he growled savagely.

“Mild,” said the Assistant Commissioner without passion.  He remained
silent for a little while.  “We’ve got hold of a man called Verloc,” he
announced casually.

Mr Vladimir did not stumble, did not stagger back, did not change his
stride.  But he could not prevent himself from exclaiming: “What?”  The
Assistant Commissioner did not repeat his statement.  “You know him,” he
went on in the same tone.

Mr Vladimir stopped, and became guttural.  “What makes you say that?”

“I don’t.  It’s Verloc who says that.”

“A lying dog of some sort,” said Mr Vladimir in somewhat Oriental
phraseology.  But in his heart he was almost awed by the miraculous
cleverness of the English police.  The change of his opinion on the
subject was so violent that it made him for a moment feel slightly sick.
He threw away his cigar, and moved on.

“What pleased me most in this affair,” the Assistant went on, talking
slowly, “is that it makes such an excellent starting-point for a piece of
work which I’ve felt must be taken in hand—that is, the clearing out of
this country of all the foreign political spies, police, and that sort
of—of—dogs.  In my opinion they are a ghastly nuisance; also an element
of danger.  But we can’t very well seek them out individually.  The only
way is to make their employment unpleasant to their employers.  The
thing’s becoming indecent.  And dangerous too, for us, here.”

Mr Vladimir stopped again for a moment.

“What do you mean?”

“The prosecution of this Verloc will demonstrate to the public both the
danger and the indecency.”

“Nobody will believe what a man of that sort says,” said Mr Vladimir
contemptuously.

“The wealth and precision of detail will carry conviction to the great
mass of the public,” advanced the Assistant Commissioner gently.

“So that is seriously what you mean to do.”

“We’ve got the man; we have no choice.”

“You will be only feeding up the lying spirit of these revolutionary
scoundrels,” Mr Vladimir protested.  “What do you want to make a scandal
for?—from morality—or what?”

Mr Vladimir’s anxiety was obvious.  The Assistant Commissioner having
ascertained in this way that there must be some truth in the summary
statements of Mr Verloc, said indifferently:

“There’s a practical side too.  We have really enough to do to look after
the genuine article.  You can’t say we are not effective.  But we don’t
intend to let ourselves be bothered by shams under any pretext whatever.”

Mr Vladimir’s tone became lofty.

“For my part, I can’t share your view.  It is selfish.  My sentiments for
my own country cannot be doubted; but I’ve always felt that we ought to
be good Europeans besides—I mean governments and men.”

“Yes,” said the Assistant Commissioner simply.  “Only you look at Europe
from its other end.  But,” he went on in a good-natured tone, “the
foreign governments cannot complain of the inefficiency of our police.
Look at this outrage; a case specially difficult to trace inasmuch as it
was a sham.  In less than twelve hours we have established the identity
of a man literally blown to shreds, have found the organiser of the
attempt, and have had a glimpse of the inciter behind him.  And we could
have gone further; only we stopped at the limits of our territory.”

“So this instructive crime was planned abroad,” Mr Vladimir said quickly.
“You admit it was planned abroad?”

“Theoretically.  Theoretically only, on foreign territory; abroad only by
a fiction,” said the Assistant Commissioner, alluding to the character of
Embassies, which are supposed to be part and parcel of the country to
which they belong.  “But that’s a detail.  I talked to you of this
business because it’s your government that grumbles most at our police.
You see that we are not so bad.  I wanted particularly to tell you of our
success.”

“I’m sure I’m very grateful,” muttered Mr Vladimir through his teeth.

“We can put our finger on every anarchist here,” went on the Assistant
Commissioner, as though he were quoting Chief Inspector Heat.  “All
that’s wanted now is to do away with the agent provocateur to make
everything safe.”

Mr Vladimir held up his hand to a passing hansom.

“You’re not going in here,” remarked the Assistant Commissioner, looking
at a building of noble proportions and hospitable aspect, with the light
of a great hall falling through its glass doors on a broad flight of
steps.

But Mr Vladimir, sitting, stony-eyed, inside the hansom, drove off
without a word.

The Assistant Commissioner himself did not turn into the noble building.
It was the Explorers’ Club.  The thought passed through his mind that Mr
Vladimir, honorary member, would not be seen very often there in the
future.  He looked at his watch.  It was only half-past ten.  He had had
a very full evening.




CHAPTER XI


After Chief Inspector Heat had left him Mr Verloc moved about the
parlour.

From time to time he eyed his wife through the open door.  “She knows all
about it now,” he thought to himself with commiseration for her sorrow
and with some satisfaction as regarded himself.  Mr Verloc’s soul, if
lacking greatness perhaps, was capable of tender sentiments.  The
prospect of having to break the news to her had put him into a fever.
Chief Inspector Heat had relieved him of the task.  That was good as far
as it went.  It remained for him now to face her grief.

Mr Verloc had never expected to have to face it on account of death,
whose catastrophic character cannot be argued away by sophisticated
reasoning or persuasive eloquence.  Mr Verloc never meant Stevie to
perish with such abrupt violence.  He did not mean him to perish at all.
Stevie dead was a much greater nuisance than ever he had been when alive.
Mr Verloc had augured a favourable issue to his enterprise, basing
himself not on Stevie’s intelligence, which sometimes plays queer tricks
with a man, but on the blind docility and on the blind devotion of the
boy.  Though not much of a psychologist, Mr Verloc had gauged the depth
of Stevie’s fanaticism.  He dared cherish the hope of Stevie walking away
from the walls of the Observatory as he had been instructed to do, taking
the way shown to him several times previously, and rejoining his
brother-in-law, the wise and good Mr Verloc, outside the precincts of the
park.  Fifteen minutes ought to have been enough for the veriest fool to
deposit the engine and walk away.  And the Professor had guaranteed more
than fifteen minutes.  But Stevie had stumbled within five minutes of
being left to himself.  And Mr Verloc was shaken morally to pieces.  He
had foreseen everything but that.  He had foreseen Stevie distracted and
lost—sought for—found in some police station or provincial workhouse in
the end.  He had foreseen Stevie arrested, and was not afraid, because Mr
Verloc had a great opinion of Stevie’s loyalty, which had been carefully
indoctrinated with the necessity of silence in the course of many walks.
Like a peripatetic philosopher, Mr Verloc, strolling along the streets of
London, had modified Stevie’s view of the police by conversations full of
subtle reasonings.  Never had a sage a more attentive and admiring
disciple.  The submission and worship were so apparent that Mr Verloc had
come to feel something like a liking for the boy.  In any case, he had
not foreseen the swift bringing home of his connection.  That his wife
should hit upon the precaution of sewing the boy’s address inside his
overcoat was the last thing Mr Verloc would have thought of.  One can’t
think of everything.  That was what she meant when she said that he need
not worry if he lost Stevie during their walks.  She had assured him that
the boy would turn up all right.  Well, he had turned up with a
vengeance!

“Well, well,” muttered Mr Verloc in his wonder.  What did she mean by it?
Spare him the trouble of keeping an anxious eye on Stevie?  Most likely
she had meant well.  Only she ought to have told him of the precaution
she had taken.

Mr Verloc walked behind the counter of the shop.  His intention was not
to overwhelm his wife with bitter reproaches.  Mr Verloc felt no
bitterness.  The unexpected march of events had converted him to the
doctrine of fatalism.  Nothing could be helped now.  He said:

“I didn’t mean any harm to come to the boy.”

Mrs Verloc shuddered at the sound of her husband’s voice.  She did not
uncover her face.  The trusted secret agent of the late Baron
Stott-Wartenheim looked at her for a time with a heavy, persistent,
undiscerning glance.  The torn evening paper was lying at her feet.  It
could not have told her much.  Mr Verloc felt the need of talking to his
wife.

“It’s that damned Heat—eh?” he said.  “He upset you.  He’s a brute,
blurting it out like this to a woman.  I made myself ill thinking how to
break it to you.  I sat for hours in the little parlour of Cheshire
Cheese thinking over the best way.  You understand I never meant any harm
to come to that boy.”

Mr Verloc, the Secret Agent, was speaking the truth.  It was his marital
affection that had received the greatest shock from the premature
explosion.  He added:

“I didn’t feel particularly gay sitting there and thinking of you.”

He observed another slight shudder of his wife, which affected his
sensibility.  As she persisted in hiding her face in her hands, he
thought he had better leave her alone for a while.  On this delicate
impulse Mr Verloc withdrew into the parlour again, where the gas jet
purred like a contented cat.  Mrs Verloc’s wifely forethought had left
the cold beef on the table with carving knife and fork and half a loaf of
bread for Mr Verloc’s supper.  He noticed all these things now for the
first time, and cutting himself a piece of bread and meat, began to eat.

His appetite did not proceed from callousness.  Mr Verloc had not eaten
any breakfast that day.  He had left his home fasting.  Not being an
energetic man, he found his resolution in nervous excitement, which
seemed to hold him mainly by the throat.  He could not have swallowed
anything solid.  Michaelis’ cottage was as destitute of provisions as the
cell of a prisoner.  The ticket-of-leave apostle lived on a little milk
and crusts of stale bread.  Moreover, when Mr Verloc arrived he had
already gone upstairs after his frugal meal.  Absorbed in the toil and
delight of literary composition, he had not even answered Mr Verloc’s
shout up the little staircase.

“I am taking this young fellow home for a day or two.”

And, in truth, Mr Verloc did not wait for an answer, but had marched out
of the cottage at once, followed by the obedient Stevie.

Now that all action was over and his fate taken out of his hands with
unexpected swiftness, Mr Verloc felt terribly empty physically.  He
carved the meat, cut the bread, and devoured his supper standing by the
table, and now and then casting a glance towards his wife.  Her prolonged
immobility disturbed the comfort of his refection.  He walked again into
the shop, and came up very close to her.  This sorrow with a veiled face
made Mr Verloc uneasy.  He expected, of course, his wife to be very much
upset, but he wanted her to pull herself together.  He needed all her
assistance and all her loyalty in these new conjunctures his fatalism had
already accepted.

“Can’t be helped,” he said in a tone of gloomy sympathy.  “Come, Winnie,
we’ve got to think of to-morrow.  You’ll want all your wits about you
after I am taken away.”

He paused.  Mrs Verloc’s breast heaved convulsively.  This was not
reassuring to Mr Verloc, in whose view the newly created situation
required from the two people most concerned in it calmness, decision, and
other qualities incompatible with the mental disorder of passionate
sorrow.  Mr Verloc was a humane man; he had come home prepared to allow
every latitude to his wife’s affection for her brother.

Only he did not understand either the nature or the whole extent of that
sentiment.  And in this he was excusable, since it was impossible for him
to understand it without ceasing to be himself.  He was startled and
disappointed, and his speech conveyed it by a certain roughness of tone.

“You might look at a fellow,” he observed after waiting a while.

As if forced through the hands covering Mrs Verloc’s face the answer
came, deadened, almost pitiful.

“I don’t want to look at you as long as I live.”

“Eh?  What!”  Mr Verloc was merely startled by the superficial and
literal meaning of this declaration.  It was obviously unreasonable, the
mere cry of exaggerated grief.  He threw over it the mantle of his
marital indulgence.  The mind of Mr Verloc lacked profundity.  Under the
mistaken impression that the value of individuals consists in what they
are in themselves, he could not possibly comprehend the value of Stevie
in the eyes of Mrs Verloc.  She was taking it confoundedly hard, he
thought to himself.  It was all the fault of that damned Heat.  What did
he want to upset the woman for?  But she mustn’t be allowed, for her own
good, to carry on so till she got quite beside herself.

“Look here!  You can’t sit like this in the shop,” he said with affected
severity, in which there was some real annoyance; for urgent practical
matters must be talked over if they had to sit up all night.  “Somebody
might come in at any minute,” he added, and waited again.  No effect was
produced, and the idea of the finality of death occurred to Mr Verloc
during the pause.  He changed his tone.  “Come.  This won’t bring him
back,” he said gently, feeling ready to take her in his arms and press
her to his breast, where impatience and compassion dwelt side by side.
But except for a short shudder Mrs Verloc remained apparently unaffected
by the force of that terrible truism.  It was Mr Verloc himself who was
moved.  He was moved in his simplicity to urge moderation by asserting
the claims of his own personality.

“Do be reasonable, Winnie.  What would it have been if you had lost me!”

He had vaguely expected to hear her cry out.  But she did not budge.  She
leaned back a little, quieted down to a complete unreadable stillness.
Mr Verloc’s heart began to beat faster with exasperation and something
resembling alarm.  He laid his hand on her shoulder, saying:

“Don’t be a fool, Winnie.”

She gave no sign.  It was impossible to talk to any purpose with a woman
whose face one cannot see.  Mr Verloc caught hold of his wife’s wrists.
But her hands seemed glued fast.  She swayed forward bodily to his tug,
and nearly went off the chair.  Startled to feel her so helplessly limp,
he was trying to put her back on the chair when she stiffened suddenly
all over, tore herself out of his hands, ran out of the shop, across the
parlour, and into the kitchen.  This was very swift.  He had just a
glimpse of her face and that much of her eyes that he knew she had not
looked at him.

It all had the appearance of a struggle for the possession of a chair,
because Mr Verloc instantly took his wife’s place in it.  Mr Verloc did
not cover his face with his hands, but a sombre thoughtfulness veiled his
features.  A term of imprisonment could not be avoided.  He did not wish
now to avoid it.  A prison was a place as safe from certain unlawful
vengeances as the grave, with this advantage, that in a prison there is
room for hope.  What he saw before him was a term of imprisonment, an
early release and then life abroad somewhere, such as he had contemplated
already, in case of failure.  Well, it was a failure, if not exactly the
sort of failure he had feared.  It had been so near success that he could
have positively terrified Mr Vladimir out of his ferocious scoffing with
this proof of occult efficiency.  So at least it seemed now to Mr Verloc.
His prestige with the Embassy would have been immense if—if his wife had
not had the unlucky notion of sewing on the address inside Stevie’s
overcoat.  Mr Verloc, who was no fool, had soon perceived the
extraordinary character of the influence he had over Stevie, though he
did not understand exactly its origin—the doctrine of his supreme wisdom
and goodness inculcated by two anxious women.  In all the eventualities
he had foreseen Mr Verloc had calculated with correct insight on Stevie’s
instinctive loyalty and blind discretion.  The eventuality he had not
foreseen had appalled him as a humane man and a fond husband.  From every
other point of view it was rather advantageous.  Nothing can equal the
everlasting discretion of death.  Mr Verloc, sitting perplexed and
frightened in the small parlour of the Cheshire Cheese, could not help
acknowledging that to himself, because his sensibility did not stand in
the way of his judgment.  Stevie’s violent disintegration, however
disturbing to think about, only assured the success; for, of course, the
knocking down of a wall was not the aim of Mr Vladimir’s menaces, but the
production of a moral effect.  With much trouble and distress on Mr
Verloc’s part the effect might be said to have been produced.  When,
however, most unexpectedly, it came home to roost in Brett Street, Mr
Verloc, who had been struggling like a man in a nightmare for the
preservation of his position, accepted the blow in the spirit of a
convinced fatalist.  The position was gone through no one’s fault really.
A small, tiny fact had done it.  It was like slipping on a bit of orange
peel in the dark and breaking your leg.

Mr Verloc drew a weary breath.  He nourished no resentment against his
wife.  He thought: She will have to look after the shop while they keep
me locked up.  And thinking also how cruelly she would miss Stevie at
first, he felt greatly concerned about her health and spirits.  How would
she stand her solitude—absolutely alone in that house?  It would not do
for her to break down while he was locked up?  What would become of the
shop then?  The shop was an asset.  Though Mr Verloc’s fatalism accepted
his undoing as a secret agent, he had no mind to be utterly ruined,
mostly, it must be owned, from regard for his wife.

Silent, and out of his line of sight in the kitchen, she frightened him.
If only she had had her mother with her.  But that silly old woman—An
angry dismay possessed Mr Verloc.  He must talk with his wife.  He could
tell her certainly that a man does get desperate under certain
circumstances.  But he did not go incontinently to impart to her that
information.  First of all, it was clear to him that this evening was no
time for business.  He got up to close the street door and put the gas
out in the shop.

Having thus assured a solitude around his hearthstone Mr Verloc walked
into the parlour, and glanced down into the kitchen.  Mrs Verloc was
sitting in the place where poor Stevie usually established himself of an
evening with paper and pencil for the pastime of drawing these
coruscations of innumerable circles suggesting chaos and eternity.  Her
arms were folded on the table, and her head was lying on her arms.  Mr
Verloc contemplated her back and the arrangement of her hair for a time,
then walked away from the kitchen door.  Mrs Verloc’s philosophical,
almost disdainful incuriosity, the foundation of their accord in domestic
life made it extremely difficult to get into contact with her, now this
tragic necessity had arisen.  Mr Verloc felt this difficulty acutely.  He
turned around the table in the parlour with his usual air of a large
animal in a cage.

Curiosity being one of the forms of self-revelation, a systematically
incurious person remains always partly mysterious.  Every time he passed
near the door Mr Verloc glanced at his wife uneasily.  It was not that he
was afraid of her.  Mr Verloc imagined himself loved by that woman.  But
she had not accustomed him to make confidences.  And the confidence he
had to make was of a profound psychological order.  How with his want of
practice could he tell her what he himself felt but vaguely: that there
are conspiracies of fatal destiny, that a notion grows in a mind
sometimes till it acquires an outward existence, an independent power of
its own, and even a suggestive voice?  He could not inform her that a man
may be haunted by a fat, witty, clean-shaved face till the wildest
expedient to get rid of it appears a child of wisdom.

On this mental reference to a First Secretary of a great Embassy, Mr
Verloc stopped in the doorway, and looking down into the kitchen with an
angry face and clenched fists, addressed his wife.

“You don’t know what a brute I had to deal with.”

He started off to make another perambulation of the table; then when he
had come to the door again he stopped, glaring in from the height of two
steps.

“A silly, jeering, dangerous brute, with no more sense than—After all
these years!  A man like me!  And I have been playing my head at that
game.  You didn’t know.  Quite right, too.  What was the good of telling
you that I stood the risk of having a knife stuck into me any time these
seven years we’ve been married?  I am not a chap to worry a woman that’s
fond of me.  You had no business to know.”  Mr Verloc took another turn
round the parlour, fuming.

“A venomous beast,” he began again from the doorway.  “Drive me out into
a ditch to starve for a joke.  I could see he thought it was a damned
good joke.  A man like me!  Look here!  Some of the highest in the world
got to thank me for walking on their two legs to this day.  That’s the
man you’ve got married to, my girl!”

He perceived that his wife had sat up.  Mrs Verloc’s arms remained lying
stretched on the table.  Mr Verloc watched at her back as if he could
read there the effect of his words.

“There isn’t a murdering plot for the last eleven years that I hadn’t my
finger in at the risk of my life.  There’s scores of these revolutionists
I’ve sent off, with their bombs in their blamed pockets, to get
themselves caught on the frontier.  The old Baron knew what I was worth
to his country.  And here suddenly a swine comes along—an ignorant,
overbearing swine.”

Mr Verloc, stepping slowly down two steps, entered the kitchen, took a
tumbler off the dresser, and holding it in his hand, approached the sink,
without looking at his wife.  “It wasn’t the old Baron who would have had
the wicked folly of getting me to call on him at eleven in the morning.
There are two or three in this town that, if they had seen me going in,
would have made no bones about knocking me on the head sooner or later.
It was a silly, murderous trick to expose for nothing a man—like me.”

Mr Verloc, turning on the tap above the sink, poured three glasses of
water, one after another, down his throat to quench the fires of his
indignation.  Mr Vladimir’s conduct was like a hot brand which set his
internal economy in a blaze.  He could not get over the disloyalty of it.
This man, who would not work at the usual hard tasks which society sets
to its humbler members, had exercised his secret industry with an
indefatigable devotion.  There was in Mr Verloc a fund of loyalty.  He
had been loyal to his employers, to the cause of social stability,—and to
his affections too—as became apparent when, after standing the tumbler in
the sink, he turned about, saying:

“If I hadn’t thought of you I would have taken the bullying brute by the
throat and rammed his head into the fireplace.  I’d have been more than a
match for that pink-faced, smooth-shaved—”

Mr Verloc, neglected to finish the sentence, as if there could be no
doubt of the terminal word.  For the first time in his life he was taking
that incurious woman into his confidence.  The singularity of the event,
the force and importance of the personal feelings aroused in the course
of this confession, drove Stevie’s fate clean out of Mr Verloc’s mind.
The boy’s stuttering existence of fears and indignations, together with
the violence of his end, had passed out of Mr Verloc’s mental sight for a
time.  For that reason, when he looked up he was startled by the
inappropriate character of his wife’s stare.  It was not a wild stare,
and it was not inattentive, but its attention was peculiar and not
satisfactory, inasmuch that it seemed concentrated upon some point beyond
Mr Verloc’s person.  The impression was so strong that Mr Verloc glanced
over his shoulder.  There was nothing behind him: there was just the
whitewashed wall.  The excellent husband of Winnie Verloc saw no writing
on the wall.  He turned to his wife again, repeating, with some emphasis:

“I would have taken him by the throat.  As true as I stand here, if I
hadn’t thought of you then I would have half choked the life out of the
brute before I let him get up.  And don’t you think he would have been
anxious to call the police either.  He wouldn’t have dared.  You
understand why—don’t you?”

He blinked at his wife knowingly.

“No,” said Mrs Verloc in an unresonant voice, and without looking at him
at all.  “What are you talking about?”

A great discouragement, the result of fatigue, came upon Mr Verloc.  He
had had a very full day, and his nerves had been tried to the utmost.
After a month of maddening worry, ending in an unexpected catastrophe,
the storm-tossed spirit of Mr Verloc longed for repose.  His career as a
secret agent had come to an end in a way no one could have foreseen;
only, now, perhaps he could manage to get a night’s sleep at last.  But
looking at his wife, he doubted it.  She was taking it very hard—not at
all like herself, he thought.  He made an effort to speak.

“You’ll have to pull yourself together, my girl,” he said
sympathetically.  “What’s done can’t be undone.”

Mrs Verloc gave a slight start, though not a muscle of her white face
moved in the least.  Mr Verloc, who was not looking at her, continued
ponderously.

“You go to bed now.  What you want is a good cry.”

This opinion had nothing to recommend it but the general consent of
mankind.  It is universally understood that, as if it were nothing more
substantial than vapour floating in the sky, every emotion of a woman is
bound to end in a shower.  And it is very probable that had Stevie died
in his bed under her despairing gaze, in her protecting arms, Mrs
Verloc’s grief would have found relief in a flood of bitter and pure
tears.  Mrs Verloc, in common with other human beings, was provided with
a fund of unconscious resignation sufficient to meet the normal
manifestation of human destiny.  Without “troubling her head about it,”
she was aware that it “did not stand looking into very much.”  But the
lamentable circumstances of Stevie’s end, which to Mr Verloc’s mind had
only an episodic character, as part of a greater disaster, dried her
tears at their very source.  It was the effect of a white-hot iron drawn
across her eyes; at the same time her heart, hardened and chilled into a
lump of ice, kept her body in an inward shudder, set her features into a
frozen contemplative immobility addressed to a whitewashed wall with no
writing on it.  The exigencies of Mrs Verloc’s temperament, which, when
stripped of its philosophical reserve, was maternal and violent, forced
her to roll a series of thoughts in her motionless head.  These thoughts
were rather imagined than expressed.  Mrs Verloc was a woman of
singularly few words, either for public or private use.  With the rage
and dismay of a betrayed woman, she reviewed the tenor of her life in
visions concerned mostly with Stevie’s difficult existence from its
earliest days.  It was a life of single purpose and of a noble unity of
inspiration, like those rare lives that have left their mark on the
thoughts and feelings of mankind.  But the visions of Mrs Verloc lacked
nobility and magnificence.  She saw herself putting the boy to bed by the
light of a single candle on the deserted top floor of a “business house,”
dark under the roof and scintillating exceedingly with lights and cut
glass at the level of the street like a fairy palace.  That meretricious
splendour was the only one to be met in Mrs Verloc’s visions.  She
remembered brushing the boy’s hair and tying his pinafores—herself in a
pinafore still; the consolations administered to a small and badly scared
creature by another creature nearly as small but not quite so badly
scared; she had the vision of the blows intercepted (often with her own
head), of a door held desperately shut against a man’s rage (not for very
long); of a poker flung once (not very far), which stilled that
particular storm into the dumb and awful silence which follows a
thunder-clap.  And all these scenes of violence came and went accompanied
by the unrefined noise of deep vociferations proceeding from a man
wounded in his paternal pride, declaring himself obviously accursed since
one of his kids was a “slobbering idjut and the other a wicked
she-devil.”  It was of her that this had been said many years ago.

Mrs Verloc heard the words again in a ghostly fashion, and then the
dreary shadow of the Belgravian mansion descended upon her shoulders.  It
was a crushing memory, an exhausting vision of countless breakfast trays
carried up and down innumerable stairs, of endless haggling over pence,
of the endless drudgery of sweeping, dusting, cleaning, from basement to
attics; while the impotent mother, staggering on swollen legs, cooked in
a grimy kitchen, and poor Stevie, the unconscious presiding genius of all
their toil, blacked the gentlemen’s boots in the scullery.  But this
vision had a breath of a hot London summer in it, and for a central
figure a young man wearing his Sunday best, with a straw hat on his dark
head and a wooden pipe in his mouth.  Affectionate and jolly, he was a
fascinating companion for a voyage down the sparkling stream of life;
only his boat was very small.  There was room in it for a girl-partner at
the oar, but no accommodation for passengers.  He was allowed to drift
away from the threshold of the Belgravian mansion while Winnie averted
her tearful eyes.  He was not a lodger.  The lodger was Mr Verloc,
indolent, and keeping late hours, sleepily jocular of a morning from
under his bed-clothes, but with gleams of infatuation in his heavy lidded
eyes, and always with some money in his pockets.  There was no sparkle of
any kind on the lazy stream of his life.  It flowed through secret
places.  But his barque seemed a roomy craft, and his taciturn
magnanimity accepted as a matter of course the presence of passengers.

Mrs Verloc pursued the visions of seven years’ security for Stevie,
loyally paid for on her part; of security growing into confidence, into a
domestic feeling, stagnant and deep like a placid pool, whose guarded
surface hardly shuddered on the occasional passage of Comrade Ossipon,
the robust anarchist with shamelessly inviting eyes, whose glance had a
corrupt clearness sufficient to enlighten any woman not absolutely
imbecile.

A few seconds only had elapsed since the last word had been uttered aloud
in the kitchen, and Mrs Verloc was staring already at the vision of an
episode not more than a fortnight old.  With eyes whose pupils were
extremely dilated she stared at the vision of her husband and poor Stevie
walking up Brett Street side by side away from the shop.  It was the last
scene of an existence created by Mrs Verloc’s genius; an existence
foreign to all grace and charm, without beauty and almost without
decency, but admirable in the continuity of feeling and tenacity of
purpose.  And this last vision had such plastic relief, such nearness of
form, such a fidelity of suggestive detail, that it wrung from Mrs Verloc
an anguished and faint murmur, reproducing the supreme illusion of her
life, an appalled murmur that died out on her blanched lips.

“Might have been father and son.”

Mr Verloc stopped, and raised a care-worn face.  “Eh?  What did you say?”
he asked.  Receiving no reply, he resumed his sinister tramping.  Then
with a menacing flourish of a thick, fleshy fist, he burst out:

“Yes.  The Embassy people.  A pretty lot, ain’t they!  Before a week’s
out I’ll make some of them wish themselves twenty feet underground.  Eh?
What?”

He glanced sideways, with his head down.  Mrs Verloc gazed at the
whitewashed wall.  A blank wall—perfectly blank.  A blankness to run at
and dash your head against.  Mrs Verloc remained immovably seated.  She
kept still as the population of half the globe would keep still in
astonishment and despair, were the sun suddenly put out in the summer sky
by the perfidy of a trusted providence.

“The Embassy,” Mr Verloc began again, after a preliminary grimace which
bared his teeth wolfishly.  “I wish I could get loose in there with a
cudgel for half-an-hour.  I would keep on hitting till there wasn’t a
single unbroken bone left amongst the whole lot.  But never mind, I’ll
teach them yet what it means trying to throw out a man like me to rot in
the streets.  I’ve a tongue in my head.  All the world shall know what
I’ve done for them.  I am not afraid.  I don’t care.  Everything’ll come
out.  Every damned thing.  Let them look out!”

In these terms did Mr Verloc declare his thirst for revenge.  It was a
very appropriate revenge.  It was in harmony with the promptings of Mr
Verloc’s genius.  It had also the advantage of being within the range of
his powers and of adjusting itself easily to the practice of his life,
which had consisted precisely in betraying the secret and unlawful
proceedings of his fellow-men.  Anarchists or diplomats were all one to
him.  Mr Verloc was temperamentally no respecter of persons.  His scorn
was equally distributed over the whole field of his operations.  But as a
member of a revolutionary proletariat—which he undoubtedly was—he
nourished a rather inimical sentiment against social distinction.

“Nothing on earth can stop me now,” he added, and paused, looking fixedly
at his wife, who was looking fixedly at a blank wall.

The silence in the kitchen was prolonged, and Mr Verloc felt
disappointed.  He had expected his wife to say something.  But Mrs
Verloc’s lips, composed in their usual form, preserved a statuesque
immobility like the rest of her face.  And Mr Verloc was disappointed.
Yet the occasion did not, he recognised, demand speech from her.  She was
a woman of very few words.  For reasons involved in the very foundation
of his psychology, Mr Verloc was inclined to put his trust in any woman
who had given herself to him.  Therefore he trusted his wife.  Their
accord was perfect, but it was not precise.  It was a tacit accord,
congenial to Mrs Verloc’s incuriosity and to Mr Verloc’s habits of mind,
which were indolent and secret.  They refrained from going to the bottom
of facts and motives.

This reserve, expressing, in a way, their profound confidence in each
other, introduced at the same time a certain element of vagueness into
their intimacy.  No system of conjugal relations is perfect.  Mr Verloc
presumed that his wife had understood him, but he would have been glad to
hear her say what she thought at the moment.  It would have been a
comfort.

There were several reasons why this comfort was denied him.  There was a
physical obstacle: Mrs Verloc had no sufficient command over her voice.
She did not see any alternative between screaming and silence, and
instinctively she chose the silence.  Winnie Verloc was temperamentally a
silent person.  And there was the paralysing atrocity of the thought
which occupied her.  Her cheeks were blanched, her lips ashy, her
immobility amazing.  And she thought without looking at Mr Verloc: “This
man took the boy away to murder him.  He took the boy away from his home
to murder him.  He took the boy away from me to murder him!”

Mrs Verloc’s whole being was racked by that inconclusive and maddening
thought.  It was in her veins, in her bones, in the roots of her hair.
Mentally she assumed the biblical attitude of mourning—the covered face,
the rent garments; the sound of wailing and lamentation filled her head.
But her teeth were violently clenched, and her tearless eyes were hot
with rage, because she was not a submissive creature.  The protection she
had extended over her brother had been in its origin of a fierce and
indignant complexion.  She had to love him with a militant love.  She had
battled for him—even against herself.  His loss had the bitterness of
defeat, with the anguish of a baffled passion.  It was not an ordinary
stroke of death.  Moreover, it was not death that took Stevie from her.
It was Mr Verloc who took him away.  She had seen him.  She had watched
him, without raising a hand, take the boy away.  And she had let him go,
like—like a fool—a blind fool.  Then after he had murdered the boy he
came home to her.  Just came home like any other man would come home to
his wife. . . .

Through her set teeth Mrs Verloc muttered at the wall:

“And I thought he had caught a cold.”

Mr Verloc heard these words and appropriated them.

“It was nothing,” he said moodily.  “I was upset.  I was upset on your
account.”

Mrs Verloc, turning her head slowly, transferred her stare from the wall
to her husband’s person.  Mr Verloc, with the tips of his fingers between
his lips, was looking on the ground.

“Can’t be helped,” he mumbled, letting his hand fall.  “You must pull
yourself together.  You’ll want all your wits about you.  It is you who
brought the police about our ears.  Never mind, I won’t say anything more
about it,” continued Mr Verloc magnanimously.  “You couldn’t know.”

“I couldn’t,” breathed out Mrs Verloc.  It was as if a corpse had spoken.
Mr Verloc took up the thread of his discourse.

“I don’t blame you.  I’ll make them sit up.  Once under lock and key it
will be safe enough for me to talk—you understand.  You must reckon on me
being two years away from you,” he continued, in a tone of sincere
concern.  “It will be easier for you than for me.  You’ll have something
to do, while I—Look here, Winnie, what you must do is to keep this
business going for two years.  You know enough for that.  You’ve a good
head on you.  I’ll send you word when it’s time to go about trying to
sell.  You’ll have to be extra careful.  The comrades will be keeping an
eye on you all the time.  You’ll have to be as artful as you know how,
and as close as the grave.  No one must know what you are going to do.  I
have no mind to get a knock on the head or a stab in the back directly I
am let out.”

Thus spoke Mr Verloc, applying his mind with ingenuity and forethought to
the problems of the future.  His voice was sombre, because he had a
correct sentiment of the situation.  Everything which he did not wish to
pass had come to pass.  The future had become precarious.  His judgment,
perhaps, had been momentarily obscured by his dread of Mr Vladimir’s
truculent folly.  A man somewhat over forty may be excusably thrown into
considerable disorder by the prospect of losing his employment,
especially if the man is a secret agent of political police, dwelling
secure in the consciousness of his high value and in the esteem of high
personages.  He was excusable.

Now the thing had ended in a crash.  Mr Verloc was cool; but he was not
cheerful.  A secret agent who throws his secrecy to the winds from desire
of vengeance, and flaunts his achievements before the public eye, becomes
the mark for desperate and bloodthirsty indignations.  Without unduly
exaggerating the danger, Mr Verloc tried to bring it clearly before his
wife’s mind.  He repeated that he had no intention to let the
revolutionists do away with him.

He looked straight into his wife’s eyes.  The enlarged pupils of the
woman received his stare into their unfathomable depths.

“I am too fond of you for that,” he said, with a little nervous laugh.

A faint flush coloured Mrs Verloc’s ghastly and motionless face.  Having
done with the visions of the past, she had not only heard, but had also
understood the words uttered by her husband.  By their extreme disaccord
with her mental condition these words produced on her a slightly
suffocating effect.  Mrs Verloc’s mental condition had the merit of
simplicity; but it was not sound.  It was governed too much by a fixed
idea.  Every nook and cranny of her brain was filled with the thought
that this man, with whom she had lived without distaste for seven years,
had taken the “poor boy” away from her in order to kill him—the man to
whom she had grown accustomed in body and mind; the man whom she had
trusted, took the boy away to kill him!  In its form, in its substance,
in its effect, which was universal, altering even the aspect of inanimate
things, it was a thought to sit still and marvel at for ever and ever.
Mrs Verloc sat still.  And across that thought (not across the kitchen)
the form of Mr Verloc went to and fro, familiarly in hat and overcoat,
stamping with his boots upon her brain.  He was probably talking too; but
Mrs Verloc’s thought for the most part covered the voice.

Now and then, however, the voice would make itself heard.  Several
connected words emerged at times.  Their purport was generally hopeful.
On each of these occasions Mrs Verloc’s dilated pupils, losing their
far-off fixity, followed her husband’s movements with the effect of black
care and impenetrable attention.  Well informed upon all matters relating
to his secret calling, Mr Verloc augured well for the success of his
plans and combinations.  He really believed that it would be upon the
whole easy for him to escape the knife of infuriated revolutionists.  He
had exaggerated the strength of their fury and the length of their arm
(for professional purposes) too often to have many illusions one way or
the other.  For to exaggerate with judgment one must begin by measuring
with nicety.  He knew also how much virtue and how much infamy is
forgotten in two years—two long years.  His first really confidential
discourse to his wife was optimistic from conviction.  He also thought it
good policy to display all the assurance he could muster.  It would put
heart into the poor woman.  On his liberation, which, harmonising with
the whole tenor of his life, would be secret, of course, they would
vanish together without loss of time.  As to covering up the tracks, he
begged his wife to trust him for that.  He knew how it was to be done so
that the devil himself—

He waved his hand.  He seemed to boast.  He wished only to put heart into
her.  It was a benevolent intention, but Mr Verloc had the misfortune not
to be in accord with his audience.

The self-confident tone grew upon Mrs Verloc’s ear which let most of the
words go by; for what were words to her now?  What could words do to her,
for good or evil in the face of her fixed idea?  Her black glance
followed that man who was asserting his impunity—the man who had taken
poor Stevie from home to kill him somewhere.  Mrs Verloc could not
remember exactly where, but her heart began to beat very perceptibly.

Mr Verloc, in a soft and conjugal tone, was now expressing his firm
belief that there were yet a good few years of quiet life before them
both.  He did not go into the question of means.  A quiet life it must be
and, as it were, nestling in the shade, concealed among men whose flesh
is grass; modest, like the life of violets.  The words used by Mr Verloc
were: “Lie low for a bit.”  And far from England, of course.  It was not
clear whether Mr Verloc had in his mind Spain or South America; but at
any rate somewhere abroad.

This last word, falling into Mrs Verloc’s ear, produced a definite
impression.  This man was talking of going abroad.  The impression was
completely disconnected; and such is the force of mental habit that Mrs
Verloc at once and automatically asked herself: “And what of Stevie?”

It was a sort of forgetfulness; but instantly she became aware that there
was no longer any occasion for anxiety on that score.  There would never
be any occasion any more.  The poor boy had been taken out and killed.
The poor boy was dead.

This shaking piece of forgetfulness stimulated Mrs Verloc’s intelligence.
She began to perceive certain consequences which would have surprised Mr
Verloc.  There was no need for her now to stay there, in that kitchen, in
that house, with that man—since the boy was gone for ever.  No need
whatever.  And on that Mrs Verloc rose as if raised by a spring.  But
neither could she see what there was to keep her in the world at all.
And this inability arrested her.  Mr Verloc watched her with marital
solicitude.

“You’re looking more like yourself,” he said uneasily.  Something
peculiar in the blackness of his wife’s eyes disturbed his optimism.  At
that precise moment Mrs Verloc began to look upon herself as released
from all earthly ties.

She had her freedom.  Her contract with existence, as represented by that
man standing over there, was at an end.  She was a free woman.  Had this
view become in some way perceptible to Mr Verloc he would have been
extremely shocked.  In his affairs of the heart Mr Verloc had been always
carelessly generous, yet always with no other idea than that of being
loved for himself.  Upon this matter, his ethical notions being in
agreement with his vanity, he was completely incorrigible.  That this
should be so in the case of his virtuous and legal connection he was
perfectly certain.  He had grown older, fatter, heavier, in the belief
that he lacked no fascination for being loved for his own sake.  When he
saw Mrs Verloc starting to walk out of the kitchen without a word he was
disappointed.

“Where are you going to?” he called out rather sharply.  “Upstairs?”

Mrs Verloc in the doorway turned at the voice.  An instinct of prudence
born of fear, the excessive fear of being approached and touched by that
man, induced her to nod at him slightly (from the height of two steps),
with a stir of the lips which the conjugal optimism of Mr Verloc took for
a wan and uncertain smile.

“That’s right,” he encouraged her gruffly.  “Rest and quiet’s what you
want.  Go on.  It won’t be long before I am with you.”

Mrs Verloc, the free woman who had had really no idea where she was going
to, obeyed the suggestion with rigid steadiness.

Mr Verloc watched her.  She disappeared up the stairs.  He was
disappointed.  There was that within him which would have been more
satisfied if she had been moved to throw herself upon his breast.  But he
was generous and indulgent.  Winnie was always undemonstrative and
silent.  Neither was Mr Verloc himself prodigal of endearments and words
as a rule.  But this was not an ordinary evening.  It was an occasion
when a man wants to be fortified and strengthened by open proofs of
sympathy and affection.  Mr Verloc sighed, and put out the gas in the
kitchen.  Mr Verloc’s sympathy with his wife was genuine and intense.  It
almost brought tears into his eyes as he stood in the parlour reflecting
on the loneliness hanging over her head.  In this mood Mr Verloc missed
Stevie very much out of a difficult world.  He thought mournfully of his
end.  If only that lad had not stupidly destroyed himself!

The sensation of unappeasable hunger, not unknown after the strain of a
hazardous enterprise to adventurers of tougher fibre than Mr Verloc,
overcame him again.  The piece of roast beef, laid out in the likeness of
funereal baked meats for Stevie’s obsequies, offered itself largely to
his notice.  And Mr Verloc again partook.  He partook ravenously, without
restraint and decency, cutting thick slices with the sharp carving knife,
and swallowing them without bread.  In the course of that refection it
occurred to Mr Verloc that he was not hearing his wife move about the
bedroom as he should have done.  The thought of finding her perhaps
sitting on the bed in the dark not only cut Mr Verloc’s appetite, but
also took from him the inclination to follow her upstairs just yet.
Laying down the carving knife, Mr Verloc listened with careworn
attention.

He was comforted by hearing her move at last.  She walked suddenly across
the room, and threw the window up.  After a period of stillness up there,
during which he figured her to himself with her head out, he heard the
sash being lowered slowly.  Then she made a few steps, and sat down.
Every resonance of his house was familiar to Mr Verloc, who was
thoroughly domesticated.  When next he heard his wife’s footsteps
overhead he knew, as well as if he had seen her doing it, that she had
been putting on her walking shoes.  Mr Verloc wriggled his shoulders
slightly at this ominous symptom, and moving away from the table, stood
with his back to the fireplace, his head on one side, and gnawing
perplexedly at the tips of his fingers.  He kept track of her movements
by the sound.  She walked here and there violently, with abrupt
stoppages, now before the chest of drawers, then in front of the
wardrobe.  An immense load of weariness, the harvest of a day of shocks
and surprises, weighed Mr Verloc’s energies to the ground.

He did not raise his eyes till he heard his wife descending the stairs.
It was as he had guessed.  She was dressed for going out.

Mrs Verloc was a free woman.  She had thrown open the window of the
bedroom either with the intention of screaming Murder!  Help! or of
throwing herself out.  For she did not exactly know what use to make of
her freedom.  Her personality seemed to have been torn into two pieces,
whose mental operations did not adjust themselves very well to each
other.  The street, silent and deserted from end to end, repelled her by
taking sides with that man who was so certain of his impunity.  She was
afraid to shout lest no one should come.  Obviously no one would come.
Her instinct of self-preservation recoiled from the depth of the fall
into that sort of slimy, deep trench.  Mrs Verloc closed the window, and
dressed herself to go out into the street by another way.  She was a free
woman.  She had dressed herself thoroughly, down to the tying of a black
veil over her face.  As she appeared before him in the light of the
parlour, Mr Verloc observed that she had even her little handbag hanging
from her left wrist. . . . Flying off to her mother, of course.

The thought that women were wearisome creatures after all presented
itself to his fatigued brain.  But he was too generous to harbour it for
more than an instant.  This man, hurt cruelly in his vanity, remained
magnanimous in his conduct, allowing himself no satisfaction of a bitter
smile or of a contemptuous gesture.  With true greatness of soul, he only
glanced at the wooden clock on the wall, and said in a perfectly calm but
forcible manner:

“Five and twenty minutes past eight, Winnie.  There’s no sense in going
over there so late.  You will never manage to get back to-night.”

Before his extended hand Mrs Verloc had stopped short.  He added heavily:
“Your mother will be gone to bed before you get there.  This is the sort
of news that can wait.”

Nothing was further from Mrs Verloc’s thoughts than going to her mother.
She recoiled at the mere idea, and feeling a chair behind her, she obeyed
the suggestion of the touch, and sat down.  Her intention had been simply
to get outside the door for ever.  And if this feeling was correct, its
mental form took an unrefined shape corresponding to her origin and
station.  “I would rather walk the streets all the days of my life,” she
thought.  But this creature, whose moral nature had been subjected to a
shock of which, in the physical order, the most violent earthquake of
history could only be a faint and languid rendering, was at the mercy of
mere trifles, of casual contacts.  She sat down.  With her hat and veil
she had the air of a visitor, of having looked in on Mr Verloc for a
moment.  Her instant docility encouraged him, whilst her aspect of only
temporary and silent acquiescence provoked him a little.

“Let me tell you, Winnie,” he said with authority, “that your place is
here this evening.  Hang it all! you brought the damned police high and
low about my ears.  I don’t blame you—but it’s your doing all the same.
You’d better take this confounded hat off.  I can’t let you go out, old
girl,” he added in a softened voice.

Mrs Verloc’s mind got hold of that declaration with morbid tenacity.  The
man who had taken Stevie out from under her very eyes to murder him in a
locality whose name was at the moment not present to her memory would not
allow her go out.  Of course he wouldn’t.

Now he had murdered Stevie he would never let her go.  He would want to
keep her for nothing.  And on this characteristic reasoning, having all
the force of insane logic, Mrs Verloc’s disconnected wits went to work
practically.  She could slip by him, open the door, run out.  But he
would dash out after her, seize her round the body, drag her back into
the shop.  She could scratch, kick, and bite—and stab too; but for
stabbing she wanted a knife.  Mrs Verloc sat still under her black veil,
in her own house, like a masked and mysterious visitor of impenetrable
intentions.

Mr Verloc’s magnanimity was not more than human.  She had exasperated him
at last.

“Can’t you say something?  You have your own dodges for vexing a man.  Oh
yes!  I know your deaf-and-dumb trick.  I’ve seen you at it before
to-day.  But just now it won’t do.  And to begin with, take this damned
thing off.  One can’t tell whether one is talking to a dummy or to a live
woman.”

He advanced, and stretching out his hand, dragged the veil off, unmasking
a still, unreadable face, against which his nervous exasperation was
shattered like a glass bubble flung against a rock.  “That’s better,” he
said, to cover his momentary uneasiness, and retreated back to his old
station by the mantelpiece.  It never entered his head that his wife
could give him up.  He felt a little ashamed of himself, for he was fond
and generous.  What could he do?  Everything had been said already.  He
protested vehemently.

“By heavens!  You know that I hunted high and low.  I ran the risk of
giving myself away to find somebody for that accursed job.  And I tell
you again I couldn’t find anyone crazy enough or hungry enough.  What do
you take me for—a murderer, or what?  The boy is gone.  Do you think I
wanted him to blow himself up?  He’s gone.  His troubles are over.  Ours
are just going to begin, I tell you, precisely because he did blow
himself.  I don’t blame you.  But just try to understand that it was a
pure accident; as much an accident as if he had been run over by a ’bus
while crossing the street.”

His generosity was not infinite, because he was a human being—and not a
monster, as Mrs Verloc believed him to be.  He paused, and a snarl
lifting his moustaches above a gleam of white teeth gave him the
expression of a reflective beast, not very dangerous—a slow beast with a
sleek head, gloomier than a seal, and with a husky voice.

“And when it comes to that, it’s as much your doing as mine.  That’s so.
You may glare as much as you like.  I know what you can do in that way.
Strike me dead if I ever would have thought of the lad for that purpose.
It was you who kept on shoving him in my way when I was half distracted
with the worry of keeping the lot of us out of trouble.  What the devil
made you?  One would think you were doing it on purpose.  And I am damned
if I know that you didn’t.  There’s no saying how much of what’s going on
you have got hold of on the sly with your infernal don’t-care-a-damn way
of looking nowhere in particular, and saying nothing at all. . . . ”

His husky domestic voice ceased for a while.  Mrs Verloc made no reply.
Before that silence he felt ashamed of what he had said.  But as often
happens to peaceful men in domestic tiffs, being ashamed he pushed
another point.

“You have a devilish way of holding your tongue sometimes,” he began
again, without raising his voice.  “Enough to make some men go mad.  It’s
lucky for you that I am not so easily put out as some of them would be by
your deaf-and-dumb sulks.  I am fond of you.  But don’t you go too far.
This isn’t the time for it.  We ought to be thinking of what we’ve got to
do.  And I can’t let you go out to-night, galloping off to your mother
with some crazy tale or other about me.  I won’t have it.  Don’t you make
any mistake about it: if you will have it that I killed the boy, then
you’ve killed him as much as I.”

In sincerity of feeling and openness of statement, these words went far
beyond anything that had ever been said in this home, kept up on the
wages of a secret industry eked out by the sale of more or less secret
wares: the poor expedients devised by a mediocre mankind for preserving
an imperfect society from the dangers of moral and physical corruption,
both secret too of their kind.  They were spoken because Mr Verloc had
felt himself really outraged; but the reticent decencies of this home
life, nestling in a shady street behind a shop where the sun never shone,
remained apparently undisturbed.  Mrs Verloc heard him out with perfect
propriety, and then rose from her chair in her hat and jacket like a
visitor at the end of a call.  She advanced towards her husband, one arm
extended as if for a silent leave-taking.  Her net veil dangling down by
one end on the left side of her face gave an air of disorderly formality
to her restrained movements.  But when she arrived as far as the
hearthrug, Mr Verloc was no longer standing there.  He had moved off in
the direction of the sofa, without raising his eyes to watch the effect
of his tirade.  He was tired, resigned in a truly marital spirit.  But he
felt hurt in the tender spot of his secret weakness.  If she would go on
sulking in that dreadful overcharged silence—why then she must.  She was
a master in that domestic art.  Mr Verloc flung himself heavily upon the
sofa, disregarding as usual the fate of his hat, which, as if accustomed
to take care of itself, made for a safe shelter under the table.

He was tired.  The last particle of his nervous force had been expended
in the wonders and agonies of this day full of surprising failures coming
at the end of a harassing month of scheming and insomnia.  He was tired.
A man isn’t made of stone.  Hang everything!  Mr Verloc reposed
characteristically, clad in his outdoor garments.  One side of his open
overcoat was lying partly on the ground.  Mr Verloc wallowed on his back.
But he longed for a more perfect rest—for sleep—for a few hours of
delicious forgetfulness.  That would come later.  Provisionally he
rested.  And he thought: “I wish she would give over this damned
nonsense.  It’s exasperating.”

There must have been something imperfect in Mrs Verloc’s sentiment of
regained freedom.  Instead of taking the way of the door she leaned back,
with her shoulders against the tablet of the mantelpiece, as a wayfarer
rests against a fence.  A tinge of wildness in her aspect was derived
from the black veil hanging like a rag against her cheek, and from the
fixity of her black gaze where the light of the room was absorbed and
lost without the trace of a single gleam.  This woman, capable of a
bargain the mere suspicion of which would have been infinitely shocking
to Mr Verloc’s idea of love, remained irresolute, as if scrupulously
aware of something wanting on her part for the formal closing of the
transaction.

On the sofa Mr Verloc wriggled his shoulders into perfect comfort, and
from the fulness of his heart emitted a wish which was certainly as pious
as anything likely to come from such a source.

“I wish to goodness,” he growled huskily, “I had never seen Greenwich
Park or anything belonging to it.”

The veiled sound filled the small room with its moderate volume, well
adapted to the modest nature of the wish.  The waves of air of the proper
length, propagated in accordance with correct mathematical formulas,
flowed around all the inanimate things in the room, lapped against Mrs
Verloc’s head as if it had been a head of stone.  And incredible as it
may appear, the eyes of Mrs Verloc seemed to grow still larger.  The
audible wish of Mr Verloc’s overflowing heart flowed into an empty place
in his wife’s memory.  Greenwich Park.  A park!  That’s where the boy was
killed.  A park—smashed branches, torn leaves, gravel, bits of brotherly
flesh and bone, all spouting up together in the manner of a firework.
She remembered now what she had heard, and she remembered it pictorially.
They had to gather him up with the shovel.  Trembling all over with
irrepressible shudders, she saw before her the very implement with its
ghastly load scraped up from the ground.  Mrs Verloc closed her eyes
desperately, throwing upon that vision the night of her eyelids, where
after a rainlike fall of mangled limbs the decapitated head of Stevie
lingered suspended alone, and fading out slowly like the last star of a
pyrotechnic display.  Mrs Verloc opened her eyes.

Her face was no longer stony.  Anybody could have noted the subtle change
on her features, in the stare of her eyes, giving her a new and startling
expression; an expression seldom observed by competent persons under the
conditions of leisure and security demanded for thorough analysis, but
whose meaning could not be mistaken at a glance.  Mrs Verloc’s doubts as
to the end of the bargain no longer existed; her wits, no longer
disconnected, were working under the control of her will.  But Mr Verloc
observed nothing.  He was reposing in that pathetic condition of optimism
induced by excess of fatigue.  He did not want any more trouble—with his
wife too—of all people in the world.  He had been unanswerable in his
vindication.  He was loved for himself.  The present phase of her silence
he interpreted favourably.  This was the time to make it up with her.
The silence had lasted long enough.  He broke it by calling to her in an
undertone.

“Winnie.”

“Yes,” answered obediently Mrs Verloc the free woman.  She commanded her
wits now, her vocal organs; she felt herself to be in an almost
preternaturally perfect control of every fibre of her body.  It was all
her own, because the bargain was at an end.  She was clear sighted.  She
had become cunning.  She chose to answer him so readily for a purpose.
She did not wish that man to change his position on the sofa which was
very suitable to the circumstances.  She succeeded.  The man did not
stir.  But after answering him she remained leaning negligently against
the mantelpiece in the attitude of a resting wayfarer.  She was
unhurried.  Her brow was smooth.  The head and shoulders of Mr Verloc
were hidden from her by the high side of the sofa.  She kept her eyes
fixed on his feet.

She remained thus mysteriously still and suddenly collected till Mr
Verloc was heard with an accent of marital authority, and moving slightly
to make room for her to sit on the edge of the sofa.

“Come here,” he said in a peculiar tone, which might have been the tone
of brutality, but was intimately known to Mrs Verloc as the note of
wooing.

She started forward at once, as if she were still a loyal woman bound to
that man by an unbroken contract.  Her right hand skimmed slightly the
end of the table, and when she had passed on towards the sofa the carving
knife had vanished without the slightest sound from the side of the dish.
Mr Verloc heard the creaky plank in the floor, and was content.  He
waited.  Mrs Verloc was coming.  As if the homeless soul of Stevie had
flown for shelter straight to the breast of his sister, guardian and
protector, the resemblance of her face with that of her brother grew at
every step, even to the droop of the lower lip, even to the slight
divergence of the eyes.  But Mr Verloc did not see that.  He was lying on
his back and staring upwards.  He saw partly on the ceiling and partly on
the wall the moving shadow of an arm with a clenched hand holding a
carving knife.  It flickered up and down.  Its movements were leisurely.
They were leisurely enough for Mr Verloc to recognise the limb and the
weapon.

They were leisurely enough for him to take in the full meaning of the
portent, and to taste the flavour of death rising in his gorge.  His wife
had gone raving mad—murdering mad.  They were leisurely enough for the
first paralysing effect of this discovery to pass away before a resolute
determination to come out victorious from the ghastly struggle with that
armed lunatic.  They were leisurely enough for Mr Verloc to elaborate a
plan of defence involving a dash behind the table, and the felling of the
woman to the ground with a heavy wooden chair.  But they were not
leisurely enough to allow Mr Verloc the time to move either hand or foot.
The knife was already planted in his breast.  It met no resistance on its
way.  Hazard has such accuracies.  Into that plunging blow, delivered
over the side of the couch, Mrs Verloc had put all the inheritance of her
immemorial and obscure descent, the simple ferocity of the age of
caverns, and the unbalanced nervous fury of the age of bar-rooms.  Mr
Verloc, the Secret Agent, turning slightly on his side with the force of
the blow, expired without stirring a limb, in the muttered sound of the
word “Don’t” by way of protest.

Mrs Verloc had let go the knife, and her extraordinary resemblance to her
late brother had faded, had become very ordinary now.  She drew a deep
breath, the first easy breath since Chief Inspector Heat had exhibited to
her the labelled piece of Stevie’s overcoat.  She leaned forward on her
folded arms over the side of the sofa.  She adopted that easy attitude
not in order to watch or gloat over the body of Mr Verloc, but because of
the undulatory and swinging movements of the parlour, which for some time
behaved as though it were at sea in a tempest.  She was giddy but calm.
She had become a free woman with a perfection of freedom which left her
nothing to desire and absolutely nothing to do, since Stevie’s urgent
claim on her devotion no longer existed.  Mrs Verloc, who thought in
images, was not troubled now by visions, because she did not think at
all.  And she did not move.  She was a woman enjoying her complete
irresponsibility and endless leisure, almost in the manner of a corpse.
She did not move, she did not think.  Neither did the mortal envelope of
the late Mr Verloc reposing on the sofa.  Except for the fact that Mrs
Verloc breathed these two would have been perfect in accord: that accord
of prudent reserve without superfluous words, and sparing of signs, which
had been the foundation of their respectable home life.  For it had been
respectable, covering by a decent reticence the problems that may arise
in the practice of a secret profession and the commerce of shady wares.
To the last its decorum had remained undisturbed by unseemly shrieks and
other misplaced sincerities of conduct.  And after the striking of the
blow, this respectability was continued in immobility and silence.

Nothing moved in the parlour till Mrs Verloc raised her head slowly and
looked at the clock with inquiring mistrust.  She had become aware of a
ticking sound in the room.  It grew upon her ear, while she remembered
clearly that the clock on the wall was silent, had no audible tick.  What
did it mean by beginning to tick so loudly all of a sudden?  Its face
indicated ten minutes to nine.  Mrs Verloc cared nothing for time, and
the ticking went on.  She concluded it could not be the clock, and her
sullen gaze moved along the walls, wavered, and became vague, while she
strained her hearing to locate the sound.  Tic, tic, tic.

After listening for some time Mrs Verloc lowered her gaze deliberately on
her husband’s body.  Its attitude of repose was so home-like and familiar
that she could do so without feeling embarrassed by any pronounced
novelty in the phenomena of her home life.  Mr Verloc was taking his
habitual ease.  He looked comfortable.

By the position of the body the face of Mr Verloc was not visible to Mrs
Verloc, his widow.  Her fine, sleepy eyes, travelling downward on the
track of the sound, became contemplative on meeting a flat object of bone
which protruded a little beyond the edge of the sofa.  It was the handle
of the domestic carving knife with nothing strange about it but its
position at right angles to Mr Verloc’s waistcoat and the fact that
something dripped from it.  Dark drops fell on the floorcloth one after
another, with a sound of ticking growing fast and furious like the pulse
of an insane clock.  At its highest speed this ticking changed into a
continuous sound of trickling.  Mrs Verloc watched that transformation
with shadows of anxiety coming and going on her face.  It was a trickle,
dark, swift, thin. . . . Blood!

At this unforeseen circumstance Mrs Verloc abandoned her pose of idleness
and irresponsibility.

With a sudden snatch at her skirts and a faint shriek she ran to the
door, as if the trickle had been the first sign of a destroying flood.
Finding the table in her way she gave it a push with both hands as though
it had been alive, with such force that it went for some distance on its
four legs, making a loud, scraping racket, whilst the big dish with the
joint crashed heavily on the floor.

Then all became still.  Mrs Verloc on reaching the door had stopped.  A
rou