and the deanery
for myself. I shall indeed, I have such obligations to Sterne. But
however, if I am asked who will make a good bishop, I shall name him
before anybody. Then comes another letter, desiring I would recommend a
Provost,(3) supposing that Pratt (who has been here about a week) will
certainly be promoted; but I believe he will not. I presented Pratt to
Lord Treasurer, and truly young Molyneux(4) would have had me present
him too; but I directly answered him I would not, unless he had business
with him. He is the son of one Mr. Molyneux of Ireland. His father wrote
a book;(5) I suppose you know it. Here is the Duke of Marlborough going
out of England (Lord knows why), which causes many speculations. Some
say he is conscious of guilt, and dare not stand it. Others think he has
a mind to fling an odium on the Government, as who should say that one
who has done such great services to his country cannot live quietly in
it, by reason of the malice of his enemies. I have helped to patch up
these people(6) together once more. God knows how long it may last.
I was to-day at a trial between Lord Lansdowne and Lord Carteret, two
friends of mine. It was in the Queen's Bench, for about six thousand a
year (or nine, I think). I sat under Lord Chief-Justice Parker, and his
pen falling down I reached it up. He made me a low bow; and I was going
to whisper him that I HAD DONE GOOD FOR EVIL; FOR HE WOULD HAVE TAKEN
MINE FROM ME.(7) I told it Lord Treasurer and Bolingbroke. Parker would
not have known me, if several lords on the bench, and in the court,
bowing, had not turned everybody's eyes, and set them a whispering. I
owe the dog a spite, and will pay him in two months at furthest, if
I can. So much for that. But you must have chat, and I must say every
sorry thing that comes into my head. They say the Queen will stay a
month longer at Windsor. These devils of Grub Street rogues, that write
the Flying Post and Medley in one paper,(8) will not be quiet. They are
always mauling Lord Treasurer, Lord Bolingbroke, and me. We have the dog
under prosecution, but Bolingbroke is not active enough; but I hope
to swinge him. He is a Scotch rogue, one Ridpath.(9) They get out upon
bail, and write on. We take them again, and get fresh bail; so it goes
round. They say some learned Dutchman has wrote a book, proving by
civil law that we do them wrong by this peace; but I shall show by plain
reason that we have suffered the wrong, and not they. I toil like a
horse, and have hundreds of letters still to read and squeeze a line out
of each, or at least the seeds of a line. Strafford goes back to Holland
in a day or two, and I hope our peace is very near. I have about thirty
pages more to write (that is, to be extracted), which will be sixty in
print. It is the most troublesome part of all, and I cannot keep myself
private, though I stole into a room up two pair of stairs, when I came
from Windsor; but my present man has not yet learned his lesson of
denying me discreetly.

30. The Duchess of Ormond found me out to-day, and made me dine with
her. Lady Masham is still expecting. She has had a cruel cold. I could
not finish my letter last post for the soul of me. Lord Bolingbroke has
had my papers these six weeks, and done nothing to them. Is Tisdall
yet in the world? I propose writing controversies, to get a name with
posterity. The Duke of Ormond will not be over these three or four
days. I desire to make him join with me in settling all right among our
people. I have ordered the Duchess to let me have an hour with the Duke
at his first coming, to give him a true state of persons and things.
I believe the Duke of Shrewsbury will hardly be declared your Governor
yet; at least, I think so now; but resolutions alter very often. The
Duke of Hamilton gave me a pound of snuff to-day, admirable good. I wish
DD had it, and Ppt too, if she likes it. It cost me a quarter of an hour
of his politics, which I was forced to hear. Lady Orkney(10) is making
me a writing-table of her own contrivance, and a bed nightgown. She is
perfectly kind, like a mother. I think the devil was in it the other
day, that I should talk to her of an ugly squinting cousin of hers, and
the poor lady herself, you know, squints like a dragon. The other day
we had a long discourse with her about love; and she told us a saying
of her sister Fitz-Hardinge,(11) which I thought excellent, that in men,
desire begets love, and in women, love begets desire. We have abundance
of our old criers(12) still hereabouts. I hear every morning your women
with the old satin and taffeta, etc., the fellow with old coats, suits
or cloaks. Our weather is abominable of late. We have not two tolerable
days in twenty. I have lost money again at ombre, with Lord Orkney
and others; yet, after all, this year I have lost but three-and-twenty
shillings; so that, considering card money, I am no loser.

Our Society hath not yet renewed their meetings. I hope we shall
continue to do some good this winter; and Lord Treasurer promises the
Academy for reforming our language shall soon go forward. I must now
go hunt those dry letter for materials. You will see something very
notable, I hope. So much for that. God Almighty bless you.




LETTER 55.(1)

LONDON, Nov. 15, 1712.

Before this comes to your hands, you will have heard of the most
terrible accident that hath almost ever happened. This morning, at
eight, my man brought me word that the Duke of Hamilton had fought
with Lord Mohun,(2) and killed him, and was brought home wounded.(3) I
immediately sent him to the Duke's house, in St. James's Square; but the
porter could hardly answer for tears, and a great rabble was about the
house. In short, they fought at seven this morning. The dog Mohun
was killed on the spot; and while(4) the Duke was over him, Mohun,
shortening his sword, stabbed him in at the shoulder to the heart. The
Duke was helped toward the cake-house by the Ring in Hyde Park (where
they fought), and died on the grass, before he could reach the house;
and was brought home in his coach by eight, while the poor Duchess(5)
was asleep. Maccartney,(6) and one Hamilton,(7) were the seconds, who
fought likewise, and are both fled. I am told that a footman of Lord
Mohun's stabbed the Duke of Hamilton; and some say Maccartney did so
too. Mohun gave the affront, and yet sent the challenge. I am infinitely
concerned for the poor Duke, who was a frank, honest, good-natured man.
I loved him very well, and I think he loved me better. He had(8) the
greatest mind in the world to have me go with him to France, but durst
not tell it me; and those he did, said I could not be spared, which
was true. They have removed the poor Duchess to a lodging in the
neighbourhood, where I have been with her two hours, and am just come
away. I never saw so melancholy a scene; for indeed all reasons for
real grief belong to her; nor is it possible for anybody to be a greater
loser in all regards. She has moved my very soul. The lodging was
inconvenient, and they would have removed her to another; but I would
not suffer it, because it had no room backward, and she must have been
tortured with the noise of the Grub Street screamers mention(ing) her
husband's murder to her ears.

I believe you have heard the story of my escape, in opening the bandbox
sent to Lord Treasurer.(9) The prints have told a thousand lies of it;
but at last we gave them a true account of it at length, printed in the
evening;(10) only I would not suffer them to name me, having been so
often named before, and teased to death with questions. I wonder how I
came to have so much presence of mind, which is usually not my talent;
but so it pleased God, and I saved myself and him; for there was a
bullet apiece. A gentleman told me that if I had been killed, the Whigs
would have called it a judgment, because the barrels were of inkhorns,
with which I had done them so much mischief. There was a pure Grub
Street of it, full of lies and inconsistencies.(11) I do not like these
things at all, and I wish myself more and more among my willows.(12)
There is a devilish spirit among people, and the Ministry must exert
themselves, or sink. Nite dee sollahs, I'll go seep.(13)

16. I thought to have finished this yesterday; but was too much
disturbed. I sent a letter early this morning to Lady Masham, to beg
her to write some comforting words to the poor Duchess. I dined to-(day)
with Lady Masham at Kensington, where she is expecting these two months
to lie in. She has promised me to get the Queen to write to the Duchess
kindly on this occasion; and to-morrow I will beg Lord Treasurer to
visit and comfort her. I have been with her two hours again, and find
her worse: her violences not so frequent, but her melancholy more formal
and settled. She has abundance of wit and spirit; about thirty-three
years old; handsome and airy, and seldom spared anybody that gave her
the least provocation; by which she had many enemies and few friends.
Lady Orkney, her sister-in-law, is come to town on this occasion, and
has been to see her, and behaved herself with great humanity. They
have been always very ill together, and the poor Duchess could not have
patience when people told her I went often to Lady Orkney's. But I am
resolved to make them friends; for the Duchess is now no more the object
of envy, and must learn humility from the severest master, Affliction.
I design to make the Ministry put out a proclamation (if it can be found
proper) against that villain Maccartney. What shall we do with these
murderers? I cannot end this letter to-night, and there is no occasion;
for I cannot send it till Tuesday, and the crowner's inquest on the
Duke's body is to be to-morrow, and I shall know more. But what care oo
for all this? Iss, poo MD im sorry for poo Pdfr's(14) friends; and this
is a very surprising event. 'Tis late, and I'll go to bed. This looks
like journals. Nite.

17. I was to-day at noon with the Duchess of Hamilton again, after I had
been with Lady Orkney, and charged her to be kind to her sister in her
affliction. The Duchess told me Lady Orkney had been with her, and that
she did not treat her as gently as she ought. They hate one another, but
I will try to patch it up. I have been drawing up a paragraph for the
Postboy, to be out to-morrow, and as malicious as possible, and
very proper for Abel Roper,(15) the printer of it. I dined at Lord
Treasurer's at six in the evening, which is his usual hour of returning
from Windsor: he promises to visit the Duchess to-morrow, and says he
has a message to her from the Queen. Thank God. I have stayed till past
one with him. So nite deelest MD.(16)

18. The Committee of Council is to sit this afternoon upon the affair
of the Duke of Hamilton's murder, and I hope a proclamation will be out
against Maccartney. I was just now ('tis now noon) with the Duchess, to
let her know Lord Treasurer will see her. She is mightily out of order.
The jury have not yet brought in their verdict upon the crowner's
inquest. We suspect Maccartney stabbed the Duke while he was fighting.
The Queen and Lord Treasurer are in great concern at this event. I dine
to-day again with Lord Treasurer; but must send this to the post-office
before, because else I shall not have time; he usually keeping me so
late. Ben Tooke bid me write to DD to send her certificate, for it is
high time it should be sent, he says. Pray make Parvisol write to me,
and send me a general account of my affairs; and let him know I shall
be over in spring, and that by all means he sells the horses. Prior has
kissed the Queen's hand, and will return to France in a few days, and
Lord Strafford to Holland; and now the King of Spain has renounced his
pretensions to France, the peace must follow very soon unavoidably. You
must no more call Philip, Duke of Anjou, for we now acknowledge him
King of Spain. Dr. Pratt tells me you are all mad in Ireland with your
playhouse frolics and prologues, and I know not what. The Bishop of
Clogher and family are well: they have heard from you, or you from them,
lately, I have forgot which: I dined there t'other day, but the Bishop
came not till after dinner; and our meat and drink was very so so.
Mr. Vedeau(17) was with me yesterday, and inquired after you. He was a
lieutenant, and is now broke, and upon half-pay. He asked me nothing
for himself; but wanted an employment for a friend, who would give a
handsome pair of gloves. One Hales sent me up a letter t'other day,
which said you lodged in his house, and therefore desired I would get
him a civil employment. I would not be within, and have directed my
man to give him an answer, that I never open letters brought me by
the writers, etc. I was complaining to a lady that I wanted to mend an
employment from forty to sixty pounds a year, in the Salt Office, and
thought it hard I could not do it. She told me one Mr. Griffin(18)
should do it. And afterward I met Griffin at her lodgings; and he was,
as I found, one I had been acquainted with. I named Filby(19) to him,
and his abode somewhere near Nantwich. He said frankly he had formerly
examined the man, and found he understood very little of his business;
but if he heard he mended, he would do what I desired. I will let it
rest a while, and then resume it; and if Ppt writes to Filby, she may
advise him to diligence, etc. I told Griffin positively I would have it
done, if the man mended. This is an account of poo Ppt's commission to
her most humble servant Pdfr. I have a world of writing to finish, and
little time; these toads of Ministers are so slow in their helps. This
makes me sometimes steal a week from the exactness I used to write to
MD. Farewell, dee logues, deelest MD MD MD,... FW FW FW ME ME ME Lele.

Smoke the folding of my letters of late.(20)




LETTER 56.(1)

LONDON, Dec. 12, 1712.

Here is now a stlange ting; a rettle flom MD unanswered: never was
before. I am slower, and MD is faster: but the last was owing to DD's
certificate. Why could it not be sent before, pay now? Is it so hard for
DD to prove she is alive? I protest solemnly I am not able to write to
MD for other business, but I will resume my journal method next time. I
find it is easier, though it contains nothing but where I dine, and the
occurrences of the day. I will write now but once in three weeks
till this business is off my hands, which must be in six, I think, at
farthest. O Ppt, I remember your reprimanding me for meddling in other
people's affairs: I have enough of it now, with a wanion.(2) Two women
have been here six times apiece; I never saw them yet. The first I have
despatched with a letter; the other I must see, and tell her I can
do nothing for her: she is wife of one Connor,(3) an old college
acquaintance, and comes on a foolish errand, for some old pretensions,
that will succeed when I am Lord Treasurer. I am got (up) two pair of
stairs, in a private lodging, and have ordered all my friends not to
discover where I am; yet every morning two or three sots are plaguing
me, and my present servant has not yet his lesson perfect of denying me.
I have written a hundred and thirty pages in folio, to be printed,
and must write thirty more, which will make a large book of four
shillings.(4) I wish I knew an opportunity of sending you some snuff.
I will watch who goes to Ireland, and do it if possible. I had a
letter from Parvisol, and find he has set my livings very low. Colonel
Hamilton, who was second to the Duke of Hamilton, is tried to-day.
I suppose he is come off, but have not heard.(5) I dined with Lord
Treasurer, but left him by nine, and visited some people. Lady Betty,(6)
his(7) daughter, will be married on Monday next (as I suppose) to the
Marquis of Caermarthen. I did not know your country place had been
Portraine, till you told me so in your last. Has Swanton taken it of
Wallis? That Wallis was a grave, wise coxcomb. God be thanked that Ppt
im better of her disoddles.(8) Pray God keep her so. The pamphlet of
Political Lying is written by Dr. Arbuthnot, the author of John Bull;
'tis very pretty, but not so obvious to be understood. Higgins,(9) first
chaplain to the Duke of Hamilton? Why, the Duke of Hamilton never dreamt
of a chaplain, nor I believe ever heard of Higgins. You are glorious
newsmongers in Ireland--Dean Francis,(10) Sir R. Levinge,(11) stuff
stuff: and Pratt, more stuff. We have lost our fine frost here; and Abel
Roper tells as you have had floods in Dublin; ho, brave(12) you! Oh
ho! Swanton seized Portraine, now I understand oo. Ay, ay, now I see
Portraune at the top of your letter. I never minded it before. Now
to your second, N.36. So, you read one of the Grub Streets about the
bandbox.(13) The Whig papers have abused me about the bandbox. God help
me, what could I do? I fairly ventured my life. There is a particular
account of it in the Postboy, and Evening Post of that day. Lord
Treasurer has had the seal sent him that sealed the box, and directions
where to find the other pistol in a tree in St. James's Park, which Lord
Bolingbroke's messenger found accordingly; but who sent the present
is not yet known. The Duke of Hamilton avoided the quarrel as much as
possible, according to the foppish rules of honour in practice. What
signified your writing angry to Filby? I hope you said nothing of
hearing anything from me. Heigh! do oo write by sandlelight! nauti,
nauti, nauti dallar, a hundred times, fol doing so. O, fais, DD, I'll
take care of myself! The Queen is in town, and Lady Masham's month of
lying-in is within two days of being out. I was at the christening on
Monday. I could not get the child named Robin, after Lord Treasurer; it
is Samuel, after the father. My brother Ormond sent me some chocolate
to-day. I wish you had share of it: but they say 'tis good for me, and I
design to drink some in a morning. Our Society meets next Thursday, now
the Queen is in town; and Lord Treasurer assures me that the Society for
reforming the language shall soon be established. I have given away ten
shillings to-day to servants; 'tan't be help if one should cry one's
eyes out.(14) Hot a stir is here about your company and visits! Charming
company, no doubt; now I keep no company at all, nor have I any desire
to keep any. I never go to a coffee-house nor a tavern, nor have touched
a card since I left Windsor. I make few visits, nor go to levees; my
only debauching is sitting late where I dine, if I like the company.
I have almost dropped the Duchesses of Shrewsbury and Hamilton, and
several others. Lord Treasurer, the Duke of Ormond, and Lady Orkney are
all that I see very often. Oh yes, and Lady Masham and Lord Bolingbroke,
and one or two private friends. I make no figure but at Court, where I
affect to turn from a lord to the meanest of my acquaintance, and I love
to go there on Sundays to see the world. But, to say the truth, I am
growing weary of it. I dislike a million of things in the course of
public affairs; and if I were to stay here much longer, I am sure
I should ruin myself with endeavouring to mend them. I am every day
invited into schemes of doing this, but I cannot find any that will
probably succeed. It is impossible to save people against their own
will; and I have been too much engaged in patchwork already. Do you
understand all this stuff? No. Well zen, you are now returned to ombre
and the Dean, and Christmas; I wish oo a very merry one; and pray don't
lose oo money, nor play upon Watt Welch's game. Nite, sollahs, 'tis rate
I'll go to seep; I don't seep well, and therefore never dare to drink
coffee or tea after dinner: but I am very seepy in a molning. This is
the effect of time and years. Nite deelest MD.

18. Morn. I am so very seepy in the morning that my man wakens me
above ten times; and now I can tell oo no news of this day. (Here is a
restless dog, crying cabbages and savoys, plagues me every morning about
this time; he is now at it. I wish his largest cabbage were sticking
in his throat.) I lodge over against the house in Little Rider Street,
where DD lodged. Don't oo lememble, maram? To-night I must see the Abbe
Gaultier,(15) to get some particulars for my History. It was he who was
first employed by France in the overtures of peace, and I have not had
time this month to see him; he is but a puppy too. Lady Orkney has just
sent to invite me to dinner; she has not given me the bed-nightgown;(16)
besides, I am come very much off from writing in bed, though I am doing
it this minute; but I stay till my fire is burnt up. My grate is very
large; two bushels of coals in a week: but I save it in lodgings. Lord
Abercorn is come to London, and will plague me, and I can do him no
service. The Duke of Shrewsbury goes in a day or two for France, perhaps
to-day. We shall have a peace very soon; the Dutch are almost entirely
agreed, and if they stop we shall make it without them; that has been
long resolved. One Squire Jones,(17) a scoundrel in my parish, has writ
to me to desire I would engage Joe Beaumont to give him his interest for
Parliament-man for Trim: pray tell Joe this; and if he designed to vote
for him already, then he may tell Jones that I received his letter, and
that I writ to Joe to do it. If Joe be engaged for any other, then he
may do what he will: and Parvisol may say he spoke to Joe, but Joe's
engaged, etc. I received three pair of fine thread stockings from Joe
lately. Pray thank him when you see him, and that I say they are very
fine and good. (I never looked at them yet, but that's no matter.) This
is a fine day. I am ruined with coaches and chairs this twelvepenny
weather. I must see my brother Ormond at eleven, and then the Duchess of
Hamilton, with whom I doubt I am in disgrace, not having seen her these
ten days. I send this to-day, and must finish it now; and perhaps
some people may come and hinder me; for it im ten o'clock (but not
shaving-day), and I must be abroad at eleven. Abbe Gaultier sends me
word I can't see him to-night; pots cake him! I don't value anything but
one letter he has of Petecum's,(18) showing the roguery of the Dutch.
Did not the Conduct of the Allies make you great politicians? Fais, I
believe you are not quite so ignorant as I thought you. I am glad to
hear oo walked so much in the country. Does DD ever read to you, ung
ooman? O, fais! I shall find strange doings hen I tum ole!(19) Here is
somebody coming that I must see that wants a little place; the son of
cousin Rooke's eldest daughter, that died many years ago. He's here.
Farewell, deelest MD MD MD ME ME ME FW FW FW, Lele.




LETTER 57.(1)

LONDON, Dec. 18, 1712.

Our Society was to meet to-day; but Lord Harley, who was President
this week, could not attend, being gone to Wimbledon with his new
brother-in-law, the young Marquis of Caermarthen, who married Lady Betty
Harley on Monday last; and Lord Treasurer is at Wimbledon too. However,
half a dozen of us met, and I propose our meetings should be once a
fortnight; for, between you and me, we do no good. It cost me nineteen
shillings to-day for my Club at dinner; I don't like it, fais. We have
terrible snowy slobbery weather. Lord Abercorn is come to town, and will
see me, whether I will or no. You know he has a pretence to a dukedom
in France, which the Duke of Hamilton was soliciting for; but Abercorn
resolves to spoil their title, if they will not allow him a fourth part;
and I have advised the Duchess to compound with him, and have made the
Ministry of my opinion. Night, dee sollahs, MD, MD.

19. Ay mally zis is sumsing rike,(2) for Pdfr to write journals again!
'Tis as natural as mother's milk, now I am got into it. Lord Treasurer
is returned from Wimbledon ('tis not above eight miles off), and sent
for me to dine with him at five; but I had the grace to be abroad,
and dined with some others, with honest Ben Tooke, by invitation. The
Duchess of Ormond promised me her picture, and coming home tonight,
I found hers and the Duke's both in my chamber. Was not that a pretty
civil surprise? Yes, and they are in fine gilded frames, too. I am
writing a letter to thank her, which I will send to-morrow morning.
I'll tell her she is such a prude that she will not let so much as her
picture be alone in a room with a man, unless the Duke's be with it;
and so forth.(3) We are full of snow, and dabbling. Lady Masham has come
abroad these three days, and seen the Queen. I dined with her t'other
day at her sister Hill's. I hope she will remove in a few days to her
new lodgings at St. James's from Kensington. Nite, dee logues MD.

20. I lodge (up) two pair of stairs, have but one room, and deny myself
to everybody almost, yet I cannot be quiet; and all my mornings are lost
with people, who will not take answers below stairs; such as Dilly, and
the Bishop, and Provost, etc. Lady Orkney invited me to dinner to-day,
which hindered me from dining with Lord Treasurer. This is his day that
his chief friends in the Ministry dine with him. However, I went there
about six, and sat with them till past nine, when they all went off; but
he kept me back, and told me the circumstances of Lady Betty's match.
The young fellow has 60,000 pounds ready money, three great houses
furnished, 7,000 pounds a year at present, and about five more after his
father and mother die. I think Lady Betty's portion is not above 8,000
pounds. I remember either Tisdall writ to me in somebody's letter,
or you did it for him, that I should mention him on occasion to Lord
Anglesea, with whom, he said, he had some little acquaintance. Lord
Anglesea was with me to-night at Lord Treasurer's; and then I asked him
about Tisdall, and described him. He said he never saw him, but that he
had sent him his book.(4) See what it is to be a puppy. Pray tell Mr.
Walls that Lord Anglesea thanked me for recommending Clements(5) to him;
that he says he is 20,000 pounds the better for knowing Clements. But
pray don't let Clements go and write a letter of thanks, and tell
my lord that he hears so and so, etc. Why, 'tis but like an Irish
understanding to do so. Sad weather; two shillings in coaches to-day,
and yet I am dirty. I am now going to read over something and correct
it. So, nite.

21. Puppies have got a new way of plaguing me. I find letters directed
for me at Lord Treasurer's, sometimes with enclosed ones to him, and
sometimes with projects, and some times with libels. I usually keep them
three or four days without opening. I was at Court to-day, as I always
am on Sundays, instead of a coffee-house, to see my acquaintance.
This day se'nnight, after I had been talking at Court with Sir William
Wyndham, the Spanish Ambassador(6) came to him and said he heard that
was Dr. Swift, and desired him to tell me that his master, and the
King of France, and the Queen, were more obliged to me than any man in
Europe; so we bowed, and shook hands, etc. I took it very well of him. I
dined with Lord Treasurer, and must again to-morrow, though I had rather
not (as DD says); but now the Queen is in town, he does not keep me so
late. I have not had time to see Fanny Manley since she came, but intend
it one of these days. Her uncle, Jack Manley,(7) I hear, cannot live
a month, which will be a great loss to her father in Ireland, for I
believe he is one of his chief supports. Our peace now will soon
be determined; for Lord Bolingbroke tells me this morning that four
provinces of Holland(8) have complied with the Queen, and we expect the
rest will do so immediately. Nite MD.

22. Lord Keeper promised me yesterday the first convenient living to
poor Mr. Gery,(9) who is married, and wants some addition to what he
has. He is a very worthy creature. I had a letter some weeks ago from
Elwick,(10) who married Betty Gery. It seems the poor woman died some
time last summer. Elwick grows rich, and purchases lands. I dined with
Lord Treasurer to-day, who has engaged me to come again to-morrow. I
gave Lord Bolingbroke a poem of Parnell's.(11) I made Parnell insert
some compliments in it to his lordship. He is extremely pleased with
it, and read some parts of it to-day to Lord Treasurer, who liked it
as much. And indeed he outdoes all our poets here a bar's length. Lord
Bolingbroke has ordered me to bring him to dinner on Christmas Day, and
I made Lord Treasurer promise to see him; and it may one day do Parnell
a kindness. You know Parnell. I believe I have told you of that poem.
Nite, deel MD.

23. This morning I presented one Diaper,(12) a poet, to Lord
Bolingbroke, with a new poem, which is a very good one; and I am to give
him a sum of money from my lord; and I have contrived to make a parson
of him, for he is half one already, being in deacon's orders, and serves
a small cure in the country; but has a sword at his a--- here in town.
'Tis a poor little short wretch, but will do best in a gown, and we
will make Lord Keeper give him a living. Lord Bolingbroke writ to
Lord Treasurer to excuse me to-day; so I dined with the former, and
Monteleon, the Spanish Ambassador, who made me many compliments. I
stayed till nine, and now it is past ten, and my man has locked me up,
and I have just called to mind that I shall be in disgrace with
Tom Leigh.(13) That coxcomb had got into acquaintance with one
Eckershall,(14) Clerk of the Kitchen to the Queen, who was civil to him
at Windsor on my account; for I had done some service to Eckershall.
Leigh teases me to pass an evening at his lodgings with Eckershall. I
put it off several times, but was forced at last to promise I would come
to-night; and it never was in my head till I was locked up, and I have
called and called, but my man is gone to bed; so I will write an excuse
to-morrow. I detest that Tom Leigh, and am as formal to him as I can
when I happen to meet him in the Park. The rogue frets me, if he knew
it. He asked me why I did not wait on the Bishop of Dromore.(15) I
answered I had not the honour to be acquainted with him, and would not
presume, etc. He takes me seriously, and says the Bishop is no proud
man, etc. He tells me of a judge in Ireland that has done ill things.
I ask why he is not out? Says he, "I think the bishops, and you, and I,
and the rest of the clergy, should meet and consult about it." I beg his
pardon, and say, "I cannot be serviceable that way." He answers, "Yes,
everybody may help something."--Don't you see how curiously he contrives
to vex me; for the dog knows that with half a word I could do more than
all of them together. But he only does it from the pride and envy of
his own heart, and not out of a humorous design of teasing. He is one
of those that would rather a service should not be done, than done by a
private man, and of his own country. You take all this, don't you? Nite
dee sollahs, I'll go seep a dozey.

24. I dined to-day with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in order to
look over some of my papers; but nothing was done. I have been also
mediating between the Hamilton family and Lord Abercorn, to have them
compound with him; and I believe they will do it. Lord Selkirk,(16) the
late Duke's brother, is to be in town, in order to go to France, to
make the demands; and the Ministry are of opinion they will get some
satisfaction, and they empowered me to advise the Hamilton side to agree
with Abercorn, who asks a fourth part, and will go to France and spoil
all if they won't yield it. Nite sollahs.

25. All melly Titmasses--melly Titmasses--I said it first--I wish it a
souzand (times) zoth with halt(17) and soul.(18) I carried Parnell to
dine at Lord Bolingbroke's, and he behaved himself very well; and Lord
Bolingbroke is mightily pleased with him. I was at St. James's Chapel by
eight this morning; and church and sacrament were done by ten. The Queen
has the gout in her hand, and did not come to church today; and I stayed
so long in my chamber that I missed going to Court. Did I tell you that
the Queen designs to have a Drawing-room and company every day? Nite dee
logues.

26. I was to wish the Duke of Ormond a happy Christmas, and give half
a crown to his porter. It will cost me a dozen half-crowns among such
fellows. I dined with Lord Treasurer, who chid me for being absent
three days. Mighty kind, with a p--; less of civility, and more of his
interest! We hear Maccartney is gone over to Ireland. Was it not comical
for a gentleman to be set upon by highwaymen, and to tell them he was
Maccartney? Upon which they brought him to a justice of peace, in hopes
of the reward,(19) and the rogues were sent to gaol. Was it not great
presence of mind? But maybe you heard this already; for there was a
Grub Street of it. Lord Bolingbroke told me I must walk away to-day when
dinner was done, because Lord Treasurer, and he, and another, were
to enter upon business; but I said it was as fit I should know their
business as anybody, for I was to justify (it).(20) So the rest went,
and I stayed, and it was so important, I was like to sleep over it. I
left them at nine, and it is now twelve. Nite, MD.

27. I dined to-day with General Hill, Governor of Dunkirk. Lady Masham
and Mrs. Hill, his two sisters, were of the company, and there have I
been sitting this evening till eleven, looking over others at play;
for I have left off loving play myself; and I think Ppt is now a great
gamester. I have a great cold on me, not quite at its height. I have
them seldom, and therefore ought to be patient. I met Mr. Addison and
Pastoral Philips on the Mall to-day, and took a turn with them; but they
both looked terrible dry and cold. A curse of party! And do you know I
have taken more pains to recommend the Whig wits to the favour and mercy
of the Ministers than any other people. Steele I have kept in his
place. Congreve I have got to be used kindly, and secured. Rowe I have
recommended, and got a promise of a place. Philips I could certainly
have provided for, if he had not run party mad, and made me withdraw my
recommendation; and I set Addison so right at first that he might have
been employed, and have partly secured him the place he has; yet I am
worse used by that faction than any man. Well, go to cards, sollah Ppt,
and dress the wine and olange, sollah MD, and I'll go seep. 'Tis rate.
Nite MD.

28. My cold is so bad that I could not go to church today, nor to Court;
but I was engaged to Lord Orkney's with the Duke of Ormond, at dinner;
and ventured, because I could cough and spit there as I pleased. The
Duke and Lord Arran left us, and I have been sitting ever since with
Lord and Lady Orkney till past eleven: and my cold is worse, and makes
me giddy. I hope it is only my cold. Oh, says Ppt, everybody is giddy
with a cold; I hope it is no more; but I'll go to bed, for the fellow
has bawled "Past twelve." Night, deels.

29. I got out early to-day, and escaped all my duns. I went to see Lord
Bolingbroke about some business, and truly he was gone out too. I dined
in the City upon the broiled leg of a goose and a bit of brawn, with
my printer. Did I tell you that I forbear printing what I have in hand,
till the Court decides something about me? I will contract no more
enemies, at least I will not embitter worse those I have already, till
I have got under shelter; and the Ministers know my resolution, so that
you may be disappointed in seeing this thing as soon as you expected.
I hear Lord Treasurer is out of order. My cold is very bad. Every(body)
has one. Nite two dee logues.

30. I suppose this will be full by Saturday; zen(21) it sall go. Duke
of Ormond, Lord Arran, and I, dined privately to-day at an old servant's
house of his. The Council made us part at six. One Mrs. Ramsay dined
with us; an old lady of about fifty-five, that we are all very fond of.
I called this evening at Lord Treasurer's, and sat with him two hours.
He has been cupped for a cold, and has been very ill. He cannot dine
with Parnell and me at Lord Bolingbroke's to-morrow, but says he will
see Parnell some other time. I hoise(22) up Parnell partly to spite the
envious Irish folks here, particularly Tom Leigh. I saw the Bishop
of Clogher's family to-day; Miss is mighty ill of a cold, coughs
incessantly.(23) Nite MD.

31. To-day Parnell and I dined with Lord Bolingbroke, to correct
Parnell's poem. I made him show all the places he disliked; and when
Parnell has corrected it fully he shall print it. I went this evening to
sit with Lord Treasurer. He is better, and will be out in a day or two.
I sat with him while the young folks went to supper; and then went down,
and there were the young folks merry together, having turned Lady Oxford
up to my lord, and I stayed with them till twelve. There was the young
couple, Lord and Lady Caermarthen, and Lord and Lady Dupplin, and Lord
Harley and I; and the old folks were together above. It looked like what
I have formerly done so often; stealing together from the old folks,
though indeed it was not from poor Lord Treasurer, who is as young a
fellow as any of us: but Lady Oxford is a silly mere old woman.(24) My
cold is still so bad that I have not the least smelling. I am just got
home, and 'tis past twelve; and I'll go to bed, and settle my head,
heavy as lead. Nite MD.

Jan. 1, 1712-13. A sousand melly new eels(25) to deelest richar MD. Pray
God Almighty bless you, and send you ever happy! I forgot to tell you
that yesterday Lord Abercorn was here, teasing me about his French
duchy, and suspecting my partiality to the Hamilton family in such a
whimsical manner that Dr. Pratt, who was by, thought he was mad. He was
no sooner gone but Lord Orkney sent to know whether he might come and
sit with me half an hour upon some business. I returned answer that I
would wait on him; which I did. We discoursed a while, and he left me
with Lady Orkney; and in came the Earl of Selkirk, whom I had never seen
before. He is another brother of the Duke of Hamilton, and is going to
France, by a power from his mother, the old Duchess,(26) to negotiate
their pretensions to the duchy of Chatelherault. He teased me for two
hours in spite of my teeth, and held my hand when I offered to stir;
would have had me engage the Ministry to favour him against Lord
Abercorn, and to convince them that Lord Abercorn had no pretensions;
and desired I would also convince Lord Abercorn himself so; and
concluded he was sorry I was a greater friend to Abercorn than Hamilton.
I had no patience, and used him with some plainness. Am not I purely
handled between a couple of puppies? Ay, says Ppt, you must be meddling
in other folks' affairs. I appeal to the Bishop of Clogher whether
Abercorn did not complain that I would not let him see me last year,
and that he swore he would take no denial from my servant when he came
again. The Ministers gave me leave to tell the Hamilton family it was
their opinion that they ought to agree with Abercorn. Lord Anglesea
was then by, and told Abercorn; upon which he gravely tells me I was
commissioned by the Ministers, and ought to perform my commission,
etc.--But I'll have done with them. I have warned Lord Treasurer and
Lord Bolingbroke to beware of Selkirk's teasing; --x on him! Yet
Abercorn vexes me more. The whelp owes to me all the kind receptions he
has had from the Ministry. I dined to-day at Lord Treasurer's with the
young folks, and sat with Lord Treasurer till nine, and then was forced
to Lady Masham's, and sat there till twelve, talking of affairs, till I
am out of humour, as everyone must that knows them inwardly. A thousand
things wrong, most of them easy to mend; yet our schemes availing at
best but little, and sometimes nothing at all. One evil, which I twice
patched up with the hazard of all the credit I had, is now spread more
than ever.(27) But burn politics, and send me from Courts and Ministers!
Nite deelest richar MD.

2. I sauntered about this morning, and went with Dr. Pratt to a picture
auction, where I had like to be drawn in to buy a picture that I was
fond of, but, it seems, was good for nothing. Pratt was there to buy
some pictures for the Bishop of Clogher, who resolves to lay out ten
pounds to furnish his house with curious pieces. We dined with the
Bishop, I being by chance disengaged. And this evening I sat with
the Bishop of Ossory,(28) who is laid up with the gout. The French
Ambassador, Duke d'Aumont,(29) came to town to-night; and the rabble
conducted him home with shouts. I cannot smell yet, though my cold
begins to break. It continues cruel hard frosty weather. Go and be
melly,... sollahs.(30)

3. Lord Dupplin and I went with Lord and Lady Orkney this morning at
ten to Wimbledon, six miles off, to see Lord and Lady Caermarthen. It is
much the finest place about this town. Did oo never see it? I was once
there before, about five years ago. You know Lady Caermarthen is Lord
Treasurer's daughter, married about three weeks ago. I hope the young
fellow will be a good husband.--I must send this away now. I came back
just by nightfall, cruel cold weather; I have no smell yet, but my cold
something better. Nite (?) sollahs; I'll take my reeve. I forget how
MD's accounts are. Pray let me know always timely before MD wants; and
pray give the bill on t'other side to Mrs. Brent as usual. I believe I
have not paid her this great while. Go, play cards, and... rove Pdfr.
Nite richar MD... roves Pdfr. FW lele.. . MD MD MD MD MD FW FW FW FW MD
MD Lele...(31)

The six odd shillings, tell Mrs. Brent, are for her new year's gift.



I(32) am just now told that poor dear Lady Ashburnham,(33) the Duke
of Ormond's daughter, died yesterday at her country house. The poor
creature was with child. She was my greatest favourite, and I am in
excessive concern for her loss. I hardly knew a more valuable person on
all accounts. You must have heard me talk of her. I am afraid to see the
Duke and Duchess. She was naturally very healthy; I am afraid she has
been thrown away for want of care. Pray condole with me. 'Tis extremely
moving. Her lord's a puppy; and I shall never think it worth my while
to be troubled with him, now he has lost all that was valuable in his
possession; yet I think he used her pretty well. I hate life when I
think it exposed to such accidents; and to see so many thousand wretches
burdening the earth, while such as her die, makes me think God did never
intend life for a blessing. Farewell.




LETTER 58.(1)

LONDON, Jan. 4, 1712-13.

I ended my last with the melancholy news of poor Lady Ashburnham's
death. The Bishop of Clogher and Dr. Pratt made me dine with them to-day
at Lord Mountjoy's, pursuant to an engagement, which I had forgot. Lady
Mountjoy told me that Maccartney was got safe out of our clutches, for
she had spoke with one who had a letter from him from Holland. Others
say the same thing. 'Tis hard such a dog should escape.--As I left Lord
Mountjoy's I saw the Duke d'Aumont, the French Ambassador, going from
Lord Bolingbroke's, where he dined, to have a private audience of the
Queen. I followed, and went up to Court, where there was a great
crowd. I was talking with the Duke of Argyle by the fireside in the
bed-chamber, when the Ambassador came out from the Queen. Argyle
presented me to him, and Lord Bolingbroke and we talked together a
while. He is a fine gentleman, something like the Duke of Ormond, and
just such an expensive man. After church to-day I showed the Bishop of
Clogher, at Court, who was who. Nite my two dee logues, and...(2)

5. Our frost is broke, but it is bloody cold. Lord Treasurer is
recovered, and went out this evening to the Queen. I dined with Lady
Oxford, and then sat with Lord Treasurer while he went out. He gave me
a letter from an unknown hand, relating to Dr. Brown,(3) Bishop of Cork,
recommending him to a better bishopric, as a person who opposed Lord
Wharton, and was made a bishop on that account, celebrating him for
a great politician, etc.: in short, all directly contrary to his
character, which I made bold to explain. What dogs there are in the
world! I was to see the poor Duke and Duchess of Ormond this morning.
The Duke was in his public room, with Mr. Southwell(4) and two more
gentlemen. When Southwell and I were alone with him, he talked something
of Lord Ashburnham, that he was afraid the Whigs would get him again.
He bore up as well as he could, but something falling accidentally in
discourse, the tears were just falling out of his eyes, and I looked
off to give him an opportunity (which he took) of wiping them with his
handkerchief. I never saw anything so moving, nor such a mixture of
greatness of mind, and tenderness, and discretion. Nite MD.

6. Lord Bolingbroke and Parnell and I dined, by invitation, with my
friend Darteneuf,(5) whom you have heard me talk of. Lord Bolingbroke
likes Parnell mightily; and it is pleasant to see that one who hardly
passed for anything in Ireland makes his way here with a little friendly
forwarding. It is scurvy rainy weather, and I have hardly been abroad
to-day, nor know anything that passes.--Lord Treasurer is quite
recovered, and I hope will be careful to keep himself well. The Duchess
of Marlborough is leaving England to go to her Duke, and makes presents
of rings to several friends, they say worth two hundred pounds apiece. I
am sure she ought to give me one, though the Duke pretended to think me
his greatest enemy, and got people to tell me so, and very mildly to let
me know how gladly he would have me softened toward him. I bid a lady of
his acquaintance and mine let him know that I had hindered many a bitter
thing against him; not for his own sake, but because I thought it looked
base; and I desired everything should be left him, except power. Nite
MD.

7. I dined with Lord and Lady Masham to-day, and this evening played at
ombre with Mrs. Vanhom, merely for amusement. The Ministers have got my
papers, and will neither read them nor give them to me; and I can hardly
do anything. Very warm slabby weather, but I made a shift to get a walk;
yet I lost half of it, by shaking off Lord Rochester,(6) who is a
good, civil, simple man. The Bishop of Ossory will not be Bishop of
Hereford,(7) to the great grief of himself and his wife. And hat is MD
doing now, I wonder? Playing at cards with the Dean and Mrs. Walls? I
think it is not certain yet that Maccartney is escaped. I am plagued
with bad authors, verse and prose, who send me their books and poems,
the vilest trash I ever saw; but I have given their names to my man,
never to let them see me. I have got new ink, and 'tis very white; and
I don't see that it turns black at all. I'll go to seep; 'tis past
twelve.--Nite, MD.

8. Oo must understand that I am in my geers, and have got a
chocolate-pot, a present from Mrs. Ashe of Clogher, and some chocolate
from my brother Ormond, and I treat folks sometimes. I dined with
Lord Treasurer at five o'clock to-day, and was by while he and Lord
Bolingbroke were at business; for it is fit I should know all that
passes now, because, etc. The Duke of Ormond employed me to speak to
Lord Treasurer to-day about an affair, and I did so; and the Duke had
spoke himself two hours before, which vexed me, and I will chide the
Duke about it. I'll tell you a good thing; there is not one of the
Ministry but what will employ me as gravely to speak for them to Lord
Treasurer as if I were their brother or his; and I do it as gravely:
though I know they do it only because they will not make themselves
uneasy, or had rather I should be denied than they. I believe our peace
will not be finished these two months; for I think we must have a
return from Spain by a messenger, who will not go till Sunday next.
Lord Treasurer has invited me to dine with him again to-morrow. Your
Commissioner, Keatley,(8) is to be there. Nite dee richar MD.(9)

9. Dr. Pratt drank chocolate with me this morning, and then we walked. I
was yesterday with him to see Lady Betty Butler, grieving for her sister
Ashburnham. The jade was in bed in form, and she did so cant, she made
me sick. I meet Tom Leigh every day in the Park, to preserve his
health. He is as ruddy as a rose, and tells me his Bishop of Dromore(10)
recovers very much. That Bishop has been very near dying. This day's
Examiner talks of the play of "What is it like?"(11) and you will think
it to be mine, and be bit; for I have no hand in these papers at all. I
dined with Lord Treasurer, and shall again to-morrow, which is his day
when all the Ministers dine with him. He calls it whipping-day. It is
always on Saturday, and we do indeed usually rally him about his faults
on that day. I was of the original Club, when only poor Lord Rivers,
Lord Keeper, and Lord Bolingbroke came; but now Ormond, Anglesea, Lord
Steward,(12) Dartmouth, and other rabble intrude, and I scold at it; but
now they pretend as good a title as I; and, indeed, many Saturdays I am
not there. The company being too many, I don't love it. Nite MD.

10. At seven this evening, as we sat after dinner at Lord Treasurer's,
a servant said Lord Peterborow was at the door. Lord Treasurer and
Lord Bolingbroke went out to meet him, and brought him in. He was just
returned from abroad, where he has been above a year. Soon as he saw me,
he left the Duke of Ormond and other lords, and ran and kissed me before
he spoke to them; but chid me terribly for not writing to him, which I
never did this last time he was abroad, not knowing where he was; and he
changed places so often, it was impossible a letter should overtake him.
He left England with a bruise, by his coach overturning, that made him
spit blood, and was so ill, we expected every post to hear of his death;
but he outrode it or outdrank it, or something, and is come home lustier
than ever. He is at least sixty, and has more spirits than any young
fellow I know in England. He has got the old Oxford regiment of horse,
and I believe will have a Garter. I love the hang-dog dearly. Nite dee
MD.

11. The Court was crammed to-day to see(13) the French Ambassador; but
he did not come. Did I never tell you that I go to Court on Sundays as
to a coffee-house, to see acquaintance, whom I should otherwise not
see twice a year? The Provost(14) and I dined with Ned Southwell,
by appointment, in order to settle your kingdom, if my scheme can
be followed; but I doubt our Ministry will be too tedious. You must
certainly have a new Parliament; but they would have that a secret yet.
Our Parliament here will be prorogued for three weeks. Those puppies the
Dutch will not yet come in, though they pretend to submit to the Queen
in everything; but they would fain try first how our session begins,
in hopes to embroil us in the House of Lords: and if my advice had been
taken, the session should have begun, and we would have trusted the
Parliament to approve the steps already made toward the peace, and had
an Address perhaps from them to conclude without the Dutch, if they
would not agree.--Others are of my mind, but it is not reckoned so safe,
it seems; yet I doubt whether the peace will be ready so soon as three
weeks, but that is a secret. Nite MD.

12. Pratt and I walked into the City to one Bateman's,(15) a famous
bookseller, for old books. There I laid out four pounds like a fool,
and we dined at a hedge ale-house, for two shillings and twopence,
like emperors. Let me see, I bought Plutarch, two volumes, for thirty
shillings, etc. Well, I'll tell you no more; oo don't understand
Greek.(16) We have no news, and I have nothing more to say to-day, and
I can't finish my work. These Ministers will not find time to do what I
would have them. So nite, nown dee dallars.

13. I was to have dined to-day with Lord Keeper, but would not, because
that brute Sir John Walter(17) was to be one of the company. You may
remember he railed at me last summer was twelvemonth at Windsor, and has
never begged my pardon, though he promised to do it; and Lord Mansel,
who was one of the company, would certainly have set us together by
the ears, out of pure roguish mischief. So I dined with Lord Treasurer,
where there was none but Lord Bolingbroke. I stayed till eight, and then
went to Lady Orkney's, who has been sick, and sat with her till twelve,
from whence you may consider it is late, sollahs. The Parliament was
prorogued to-day, as I told you, for three weeks. Our weather is very
bad and slobbery, and I shall spoil my new hat (I have bought a new
hat), or empty my pockets. Does Hawkshaw pay the interest he owes? Lord
Abercorn plagues me to death. I have now not above six people to provide
for, and about as many to do good offices to; and thrice as many that I
will do nothing for; nor can I if I would. Nite dee MD.

14. To-day I took the circle of morning visits. I went to the Duchess of
Ormond, and there was she, and Lady Betty, and Lord Ashburnham together:
this was the first time the mother and daughter saw each other since
Lady Ashburnham's death. They were both in tears, and I chid them for
being together, and made Lady Betty go to her own chamber; then sat a
while with the Duchess, and went after Lady Betty, and all was well.
There is something of farce in all these mournings, let them be ever
so serious. People will pretend to grieve more than they really do,
and that takes off from their true grief. I then went to the Duchess of
Hamilton, who never grieved, but raged, and stormed, and railed.(18) She
is pretty quiet now, but has a diabolical temper. Lord Keeper and his
son, and their two ladies, and I, dined to-day with Mr. Caesar,(19)
Treasurer of the Navy, at his house in the City, where he keeps his
office. We happened to talk of Brutus, and I said something in his
praise, when it struck me immediately that I had made a blunder in doing
so; and, therefore, I recollected myself, and said, "Mr. Caesar, I beg
your pardon." So we laughed, etc. Nite, my own deelest richar logues,
MD.

15. I forgot to tell you that last night I had a present sent me (I
found it, when I came home, in my chamber) of the finest wild fowl I
ever saw, with the vilest letter, and from the vilest poet in the world,
who sent it me as a bribe to get him an employment. I knew not where
the scoundrel lived, so I could not send them back, and therefore I gave
them away as freely as I got them, and have ordered my man never to let
up the poet when he comes. The rogue should have kept the wings at least
for his muse. One of his fowls was a large capon pheasant, as fat as
a pullet. I ate share of it to-day with a friend. We have now a
Drawing-room every Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday at one o'clock. The
Queen does not come out; but all her Ministers, foreigners, and persons
of quality are at it. I was there to-day; and as Lord Treasurer came
towards me, I avoided him, and he hunted me thrice about the room. I
affect never to take notice of him at church or Court. He knows it, for
I have told him so; and to-night, at Lord Masham's, he gave an account
of it to the company; but my reasons are, that people seeing me speak to
him causes a great deal of teasing. I tell you what comes into my head,
that I never knew whether MD were Whigs or Tories, and I value our
conversation the more that it never turned on that subject. I have
a fancy that Ppt is a Tory, and a violent one. I don't know why; but
methinks she looks like one, and DD a sort of a Trimmer. Am I right? I
gave the Examiner a hint about this prorogation, and to praise the
Queen for her tenderness to the Dutch in giving them still more time to
submit.(20) It fitted the occasions at present. Nite MD.

16. I was busy to-day at the Secretary's office, and stayed till past
three. The Duke of Ormond and I were to dine at Lord Orkney's. The Duke
was at the Committee, so I thought all was safe. When I went there, they
had almost dined; for the Duke had sent to excuse himself, which I never
knew. I came home at seven, and began a little whim, which just came
into my head; and will make a threepenny pamphlet.(21) It shall be
finished and out in a week; and if it succeeds, you shall know what it
is; otherwise, not. I cannot send this to-morrow, and will put it off
till next Saturday, because I have much business. So my journals shall
be short, and Ppt must have patience. So nite, dee sollahs.

17. This rogue Parnell has not yet corrected his poem, and I would
fain have it out. I dined to-day with Lord Treasurer, and his Saturday
company, nine of us in all. They went away at seven, and Lord Treasurer
and I sat talking an hour after. After dinner he was talking to the
lords about the speech the Queen must make when the Parliament meets. He
asked me how I would make it. I was going to be serious, because it
was seriously put; but I turned it to a jest. And because they had been
speaking of the Duchess of Marlborough going to Flanders after the Duke,
I said the speech should begin thus: "My Lords and Gentlemen, In order
to my own quiet, and that of my subjects, I have thought fit to send
the Duchess of Marlborough abroad after the Duke." This took well,
and turned off the discourse. I must tell you I do not at all like the
present situation of affairs, and remember I tell you so. Things must be
on another foot, or we are all undone. I hate this driving always to an
inch. Nite MD.

18. We had a mighty full Court to-day. Dilly was with me at the French
church, and edified mightily. The Duke of Ormond and I dined at Lord
Orkney's; but I left them at seven, and came home to my whim. I have
made a great progress. My large Treatise(22) stands stock still. Some
think it too dangerous to publish, and would have me print only what
relates to the peace. I cannot tell what I shall do.--The Bishop of
Dromore is dying. They thought yesterday he could not live two hours;
yet he is still alive, but is utterly past all hopes. Go to cards,
sollahs, and nite.

19. I was this morning to see the Duke and Duchess of Ormond. The
Duke d'Aumont came in while I was with the Duke of Ormond, and we
complimented each other like dragons. A poor fellow called at the door
where I lodge, with a parcel of oranges for a present for me. I bid my
man know what his name was, and whence he came. He sent word his name
was Bun, and that I knew him very well. I bid my man tell him I was
busy, and he could not speak to me; and not to let him leave his
oranges. I know no more of it, but I am sure I never heard the name, and
I shall take no such presents from strangers. Perhaps he might be only
some beggar, who wanted a little money. Perhaps it might be something
worse. Let them keep their poison for their rats. I don't love it.(23)
That blot is a blunder. Nite dee MD....

20. A Committee of our Society dined to-day with the Chancellor of
the Exchequer. Our Society does not meet now as usual, for which I
am blamed: but till Lord Treasurer will agree to give us money and
employments to bestow, I am averse to it; and he gives us nothing but
promises. The Bishop of Dromore is still alive, and that is all. We
expect every day he will die, and then Tom Leigh must go back, which is
one good thing to the town. I believe Pratt will drive at one of these
bishoprics. Our English bishopric(24) is not yet disposed of. I believe
the peace will not be ready by the session. Nite MD.

21. I was to-day with my printer, to give him a little pamphlet I have
written, but not politics. It will be out by Monday. If it succeeds, I
will tell you of it; otherwise, not. We had a prodigious thaw to-day,
as bad as rain; yet I walked like a good boy all the way. The Bishop of
Dromore still draws breath, but cannot live two days longer. My large
book lies flat. Some people think a great part of it ought not to be now
printed. I believe I told you so before. This letter shall not go till
Saturday, which makes up the three weeks exactly; and I allow MD six
weeks, which are now almost out; so oo must know I expect a rettle vely
soon, and that MD is vely werr;(25) and so nite, dee MD.

22. This is one of our Court days, and I was there. I told you there
is a Drawing-room, Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday. The Hamiltons and
Abercorns have done teasing me. The latter, I hear, is actually going to
France. Lord Treasurer quarrelled with me at Court for being four days
without dining with him; so I dined there to-day, and he has at last
fallen in with my project (as he calls it) of coining halfpence and
farthings, with devices, like medals, in honour of the Queen, every year
changing the device. I wish it may be done. Nite MD.

23. The Duke of Ormond and I appointed to dine with Ned Southwell
to-day, to talk of settling your affairs of Parliament in Ireland, but
there was a mixture of company, and the Duke of Ormond was in haste, and
nothing was done. If your Parliament meets this summer, it must be a new
one; but I find some are of opinion there should be none at all these
two years. I will trouble myself no more about it. My design was to
serve the Duke of Ormond. Dr. Pratt and I sat this evening with the
Bishop of Clogher, and played at ombre for threepences. That, I suppose,
is but low with you. I found, at coming home, a letter from MD, N.37. I
shall not answer it zis bout, but will the next. I am sorry for poo poo
Ppt. Pray walk hen oo can. I have got a terrible new cold before my old
one was quite gone, and don't know how. Pay. ... (26) I shall have DD's
money soon from the Exchequer. The Bishop of Dromore is dead now at
last. Nite, dee MD.

24. I was at Court to-day, and it was comical to see Lord Abercorn
bowing to me, but not speaking, and Lord Selkirk the same.(27) I dined
with Lord Treasurer and his Saturday Club, and sat with him two hours
after the rest were gone, and spoke freer to him of affairs than I am
afraid others do, who might do more good. All his friends repine, and
shrug their shoulders; but will not deal with him so freely as they
ought. It is an odd business; the Parliament just going to sit, and no
employments given. They say they will give them in a few days. There
is a new bishop made of Hereford;(28) so Ossory(29) is disappointed. I
hinted so to his friends two months ago, to make him leave off deluding
himself, and being indiscreet, as he was. I have just time to send this,
without giving to the bellman. Nite deelest richar MD.... dee MD MD MD
FW FW FW ME ME ME Lele Lele Lele.

My second cold is better now. Lele lele lele lele.




LETTER 59.(1)

LONDON, Jan. 25, 1712-1713.

We had such a terrible storm to-day, that, going to Lord Bolingbroke's,
I saw a hundred tiles fallen down; and one swinger fell about forty
yards before me, that would have killed a horse: so, after church and
Court, I walked through the Park, and took a chair to Lord Treasurer's.
Next door to his house, a tin chimneytop had fallen down, with a hundred
bricks. It is grown calm this evening. I wonder had you such a wind
to-day? I hate it as much as any hog does. Lord Treasurer has engaged
me to dine again with him to-morrow. He has those tricks sometimes of
inviting me from day to day, which I am forced to break through. My
little pamphlet(2) is out: 'tis not politics. If it takes, I say again
you shall hear of it. Nite dee logues.

26. This morning I felt a little touch of giddiness, which has
disordered and weakened me with its ugly remains all this day. Pity
Pdfr. After dinner at Lord Treasurer's, the French Ambassador, Duke
d'Aumont, sent Lord Treasurer word that his house was burnt down to the
ground. It took fire in the upper rooms, while he was at dinner with
Monteleon, the Spanish Ambassador, and other persons; and soon after
Lord Bolingbroke came to us with the same story. We are full of
speculations upon it, but I believe it was the carelessness of his
French rascally servants. 'Tis odd that this very day Lord Somers,
Wharton, Sunderland, Halifax, and the whole club of Whig lords, dined at
Pontack's(3) in the City, as I received private notice. They have some
damned design. I tell you another odd thing; I was observing it to Lord
Treasurer, that he was stabbed on the day King William died; and the
day I saved his life, by opening the bandbox,(4) was King William's
birthday. My friend Mr. Lewis has had a lie spread on him by the mistake
of a man, who went to another of his name, to give him thanks for
passing his Privy Seal to come from France.(5) That other Lewis spread
about that the man brought him thanks from Lord Perth and Lord Melfort
(two lords with the Pretender), for his great services, etc. The Lords
will examine that t'other Lewis to-morrow in council; and I believe
you will hear of it in the prints, for I will make Abel Roper give
a relation of it. Pray tell me if it be necessary to write a little
plainer; for I looked over a bit of my last letter, and could hardly
read it. I'll mend my hand, if oo please: but you are more used to it
nor I, as Mr. Raymond says. Nite MD.

27. I dined to-day with Lord Treasurer: this makes four days together;
and he has invited me again to-morrow, but I absolutely refused him.
I was this evening at a christening with him of Lord Dupplin's(6)
daughter. He went away at ten; but they kept me and some others till
past twelve; so you may be sure 'tis late, as they say. We have now
stronger suspicions that the Duke d'Aumont's house was set on fire by
malice. I was to-day to see Lord Keeper, who has quite lost his voice
with a cold. There Dr. Radcliffe told me that it was the Ambassador's
confectioner set the house on fire by boiling sugar, and going down and
letting it boil over. Yet others still think differently; so I know not
what to judge. Nite my own deelest MD, rove Pdfr.

28. I was to-day at Court, where the Spanish Ambassador talked to me as
if he did not suspect any design in burning d'Aumont's house: but Abbe
Gaultier, Secretary for France here, said quite otherwise; and that
d'Aumont had a letter the very same day to let him know his house should
be burnt, and they tell several other circumstances too tedious to
write. One is, that a fellow mending the tiles just when the fire broke
out, saw a pot with wildfire(7) in the room. I dined with Lord Orkney.
Neither Lord Abercorn nor Selkirk will now speak with me. I have
disobliged both sides. Nite dear MD.

29. Our Society met to-day, fourteen of us, and at a tavern. We now
resolve to meet but once a fortnight, and have a Committee every other
week of six or seven, to consult about doing some good. I proposed
another message to Lord Treasurer by three principal members, to give a
hundred guineas to a certain person, and they are to urge it as well as
they can. We also raised sixty guineas upon our own Society; but I made
them do it by sessors,(8) and I was one of them, and we fitted our tax
to the several estates. The Duke of Ormond pays ten guineas, and I the
third part of a guinea; at that rate, they may tax as often as they
please. Well, but I must answer oor rettle, ung oomens: not yet; 'tis
rate now, and I can't tind it. Nite deelest MD.

30. I have drank Spa waters this two or three days; but they do not
pass, and make me very giddy. I an't well; faith, I'll take them no
more. I sauntered after church with the Provost to-day to see a library
to be sold, and dined at five with Lord Orkney. We still think there was
malice in burning d'Aumont's house. I hear little Harrison(9) is come
over; it was he I sent to Utrecht. He is now Queen's Secretary to the
Embassy, and has brought with him the Barrier Treaty, as it is now
corrected by us, and yielded to by the Dutch, which was the greatest
difficulty to retard the peace. I hope he will bring over the peace a
month hence, for we will send him back as soon as possible. I long
to see the little brat, my own creature. His pay is in all a thousand
pounds a year, and they have never paid him a groat, though I have
teased their hearts out. He must be three or four hundred pounds in debt
at least, the brat! Let me go to bed, sollahs.--Nite dee richar MD.

31. Harrison was with me this morning: we talked three hours, and then
I carried him to Court. When we went down to the door of my lodging, I
found a coach waited for him. I chid him for it; but he whispered me it
was impossible to do otherwise; and in the coach he told me he had not
one farthing in his pocket to pay it; and therefore took the coach for
the whole day, and intended to borrow money somewhere or other. So
there was the Queen's Minister entrusted in affairs of the greatest
importance, without a shilling in his pocket to pay a coach! I paid
him while he was with me seven guineas, in part of a dozen of shirts he
bought me in Holland. I presented him to the Duke of Ormond, and several
lords at Court; and I contrived it so that Lord Treasurer came to me and
asked (I had Parnell by me) whether that was Dr. Parnell, and came up
and spoke to him with great kindness, and invited him to his house.
I value myself upon making the Ministry desire to be acquainted with
Parnell, and not Parnell with the Ministry. His poem is almost fully
corrected, and shall soon be out. Here's enough for to-day: only to tell
you that I was in the City with my printer to alter an Examiner about my
friend Lewis's story,(10) which will be told with remarks. Nite MD.

Feb. 1. I could do nothing till to-day about the Examiner, but the
printer came this morning, and I dictated to him what was fit to be
said, and then Mr. Lewis came, and corrected it as he would have it;
so I was neither at church nor Court. The Duke of Ormond and I dined at
Lord Orkney's. I left them at seven, and sat with Sir Andrew Fountaine,
who has a very bad sore leg, for which he designs to go to France. Fais,
here's a week gone, and one side of this letter not finished. Oh, but I
write now but once in three weeks; iss, fais, this shall go sooner. The
Parliament is to sit on the third, but will adjourn for three or four
days; for the Queen is laid up with the gout, and both Speakers out of
order, though one of them, the Lord Keeper, is almost well. I spoke
to the Duke of Ormond a good deal about Ireland. We do not altogether
agree, nor am I judge enough of Irish affairs; but I will speak to Lord
Treasurer to-morrow, that we three may settle them some way or other.
Nite sollahs both, rove Pdfr.

2. I had a letter some days ago from Moll Gery;(11) her name is now
Wigmore, and her husband has turned parson. She desires nothing but that
I would get Lord Keeper to give him a living; but I will send her no
answer, though she desires it much. She still makes mantuas at Farnham.
It rained all this day, and Dilly came to me, and was coaching it into
the City; so I went with him for a shaking, because it would not cost
me a farthing. There I met my friend Stratford,(12) the merchant, who
is going abroad to gather up his debts, and be clear in the world.
He begged that I would dine with some merchant friends of ours there,
because it was the last time I should see him: so I did, and thought to
have seen Lord Treasurer in the evening, but he happened to go out
at five; so I visited some friends, and came home. And now I have
the greatest part of your letter to answer; and yet I will not do it
to-night, say what oo please. The Parliament meets to-morrow, but will
be prorogued for a fortnight; which disappointment will, I believe, vex
abundance of them, though they are not Whigs; for they are forced to be
in town at expense for nothing: but we want an answer from Spain, before
we are sure of everything being right for the peace; and God knows
whether we can have that answer this month. It is a most ticklish
juncture of affairs; we are always driving to an inch: I am weary of it.
Nite MD.

3. The Parliament met, and was prorogued, as I said, and I found
some cloudy faces, and heard some grumbling. We have got over all
our difficulties with France, I think. They have now settled all the
articles of commerce between us and them, wherein they were very much
disposed to play the rogue if we had not held them to (it); and this
business we wait from Spain is to prevent some other rogueries of the
French, who are finding an evasion to trade to the Spanish West Indies;
but I hope we shall prevent it. I dined with Lord Treasurer, and he was
in good humour enough. I gave him that part of my book in manuscript to
read where his character was, and drawn pretty freely. He was reading
and correcting it with his pencil, when the Bishop of St. David's(13)
(now removing to Hereford) came in and interrupted us. I left him at
eight, and sat till twelve with the Provost and Bishop of Clogher at the
Provost's. Nite MD.

4. I was to-day at Court, but kept out of Lord Treasurer's way, because
I was engaged to the Duke of Ormond, where I dined, and, I think, ate
and drank too much. I sat this evening with Lady Masham, and then with
Lord Masham and Lord Treasurer at Lord Masham's. It was last year, you
may remember, my constant evening place. I saw Lady Jersey(14) with Lady
Masham, who has been laying out for my acquaintance, and has forced a
promise for me to drink chocolate with her in a day or two, which I know
not whether I shall perform (I have just mended my pen, you see), for I
do not much like her character; but she is very malicious, and therefore
I think I must keep fair with her. I cannot send this letter till
Saturday next, I find; so I will answer oors now. I see no different
days of the month; yet it is dated January 3: so it was long a coming.
I did not write to Dr. Coghill that I would have nothing in Ireland, but
that I was soliciting nothing anywhere, and that is true. I have named
Dr. Sterne to Lord Treasurer, Lord Bolingbroke, and the Duke of Ormond,
for a bishopric, and I did it heartily. I know not what will come of
it; but I tell you as a great secret that I have made the Duke of Ormond
promise me to recommend nobody till he tells me, and this for some
reasons too long to mention. My head is still in no good order. I am
heartily sorry for poo Ppt, I'm sure. Her head is good for...(15) I'll
answer more to-mollow. Nite, dearest MD; nite dee sollahs, MD.(16)

5. I must go on with oo letter. I dined to-day with Sir Andrew Fountaine
and the Provost, and I played at ombre with him all the afternoon. I
won, yet Sir Andrew is an admirable player. Lord Pembroke(17) came in,
and I gave him three or four scurvy Dilly puns, that begin with an IF.
Well, but oor letter, well, ret me see.--No; I believe I shall write no
more this good while, nor publish what I have done. Nauty (?) Ppt, oo
are vely tempegant. I did not suspect oo would tell Filby.(18) Oo are
so... (19) Turns and visitations--what are these? I'll preach and visit
as much for Mr. Walls. Pray God mend poopt's(20) health; mine is but
very indifferent. I have left off Spa water; it makes my leg swell. Nite
deelest MD.

6. This is the Queen's Birthday, and I never saw it celebrated with so
much luxury and fine clothes. I went to Court to see them, and I dined
with Lord Keeper, where the ladies were fine to admiration. I passed the
evening at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's, and came home pretty early, to answer oo
rettle again. Pray God keep the Queen. She was very ill about ten days
ago, and had the gout in her stomach. When I came from Lord Keeper's, I
called at Lord Treasurer's, because I heard he was very fine, and
that was a new thing; and it was true, for his coat and waistcoat were
embroidered. I have seen the Provost often since, and never spoke to him
to speak to the Temples about Daniel Carr, nor will; I don't care to do
it. I have writ lately to Parvisol. Oo did well to let him make up his
accounts. All things grow dear in Ireland, but corn to the parsons; for
my livings are fallen much this year by Parvisol's account. Nite dee
logues, MD.

 7.(8)  I was at Court to-day, but saw no Birthday clothes; the great folks
never wear them above once or twice. I dined with Lord Orkney, and sat
the evening with Sir Andrew Fountaine, whose leg is in a very dubious
condition. Pray let me know when DD's money is near due: always let me
know it beforehand. This, I believe, will hardly go till Saturday; for
I tell you what, being not very well, I dare not study much: so I let
company come in a morning, and the afternoon pass in dining and sitting
somewhere. Lord Treasurer is angry if I don't dine with him every second
day, and I cannot part with him till late: he kept me last night till
near twelve. Our weather is constant rain above these two months, which
hinders walking, so that our spring is not like yours. I have not seen
Fanny Manley(21) yet; I cannot find time. I am in rebellion with all my
acquaintance, but I will mend with my health and the weather. Clogher
make a figure! Clogher make a ----. Colds! why, we have been all dying
with colds; but now they are a little over, and my second is almost
off. I can do nothing for Swanton indeed. It is a thing impossible, and
wholly out of my way. If he buys, he must buy. So now I have answered oo
rettle; and there's an end of that now; and I'll say no more, but bid oo
nite, dee MD.

8.(9) It was terrible rainy to-day from morning till night. I intended
to have dined with Lord Treasurer, but went to see Sir Andrew Fountaine,
and he kept me to dinner, which saved coach-hire; and I stayed with him
all the afternoon, and lost thirteen shillings and sixpence at ombre.
There was management! and Lord Treasurer will chide; but I'll dine
with him to-morrow. The Bishop of Clogher's daughter has been ill some
days,(22) and it proves the smallpox. She is very full; but it comes
out well, and they apprehend no danger. Lady Orkney has given me her
picture; a very fine original of Sir Godfrey Kneller's; it is now a
mending. He has favoured her squint admirably; and you know I love a
cast in the eye. I was to see Lady Worsley(23) to-day, who is just come
to town; she is full of rheumatic pains. All my acquaintance grow old
and sickly. She lodges in the very house in King Street, between St.
James's Street and St. James's Square, where DD's brother bought the
sweetbread, when I lodged there, and MD came to see me. Short sighs.(24)
Nite MD.

9.(10) I thought to have dined with Lord Treasurer to-day, but he dined
abroad at Tom Harley's; so I dined at Lord Masham's, and was winning all
I had lost playing with Lady Masham at crown picquet, when we went to
pools, and I lost it again. Lord Treasurer came in to us, and chid me
for not following him to Tom Harley's. Miss Ashe is still the same, and
they think her not in danger; my man calls there daily after I am gone
out, and tells me at night. I was this morning to see Lady Jersey, and
we have made twenty parties about dining together, and I shall hardly
keep one of them. She is reduced after all her greatness to seven
servants, and a small house, and no coach.(25) I like her tolerably as
yet. Nite MD.

10.(11) I made visits this morning to the Duke and Duchess of Ormond,
and Lady Betty, and the Duchess of Hamilton. (When I was writing this
near twelve o'clock, the Duchess of Hamilton sent to have me dine with
her to-morrow. I am forced to give my answer through the door, for my
man has got the key, and is gone to bed; but I cannot obey her, for our
Society meets to-morrow.) I stole away from Lord Treasurer by eight, and
intended to have passed the evening with Sir Thomas Clarges(26) and his
lady; but met them in another place, and have there sat till now. My
head has not been ill to-day. I was at Court, and made Lord Mansel walk
with me in the Park before we went to dinner.--Yesterday and to-day have
been fair, but yet it rained all last night. I saw Sterne staring at
Court to-day. He has been often to see me, he says: but my man has
not yet let him up. He is in deep mourning; I hope it is not for his
wife.(27) I did not ask him. Nite MD.

12.(28) I have reckoned days wrong all this while; for this is the
twelfth. I do not know when I lost it. I dined to-day with our Society,
the greatest dinner I have ever seen. It was at Jack Hill's, the
Governor of Dunkirk. I gave an account of sixty guineas I had collected,
and am to give them away to two authors to-morrow; and Lord Treasurer
has promised us a hundred pounds to reward some others. I found a letter
on my table last night to tell me that poor little Harrison, the Queen's
Secretary, that came lately from Utrecht with the Barrier Treaty, was
ill, and desired to see me at night; but it was late, and I could not
go till to-day. I have often mentioned him in my letters, you may
remember.... I went in the morning, and found him mighty ill, and got
thirty guineas for him from Lord Bolingbroke, and an order for a hundred
pounds from the Treasury to be paid him to-morrow; and I have got him
removed to Knightsbridge for air. He has a fever and inflammation on his
lungs; but I hope will do well. Nite.

13. I was to see a poor poet, one Mr. Diaper,(29) in a nasty garret,
very sick. I gave him twenty guineas from Lord Bolingbroke, and disposed
the other sixty to two other authors, and desired a friend to receive
the hundred pounds for poor Harrison, and will carry it to him to-morrow
morning. I sent to see how he did, and he is extremely ill; and I
very much afflicted for him, for he is my own creature, and in a very
honourable post, and very worthy of it. I dined in the City. I am in
much concern for this poor lad. His mother and sister attend him, and he
wants nothing. Nite poo dee MD.

14. I took Parnell this morning, and we walked to see poor Harrison.
I had the hundred pounds in my pocket. I told Parnell I was afraid to
knock at the door; my mind misgave me. I knocked, and his man in tears
told me his master was dead an hour before. Think what grief this is to
me! I went to his mother, and have been ordering things for his funeral
with as little cost as possible, to-morrow at ten at night. Lord
Treasurer was much concerned when I told him. I could not dine with Lord
Treasurer, nor anywhere else; but got a bit of meat toward evening. No
loss ever grieved me so much: poor creature! Pray God Almighty bless
poor MD. Adieu.

I send this away to-night, and am sorry it must go while I am in so much
grief.




LETTER 60.(1)

LONDON, Feb. 15 (1712-13).

I dined to-day with Mr. Rowe(2) and a projector, who has been teasing
me with twenty schemes to get grants; and I don't like one of them; and,
besides, I was out of humour for the loss of poor Harrison. At ten
this night I was at his funeral, which I ordered to be as private as
possible. We had but one coach with four of us; and when it was carrying
us home after the funeral, the braces broke; and we were forced to sit
in it, and have it held up, till my man went for chairs,(3) at eleven at
night in terrible rain. I am come home very melancholy, and will go to
bed. Nite... MD.(4)

16. I dined to-day with Lord Dupplin and some company to divert me; but
left them early, and have been reading a foolish book for amusement. I
shall never have courage again to care for making anybody's fortune. The
Parliament meets to-morrow, and will be prorogued another fortnight,
at which several of both parties were angry; but it cannot be helped,
though everything about the peace is past all danger. I never saw such
a continuance of rainy weather. We have not had two fair days together
these ten weeks. I have not dined with Lord Treasurer these four days,
nor can I till Saturday; for I have several engagements till then,
and he will chide me to some purpose. I am perplexed with this hundred
pounds of poor Harrison's, what to do with it. I cannot pay his
relations till they administer, for he is much in debt;(5) but I will
have the staff in my own hands, and venture nothing. Nite poo dee MD.

17. Lady Jersey and I dined by appointment to-day with Lord Bolingbroke.
He is sending his brother(6) to succeed Mr.(7) Harrison. It is the
prettiest post in Europe for a young gentleman. I lose my money at ombre
sadly; I make a thousand blunders. I play but(8) threepenny ombre; but
it is what you call running ombre. Lady Clarges,(9) and a drab I hate,
won a dozen shillings of me last night. The Parliament was prorogued
to-day; and people grumble; and the good of it is the peace cannot be
finished by the time they meet, there are so many fiddling things to do.
Is Ppt an ombre lady yet? You know all the tricks of it now, I suppose.
I reckon you have all your cards from France, for ours pay sixpence a
pack taxes, which goes deep to the box. I have given away all my Spa
water, and take some nasty steel drops, and my head has been better this
week past. I send every day to see how Miss Ashe does: she is very full,
they say, but in no danger. I fear she will lose some of her beauty.
The son lies out of the house. I wish he had them too, while he is so
young.--Nite MD.

18. The Earl of Abingdon(10) has been teasing me these three months to
dine with him; and this day was appointed about a week ago, and I named
my company; Lord Stawel,(11) Colonel Disney,(12) and Dr. Arbuthnot; but
the two last slipped out their necks, and left Stawell and me to dine
there. We did not dine till seven, because it is Ash Wednesday. We had
nothing but fish, which Lord Stawell could not eat, and got a broiled
leg of a turkey. Our wine was poison; yet the puppy has twelve thousand
pound a year. His carps were raw, and his candles tallow. He(13) shall
not catch me in haste again, and everybody has laughed at me for dining
with him. I was to-day to let Harrison's mother know I could not
pay till she administers; which she will do. I believe she is an old
bawd,(14) and her daughter a ------. There were more Whigs to-day at
Court than Tories. I believe they think the peace must be made, and so
come to please the Queen. She is still lame with the gout. Nite MD.

19. I was at Court to-day, to speak to Lord Bolingbroke to look over
Parnell's poem since it is corrected; and Parnell and I dined with him,
and he has shown him three or four more places to alter a little. Lady
Bolingbroke came down to us while we were at dinner, and Parnell stared
at her as if she were a goddess. I thought she was like Parnell's wife,
and he thought so too. Parnell is much pleased with Lord Bolingbroke's
favour to him, and I hope it may one day turn to his advantage. His poem
will be printed in a few days. Our weather continues as fresh raining as
if it had not rained at all. I sat to-night at Lady Masham's, where
Lord Treasurer came and scolded me for not dining with him. I told him
I could not till Saturday. I have stayed there till past twelve. So nite
dee sollahs, nite.

20. Lady Jersey, Lady Catherine Hyde,(15) the Spanish Ambassador, the
Duke d'Atree,(16) another Spaniard, and I, dined to-day by appointment
with Lord Bolingbroke; but they fell a drinking so many Spanish healths
in champagne that I stole away to the ladies, and drank tea till eight;
and then went and lost my money at ombre with Sir Andrew Fountaine, who
has a very bad leg. Miss Ashe is past all danger; and her eye, which was
lately bad (I suppose one effect of her distemper), is now better. I do
not let the Bishop see me, nor shall this good while. Good luck! when I
came home, I warrant, I found a letter from MD, No.38; and oo write
so small nowadays, I hope oo poor eyes are better. Well, this shall go
to-morrow se'nnight, with a bill for MD. I will speak to Mr. Griffin(17)
to-morrow about Ppt's brother Filby, and desire, whether he deserves
or no, that his employment may be mended; that is to say, if I can see
Griffin; otherwise not; and I'll answer oo rettle hen I Pdfr think fit.
Nite MD.

21. Methinks I writ a little saucy last night. I mean the last... (18) I
saw Griffin at Court. He says he knows nothing of a salt-work at Recton;
but that he will give Filby a better employment, and desires Filby will
write to him. If I knew how to write to Filby, I would; but pray do you.
Bid him make no mention of you; but only let Mr. Griffin know that
he has the honour to be recommended by Dr. S----, etc.; that he will
endeavour to deserve, etc.; and if you dictated a whole letter for him,
it would be better; I hope he can write and spell well. I'll inquire for
a direction to Griffin before I finish this. I dined with Lord Treasurer
and seven lords to-day. You know Saturday is his great day, but I sat
with them alone till eight, and then came home, and have been writing a
letter to Mrs. Davis, at York. She took care to have a letter delivered
for me at Lord Treasurer's; for I would not own one she sent by post.
She reproaches me for not writing to her these four years; and I have
honestly told her it was my way never to write to those whom I am never
likely to see, unless I can serve them, which I cannot her, etc. Davis
the schoolmaster's widow. Nite MD.

22. I dined to-day at Lord Orkney's, with the Duke of Ormond and Sir
Thomas Hanmer.(19) Have you ever heard of the latter? He married the
Duchess of Grafton in his youth (she dined with us too). He is the
most considerable man in the House of Commons. He went last spring to
Flanders, with the Duke of Ormond; from thence to France, and was going
to Italy; but the Ministry sent for him, and he has been come over about
ten days. He is much out of humour with things: he thinks the peace is
kept off too long, and is full of fears and doubts. It is thought he is
designed for Secretary of State, instead of Lord Dartmouth. We have been
acquainted these two years; and I intend, in a day or two, to have an
hour's talk with him on affairs. I saw the Bishop of Clogher at Court;
Miss is recovering. I know not how much she will be marked. The Queen
is slowly mending of her gout, and intends to be brought in a chair to
Parliament when it meets, which will be March 3; for I suppose they
will prorogue no more; yet the peace will not be signed then, and we
apprehend the Tories themselves will many of them be discontented. Nite
dee MD.

23. It was ill weather to-day, and I dined with Sir Andrew Fountaine,
and in the evening played at ombre with him and the Provost, and won
twenty-five shillings; so I have recovered myself pretty well. Dilly has
been dunning me to see Fanny Manley; but I have not yet been able to
do it. Miss Ashe is now quite out of danger; and hope will not be much
marked. I cannot tell how to direct to Griffin; and think he lives in
Bury Street, near St. James's Street, hard by me; but I suppose your
brother may direct to him to the Salt Office, and, as I remember, he
knows his Christian name, because he sent it me in the list of the
Commissioners. Nite dee MD.

24. I walked this morning to Chelsea, to see Dr. Atterbury, Dean
of Christ Church. I had business with him about entering Mr.
Fitzmaurice,(20) my Lord Kerry's son, into his College; and Lady
Kerry(21) is a great favourite of mine. Lord Harley, Lord Dupplin, young
Bromley(22) the Speaker's son, and I, dined with Dr. Stratford(23) and
some other clergymen; but I left them at seven to go to Lady Jersey,
to see Monteleon the Spanish Ambassador play at ombre. Lady Jersey was
abroad, and I chid the servants, and made a rattle; but since I came
home she sent me a message that I was mistaken, and that the meeting is
to be to-morrow. I have a worse memory than when I left you, and every
day forget appointments; but here my memory was by chance too good. But
I'll go to-morrow; for Lady Catherine Hyde and Lady Bolingbroke are to
be there by appointment, and I listed(24) up my periwig, and all, to
make a figure. Well, who can help it? Not I, vow to...!(25) Nite MD.

25. Lord Treasurer met me last night at Lord Masham's, and thanked me
for my company in a jeer, because I had not dined with him in three
days. He chides me if I stay away but two days together. What will this
come to? Nothing. My grandmother used to say, "More of your lining, and
less of your dining." However, I dined with him, and could hardly
leave him at eight, to go to Lady Jersey's, where five or six foreign
Ministers were, and as many ladies. Monteleon played like the English,
and cried "gacco," and knocked his knuckles for trump, and played at
small games like Ppt. Lady Jersey whispered me to stay and sup with the
ladies when the fellows were gone; but they played till eleven, and I
would not stay. I think this letter must go on Saturday; that's certain;
and it is not half full yet. Lady Catherine Hyde had a mighty mind I
should be acquainted with Lady Dalkeith,(26) her sister, the Duke of
Monmouth's eldest son's widow, who was of the company to-night; but I
did not like her; she paints too much. Nite MD.

26. This day our Society met at the Duke of Ormond's, but I had business
that called me another way; so I sent my excuses, and dined privately
with a friend. Besides, Sir Thomas Hanmer whispered me last night at
Lady Jersey's that I must attend Lord Treasurer and Duke of Ormond at
supper at his house to-night; which I did at eleven, and stayed till
one, so oo may be sure 'tis late enough. There was the Duchess of
Grafton, and the Duke her son; nine of us in all. The Duke of Ormond
chid me for not being at the Society to-day, and said sixteen were
there. I said I never knew sixteen people good company in my life; no,
fais, nor eight either. We have no news in this town at all. I wonder
why I don't write you news. I know less of what passes than anybody,
because I go to(27) no coffee-house, nor see any but Ministers, and such
people; and Ministers never talk politics in conversation. The Whigs are
forming great schemes against the meeting of Parliament, which will be
next Tuesday, I still think, without fail; and we hope to hear by then
that the peace is ready to sign. The Queen's gout mends daily. Nite MD.

27. I passed a very insipid day, and dined privately with a friend in
the neighbourhood. Did I tell you that I have a very fine picture of
Lady Orkney,(28) an original, by Sir Godfrey Kneller, three-quarters
length? I have it now at home, with a fine frame. Lord Bolingbroke
and Lady Masham have promised to sit for me; but I despair of Lord
Treasurer; only I hope he will give me a copy, and then I shall have all
the pictures of those I really love here; just half a dozen; only I'll
make Lord Keeper give me his print in a frame. This letter must go
to-morrow, because of sending ME a bill; else it should not till next
week, I assure oo. I have little to do now with my pen; for my grand
business stops till they are more pressing, and till something or other
happens; and I believe I shall return with disgust to finish it, it is
so very laborious. Sir Thomas Hanmer has my papers now. And hat is MD
doing now? Oh, at ombre with the Dean always on Friday night, with Mrs.
Walls. Pray don't play at small games. I stood by, t'other night, while
the Duke d'Atree(29) lost six times with manilio, basto, and three small
trumps; and Lady Jersey won above twenty pounds. Nite dee richar(30) MD.

28. I was at Court to-day, when the Abbe Gaultier whispered me that a
courier was just come with an account that the French King had consented
to all the Queen's demands, and his consent was carried to Utrecht,
and the peace will be signed in a few days. I suppose the general peace
cannot be so soon ready; but that is no matter. The news presently ran
about the Court. I saw the Queen carried out in her chair, to take the
air in the garden. I met Griffin at Court, and he told me that orders
were sent to examine Filby; and, if he be fit, to make him (I think he
called it) an assistant; I don't know what, Supervisor, I think; but it
is some employment a good deal better than his own. The Parliament will
have another short prorogation, though it is not known yet. I dined with
Lord Treasurer and his Saturday company, and left him at eight to put
this in the post-office time enough. And now I must bid oo farewell,
deelest richar Ppt. God bless oo ever, and rove Pdfr. Farewell MD MD MD
FW FW FW FW ME ME ME Lele Lele.




LETTER 61.(1)

LONDON, March 1, 1712-13.

'Tis out of my head whether I answered all your letter in my last
yesterday or no. I think I was in haste, and could not: but now I see I
answered a good deal of it; no, only about your brother, and ME's bill.
I dined with Lady Orkney, and we talked politics till eleven at night;
and, as usual, found everything wrong, and put ourselves out of humour.
Yes, I have Lady Giffard's picture sent me by your mother. It is boxed
up at a place where my other things are. I have goods in two or three
places; and when I leave a lodging, I box up the books I get (for I
always get some), and come naked into a new lodging; and so on. Talk not
to me of deaneries; I know less of that than ever by much. Nite MD.

2. I went to-day into the City to see Pat Rolt,(2) who lodges with a
City cousin, a daughter of coz Cleve; (you are much the wiser). I had
never been at her house before. My he-coz Thompson the butcher is dead,
or dying. I dined with my printer, and walked home, and went to sit with
Lady Clarges. I found four of them at whist; Lady Godolphin(3) was one.
I sat by her, and talked of her cards, etc., but she would not give
me one look, nor say a word to me. She refused some time ago to be
acquainted with me. You know she is Lord Marlborough's eldest daughter.
She is a fool for her pains, and I'll pull her down. What can I do for
Dr. Smith's daughter's husband? I have no personal credit with any
of the Commissioners. I'll speak to Keatley;(4) but I believe it will
signify nothing. In the Customs people must rise by degrees, and he
must at first take what is very low, if he be qualified for that. Ppt
mistakes me; I am not angry at your recommending anyone to me, provided
you will take my answer. Some things are in my way, and then I serve
those I can. But people will not distinguish, but take things ill, when
I have no power; but Ppt is wiser. And employments in general are very
hard to be got. Nite MD.

3. I dined to-day with Lord Treasurer, who chid me for my absence, which
was only from Saturday last. The Parliament was again prorogued for a
week, and I suppose the peace will be ready by then, and the Queen
will be able to be brought to the House, and make her speech. I saw Dr.
Griffith(5) two or three months ago, at a Latin play at Westminster;
but did not speak to him. I hope he will not die; I should be sorry for
Ppt's sake; he is very tender of her. I have long lost all my colds,
and the weather mends a little. I take some steel drops, and my head
is pretty well. I walk when I can, but am grown very idle; and, not
finishing my thing, I gamble(6) abroad and play at ombre. I shall be
more careful in my physic than Mrs. Price: 'tis not a farthing matter
her death, I think; and so I say no more to-night, but will read a dull
book, and go sleep. Nite dee MD.

4. Mr. Ford has been this half-year inviting me to dine at his lodgings:
so I did to-day, and brought the Provost and Dr. Parnell with me, and my
friend Lewis was there. Parnell went away, and the other three played at
ombre, and I looked on; which I love, and would not play. Tisdall is a
pretty fellow, as you say; and when I come back to Ireland with nothing,
he will condole with me with abundance of secret pleasure. I believe
I told you what he wrote to me, that I have saved England, and he
Ireland;(7) but I can bear that. I have learned to hear and see, and say
nothing. I was to see the Duchess of Hamilton to-day, and met Blith(8)
of Ireland just going out of her house into his coach. I asked her how
she came to receive young fellows. It seems he had a ball in the Duke
of Hamilton's house when the Duke died; and the Duchess got an
advertisement put in the Postboy,(9) reflecting on the ball, because
the Marlborough daughters(10) were there; and Blith came to beg the
Duchess's pardon, and clear himself. He's a sad dog. Nite poo dee
deelest MD.

5. Lady Masham has miscarried; but is well almost again. I have many
visits to-day. I met Blith at the Duke of Ormond's; and he begged me to
carry him to the Duchess of Hamilton, to beg her pardon again. I did
on purpose to see how the blunderbuss behaved himself; but I begged the
Duchess to use him mercifully, for she is the devil of a teaser. The
good of it is, she ought to beg his pardon, for he meant no harm; yet
she would not allow him to put in an advertisement to clear himself from
hers, though hers was all a lie. He appealed to me, and I gravely gave
it against him. I was at Court to-day, and the foreign Ministers have
got a trick of employing me to speak for them to Lord Treasurer and Lord
Bolingbroke; which I do when the case is reasonable. The College(11)
need not fear; I will not be their Governor. I dined with Sir Thomas
Hanmer and his Duchess.(12) The Duke of Ormond was there, but we parted
soon, and I went to visit Lord Pembroke for the first time; but it was
to see some curious books. Lord Cholmondeley(13) came in; but I would
not talk to him, though he made many advances. I hate the scoundrel for
all he is your Griffith's friend.--Yes, yes, I am abused enough, if that
be all. Nite sollahs.

6. I was to-day at an auction of pictures with Pratt,(14) and laid
out two pound five shillings for a picture of Titian, and if it were
a Titian it would be worth twice as many pounds. If I am cheated, I'll
part with it to Lord Masham: if it be a bargain, I'll keep it to myself.
That's my conscience. But I made Pratt buy several pictures for Lord
Masham. Pratt is a great virtuoso that way. I dined with Lord Treasurer,
but made him go to Court at eight. I always tease him to be gone. I
thought to have made Parnell dine with him, but he was ill; his head
is out of order like mine, but more constant, poor boy!--I was at Lord
Treasurer's levee with the Provost, to ask a book for the College.--I
never go to his levee, unless to present somebody. For all oor rallying,
saucy(15) Ppt, as hope saved, I expected they would have decided about
me long ago; and as hope saved, as soon as ever things are given away
and I not provided for, I will be gone with the very first opportunity,
and put up bag and baggage. But people are slower than can be thought.
Nite MD.

7. Yes, I hope Leigh will soon be gone, a p-- on him! I met him once,
and he talked gravely to me of not seeing the Irish bishops here, and
the Irish gentlemen; but I believe my answers fretted him enough. I
would not dine with Lord Treasurer to-day, though it was Saturday (for
he has engaged me for to-morrow), but went and dined with Lord Masham,
and played at ombre, sixpenny running ombre, for three hours. There were
three voles(16) against me, and I was once a great loser, but came off
for three shillings and sixpence. One may easily lose five guineas at
it. Lady Orkney is gone out of town to-day, and I could not see her for
laziness, but writ to her. She has left me some physic. Fais, I never
knew MD's politics before, and I think it pretty extraordinary, and a
great compliment to you, and I believe never three people conversed so
much with so little politics. I avoid all conversation with the other
party; it is not to be borne, and I am sorry for it. O yes, things (are)
very dear. DD must come in at last with DD's two eggs a penny. There the
proverb was well applied. Parvisol has sent me a bill of fifty pounds,
as I ordered him, which, I hope, will serve me, and bring me over. Pray
God MD does not be delayed for it; but I have had very little from him
this long time. I was not at Court to-day; a wonder! Nite sollahs...
Pdfr.

8. Oo must know, I give chocolate almost every day to two or three
people that I suffer to come to see me in a morning. My man begins to
lie pretty well. 'Tis nothing for people to be denied ten times. My man
knows all I will see, and denies me to everybody else. This is the
day of the Queen's coming to the Crown, and the day Lord Treasurer was
stabbed by Guiscard. I was at Court, where everybody had their Birthday
clothes on, and I dined with Lord Treasurer, who was very fine. He
showed me some of the Queen's speech, which I corrected in several
places, and penned the vote of address of thanks for the speech; but
I was of opinion the House should not sit on Tuesday next, unless they
hear the peace is signed; that is, provided they are sure it will be
signed the week after, and so have one scolding for all. Nite MD.

9. Lord Treasurer would have had me dine with him to-day; he desired
me last night, but I refused, because he would not keep the day of his
stabbing with all the Cabinet, as he intended: so I dined with my
friend Lewis; and the Provost and Parnell, and Ford, was with us. I
lost sixteen shillings at ombre; I don't like it, as etc. At night Lewis
brought us word that the Parliament does not sit to-morrow. I hope
they are sure of the peace by next week, and then they are right in
my opinion: otherwise I think they have done wrong, and might have sat
three weeks ago. People will grumble; but Lord Treasurer cares not a
rush. Lord Keeper is suddenly taken ill of a quinsy, and some lords are
commissioned, I think Lord Trevor,(17) to prorogue the Parliament in his
stead. You never saw a town so full of ferment and expectation. Mr. Pope
has published a fine poem, called Windsor Forest.(18) Read it. Nite.

10. I was early this morning to see Lord Bolingbroke. I find he was of
opinion the Parliament should sit; and says they are not sure the peace
will be signed next week. The prorogation is to this day se'nnight. I
went to look on a library I am going to buy, if we can agree. I have
offered a hundred and twenty pounds, and will give ten more. Lord
Bolingbroke will lend me the money. I was two hours poring on the books.
I will sell some of them, and keep the rest; but I doubt they won't take
the money. I dined in the City, and sat an hour in the evening with Lord
Treasurer, who was in very good humour; but reproached me for not dining
with him yesterday and to-day. What will all this come to? Lord Keeper
had a pretty good night, and is better. I was in pain for him. How do oo
do sollahs?... Nite MD.(19)

11. I was this morning to visit the Duke and Duchess of Ormond, and
the Duchess of Hamilton, and went with the Provost to an auction of
pictures, and laid out fourteen shillings. I am in for it, if I had
money; but I doubt I shall be undone; for Sir Andrew Fountaine invited
the Provost and me to dine with him, and play at ombre, when I fairly
lost fourteen shillings. Fais, it won't do; and I shall be out of
conceit with play this good while. I am come home; and it is late, and
my puppy let out my fire, and I am gone to bed and writing there, and
it is past twelve a good while. Went out four matadores and a trump in
black, and was bested. Vely bad, fais! Nite my deelest logues MD.

12. I was at another auction of pictures to-day, and a great auction it
was. I made Lord Masham lay out forty pounds. There were pictures sold
of twice as much value apiece. Our Society met to-day at the Duke of
Beaufort's: a prodigious fine dinner, which I hate; but we did some
business. Our printer was to attend us, as usual; and the Chancellor of
the Exchequer sent the author of the Examiner(20) twenty guineas. He is
an ingenious fellow, but the most confounded vain coxcomb in the world,
so that I dare not let him see me, nor am acquainted with him. I had
much discourse with the Duke of Ormond this morning, and am driving
some points to secure us all in case of accidents, etc.(21) I left the
Society at seven. I can't drink now at all with any pleasure. I love
white Portugal wine better than claret, champagne, or burgundy. I have a
sad vulgar appetite. I remember Ppt used to maunder, when I came from a
great dinner, and DD had but a bit of mutton. I cannot endure above one
dish; nor ever could since I was a boy, and loved stuffing. It was a
fine day, which is a rarity with us, I assure (you). Never fair two days
together. Nite dee MD.

13. I had a rabble of Irish parsons this morning drinking my chocolate.
I cannot remember appointments. I was to have supped last night with the
Swedish Envoy at his house, and some other company, but forgot it; and
he rallied me to-day at Lord Bolingbroke's, who excused me, saying, the
Envoy ought not to be angry, because I serve Lord Treasurer and him the
same way. For that reason, I very seldom promise to go anywhere. I dined
with Lord Treasurer, who chid me for being absent so long, as he always
does if I miss a day. I sat three hours this evening with Lady Jersey;
but the first two hours she was at ombre with some company. I left Lord
Treasurer at eight: I fancied he was a little thoughtful, for he was
playing with an orange by fits, which, I told him, among common men
looked like the spleen. This letter shall not go to-morrow; no haste,
ung oomens; nothing that presses. I promised but once in three weeks,
and I am better than my word. I wish the peace may be ready, I mean that
we have notice it is signed, before Tuesday; otherwise the grumbling
will much increase. Nite logues.

14. It was a lovely day this, and I took the advantage of walking a good
deal in the Park, before I went to Court. Colonel Disney, one of our
Society, is ill of a fever, and, we fear, in great danger. We all love
him mightily, and he would be a great loss. I doubt I shall not buy the
library; for a roguey bookseller has offered sixty pounds more than I
designed to give; so you see I meant to have a good bargain. I dined
with Lord Treasurer and his Saturday company; but there were but seven
at table. Lord Peterborrow is ill, and spits blood, with a bruise he got
before he left England; but, I believe, an Italian lady he has
brought over is the cause that his illness returns. You know old Lady
Bellasis(22) is dead at last? She has left Lord Berkeley of Stratton(23)
one of her executors, and it will be of great advantage to him; they say
above ten thousand pounds. I stayed with Lord Treasurer upon business,
after the company was gone; but I dare not tell you upon what. My
letters would be good memoirs, if I durst venture to say a thousand
things that pass; but I hear so much of letters opening at your
post-office that I am fearful, etc., and so good-nite, sollahs, rove
Pdfr, MD.

15. Lord Treasurer engaged me to dine with him again to-day, and I
had ready what he wanted; but he would not see it, but put me off till
to-morrow. The Queen goes to chapel now. She is carried in an open
chair, and will be well enough to go to Parliament on Tuesday, if
the Houses meet, which is not yet certain; neither, indeed, can the
Ministers themselves tell; for it depends on winds and weather, and
circumstances of negotiation. However, we go on as if it was certainly
to meet; and I am to be at Lord Treasurer's to-morrow, upon that
supposition, to settle some things relating that way. Ppt(24) may
understand me. The doctors tell me that if poor Colonel Disney does not
get some sleep to-night, he must die. What care you? Ah! but I do
care. He is one of our Society; a fellow of abundance of humour; an old
battered rake, but very honest, not an old man, but an old rake. It was
he that said of Jenny Kingdom,(25) the maid of honour, who is a little
old, that, since she could not get a husband, the Queen should give her
a brevet to act as a married woman. You don't understand this. They give
brevets to majors and captains to act as colonels in the army. Brevets
are commissions. Ask soldiers, dull sollahs. Nite MD.

16. I was at Lord Treasurer's before he came; and, as he entered, he
told me the Parliament was prorogued till Thursday se'nnight. They have
had some expresses, by which they count that the peace may be signed
by that time; at least, that France, Holland, and we, will sign some
articles, by which we shall engage to sign the peace when it is ready:
but Spain has no Minister there; for Monteleon, who is to be their
Ambassador at Utrecht, is not yet gone from hence; and till he is there,
the Spaniards can sign no peace: and (of) one thing take notice, that
a general peace can hardly be finished these two months, so as to be
proclaimed here; for, after signing, it must be ratified; that is,
confirmed by the several princes at their Courts, which to Spain will
cost a month; for we must have notice that it is ratified in all Courts
before we can proclaim it. So be not in too much haste. Nite MD.

17. The Irish folks were disappointed that the Parliament did not meet
to-day, because it was St. Patrick's Day; and the Mall was so full of
crosses that I thought all the world was Irish. Miss Ashe is almost
quite well, and I see the Bishop, but shall not yet go to his house. I
dined again with Lord Treasurer; but the Parliament being prorogued, I
must keep what I have till next week: for I believe he will not see it
till just the evening before the session. He has engaged me to dine with
him again to-morrow, though I did all I could to put it off; but I don't
care to disoblige him. Nite dee sollahs 'tis late. Nite MD.

18. I have now dined six days successively with Lord Treasurer; but
to-night I stole away while he was talking with somebody else, and so am
at liberty to-morrow. There was a flying report of a general cessation
of arms: everybody had it at Court; but, I believe, there is nothing in
it. I asked a certain French Minister how things went. And he whispered
me in French, "Your Plenipotentiaries and ours play the fool." None
of us, indeed, approve of the conduct of either at this time; but Lord
Treasurer was in full good-humour for all that. He had invited a good
many of his relations; and, of a dozen at table, they were all of the
Harley family but myself. Disney is recovering, though you don't care
a straw. Dilly murders us with his IF puns. You know them.... (26) Nite
MD.

19. The Bishop of Clogher has made an IF pun that he is mighty proud of,
and designs to send it over to his brother Tom. But Sir Andrew Fountaine
has wrote to Tom Ashe last post, and told him the pun, and desired him
to send it over to the Bishop as his own; and, if it succeeds, 'twill
be a pure bite. The Bishop will tell it us as a wonder that he and his
brother should jump so exactly. I'll tell you the pun:--If there was a
hackney coach at Mr. Pooley's(27) door, what town in Egypt would it be?
Why, it would be Hecatompolis; Hack at Tom Pooley's. "Sillly," says Ppt.
I dined with a private friend to-day; for our Society, I told you, meet
but once a fortnight. I have not seen Fanny Manley yet; I can't help it.
Lady Orkney is come to town: why, she was at her country house; hat(28)
care you? Nite darling (?) dee MD.

20. Dilly read me a letter to-day from Ppt. She seems to have scratched
her head when she writ it. 'Tis a sad thing to write to people without
tact. There you say, you hear I was going to Bath. No such thing; I am
pretty well, I thank God. The town is now sending me to Savoy.(29) Forty
people have given me joy of it, yet there is not the least truth that I
know in it. I was at an auction of pictures, but bought none. I was so
glad of my liberty, that I would dine nowhere; but, the weather being
fine, I sauntered into the City, and ate a bit about five, and then
supped at Mr. Burke's(30) your Accountant-General, who had been engaging
me this month. The Bishop of Clogher was to have been there, but was
hindered by Lord Paget's(31) funeral. The Provost and I sat till one
o'clock; and, if that be not late, I don't know what is late. Parnell's
poem will be published on Monday, and to-morrow I design he shall
present it to Lord Treasurer and Lord Bolingbroke at Court. The poor lad
is almost always out of order with his head. Burke's wife is his sister.
She has a little of the pert Irish way. Nite MD.

21. Morning. I will now finish my letter; for company will come, and
a stir, and a clutter; and I'll keep the letter in my pottick,(32)
and give it into the post myself. I must go to Court, and you know on
Saturdays I dine with Lord Treasurer, of course. Farewell, deelest MD MD
MD, FW FW FW, MD ME ME ME Lele sollahs.(33)




LETTER 62.(1)

LONDON, March 21, 1712-13.

I gave your letter in this night. I dined with Lord Treasurer to-day,
and find he has been at a meeting at Lord Halifax's house, with four
principal Whigs; but he is resolved to begin a speech against them when
the Parliament sits; and I have begged that the Ministers may have a
meeting on purpose to settle that matter, and let us be the attackers;
and I believe it will come to something, for the Whigs intend to attack
the Ministers: and if, instead of that, the Ministers attack the Whigs,
it will be better: and farther, I believe we shall attack them on those
very points they intend to attack us. The Parliament will be again
prorogued for a fortnight, because of Passion Week. I forgot to tell you
that Mr. Griffin has given Ppt's brother(2) a new employment, about ten
pounds a year better than his former; but more remote, and consequently
cheaper. I wish I could have done better, and hope oo will take what can
be done in good part, and that oo brother will not dislike it.--Nite own
dear... MD.

22. I dined to-day with Lord Steward.(3) There Frank Annesley(4) (a
Parliament-man) told me he had heard that I had wrote to my friends in
Ireland to keep firm to the Whig interest; for that Lord Treasurer would
certainly declare for it after the peace. Annesley said twenty people
had told him this. You must know this is what they endeavour to report
of Lord Treasurer, that he designs to declare for the Whigs; and a
Scotch fellow has wrote the same to Scotland; and his meeting with
those lords gives occasion to such reports. Let me henceforth call
Lord Treasurer Eltee, because possibly my letters may be opened. Pray
remember Eltee. You know the reason; L.T. and Eltee pronounced the same
way. Stay, 'tis five weeks since I had a letter from MD. I allow you
six. You see why I cannot come over the beginning of April; whoever has
to do with this Ministry can fix no time: but as(5) hope saved, it is
not Pdfr's fault. Pay don't blame poo Pdfr. Nite deelest logues MD.(6)

23. I dined to-day at Sir Thomas Hanmer's, by an old appointment: there
was the Duke of Ormond, and Lord and Lady Orkney. I left them at six.
Everybody is as sour as vinegar. I endeavour to keep a firm friendship
between the Duke of Ormond and Eltee. (Oo know who Eltee is, or have oo
fordot already?) I have great designs, if I can compass them; but delay
is rooted in Eltee's heart; yet the fault is not altogether there, that
things are no better. Here is the cursedest libel in verse come out that
ever was seen, called The Ambassadress;(7) it is very dull, too; it has
been printed three or four different ways, and is handed about, but not
sold. It abuses the Queen horribly. The Examiner has cleared me to-day
of being author of his paper, and done it with great civilities to
me.(8) I hope it will stop people's mouths; if not, they must go on and
be hanged, I care not. 'Tis terribly rainy weather, I'll go sleep. Nite
deelest MD.

24. It rained all this day, and ruined me in coach-hire. I went to
Colonel Disney, who is past danger. Then I visited Lord Keeper, who was
at dinner; but I would not dine with him, but drove to Lord Treasurer
(Eltee I mean), paid the coachman, and went in; but he dined abroad: so
I was forced to call the coachman again, and went to Lord Bolingbroke's.
He dined abroad too; and at Lord Dupplin's I alighted, and by good
luck got a dinner there, and then went to the Latin play at Westminster
School, acted by the boys; and Lord Treasurer (Eltee I mean again)
honoured them with his presence. Lady Masham's eldest son, about two
years old, is ill, and I am afraid will not live: she is full of grief,
and I pity and am angry with her. Four shillings to-day in coach-hire;
fais, it won't do. Our peace will certainly be ready by Thursday
fortnight; but our Plenipotentiaries were to blame that it was not done
already. They thought their powers were not full enough to sign the
peace, unless every Prince was ready, which cannot yet be; for Spain has
no Minister yet at Utrecht; but now ours have new orders. Nite MD.

25. Weather worse than ever; terrible rain all day, but I was resolved
I would spend no more money. I went to an auction of pictures with Dr.
Pratt, and there met the Duke of Beaufort, who promised to come with me
to Court, but did not. So a coach I got, and went to Court, and did some
little business there, but was forced to go home; for oo must understand
I take a little physic over-night, which works me next day. Lady Orkney
is my physician. It is hiera picra,(9) two spoonfuls, devilish stuff!
I thought to have dined with Eltee, but would not, merely to save a
shilling; but I dined privately with a friend, and played at ombre, and
won six shillings. Here are several people of quality lately dead of
the smallpox. I have not yet seen Miss Ashe, but hear she is well. The
Bishop of Clogher has bought abundance of pictures, and Dr. Pratt has
got him very good pennyworths.(10) I can get no walks, the weather is so
bad. Is it so with oo, sollahs?... (11)

26. Though it was shaving-day, head and beard, yet I was out early to
see Lord Bolingbroke, and talk over affairs with him; and then I went to
the Duke of Ormond's, and so to Court, where the Ministers did not come,
because the Parliament was prorogued till this day fortnight. We had
terrible rain and hail to-day. Our Society met this day, but I left them
before seven, and went to Sir A(ndrew) F(ountaine), and played at ombre
with him and Sir Thomas Clarges, till ten, and then went to Sir Thomas
Hanmer. His wife, the Duchess of Grafton, left us after a little while,
and I stayed with him about an hour, upon some affairs, etc. Lord
Bolingbroke left us at the Society before I went; for there is an
express from Utrecht, but I know not yet what it contains; only I know
the Ministers expect the peace will be signed in a week, which is a week
before the session. Nite, MD.

27. Parnell's poem is mightily esteemed; but poetry sells ill. I am
plagued with that... (12) poor Harrison's mother; you would laugh to see
how cautious I am of paying her the 100 pounds I received for her son
from the Treasury. I have asked every creature I know whether I may do
it safely, yet durst not venture, till my Lord Keeper assured me there
was no danger. I have not paid her, but will in a day or two: though I
have a great mind to stay till Ppt sends me her opinion, because Ppt
is a great lawyer. I dined to-day with a mixture of people at a
Scotchman's, who made the invitation to Mr. Lewis and me, and has some
design upon us, which we know very well. I went afterwards to see a
famous moving picture,(13) and I never saw anything so pretty. You see a
sea ten miles wide, a town on t'other end, and ships sailing in the sea,
and discharging their cannon. You see a great sky, with moon and stars,
etc. I'm a fool. Nite, dee MD.

28. I had a mighty levee to-day. I deny myself to everybody, except
about half a dozen, and they were all here, and Mr. Addison was one, and
I had chocolate twice, which I don't like. Our rainy weather continues.
Coach-hire goes deep. I dined with Eltee and his Saturday company, as
usual, and could not get away till nine. Lord Peterborow was making long
harangues, and Eltee kept me in spite. Then I went to see the Bishop of
Ossory, who had engaged me in the morning; he is going to Ireland. The
Bishop of Killaloe(14) and Tom Leigh was with us. The latter had wholly
changed his style, by seeing how the bishops behaved themselves, and he
seemed to think me one of more importance than I really am. I put the
ill conduct of the bishops about the First-Fruits, with relation to
Eltee and me, strongly upon Killaloe, and showed how it had hindered me
from getting a better thing for them, called the Crown rents, which the
Queen had promised. He had nothing to say, but was humble, and desired
my interest in that and some other things. This letter is half done in a
week: I believe oo will have it next. Nite MD.

29. I have been employed in endeavouring to save one of your junior
Fellows,(15) who came over here for a dispensation from taking orders,
and, in soliciting it, has run out his time, and now his fellowship is
void, if the College pleases, unless the Queen suspends the execution,
and gives him time to take orders. I spoke to all the Ministers
yesterday about it; but they say the Queen is angry, and thought it
was a trick to deceive her; and she is positive, and so the man must be
ruined, for I cannot help him. I never saw him in my life; but the
case was so hard, I could not forbear interposing. Your Government
recommended him to the Duke of Ormond, and he thought they would
grant it; and by the time it was refused, the fellowship by rigour
is forfeited. I dined with Dr. Arbuthnot (one of my brothers) at his
lodgings in Chelsea, and was there at chapel; and the altar put me
in mind of Tisdall's outlandish would(16) at your hospital for the
soldiers. I was not at Court to-day, and I hear the Queen was not at
church. Perhaps the gout has seized her again. Terrible rain all day.
Have oo such weather? Nite MD.

30. Morning. I was naming some time ago, to a certain person, another
certain person, that was very deserving, and poor and sickly; and
t'other, that first certain person, gave me a hundred pounds to give the
other, which I have not yet done. The person who is to have it never
saw the giver, nor expects one farthing, nor has the least knowledge or
imagination of it; so I believe it will be a very agreeable surprise;
for I think it is a handsome present enough. At night I dined in the
City, at Pontack's,(17) with Lord Dupplin, and some others. We were
treated by one Colonel Cleland,(18) who has a mind to be Governor of
Barbados, and is laying these long traps for me and others, to engage
our interests for him. He is a true Scotchman. I paid the hundred pounds
this evening, and it was an agreeable surprise to the receiver. We
reckon the peace is now signed, and that we shall have it in three days.
I believe it is pretty sure. Nite MD.

31. I thought to-day on Ppt when she told me she suppose(d) I was
acquainted with the steward, when I was giving myself airs of being at
some lord's house. Sir Andrew Fountaine invited the Bishop of Clogher
and me, and some others, to dine where he did; and he carried us to the
Duke of Kent's,(19) who was gone out of town; but the steward treated
us nobly, and showed us the fine pictures, etc. I have not yet seen Miss
Ashe. I wait till she has been abroad, and taken the air. This evening
Lady Masham, Dr. Arbuthnot, and I, were contriving a lie for to-morrow,
that Mr. Noble,(20) who was hanged last Saturday, was recovered by
his friends, and then seized again by the sheriff, and is now in a
messenger's hands at the Black Swan in Holborn. We are all to send to
our friends, to know whether they have heard anything of it, and so we
hope it will spread. However, we shall do our endeavours; nothing shall
be wanting on our parts, and leave the rest to fortune. Nite MD.

April 1. We had no success in our story, though I sent my man to several
houses, to inquire among the footmen, without letting him into the
secret; but I doubt my colleagues did not contribute as they ought.
Parnell and I dined with Darteneuf(21) to-day. You have heard of
Darteneuf: I have told you of Darteneuf. After dinner we all went to
Lord Bolingbroke's, who had desired me to dine with him; but I would
not, because I heard it was to look over a dull poem of one parson
Trapp(22) upon the peace. The Swedish Envoy told me to-day at Court that
he was in great apprehensions about his master;(23) and indeed we are
afraid that prince has(24) died among those Turkish dogs. I prevailed on
Lord Bolingbroke to invite Mr. Addison to dine with him on Good Friday.
I suppose we shall be mighty mannerly. Addison is to have a play of his
acted on Friday in Easter Week: 'tis a tragedy, called Cato; I saw it
unfinished some years ago.(25) Did I tell you that Steele has begun a
new daily paper, called the Guardian?(26) they say good for nothing. I
have not seen it. Nite dee MD.

2. I was this morning with Lord Bolingbroke, and he tells me a Spanish
courier is just come, with the news that the King of Spain has agreed to
everything that the Queen desires; and the Duke d'Ossuna has left Paris
in order to his journey to Utrecht. I was prevailed on to come home with
Trapp, and read his poem and correct it; but it was good for nothing.
While I was thus employed, Sir Thomas Hanmer came up to my chamber, and
balked me of a journey he and I intended this week to Lord Orkney's at
Cliffden;(27) but he is not well, and his physician will not let him
undertake such a journey. I intended to dine with Lord Treasurer; but
going to see Colonel Disney, who lives with General Withers,(28) I liked
the General's little dinner so well, that I stayed and took share of
it, and did not go to Lord Treasurer till six, where I found Dr.
Sacheverell, who told us that the bookseller had given him 100 pounds
for his sermon,(29) preached last Sunday, and intended to print 30,000:
I believe he will be confoundedly bit, and will hardly sell above half.
I have fires still, though April has begun, against my old maxim; but
the weather is wet and cold. I never saw such a long run of ill weather
in my life. Nite dee logues MD.

3. I was at the Queen's chapel to-day, but she was not there. Mr. St.
John, Lord Bolingbroke's brother, came this day at noon with an express
from Utrecht, that the peace is signed by all the Ministers there, but
those of the Emperor, who will likewise sign in a few days; so that now
the great work is in effect done, and I believe it will appear a most
excellent peace for Europe, particularly for England. Addison and I, and
some others, dined with Lord Bolingbroke, and sat with him till twelve.
We were very civil, but yet when we grew warm, we talked in a friendly
manner of party. Addison raised his objections, and Lord Bolingbroke
answered them with great complaisance. Addison began Lord Somers's
health, which went about; but I bid him not name Lord Wharton's, for I
would not pledge it; and I told Lord Bolingbroke frankly that Addison
loved Lord Wharton as little as I did: so we laughed, etc. Well, but
you are glad of the peace, you Ppt the Trimmer, are not you? As for DD
I don't doubt her. Why, now, if I did not think Ppt had been a violent
Tory, and DD the greater Whig of the two! 'Tis late. Nite MD.

4. This Passion Week, people are so demure, especially this last day,
that I told Dilly, who called here, that I would dine with him, and so I
did, faith; and had a small shoulder of mutton of my own bespeaking. It
rained all day. I came home at seven, and have never stirred out, but
have been reading Sacheverell's long dull sermon, which he sent me. It
is the first sermon since his suspension is expired; but not a word in
it upon the occasion, except two or three remote hints. The Bishop of
Clogher has been sadly bit by Tom Ashe, who sent him a pun, which the
Bishop had made, and designed to send to him, but delayed it; and Lord
Pembroke and I made Sir Andrew Fountaine write it to Tom. I believe
I told you of it in my last; it succeeded right, and the Bishop was
wondering to Lord Pembroke how he and his brother could hit on the same
thing. I'll go to bed soon, for I must be at church by eight to-morrow,
Easter Day. Nite dee MD.

5. Warburton(30) wrote to me two letters about a living of one Foulkes,
who is lately dead in the county of Meath. My answer is, that before I
received the first letter, General Gorges(31) had recommended a friend
of his to the Duke of Ormond, which was the first time I heard of its
vacancy, and it was the Provost told me of it. I believe verily that
Foulkes was not dead when Gorges recommended the other: for Warburton's
last letter said that Foulkes was dead the day before the date.--This
has prevented me from serving Warburton, as I would have done, if I had
received early notice enough. Pray say or write this to Warburton, to
justify me to him. I was at church at eight this morning, and dressed
and shaved after I came back, but was too late at Court; and Lord
Abingdon(32) was like to have snapped me for dinner, and I believe will
fall out with me for refusing him; but I hate dining with them, and I
dined with a private friend, and took two or three good walks; for it
was a very fine day, the first we have had a great while. Remember, was
Easter Day a fine day with you? I have sat with Lady Worsley till now.
Nite dee MD.

6. I was this morning at ten at the rehearsal of Mr. Addison's play,
called Cato, which is to be acted on Friday. There were not above half a
score of us to see it. We stood on the stage, and it was foolish enough
to see the actors prompted every moment, and the poet directing them;
and the drab that acts Cato's daughter,(33) out in the midst of a
passionate part, and then calling out, "What's next?" The Bishop of
Clogher was there too; but he stood privately in a gallery. I went to
dine with Lord Treasurer, but he was gone to Wimbledon, his daughter
Caermarthen's(34) country seat, seven miles off. So I went back,
and dined privately with Mr. Addison, whom I had left to go to Lord
Treasurer. I keep fires yet; I am very extravagant. I sat this evening
with Sir A. Fountaine, and we amused ourselves with making IFS for
Dilly. It is rainy weather again; nevle saw ze rike.(35) This letter
shall go to-morrow; remember, ung oomens, it is seven weeks since oor
last, and I allow oo but five weeks; but oo have been galloping into
the country to Swanton's.(36) O pray tell Swanton I had his letter, but
cannot contrive how to serve him. If a Governor were to go over, I would
recommend him as far as lay in my power, but I can do no more: and you
know all employments in Ireland, at least almost all, are engaged
in reversions. If I were on the spot, and had credit with a Lord
Lieutenant, I would very heartily recommend him; but employments here
are no more in my power than the monarchy itself. Nite, dee MD.

7. Morning. I have had a visitor here, that has taken up my time. I have
not been abroad, oo may be sure; so I can say nothing to-day, but that
I rove MD bettle zan ever, if possibbere. I will put this in the
post-office; so I say no more. I write by this post to the Dean, but it
is not above two lines; and one enclosed to you, but that enclosed to
you is not above three lines; and then one enclosed to the Dean, which
he must not have but upon condition of burning it immediately after
reading, and that before your eyes; for there are some things in it I
would not have liable to accident. You shall only know in general that
it is an account of what I have done to serve him in his pretensions on
these vacancies, etc. But he must not know that you know so much.(37)
Does this perplex you? Hat care I? But rove Pdfr, saucy Pdfr. Farewell,
deelest MD MD MD FW FW FW,... ME, MD Lele.




LETTER 63.(1)

LONDON, April 7, 1713.

I fancy I marked my last, which I sent this day, wrong; only 61, and it
ought to be 62. I dined with Lord Treasurer, and though the business I
had with him is something against Thursday, when the Parliament is to
meet, and this is Tuesday, yet he put it off till to-morrow. I dare not
tell you what it is, lest this letter should miscarry or be opened; but
I never saw his fellow for delays. The Parliament will now certainly
sit, and everybody's expectations are ready to burst. At a Council
to-night the Lord Chief-Justice Parker, a Whig, spoke against the peace;
so did Lord Chomley,(2) another Whig, who is Treasurer of the Household.
My Lord Keeper(3) was this night made Lord Chancellor. We hope there
will soon be some removes. Nite, dee sollahs; Late. Rove Pdfr.(4)

8. Lord Chomley (the right name is Cholmondeley) is this day removed
from his employment, for his last night's speech; and Sir Richard
Temple,(5) Lieutenant-General, the greatest Whig in the army, is turned
out; and Lieutenant-General Palmes(6) will be obliged to sell his
regiment. This is the first-fruits of a friendship I have established
between two great men. I dined with Lord Treasurer, and did the business
I had for him to his satisfaction. I won't tell MD what it was.... (7)
for zat. The Parliament sits to-morrow for certain. Here is a letter
printed in Maccartney's name, vindicating himself from the murder of the
Duke of Hamilton. I must give some hints to have it answered; 'tis full
of lies, and will give an opportunity of exposing that party. To morrow
will be a very important day. All the world will be at Westminster. Lord
Treasurer is as easy as a lamb. They are mustering up the proxies of the
absent lords; but they are not in any fear of wanting a majority, which
death and accidents have increased this year. Nite MD.

9. I was this morning with Lord Treasurer, to present to him a young
son(8) of the late Earl of Jersey, at the desire of the widow. There I
saw the mace and great coach ready for Lord Treasurer, who was going to
Parliament. Our Society met to-day; but I expected the Houses would
sit longer than I cared to fast; so I dined with a friend, and never
inquired how matters went till eight this evening, when I went to Lord
Orkney's, where I found Sir Thomas Hanmer. The Queen delivered her
speech very well, but a little weaker in her voice. The crowd was vast.
The order for the Address(9) was moved, and opposed by Lord Nottingham,
Halifax, and Cowper. Lord Treasurer spoke with great spirit and
resolution; Lord Peterborow flirted(10) against the Duke of Marlborough
(who is in Germany, you know), but it was in answer to one of Halifax's
impertinences. The order for an Address passed by a majority of
thirty-three, and the Houses rose before six. This is the account I
heard at Lord Orkney's. The Bishop of Chester,(11) a high Tory, was
against the Court. The Duchess of Marlborough sent for him some months
ago, to justify herself to him in relation to the Queen, and showed
him letters, and told him stories, which the weak man believed, and was
perverted. Nite MD.

10. I dined with a cousin in the City, and poor Pat Rolt was there.
I have got her rogue of a husband leave to come to England from
Port-Mahon. The Whigs are much down; but I reckon they have some
scheme in agitation. This Parliament-time hinders our Court meetings
on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. I had a great deal of business
to-night, which gave me a temptation to be idle, and I lost a dozen
shillings at ombre, with Dr. Pratt and another. I have been to see
t'other day the Bishop of Clogher and lady, but did not see Miss. It
rains every day, and yet we are all over dust. Lady Masham's eldest boy
is very ill: I doubt he will not live, and she stays at Kensington to
nurse him, which vexes us all. She is so excessively fond, it makes me
mad. She should never leave the Queen, but leave everything, to stick to
what is so much the interest of the public, as well as her own. This I
tell her; but talk to the winds. Nite MD.

11. I dined at Lord Treasurer's, with his Saturday company. We had ten
at table, all lords but myself and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Argyle went off at six, and was in very indifferent humour as usual.
Duke of Ormond and Lord Bolingbroke were absent. I stayed till near ten.
Lord Treasurer showed us a small picture, enamelled work, and set in
gold, worth about twenty pounds; a picture, I mean, of the Queen,
which she gave to the Duchess of Marlborough, set in diamonds. When the
Duchess was leaving England, she took off all the diamonds, and gave
the picture to one Mrs. Higgins (an old intriguing woman, whom everybody
knows), bidding her make the best of it she could. Lord Treasurer sent
to Mrs. Higgins for this picture, and gave her a hundred pounds for it.
Was ever such an ungrateful beast as that Duchess? or did you ever hear
such a story? I suppose the Whigs will not believe it. Pray, try them.
Takes off the diamonds, and gives away the picture to an insignificant
woman, as a thing of no consequence: and gives it to her to sell, like a
piece of old-fashioned plate. Is she not a detestable slut? Nite deelest
MD.

12. I went to Court to-day, on purpose to present Mr. Berkeley,(12) one
of your Fellows of Dublin College, to Lord Berkeley of Stratton. That
Mr. Berkeley is a very ingenious man, and great philosopher, and I have
mentioned him to all the Ministers, and given them some of his writings;
and I will favour him as much as I can. This I think I am bound to,
in honour and conscience, to use all my little credit toward helping
forward men of worth in the world. The Queen was at chapel to-day,
and looks well. I dined at Lord Orkney's with the Duke of Ormond,
Lord Arran, and Sir Thomas Hanmer. Mr. St. John, Secretary at Utrecht,
expects every moment to return there with the ratification of the peace.
Did I tell you in my last of Addison's play called Cato, and that I was
at the rehearsal of it? Nite MD.

13. This morning my friend, Mr. Lewis, came to me, and showed me an
order for a warrant for the three vacant deaneries; but none of them
to me. This was what I always foresaw, and received the notice of it
better, I believe, than he expected. I bid Mr. Lewis tell Lord Treasurer
that I took nothing ill of him but his not giving me timely notice, as
he promised to do, if he found the Queen would do nothing for me. At
noon, Lord Treasurer hearing I was in Mr. Lewis's office, came to me,
and said many things too long to repeat. I told him I had nothing to
do but go to Ireland immediately; for I could not, with any reputation,
stay longer here, unless I had something honourable immediately given to
me. We dined together at the Duke of Ormond's. He there told me he had
stopped the warrants for the deans, that what was done for me might be
at the same time, and he hoped to compass it to-night; but I believe
him not. I told the Duke of Ormond my intentions. He is content Sterne
should be a bishop, and I have St. Patrick's; but I believe nothing will
come of it, for stay I will not; and so I believe for all oo... (13) oo
may see me in Dublin before April ends. I am less out of humour than you
would imagine: and if it were not that impertinent people will condole
with me, as they used to give me joy, I would value it less. But I will
avoid company, and muster up my baggage, and send them next Monday
by the carrier to Chester, and come and see my willows, against the
expectation of all the world.--Hat care I? Nite deelest logues, MD.

14. I dined in the City to-day, and ordered a lodging to be got ready
for me against I came to pack up my things; for I will leave this end of
the town as soon as ever the warrants for the deaneries are out,
which are yet stopped. Lord Treasurer told Mr. Lewis that it should be
determined to-night: and so he will for(14) a hundred nights. So he said
yesterday, but I value it not. My daily journals shall be but short
till I get into the City, and then I will send away this, and follow it
myself; and design to walk it all the way to Chester, my man and I, by
ten miles a day. It will do my health a great deal of good. I shall do
it in fourteen days. Nite dee MD.

15. Lord Bolingbroke made me dine with him to-day; he(15) was as good
company as ever; and told me the Queen would determine something for me
to-night. The dispute is, Windsor or St. Patrick's. I told him I would
not stay for their disputes, and he thought I was in the right. Lord
Masham told me that Lady Masham is angry I have not been to see her
since this business, and desires I will come to-morrow. Nite deelest MD.

16. I was this noon at Lady Masham's, who was just come from Kensington,
where her eldest son is sick. She said much to me of what she had talked
to the Queen and Lord Treasurer. The poor lady fell a shedding tears
openly. She could not bear to think of my having St. Patrick's, etc. I
was never more moved than to see so much friendship. I would not stay
with her, but went and dined with Dr. Arbuthnot, with Mr. Berkeley,
one of your Fellows, whom I have recommended to the Doctor, and to Lord
Berkeley of Stratton. Mr. Lewis tells me that the Duke of Ormond has
been to-day with the Queen; and she was content that Dr. Sterne should
be Bishop of Dromore, and I Dean of St. Patrick's; but then out came
Lord Treasurer, and said he would not be satisfied but that I must be
Prebend(ary) of Windsor. Thus he perplexes things. I expect neither; but
I confess, as much as I love England, I am so angry at this treatment
that, if I had my choice, I would rather have St. Patrick's. Lady Masham
says she will speak to purpose to the Queen to-morrow. Nite,... dee MD.

17. I went to dine at Lady Masham's to-day, and she was taken ill of a
sore throat, and aguish. She spoke to the Queen last night, but had
not much time. The Queen says she will determine to-morrow with Lord
Treasurer. The warrants for the deaneries are still stopped, for fear I
should be gone. Do you think anything will be done? I don't care whether
it is or no. In the meantime, I prepare for my journey, and see no great
people, nor will see Lord Treasurer any more, if I go. Lord Treasurer
told Mr. Lewis it should be done to-night; so he said five nights ago.
Nite MD.

18. This morning Mr. Lewis sent me word that Lord Treasurer told him
the Queen would determine at noon. At three Lord Treasurer sent to me to
come to his lodgings at St. James's, and told me the Queen was at last
resolved that Dr. Sterne should be Bishop of Dromore, and I Dean of St.
Patrick's; and that Sterne's warrant should be drawn immediately. You
know the deanery is in the Duke of Ormond's gift; but this is concerted
between the Queen, Lord Treasurer, and the Duke of Ormond, to make room
for me. I do not know whether it will yet be done; some unlucky accident
may yet come. Neither can I feel joy at passing my days in Ireland; and
I confess I thought the Ministry would not let me go; but perhaps they
can't help it. Nite MD.

19. I forgot to tell you that Lord Treasurer forced me to dine with
him yesterday as usual, with his Saturday company; which I did after
frequent refusals. To-day I dined with a private friend, and was not at
Court. After dinner Mr. Lewis sent me a note, that the Queen stayed till
she knew whether the Duke of Ormond approved of Sterne for Bishop. I
went this evening, and found the Duke of Ormond at the Cock-pit, and
told him, and desired he would go to the Queen, and approve of Sterne.
He made objections, desired I would name any other deanery, for he
did not like Sterne; that Sterne never went to see him; that he was
influenced by the Archbishop of Dublin, etc.; so all now is broken
again. I sent out for Lord Treasurer, and told him this. He says all
will do well; but I value not what he says. This suspense vexes me worse
than anything else. Nite MD.

20. I went to-day, by appointment, to the Cock-pit, to talk with the
Duke of Ormond. He repeated the same proposals of any other deanery,
etc. I desired he would put me out of the case, and do as he pleased.
Then, with great kindness, he said he would consent; but would do it
for no man alive but me, etc. And he will speak to the Queen today or
to-morrow; so, perhaps, something will come of it. I can't tell. Nite
dee dee logues, MD.

21. The Duke of Ormond has told the Queen he is satisfied that Sterne
should be Bishop, and she consents I shall be Dean; and I suppose the
warrants will be drawn in a day or two. I dined at an ale-house with
Parnell and Berkeley; for I am not in humour to go among the Ministers,
though Lord Dartmouth invited me to dine with him to-day, and Lord
Treasurer was to be there. I said I would, if I were out of suspense.
Nite deelest MD.

22. The Queen says warrants shall be drawn, but she will dispose of all
in England and Ireland at once, to be teased no more. This will delay
it some time; and, while it is delayed, I am not sure of the Queen, my
enemies being busy. I hate this suspense. Nite deelest MD.(16)

23. I dined yesterday with General Hamilton.(17) I forgot to tell oo. I
write short journals now. I have eggs on the spit. This night the Queen
has signed all the warrants, among which Sterne is Bishop of Dromore,
and the Duke of Ormond is to send over an order for making me Dean of
St. Patrick's. I have no doubt of him at all. I think 'tis now passed.
And I suppose MD is malicious enough to be glad, and rather have it than
Wells.(18) But you see what a condition I am in. I thought I was to pay
but six hundred pounds for the house; but the Bishop of Clogher says
eight hundred pounds; first-fruits one hundred and fifty pounds, and so,
with patent, a thousand pounds in all; so that I shall not be the better
for the deanery these three years. I hope in some time they will be
persuaded here to give me some money to pay off these debts. I must
finish the book I am writing,(19) before I can go over; and they expect
I shall pass next winter here, and then I will dun them to give me a
sum of money. However, I hope to pass four or five months with MD, and
whatever comes on it. MD's allowance must be increased, and shall be
too, fais... (20) I received oor rettle No. 39 to-night; just ten weeks
since I had your last. I shall write next post to Bishop Sterne. Never
man had so many enemies of Ireland(21) as he. I carried it with the
strongest hand possible. If he does not use me well and gently in
what dealings I shall have with him, he will be the most ungrateful of
mankind. The Archbishop of York,(22) my mortal enemy, has sent, by a
third hand, that he would be glad to see me. Shall I see him, or not?
I hope to be over in a month, and that MD, with their raillery, will
be mistaken, that I shall make it three years. I will answer oo rettle
soon; but no more journals. I shall be very busy. Short letters from
hence forward. I shall not part with Laracor. That is all I have to live
on, except the deanery be worth more than four hundred pounds a year.
Is it? If it be, the overplus shall be divided between MD and FW beside
usual allowance of MD.... (23) Pray write to me a good-humoured letter
immediately, let it be ever so short. This affair was carried with great
difficulty, which vexes me. But they say here 'tis much to my reputation
that I have made a bishop, in spite of all the world, to get the best
deanery in Ireland. Nite dee sollahs.

24. I forgot to tell you I had Sterne's letter yesterday, in answer to
mine. Oo performed oor commission well, dood dallars both.(24) I made
mistakes the three last days, and am forced to alter the number.(25) I
dined in the City to-day with my printer, and came home early, and
am going to (be) busy with my work. I will send this to-morrow, and I
suppose the warrants will go then. I wrote to Dr. Coghill, to take care
of passing my patent; and to Parvisol, to attend him with money, if he
has any, or to borrow some where he can. Nite MD.

25. Morning. I know not whether my warrant be yet ready from the Duke of
Ormond. I suppose it will by tonight. I am going abroad, and will keep
this unsealed, till I know whether all be finished. Mollow,(26) sollahs.

I had this letter all day in my pocket, waiting till I heard the
warrants were gone over. Mr. Lewis sent to Southwell's clerk at ten; and
he said the Bishop of Killaloe(27) had desired they should be stopped
till next post. He sent again, that the Bishop of Killaloe's business
had nothing to do with ours. Then I went myself, but it was past eleven,
and asked the reason. Killaloe is removed to Raphoe, and he has a mind
to have an order for the rents of Raphoe, that have fallen due since the
vacancy, and he would have all stop till he has gotten that. A pretty
request! But the clerk, at Mr. Lewis's message, sent the warrants for
Sterne and me; but then it was too late to send this, which frets me
heartily, that MD should not have intelligence first from Pdfr. I
think to take a hundred pounds a year out of the deanery, and divide it
between MD and Pr,(28) and so be one year longer in paying the debt; but
we'll talk of zis hen I come over. So nite dear sollahs. Lele.(29)

26. I was at Court to-day, and a thousand people gave me joy; so I ran
out. I dined with Lady Orkney. Yesterday I dined with Lord Treasurer
and his Saturday people as usual; and was so bedeaned! The Archbishop
of York says he will never more speak against me. Pray see that Parvisol
stirs about getting my patent. I have given Tooke DD's note to prove she
is alive. I'll answer oo rettle.... Nite.

27. Nothing new to-day. I dined with Tom Harley, etc. I'll seal up this
to-night. Pray write soon.... MD MD MD FW FW FW ME ME ME Lele, lele.




LETTER 64.(1)

LONDON, May 16 (1713).

I had yours, No. 40, yesterday. Your new Bishop acts very ungratefully.
I cannot say so bad of it as he deserved. I begged at the same post
his warrant and mine went over, that he would leave those livings to my
disposal. I shall write this post to him to let him know how ill I take
it. I have letters to tell me that I ought to think of employing some
body to set the tithes of the deanery. I know not what to do at this
distance. I cannot be in Ireland under a month. I will write two orders;
one to Parvisol, and t'other to Parvisol, and a blank for whatever
fellow it is whom the last Dean employed; and I would desire you to
advise with friends which to make use of: and if the latter, let the
fellow's name be inserted, and both act by commission. If the former,
then speak to Parvisol, and know whether he can undertake it. I doubt it
is hardly to be done by a perfect stranger alone, as Parvisol is. He
may perhaps venture at all, to keep up his interest with me; but that is
needless, for I am willing to do him any good, that will do me no harm.
Pray advise with Walls and Raymond, and a little with Bishop Sterne
for form. Tell Raymond I cannot succeed for him to get that living of
Moimed. It is represented here as a great sinecure. Several chaplains
have solicited for it; and it has vexed me so, that, if I live, I will
make it my business to serve him better in something else. I am heartily
sorry for his illness, and that of the other two. If it be not necessary
to let the tithes till a month hence, you may keep the two papers, and
advise well in the meantime; and whenever it is absolutely necessary,
then give that paper which you are most advised to. I thank Mr. Walls
for his letter. Tell him that must serve for an answer, with my
service to him and her. I shall buy Bishop Sterne's hair as soon as his
household goods. I shall be ruined, or at least sadly cramped, unless
the Queen will give me a thousand pounds. I am sure she owes me a great
deal more. Lord Treasurer rallies me upon it, and I believe intends it;
but, quando? I am advised to hasten over as soon as possible, and so I
will, and hope to set out the beginning of June. Take no lodging for me.
What? at your old tricks again? I can lie somewhere after I land, and I
care not where, nor how. I will buy your eggs and bacon, DD... (2)
your caps and Bible; and pray think immediately, and give me some
commissions, and I will perform them as far as oo poo Pdfr can.(3)
The letter I sent before this was to have gone a post before; but an
accident hindered it; and, I assure oo, I wam very akkree(4) MD did
not write to Dean Pdfr, and I think oo might have had a Dean under your
girdle for the superscription. I have just finished my Treatise,(5) and
must be ten days correcting it. Farewell, deelest MD, MD, MD, FW, FW,
FW, ME, ME, ME, Lele.

You'll seal the two papers after my name.


"LONDON, May 16, 1713.

"I appoint Mr. Isaiah Parvisol and Mr. to set and let the tithes of the
Deanery of St. Patrick's for this present year. In witness whereof, I
hereunto set my hand and seal, the day and year above written.

                                 (JONAT. SWIFT."(6))


"LONDON, May 16, 1713.

"I do hereby appoint Mr. Isaiah Parvisol my proctor, to set and let
the tithes of the Deanery of St. Patrick's. In witness whereof, I have
hereunto set my hand and seal, the day and year above written.

                                  JONAT. SWIFT."




LETTER 65.(1)

CHESTER, June 6, 1713.

I am come here after six days. I set out on Monday last, and got here
to-day about eleven in the morning. A noble rider, fais! and all the
ships and people went off yesterday with a rare wind. This was told
me, to my comfort, upon my arrival. Having not used riding these three
years, made me terrible weary; yet I resolve on Monday to set out for
Holyhead, as weary as I am. 'Tis good for my health, mam. When I came
here, I found MD's letter of the 26th of May sent down to me. Had you
writ a post sooner I might have brought some pins: but you were lazy,
and would not write your orders immediately, as I desired you. I will
come when God pleases; perhaps I may be with you in a week. I will be
three days going to Holyhead; I cannot ride faster, say hat oo will. I
am upon Stay-behind's mare. I have the whole inn to myself. I would fain
'scape this Holyhead journey; but I have no prospect of ships, and it
will be almost necessary I should be in Dublin before the 25th instant,
to take the oaths;(2) otherwise I must wait to a quarter sessions. I
will lodge as I can; therefore take no lodgings for me, to pay in my
absence. The poor Dean can't afford it. I spoke again to the Duke of
Ormond about Moimed for Raymond, and hope he may yet have it, for I laid
it strongly to the Duke, and gave him the Bishop of Meath's memorial.
I am sorry for Raymond's fistula; tell him so. I will speak to Lord
Treasurer about Mrs. South(3) to-morrow. Odso! I forgot; I thought I
had been in London. Mrs. Tisdall(4) is very big, ready to lie down. Her
husband is a puppy. Do his feet stink still? The letters to Ireland go
at so uncertain an hour, that I am forced to conclude. Farewell, MD, MD
MD FW FW FW ME ME ME ME.

     Lele lele
     lele logues and
     Ladies bose fair
     and slender.

(On flyleaf.)

I mightily approve Ppt's project of hanging the blind parson. When I
read that passage upon Chester walls, as I was coming into town, and
just received your letter, I said aloud--Agreeable B-tch.



NOTES.

These notes are referenced by 'Notes to the Introduction' or 'Letter
(number)', and the numbers in square brackets (thus -- (3)) in the body
of the Journal.



Notes to the Introduction.

1 Notes and Queries, Sixth Series, x. 287.

2 See letter from Swift to John Temple, February 1737. She was then
"quite sunk with years and unwieldliness."

3 Athenaeum, Aug. 8, 1891.

4 Journal, May 4, 1711.

5 Craik's Life of Swift, 269.

6 Unpublished Letters of Dean Swift, pp. 189-96.

7 In 1730 he wrote, "Those who have been married may form juster
ideas of that estate than I can pretend to do" (Dr. Birkbeck Hill's
Unpublished Letters of Dean Swift, p. 237).

8 Scott added a new incident which has become incorporated in the
popular conception of Swift's story. Delany is said to have met
Swift rushing out of Archbishop King's study, with a countenance of
distraction, immediately after the wedding. King, who was in tears,
said, "You have just met the most unhappy man on earth; but on the
subject of his wretchedness you must never ask a question." Will it be
believed that Scott--who rejects Delany's inference from this alleged
incident--had no better authority for it than "a friend of his
(Delany's) relict"?

9 This incident, for which there is probably some foundation of fact--we
cannot say how much--has been greatly expanded by Mrs. Woods in her
novel Esther Vanhomrigh. Unfortunately most of her readers cannot, of
course, judge exactly how far her story is a work of imagination.

10 In October Swift explained that he had been in the country "partly to
see a lady of my old acquaintance, who was extremely ill" (Unpublished
Letters of Dean Swift, p. 198).

11 There is a story that shortly before her death Swift begged Stella to
allow herself to be publicly announced as his wife, but that she replied
that it was then too late. The versions given by Delany and Theophilus
Swift differ considerably, while Sheridan alters the whole thing by
representing Swift as brutally refusing to comply with Stella's last
wishes.

12 There has also been the absurd suggestion that the impediment was
Swift's knowledge that both he and Stella were the illegitimate children
of Sir William Temple--a theory which is absolutely disproved by known
facts.

13 It is curious to note the intimate knowledge of some of Swift's
peculiarities which was possessed by the hostile writer of a pamphlet
called A Hue and Cry after Dr. S---t, published in 1714. That piece
consists, for the most part, of extracts from a supposed Diary by Swift,
and contains such passages as these: "Friday. Go to the Club... Am
treated. Expenses one shilling." "Saturday. Bid my servant get all
things ready for a journey to the country: mend my breeches; hire a
washerwoman, making her allow for old shirts, socks, dabbs and markees,
which she bought of me... Six coaches of quality, and nine hacks, this
day called at my lodgings." "Thursday. The Earl looked queerly: left him
in a huff. Bid him send for me when he was fit for company... Spent ten
shillings."

14 The "little language" is marked chiefly by such changes of letters
(e.g., l for r, or r for l) as a child makes when learning to speak.
The combinations of letters in which Swift indulges are not so easy of
interpretation. For himself he uses Pdfr, and sometimes Podefar or FR
(perhaps Poor dear foolish rogue). Stella is Ppt (Poor pretty thing).
MD (my dears) usually stands for both Stella and Mrs. Dingley, but
sometimes for Stella alone. Mrs. Dingley is indicated by ME (Madam
Elderly), D, or DD (Dear Dingley). The letters FW may mean Farewell, or
Foolish Wenches. Lele seems sometimes to be There, there, and sometimes
Truly.




LETTER 1.

1. Addressed "To Mrs. Dingley, at Mr. Curry's house over against the
Ram in Capel Street, Dublin, Ireland," and endorsed by Esther Johnson,
"Sept. 9. Received." Afterwards Swift added, "MD received this Sept. 9,"
and "Letters to Ireland from Sept.1710, begun soon after the change of
Ministry. Nothing in this."

2. Beaumont is the "grey old fellow, poet Joe," of Swift's verses "On
the little house by the Churchyard at Castlenock." Joseph Beaumont, a
linen-merchant, is described as "a venerable, handsome, grey-headed man,
of quick and various natural abilities, but not improved by learning."
His inventions and mathematical speculations, relating to the longitude
and other things, brought on mental troubles, which were intensified
by bankruptcy, about 1718. He was afterwards removed from Dublin to his
home at Trim, where he rallied; but in a few years his madness returned,
and he committed suicide.

3. Vicar of Trim, and formerly a Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. In
various places in his correspondence Swift criticises the failings of
Dr. Anthony Raymond, who was, says Scott, "a particular friend." His
unreliability in money matters, the improvidence of his large family,
his peculiarities in grammar, his pride in his good manners, all these
points are noticed in the journal and elsewhere. But when Dr. Raymond
returned to Ireland after a visit to London, Swift felt a little
melancholy, and regretted that he had not seen more of him. In July 1713
Raymond was presented to the Crown living of Moyenet.

4. A small township on the estuary of the Dee, between twelve and
thirteen miles north-west of Chester. In the early part of the
eighteenth century Parkgate was a rival of Holyhead as a station for the
Dublin packets, which started, on the Irish side, from off Kingsend.

5. Dr. St. George Ashe, afterwards Bishop of Derry, who had been Swift's
tutor at Trinity College, Dublin. He died in 1718. It is this lifelong
friend who is said to have married Swift and Esther Johnson in 1716.

6. The Commission to solicit for the remission of the First-Fruits and
twentieth parts, payable to the Crown by the Irish clergy, was signed
by the Archbishops of Armagh, Dublin, and Cashel, and the Bishops of
Kildare, Meath, and Killala.

7. Dr. William Lloyd was appointed Bishop of Killala in 1690. He had
previously been Dean of Achonry.

8. Dr. John Hough (1651-1743). In 1687 he had been elected President of
Magdalen College, Oxford, in place of the nominee of James II. Hough was
Bishop of Oxford, Lichfield, and Worcester successively, and declined
the primacy in 1715.

9. Steele was at this time Gazetteer. The Cockpit, in Whitehall, looked
upon St. James's Palace, and was used for various Government purposes.

10. This coffee-house, the resort of the Whig politicians, was kept by a
man named Elliot. It is often alluded to in the Tatler and Spectator.

11. William Stewart, second Viscount Mountjoy, a friend and
correspondent of Swift's in Ireland. He was the son of one of William's
generals, and was himself a Lieutenant-General and Master-General of the
Ordnance; he died in 1728.

12. Catherine, daughter of Maurice Keating, of Narraghmore, Kildare, and
wife of Garret Wesley, of Dangan, M.P. for Meath. She died in 1745. On
the death of Garret Wesley without issue in 1728, the property passed to
a cousin, Richard Colley, who was afterwards created Baron Mornington,
and was grandfather to the Duke of Wellington.

13. The landlady of Esther Johnson and Mrs. Dingley.

14. Swift's housekeeper at Laracor. Elsewhere Swift speaks of his "old
Presbyterian housekeeper," "who has been my Walpole above thirty years,
whenever I lived in this kingdom." "Joe Beaumont is my oracle for public
affairs in the country, and an old Presbyterian woman in town."

15. Isaiah Parvisol, Swift's tithe-agent and steward at Laracor, was an
Irishman of French extraction, who died in 1718 (Birkbeck's Unpublished
Letters of Dean Swift, 1899, p.85).

Letter 2.

1. In some MS. Accounts of Swift's, in the Forster Collection at South
Kensington there is the following entry:--"Set out for England Aug. 31st
on Thursday, 10 at night; landed at Parkgate Friday 1st at noon.
Sept. 1, 1710, came to London. Thursday at noon, Sept. 7th, with Lord
Mountjoy, etc. Mem.: Lord Mountjoy bore my expenses from Chester to
London."

2. In a letter to Archbishop King of the same date Swift says he
was "equally caressed by both parties; by one as a sort of bough for
drowning men to lay hold of, and by the other as one discontented with
the late men in power."

3. The Earl of Godolphin, who was severely satirised by Swift in his Sid
Hamet's Rod, 1710. He had been ordered to break his staff as Treasurer
on August 8. Swift told Archbishop King that Godolphin was "altogether
short, dry, and morose."

4. Martha, widow of Sir Thomas Giffard, Bart., of County Kildare, the
favourite sister of Sir William Temple, had been described by Swift in
early pindaric verses as "wise and great." Afterwards he was to call her
"an old beast" (Journal, Nov. 11, 1710). Their quarrel arose, towards
the close of 1709, out of a difference with regard to the publication
of Sir William Temple's Works. On the appearance of vol. v. Lady
Giffard charged Swift with publishing portions of the writings from
an unfaithful copy in lieu of the originals in his possession, and in
particular with printing laudatory notices of Godolphin and Sunderland
which Temple intended to omit, and with omitting an unfavourable remark
on Sunderland which Temple intended to print. Swift replied that the
corrections were all made by Temple himself.

5. Lord Wharton's second wife, Lucy, daughter of Lord Lisburn. She
died in 1716, a few months after her husband. See Lady M. W. Montagu's
Letters.

6. Mrs. Bridget Johnson, who married, as her second husband, Ralph
Mose or Moss, of Farnham, an agent for Sir William Temple's estate,
was waiting-woman or companion to Lady Giffard. In her will (1722) Lady
Giffard left Mrs. Moss 20 pounds, "with my silver cup and cover." Mrs.
Moss died in 1745, when letters of administration were granted to a
creditor of the deceased.

7. Dr. William King (1610-1729), a Whig and High Churchman, had more
than one difference with Swift during the twenty years following Swift's
first visit to London in connection with the First-Fruits question.

8. Swift's benefice, in the diocese of Meath, two miles from Trim.

9. Steele, who had been issuing the Tatler thrice weekly since April.
He lost the Gazetteership in October.

10. James, second Duke of Ormond (1665-1745) was appointed Lord
Lieutenant on the 26th of October. In the following year he became
Captain-General and Commander-in-Chief. He was impeached of high treason
and attainted in 1715; and he died in exile.

11. "Presto," substituted by the original editor for "Pdfr," was
suggested by a passage in the Journal for Aug. 2, 1711, where Swift says
that the Duchess of Shrewsbury "could not say my name in English, but
said Dr. Presto, which is Italian for Swift."

12. Charles Jervas, the popular portrait-painter, has left two portraits
of Swift, one of which is in the National Portrait Gallery, and the
other in the Bodleian Library.

13. Sir William Temple's nephew, and son of Sir John Temple (died
1704), Solicitor and Attorney-General, and Speaker of the Irish House of
Commons. "Jack" Temple acquired the estate of Moor Park, Surrey, by his
marriage with Elizabeth, granddaughter of Sir William Temple, and elder
daughter of John Temple, who committed suicide in 1689. As late as 1706
Swift received an invitation to visit Moor Park.

14. Dr. Benjamin Pratt, Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, was
appointed Dean of Down in 1717. Swift calls him "a person of wit and
learning," and "a gentleman of good birth and fortune,... very much
esteemed among us" (Short Character of Thomas, Earl of Wharton). On his
death in 1721 Swift wrote, "He was one of the oldest acquaintance I had,
and the last that I expected to die. He has left a young widow, in very
good circumstances. He had schemes of long life.... What a ridiculous
thing is man!" (Unpublished Letters of Dean Swift, 1899, p. 106).

15. A Westmeath landlord, whom Swift met from time to time in London.
The Leighs were well acquainted with Esther Johnson.

16. Dr. Enoch Sterne, appointed Dean of St. Patrick's, Dublin, in 1704.
Swift was his successor in the deanery on Dr. Sterne's appointment
as Bishop of Dromore in 1713. In 1717 Sterne was translated to the
bishopric of Clogher. He spent much money on the cathedrals, etc., with
which he was connected.

17. Archdeacon Walls was rector of Castle Knock, near Trim. Esther
Johnson was a frequent visitor at his house in Queen Street, Dublin.

18. William Frankland, Comptroller of the Inland Office at the Post
Office, was the second son of the Postmaster-General, Sir Thomas
Frankland, Bart. Luttrell (vi. 333) records that in 1708 he was made
Treasurer of the Stamp Office, or, according to Chamberlayne's Mag.
Brit. Notitia for 1710, Receiver-General.

19. Thomas Wharton, Earl and afterwards Marquis of Wharton, had been
one of Swift's fellow-travellers from Dublin. Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
under the Whig Government, from 1708 to 1710, Wharton was the most
thorough-going party man that had yet appeared in English politics; and
his political enemies did not fail to make the most of his well-known
immorality. In his Notes to Macky's Characters Swift described Wharton
as "the most universal villain that ever I knew." On his death in 1715
he was succeeded by his profligate son, Philip, who was created Duke of
Wharton in 1718.

20. This money was a premium the Government had promised Beaumont for
his Mathematical Sleying Tables, calculated for the improvement of the
linen manufacture.

21. The bellman was both town-crier and night-watchman.

Letter 3.

1. Dr. William Cockburn (1669-1739), Swift's physician, of a good
Scottish family, was educated at Leyden. He invented an electuary for
the cure of fluxes, and in 1730, in The Danger of Improving Physick,
satirised the academical physicians who envied him the fortune he had
made by his secret remedy. He was described in 1729 as "an old very rich
quack."

2. Sir Matthew Dudley, Bart., an old Whig friend, was M.P. for
Huntingdonshire, and Commissioner of the Customs from 1706 to 1712, and
again under George I., until his death in 1721.

3. Isaac Manley, who was appointed Postmaster-General in Ireland in 1703
(Luttrell, v. 333). He had previously been Comptroller of the English
Letter Office, a post in which he was succeeded by William Frankland,
son of Sir Thomas Frankland. Dunton calls Manley "loyal and acute."

4. Sir Thomas Frankland was joint Postmaster-General from 1691 to 1715.
He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father, Sir William
Frankland, in 1697, and he died in 1726. Macky describes Sir Thomas as
"of a sweet and easy disposition, zealous for the Constitution, yet not
forward, and indulgent to his dependants." On this Swift comments, "This
is a fair character."

5. Theophilus Butler, elected M.P. for Cavan, in the Irish Parliament,
in 1703, and for Belturbet (as "the Right Hon. Theophilus Butler") in
1713. On May 3, 1710, Luttrell wrote (Brief Relation of State Affairs,
vi. 577), "'Tis said the Earl of Montrath, Lord Viscount Mountjoy... and
Mr. Butler will be made Privy Councillors of the Kingdom of Ireland."
Butler--a contemporary of Swift's at Trinity College, Dublin--was
created Baron of Newtown-Butler in 1715, and his brother, who succeeded
him in 1723, was made Viscount Lanesborough. Butler's wife was Emilia,
eldest daughter and co-heir of James Stopford, of Tara, County Meath.

6. No. 193 of the Tatler, for July 4, 1710, contained a letter from
Downes the Prompter--not by Steele himself--in ridicule of Harley and
his proposed Ministry.

7. Charles Robartes, second Earl of Radnor, who died in 1723. In the
Journal for Dec. 30, 1711, Swift calls him "a scoundrel."

8. Benjamin Tooke, Swift's bookseller or publisher, lived at the Middle
Temple Gate. Dunton wrote of him, "He is truly honest, a man of refined
sense, and is unblemished in his reputation." Tooke died in 1723.

9. Swift's servant, of whose misdeeds he makes frequent complaints in
the Journal.

10. Deputy Vice-Treasurer of Ireland. In one place Swift calls him
Captain Pratt; and in all probability he is the John Pratt who, as we
learn from Dalton's English Army Lists, was appointed captain in General
Erle's regiment of foot in 1699, and was out of the regiment by 1706. In
1702 he obtained the Queen's leave to be absent from the regiment when
it was sent to the West Indies. Pratt seems to have been introduced to
Swift by Addison.

11. Charles Ford, of Wood Park, near Dublin, was a great lover of the
opera and a friend of the Tory wits. He was appointed Gazetteer in 1712.
Gay calls him "joyous Ford," and he was given to over-indulgence in
conviviality. See Swift's poem on Stella at Wood Park.

12. Lord Somers, to whom Swift had dedicated The Tale of a Tub, with
high praise of his public and private virtues. In later years Swift said
that Somers "possessed all excellent qualifications except virtue."

13. At the foundation school of the Ormonds at Kilkenny. (see note 22.)

14. A Whig haberdasher.

15. Benjamin Hoadley, the Whig divine, had been engaged in controversy
with Sacheverell, Blackall, and Atterbury. After the accession of George
I. he became Bishop of Bangor, Hereford, Salisbury, and Winchester in
success.

16. Dr. Henry Sacheverell, whose impeachment and trial had led to the
fall of the Whig Government.

17. Sir Berkeley Lucy, Bart., F.R.S., married Katherine, daughter of
Charles Cotton, of Beresford, Staffordshire, Isaac Walton's friend. Lady
Lucy died in 1740, leaving an only surviving daughter, Mary, who married
the youngest son of the Earl of Northampton, and had two sons, who
became successively seventh and eighth Earls of Northampton. Forster and
others assumed that "Lady Lucy" was a Lady Lucy Stanhope, though they
were not able to identify her. It was reserved for Mr. Ryland to clear
up this difficulty. As he points out, Lady Lucy's elder sister, Olive,
married George Stanhope, Dean of Canterbury, and left a daughter
Mary,--Swift's "Moll Stanhope,"--a beauty and a madcap, who married,
in 1712, William Burnet, son of Bishop Burnet, and died in 1714. Mary,
another sister of Lady Lucy's, married Augustine Armstrong, of Great
Ormond Street, and is the Mrs. Armstrong mentioned by Swift on Feb. 3,
1711, as a pretender to wit, without taste. Sir Berkeley Lucy's mother
was a daughter of the first Earl of Berkeley, and it was probably
through the Berkeleys that Swift came to know the Lucys.

18. Ann Long was sister to Sir James Long, and niece to Colonel
Strangeways. Once a beauty and toast of the Kit-Cat Club, she fell
into narrow circumstances through imprudence and the unkindness of her
friends, and retired under the name of Mrs. Smythe to Lynn, in Norfolk,
where she died in 1711 (see Journal, December 25, 1711). Swift said,
"She was the most beautiful person of the age she lived in; of great
honour and virtue, infinite sweetness and generosity of temper, and true
good sense" (Forster's Swift, 229). In a letter of December 1711, Swift
wrote that she "had every valuable quality of body and mind that could
make a lady loved and esteemed."

19. Said, I know not on what authority, to be Swift's friend, Mrs.
Barton. But Mrs. Barton is often mentioned by Swift as living in London
in 1710-11.

20. One of Swift's cousins, who was separated from her husband, a man of
bad character, living abroad. Her second husband, Lancelot, a servant of
Lord Sussex, lived in New Bond Street, and there Swift lodged in 1727.

21. 100,000 pounds.

22. Francis Stratford's name appears in the Dublin University Register
for 1686 immediately before Swift's. Budgell is believed to have
referred to the friendship of Swift and Stratford in the Spectator,
No. 353, where he describes two schoolfellows, and says that the man of
genius was buried in a country parsonage of 160 pounds a year, while
his friend, with the bare abilities of a common scrivener, had gained an
estate of above 100,000 pounds.

23. William Cowper, afterwards Lord Cowper.

24. Sir Simon Harcourt, afterwards Viscount Harcourt, had been counsel
for Sacheverell. On Sept. 19, 1710, he was appointed Attorney-General,
and on October 19 Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. In April 1713 he became
Lord Chancellor.

25. This may be some relative of Dr. John Freind (see Letter 9), or,
more probably, as Sir Henry Craik suggests, a misprint for Colonel
Frowde, Addison's friend (see Journal, Nov. 4, 1710). No officer named
Freind or Friend is mentioned in Dalton's English Army Lists.

26. See the Tatler, Nos. 124, 203. There are various allusions in the
"Wentworth Papers" to this, the first State Lottery of 1710; and two
bluecoat boys drawing out the tickets, and showing their hands to the
crowd, as Swift describes them, are shown in a reproduction of a picture
in a contemporary pamphlet given in Ashton's Social Life in the Reign of
Queen Anne, i. 115.

27. A few weeks later Swift wrote, "I took a fancy of resolving to grow
mad for it, but now it is off."

28. Sir John Holland, Bart., was a leading manager for the Commons in
the impeachment of Sacheverell. He succeeded Sir Thomas Felton in the
Comptrollership in March 1710.

29. Dryden Leach. (see Letter 7.)

30. William Pate, "bel esprit and woollen-draper," as Swift called him,
lived opposite the Royal Exchange. He was Sheriff of London in 1734,
and died in 1746. Arbuthnot, previous to matriculating at Oxford, lodged
with Pate, who gave him a letter of introduction to Dr. Charlett,
Master of University College; and Pate is supposed to have been the
woollen-draper, "remarkable for his learning and good-nature," who is
mentioned by Steele in the Guardian, No. 141.

31. James Brydges, son of Lord Chandos of Sudeley, was appointed
Paymaster-General of Forces Abroad in 1707. He succeeded his father
as Baron Chandos in 1714, and was created Duke of Chandos in 1729. The
"princely Chandos" and his house at Canons suggested to Pope the Timon's
villa of the "Epistle to Lord Burlington." The Duke died in 1744.

32. Charles Talbot, created Duke of Shrewsbury in 1694, was held in
great esteem by William III., and was Lord Chamberlain under Anne. In
1713 he became Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and held various offices
under George I., until his death in 1718. "Before he was o. age," says
Macaulay, "he was allowed to be one of the finest gentlemen and finest
scholars of his time."

33. See No. 230.

34. William Cavendish, second Duke of Devonshire (1673-1729), who was
Lord Steward from 1707 to 1710 and from 1714 to 1716. Afterwards he was
Lord President of the Council. Swift's comment on Macky's character of
this Whig nobleman was, "A very poor understanding."

35. John Annesley, fourth Earl of Anglesea, a young nobleman of
great promise, had only recently been appointed joint Vice-Treasurer,
Receiver-General, and Paymaster of the Forces in Ireland, and sworn of
the Privy Council.

36. Nichols, followed by subsequent editors, suggested that "Durham"
was a mistake for "St. David's," because Dr. George Bull, Bishop of St.
David's, died in 1710. But Dr. Bull died on Feb. 17, 1710, though his
successor, Dr. Philip Bisse, was not appointed until November; and Swift
was merely repeating a false report of the death of Lord Crewe, Bishop
of Durham, which was current on the day on which he wrote. Luttrell
says, on Sept. 19, "The Lord Crewe.. . died lately"; but on the 23rd he
adds, "The Bishop of Durham is not dead as reported" (Brief Relation,
vi. 630, 633.

37. Lady Elizabeth ("Betty") Butler, who died unmarried in 1750.

38. Swift wrote in 1734, "Once every year I issued out an edict,
commanding that all ladies of wit, sense, merit, and quality, who had
an ambition to be acquainted with me, should make the first advances at
their peril: which edict, you may believe, was universally obeyed."

39. Charles, second Earl of Berkeley (1649-1710), married Elizabeth,
daughter of Baptist Noel, Viscount Campden. The Earl died on Sept. 24,
1710, and his widow in 1719. Swift, it will be remembered, had been
chaplain to Lord Berkeley in Ireland in 1699.

40. Lady Betty and Lady Mary Butler. (see Letter 7, notes 2 and 3.)

41. Henry Boyle, Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1702 to 1708, was
Secretary of State from 1708 to 1710, when he was succeeded by St. John.
In 1714 he was created Baron Carleton, and he was Lord President from
1721 until his death in 1725.

42. On Sept. 29 Swift wrote that his rooms consisted of the first floor,
a dining-room and bed-chamber, at eight shillings a week. On his last
visit to England, in 1726, he lodged "next door to the Royal Chair" in
Bury Street. Steele lived in the same street from 1707 to 1712; and Mrs.
Vanhomrigh was Swift's next-door neighbour.

43. In Exchange Alley. Cf. Spectator, No. 454: "I went afterwards to
Robin's, and saw people who had dined with me at the fivepenny ordinary
just before, give bills for the value of large estates."

Letter 4.

1 John Molesworth, Commissioner of the Stamp Office, was sent as Envoy
to Tuscany in 1710, and was afterwards Minister at Florence, Venice,
Geneva, and Turin. He became second Viscount Molesworth in 1725, and
died in 1731.

2 Misson says, "Every two hours you may write to any part of the city or
suburbs: he that receives it pays a penny, and you give nothing when you
put it into the Post; but when you write into the country both he that
writes and he that receives pay each a penny." The Penny Post system had
been taken over by the Government, but was worked separately from the
general Post.

3 The Countess of Berkeley's second daughter, who married, in 1706,
Sir John Germaine, Bart. (1650-1718), a soldier of fortune. Lady Betty
Germaine is said to have written a satire on Pope (Nichols' Literary
Anecdotes, ii. 11), and was a constant correspondent of Swift's. She was
always a Whig, and shortly before her death in 1769 she made a present
of 100 pounds to John Wilkes, then in prison in the Tower. Writing of
Lady Betty Butler and Lady Betty Germaine, Swift says elsewhere, "I saw
two Lady Bettys this afternoon; the beauty of one, the good breeding
and nature of the other, and the wit of either, would have made a fine
woman." Germaine obtained the estate at Drayton through his first wife,
Lady Mary Mordaunt--Lord Peterborough's sister--who had been divorced
by her first husband, the Duke of Norfolk. Lady Betty was thirty years
younger than her husband, and after Sir John's death she remained a
widow for over fifty years.

4 The letter in No. 280 of the Tatler.

5 Discover, find out. Cf. Shakespeare's All's Well that Ends Well, iii.
6: "He was first smoked by the old Lord Lafeu."

6 A village near Dublin.

7 Excellent.

8 John Molesworth, and, probably, his brother Richard, afterwards third
Viscount Molesworth, who had saved the Duke of Marlborough's life at
the battle of Ramillies, and had been appointed, in 1710, colonel of a
regiment of foot.

9 Presumably at Charles Ford's.

10 The Virtues of Sid Hamet the Magician's Rod, published as a single
folio sheet, was a satire on Godolphin.

11 Apparently Marcus Antonius Morgan, steward to the Bishop of Kildare
(Craik). Swift wrote to the Duke of Montagu on Aug. 12, 1713 (Buccleuch
MSS., 1899, i. 359). "Mr. Morgan of Kingstrope is a friend, and was, I
am informed, put out of the Commission of justice for being so."

12 Dr. Raymond is called Morgan's "father" because he warmly supported
Morgan's interests.

13 The Rev. Thomas Warburton, Swift's curate at Laracor, whom Swift
described to the Archbishop as "a gentleman of very good learning and
sense, who has behaved himself altogether unblamably."

14 The tobacco was to be used as snuff. About this time ladies much
affected the use of snuff, and Steele, in No. 344 of the Spectator,
speaks of Flavilla pulling out her box, "which is indeed full of good
Brazil," in the middle of the sermon. People often made their own snuff
out of roll tobacco, by means of rasps. On Nov. 3, 1711, Swift speaks
of sending "a fine snuff rasp of ivory, given me by Mrs. St. John for
Dingley, and a large roll of tobacco."

15 Katherine Barton, second daughter of Robert Barton, of Brigstock,
Northamptonshire, and niece of Sir Isaac Newton. She was a favourite
among the toasts of the Kit-Cat Club, and Lord Halifax, who left her
a fortune, was an intimate friend. In 1717 she married John Conduitt,
afterwards Master of the Mint.

16 William Connolly, appointed a Commissioner of the Revenue in 1709,
was afterwards Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. He died in 1729.
Francis Robarts, appointed a Commissioner of the Revenue in 1692, was
made a Teller of the Exchequer in England in 1704, and quitted that
office, in September 1710, on his reappointment, in Connolly's place,
as Revenue Commissioner in Ireland. In 1714 Robarts was removed, and
Connolly again appointed Commissioner.

17 Enoch Sterne, Collector of Wicklow and Clerk to the Irish House of
Lords. Writing to Dr. Sterne on Sept. 26, Swift said, "I saw Collector
Sterne, who desired me to present his service to you, and to tell you he
would be glad to hear from you, but not about business."

18 In his "Character of Mrs. Johnson" Swift says, "She was never known
to cry out, or discover any fear, in a coach." The passage in the text
is obscure. Apparently Esther Johnson had boasted of saving money by
walking, instead of riding, like a coward.

19 John Radcliffe (1650-1714), the well-known physician and wit, was
often denounced as a clever empiric. Early in 1711 he treated Swift for
his dizziness. By his will, Radcliffe left most of his property to the
University of Oxford.

20 Charles Barnard, Sergeant-Surgeon to the Queen, and Master of the
Barber Surgeons' Company. His large and valuable library, to which Swift
afterwards refers, fetched great prices. Luttrell records Barnard's
death in his diary for Oct. 12, 1710.

21 Robert Harley, afterwards Earl of Oxford, had been appointed
Chancellor of the Exchequer in August 1710. In May 1711 he was raised to
the peerage and made Lord High Treasurer; and he is constantly referred
to in the Journal as "Lord Treasurer." He was impeached in 1715, but was
acquitted to 1717; he died in 1724.

22 The Right Hon. Thomas Bligh, M.P., of Rathmore, County Meath, died on
Aug. 28, 1710. His son, mentioned later in the Journal, became Earl of
Darnley.

Letter 5.

1 Penalty.

2 Erasmus Lewis, Under Secretary of State under Lord Dartmouth, was a
great friend of Swift, Pope, and Arbuthnot. He had previously been one
of Harley's secretaries, and in his Horace Imitated, Book I. Ep. vii.,
Swift describes him as "a cunning shaver, and very much in Harley's
favour." Arbuthnot says that under George I. Lewis kept company with
the greatest, and was "principal governor" in many families. Lewis was
a witness to Arbuthnot's will. Pope and Esther Vanhomrigh both left him
money to buy rings. Lewis died in 1754, aged eighty-three.

3 Charles Darteneuf, or Dartiquenave, was a celebrated epicure, who is
said to have been a son of Charles II. Lord Lyttleton, in his Dialogues
of the Dead, recalling Pope's allusions to him, selects him to represent
modern bon vivants in the dialogue between Darteneuf and Apicius. See
Tatler 252. Darteneuf was Paymaster of the Royal Works and a member of
the Kit-Cat Club. He died in 1737.

4 No. 230.

5 Good, excellent.

6 Captain George Delaval, appointed Envoy Extraordinary to the King of
Portugal in Oct, 1710, was with Lord Peterborough in Spain in 1706. In
May 1707 he went to Lisbon with despatches for the Courts of Spain
and Portugal, from whence he was to proceed as Envoy to the Emperor of
Morocco, with rich presents (Luttrell, vi. 52, 174, 192).

7 Charles Montagu, Earl of Halifax, as Ranger of Bushey Park and Hampton
Court, held many offices under William III., and was First Lord of
the Treasury under George I., until his death in 1715. He was great as
financier and as debater, and he was a liberal patron of literature.

8 John Manley, M.P. for Bossiney, was made Surveyor-General on Sept. 30,
1710, and died in 1714. In 1706 he fought a duel with another Cornish
member (Luttrell, vi. 11, 535, 635). He seems to be the cousin whom Mrs.
De la Riviere Manley accuses of having drawn her into a false marriage.
For Isaac Manley and Sir Thomas Frankland, see Letter 3, notes 3 and 4.

9 The Earl of Godolphin (see Letter 2, note 3).

10 Sir John Stanley, Bart., of Northend, Commissioner of Customs, whom
Swift knew through his intimate friends the Pendarves. His wife, Anne,
daughter of Bernard Granville, and niece of John, Earl of Bath, was aunt
to Mary Granville, afterwards Mrs. Delany, who lived with the Stanleys
at their house in Whitehall.

11 Henry, Viscount Hyde, eldest son of Laurence Hyde, Earl of Rochester,
succeeded his father in the earldom in 1711, and afterwards became Earl
of Clarendon. His wife, Jane, younger daughter of Sir William Leveson
Gower,--who married a daughter of John Granville, Earl of Bath,--was
a beauty, and the mother of two beauties--Jane, afterwards Countess of
Essex (see journal, Jan. 29, 1712), and Catherine, afterwards Countess
of Queensberry. Lady Hyde was complimented by Prior, Pope, and her
kinsman, Lord Lansdowne, and is said to have been more handsome than
either of her daughters. She died in 1725; her husband in 1753. Lord
Hyde became joint Vice-Treasurer for Ireland in 1710; hence his interest
with respect to Pratt's appointment.

12 See Letter 3, note 10.

13 Sir Paul Methuen (1672-1757), son of John Methuen, diplomatist and
Lord Chancellor of Ireland. Methuen was Envoy and Ambassador to Portugal
from 1697 to 1708, and was M.P. for Devizes from 1708 to 1710, and a
Lord of the Admiralty. Under George I. he was Ambassador to Spain, and
held other offices. Gay speaks of "Methuen of sincerest mind, as Arthur
grave, as soft as womankind," and Steele dedicated to him the seventh
volume of the Spectator. In his Notes on Macky's Characters, Swift calls
him "a profligate rogue... without abilities of any kind."

14 Sir James Montagu was Attorney-General from 1708 to Sept. 1710, when
he resigned, and was succeeded by Sir Simon Harcourt. Under George I.
Montagu was raised to the Bench, and a few months before his death in
1723 became Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

15 The turnpike system had spread rapidly since the Restoration, and
had already effected an important reform in the English roads. Turnpike
roads were as yet unknown in Ireland.

16 Ann Johnson, who afterwards married a baker named Filby.

17 An infusion of which the main ingredient was cowslip or palsy-wort.

18 William Legge, first Earl of Dartmouth (1672-1750), was St. John's
fellow Secretary of State. Lord Dartmouth seems to have been a plain,
unpretending man, whose ignorance of French helped to throw important
matters into St. John's hands.

19 Richard Dyot was tried at the Old Bailey, on Jan. 13, 1710-11, for
counterfeiting stamps, and was acquitted, the crime being found
not felony, but only breach of trust. Two days afterwards a bill of
indictment was found against him for high misdemeanour.

20 Sir Philip Meadows (1626-1718) was knighted in 1658, and was
Ambassador to Sweden under Cromwell. His son Philip (died 1757) was
knighted in 1700, and was sent on a special mission to the Emperor in
1707. A great-grandson of the elder Sir Philip was created Earl Manvers
in 1806.

21 Her eyes were weak.

22 The son of the Sir Robert Southwell to whom Temple had offered Swift
as a "servant" on his going as Secretary of State to Ireland in 1690.
Edward Southwell (1671-1730) succeeded his father as Secretary of
State for Ireland in 1702, and in 1708 was appointed Clerk to the Privy
Council of Great Britain. Southwell held various offices under George I.
and George II., and amassed a considerable fortune.

23 Nicholas Rowe (1674-1718), dramatist and poet laureate, and one of
the first editors of Shakespeare, was at this time under-secretary to
the Duke of Queensberry, Secretary of State for Scotland.

24 No. 238 contains Swift's "Description of a Shower in London."

25 This seems to be a vague allusion to the text, "Cast thy bread upon
the waters," etc.

26 Sir Godfrey Kneller (1646-1723), the fashionable portrait-painter of
the period.

27 At the General election of 1710 the contest at Westminster excited
much interest. The number of constituents was large, and the franchise
low, all householders who paid scot and lot being voters. There were,
too, many houses of great Whig merchants, and a number of French
Protestants. But the High Church candidates, Cross and Medlicott,
were returned by large majorities, though the Whigs had chosen popular
candidates--General Stanhope, fresh from his successes in Spain, and Sir
Henry Dutton Colt, a Herefordshire gentleman.

28 Sir Andrew Fountaine (1676-1753), a distinguished antiquary, of an
old Norfolk family, was knighted by William III. in 1699, and inherited
his father's estate at Norfolk in 1706. He succeeded Sir Isaac Newton as
Warden of the Mint in 1727, and was Vice-Chamberlain to Queen Caroline.
He became acquainted with Swift in Ireland in 1707, when he went over as
Usher of the Black Rod in Lord Pembroke's Court.

29 See Letter 2, note 17. The Bishop was probably Dr. Moreton, Bishop of
Meath (see Journal, July 1, 1712).

30 The game of ombre--of Spanish origin--is described in Pope's Rape of
the Lock. See also the Compleat Gamester, 1721, and Notes and Queries,
April 8, 1871. The ace of spades, or Spadille, was always the first
trump; the ace of clubs (Basto) always the third. The second trump was
the worst card of the trump suit in its natural order, i.e. the seven in
red and the deuce in black suits, and was called Manille. If either of
the red suits was trumps, the ace of the suit was fourth trump (Punto).
Spadille, Manille, and Basto were "matadores," or murderers, as they
never gave suit.

31 See Letter 3, note 30,

32 In the Spectator, No. 337, there is a complaint from "one of the top
China women about town," of the trouble given by ladies who turn
over all the goods in a shop without buying anything. Sometimes they
cheapened tea, at others examined screens or tea-dishes.

33 The Right Hon. John Grubham Howe, M.P. for Gloucestershire, an
extreme Tory, had recently been appointed Paymaster of the Forces. He is
mentioned satirically as a patriot in sec. 9 of The Tale of a Tub.

34 George Henry Hay, Viscount Dupplin, eldest son of the sixth Earl of
Kinnoull, was made a Teller of the Exchequer in August, and a peer of
Great Britain in December 1711, with the title of Baron Hay. He married,
in 1709, Abigail, Harley's younger daughter, and he succeeded his father
in the earldom of Kinnoull in 1719.

35 Edward Harley, afterwards Lord Harley, who succeeded his father as
Earl of Oxford in 1724. He married Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles,
daughter of the Duke of Newcastle, but died without male issue in 1741.
His interest in literature caused him to form the collection known as
the Harleian Miscellany.

36 William Penn (1644-1718), the celebrated founder of Pennsylvania.
Swift says that he "spoke very agreeably, and with much spirit."

37 This "Memorial to Mr. Harley about the First-Fruits" is dated Oct. 7,
1710.

38 Henry St. John, created Viscount Bolingbroke in July 1712. In the
quarrel between Oxford and Bolingbroke in 1714, Swift's sympathies were
with Oxford.

39 I.e., it is decreed by fate. So Tillotson says, "These things are
fatal and necessary."

40 See Letter 3, note 8.

41 Obscure. Hooker speaks of a "blind or secret corner."

42 Ale served in a gill measure.

43 Scott suggests that the allusion is to The Tale of a Tub.

44 An extravagant compliment.

45 See Letter 8.

46 L'Estrange speaks of "trencher-flies and spungers."

47 See Letter 1, note 10.

48 Samuel Garth, physician and member of the Kit-Cat Club, was knighted
in 1714. He is best known by his satirical poem, The Dispensary, 1699.

49 Gay speaks of "Wondering Main, so fat, with laughing eyes" (Mr.
Pope's Welcome from Greece, st. xvii.).

50 See Letter 5, note 10.

51 See the letter of Oct. 10, 1710, to Archbishop King.

52 See Letter 1.

53 Seventy-three lines in folio upon one page, and in a very small
hand." (Deane Swift).

Letter 6.

1. I.e., Lord Lieutenant.

2 Tatler, No. 238.

3 See Letter 1, note 12.

4 Charles Coote, fourth Earl of Mountrath, and M.P. for Knaresborough.
He died unmarried in 1715.

5 Henry Coote, Lord Mountrath's brother. He succeeded to the earldom in
1715, but died unmarried in 1720.

6 The Devil Tavern was the meeting-place of Ben Jonson's Apollo Club.
The house was pulled down in 1787.

7 Addison was re-elected M.P. for Malmesbury in Oct. 1710, and he kept
that seat until his death in 1719.

8 Captain Charles Lavallee, who served in the Cadiz Expedition of 1702,
and was appointed a captain in Colonel Hans Hamilton's Regiment of Foot
in 1706 (Luttrell, v. 175, vi. 640; Dalton's English Army Lists, iv.
126).

9 See Letter 5.

10 The Tatler, No. 230, Sid Hamet's Rod, and the ballad (now lost) on
the Westminster Election.

11 The Earl of Galway (1648-1720), who lost the battle of Almanza to
the Duke of Berwick in 1707. Originally the Marquis de Ruvigny, a
French refugee, he had been made Viscount Galway and Earl of Galway
successively by William III.

12 William Harrison, the son of a doctor at St. Cross, Winchester, had
been recommended to Swift by Addison, who obtained for him the post of
governor to the Duke of Queensberry's son. In Jan. 1711 Harrison began
the issue of a continuation of Steele's Tatler with Swift's assistance,
but without success. In May 1711, St. John gave Harrison the appointment
of secretary to Lord Raby, Ambassador Extraordinary at the Hague, and in
Jan. 1713 Harrison brought the Barrier Treaty to England. He died in
the following month, at the age of twenty-seven, and Lady Strafford says
that "his brother poets buried him, as Mr. Addison, Mr. Philips, and Dr.
Swift." Tickell calls him "that much loved youth," and Swift felt his
death keenly. Harrison's best poem is Woodstock Park, 1706.

13 The last volume of Tonson's Miscellany, 1708.

14 James Douglas, second Duke of Queensberry and Duke of Dover
(1662-1711), was appointed joint Keeper of the Privy Seal in 1708, and
third Secretary of State in 1709. Harrison must have been "governor"
either to the third son, Charles, Marquis of Beverley (born 1698), who
succeeded to the dukedom in 1711, or to the fourth son, George, born in
1701.

15 Anthony Henley, son of Sir Robert Henley, M.P. for Andover, was
a favourite with the wits in London. He was a strong Whig, and
occasionally contributed to the Tatler and Maynwaring's Medley. Garth
dedicated The Dispensary to him. Swift records Henley's death from
apoplexy in August 1711.

16 Sir William Ashurst, Sir Gilbert Heathcote, and Mr. John Ward were
replaced by Sir Richard Hoare, Sir George Newland, and Mr. John Cass at
the election for the City in 1710. Scott was wrong in saying that the
Whigs lost also the fourth seat, for Sir William Withers had been member
for the City since 1707.

17 Sir Richard Onslow, Bart., was chosen Speaker of the House of Commons
in 1708. Under George I. he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
was elevated to the peerage as Baron Onslow in 1716. He died in the
following year.

18 "The upper part of the letter was a little besmeared with some such
stuff; the mark is still on it" (Deane Swift).

19 John Bolton, D.D., appointed a prebendary of St. Patrick's in 1691,
became Dean of Derry in 1699. He died in 1724. Like Swift, Bolton was
chaplain to Lord Berkeley, the Lord Lieutenant, and, according to Swift,
he obtained the deanery of Derry through Swift having declined to give a
bribe of 1000 pounds to Lord Berkeley's secretary. But Lord Orrery says
that the Bishop of Derry objected to Swift, fearing that he would be
constantly flying backwards and forwards between Ireland and England.

20 See Letter 2, note 16.

21 "That is, to the next page; for he is now within three lines of the
bottom of the first" (Deane Swift).

22 See Letter 4, note 15.

23 Joshua Dawson, secretary to the Lords Justices. He built a fine house
in Dawson Street, Dublin, and provided largely for his relatives by the
aid of the official patronage in his hands.

24 He had been dead three weeks (see Letters 3 and 5).

25 In The Importance of the Guardian Considered, Swift says that
Steele, "to avoid being discarded, thought fit to resign his place of
Gazetteer."

26 As Swift never used the name "Stella" in the Journal, this fragment
of his "little language" must have been altered by Deane Swift, the
first editor. Forster makes the excellent suggestion that the correct
reading is "sluttikins," a word used in the Journal on Nov. 28, 1710.
Swift often calls his correspondents "sluts."

27 Godolphin, who was satirised in Sid Hamel's Rod (see Letter 2, note
3).

28 No. 230.

29 "This appears to be an interjection of surprise at the length of his
journal" (Deane Swift).

30 Matthew Prior, poet and diplomatist, had been deprived of his
Commissionership of Trade by the Whigs, but was rewarded for his Tory
principles in 1711 by a Commissionership of Customs.

31 "The twentieth parts are 12 pence in the pound paid annually out of
all ecclesiastical benefices as they were valued at the Reformation.
They amount to about 500 pounds per annum; but are of little or no value
to the Queen after the offices and other charges are paid, though of
much trouble and vexation to the clergy" (Swift's "Memorial to Mr.
Harley").

32 Charles Mordaunt, the brilliant but erratic Earl of Peterborough, had
been engaged for two years, after the unsatisfactory inquiry into his
conduct in Spain by the House of Lords in 1708, in preparing an account
of the money he had received and expended. The change of Government
brought him relief from his troubles; in November he was made
Captain-General of Marines, and in December he was nominated Ambassador
Extraordinary to Vienna.

33 Tapped, nudged.

34 I.e., told only to you.

35 Sir Hew Dalrymple (1652-1737), Lord President of the Court of
Session, and son of the first Viscount Stair.

36 Robert Benson, a moderate Tory, was made a Lord of the Treasury in
August 1710, and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the following June, and
was raised to the peerage as Baron Bingley in 1713. He died in 1731.

37 The Smyrna Coffee-house was on the north side of Pall Mall, opposite
Marlborough House. In the Tatler (Nos. 10, 78) Steele laughed at the
"cluster of wise heads" to be found every evening at the Smyrna; and
Goldsmith says that Beau Nash would wait a whole day at a window at
the Smyrna, in order to receive a bow from the Prince or the Duchess of
Marlborough, and would then look round upon the company for admiration
and respect.

38 See Letter 4, note 14.

39 See Letter 5, note 17.

40 An Irish doctor, with whom Swift invested money.

41 Enoch Sterne, Collector of Wicklow and Clerk to the House of Lords in
Ireland.

42 Claret.

43 Colonel Ambrose Edgworth, a famous dandy, who is supposed to have
been referred to by Steele in No. 246 of the Tatler. Edgworth was the
son of Sir John Edgworth, who was made Colonel of a Regiment of Foot
in 1689 (Dalton, iii, 59). Ambrose Edgworth was a Captain in the same
regiment, but father and son were shortly afterwards turned out of
the regiment for dishonest conduct in connection with the soldiers'
clothing. Ambrose was, however, reappointed a Captain in General Eric's
Regiment of Foot in 1691. He served in Spain as Major in Brigadier
Gorge's regiment; was taken prisoner in 1706; and was appointed
Lieutenant-Colonel of Colonel Thomas Allen's Regiment of Foot in 1707.

44 This volume of Miscellanies in Prose and Verse was published by
Morphew in 1711.

45 Dr. Thomas Lindsay, afterwards Bishop of Raphoe.


Letter 7.

1 The first mention of the Vanhomrighs in the Journal. Swift had made
their acquaintance when he was in London in 1708.

2 Lady Elizabeth and Lady Mary (see Letter 3, note 40 and below).

3 John, third Lord Ashburnham, and afterwards Earl of Ashburnham
(1687-1737), married, on Oct. 21, 1710, Lady Mary Butler, younger
daughter of the Duke of Ormond. She died on Jan. 2, 1712-3, in her
twenty-third year. She was Swift's "greatest favourite," and he was much
moved at her death.

4 Edward Wortley Montagu, grandson of the first Earl of Sandwich, and
M.P. for Huntingdon. He was a great friend of Addison's, and the second
volume of the Tatler was dedicated to him. In 1712 he married the famous
Lady Mary Pierrepont, eldest daughter of the Duke of Kingston, and under
George I. he became Ambassador Extraordinary to the Porte. He died in
1761, aged eighty.

5 See Letter 5, note 27. No copy of these verses is known.

6 Henry Alexander, fifth Earl of Stirling, who died without issue in
1739. His sister, Lady Judith Alexander, married Sir William Trumbull,
Pope's friend.

7 "These words, notwithstanding their great obscurity at present,
were very clear and intelligible to Mrs. Johnson: they referred to
conversations, which passed between her and Dr. Tisdall seven or eight
years before; when the Doctor, who was not only a learned and faithful
divine, but a zealous Church-Tory, frequently entertained her with
Convocation disputes. This gentleman, in the year 1704, paid his
addresses to Mrs. Johnson" (Deane Swift). The Rev. William Tisdall
was made D.D. in 1707. Swift never forgave Tisdall's proposal to marry
Esther Johnson in 1704, and often gave expression to his contempt for
him. In 1706 Tisdall married, and was appointed Vicar of Kerry and
Ruavon; in 1712 he became Vicar of Belfast. He published several
controversial pieces, directed against Presbyterians and other
Dissenters.

8 No. 193 of the Tatler, for July 4, 1710, contained a letter from
Downes the Prompter in ridicule of Harley's newly formed Ministry.
This letter, the authorship of which Steele disavowed, was probably by
Anthony Henley.

9 William Berkeley, fourth Baron Berkeley of Stratton, was sworn of the
Privy Council in September 1710, and was appointed Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster. He married Frances, youngest daughter of Sir John
Temple, of East Sheen, Surrey, and died in 1740.

10 Probably the widow of Sir William Temple's son, John Temple (see
Letter 2, note 13). She was Mary Duplessis, daughter of Duplessis
Rambouillet, a Huguenot.

11 The Rev. James Sartre, who married Addison's sister Dorothy, was
Prebendary and Archdeacon of Westminster. He had formerly been French
pastor at Montpelier. After his death in 1713 his widow married a Mr.
Combe, and lived until 1750.

12 William Congreve's last play was produced in 1700. In 1710, when
he was forty, he published a collected edition of his works. Swift and
Congreve had been schoolfellows at Kilkenny, and they had both been
pupils of St. George Ashe--afterwards Bishop of Clogher--at Trinity
College, Dublin. On Congreve's death, in 1729, Swift wrote, "I loved him
from my youth."

13 See Letter 4, note 11.

14 Dean Sterne.

15 See Letter 6, note 19.

16 When he became Dean he withheld from Swift the living of St. Nicholas
Without, promised in gratitude for the aid rendered by Swift in his
election.

17 Crowe was a Commissioner for Appeals from the Revenue Commissioners
for a short time in 1706, and was Recorder of Blessington, Co. Wicklow.
In his Short Character of Thomas, Earl of Wharton, 1710, Swift speaks of
Whartons "barbarous injustice to... poor Will Crowe."

18 See Letter 3, note 10.

19 See Letter 3, note 35.

20 See Letter 1, note 15.

21 Richard Tighe, M.P. for Belturbet, was a Whig, much disliked by
Swift. He became a Privy Councillor under George I.

22 Dryden Leach, of the Old Bailey, formerly an actor, was son of
Francis Leach. Swift recommended Harrison to employ Leach in printing
the continuation of the Tatler; but Harrison discarded him. (See
Journal, Jan. 16, 1710-11, and Timperley's Literary Anecdotes, 600,
631).

23 The Postman, which appeared three days in the week, written by M.
Fonvive, a French Protestant, whom Dunton calls "the glory and mirror
of news writers, a very grave, learned, orthodox man." Fonvive had a
universal system of intelligence, at home and abroad, and "as his news
is early and good, so his style is excellent."

24 Sir William Temple left Esther Johnson the lease of some property in
Ireland.

25 See Letter 5, note 23.

26 An out-of-the-way or obscure house. So Pepys (Diary, Oct. 15, 1661)
"To St. Paul's Churchyard to a blind place where Mr. Goldsborough was to
meet me."

27 Sir Richard Temple, Bart., of Stowe, a Lieutenant-General who saw
much service in Flanders, was dismissed in 1713 owing to his Whig views,
but on the accession of George I. was raised to the peerage, and was
created Viscount Cobham in 1718. He died in 1749. Congreve wrote in
praise of him, and he was the "brave Cobham" of Pope's first Moral
Essay.

28 Richard Estcourt, the actor, died in August 1712, when his abilities
on the stage and as a talker were celebrated by Steele to No. 468 of the
Spectator. See also Tatler, Aug. 6, 1709, and Spectator, May 5, 1712.
Estcourt was "providore" of the Beef-Steak Club, and a few months before
his death opened the Bumper Tavern in James Street, Covent Garden.

29 See Letter 5, note 49.

30 Poor, mean. Elsewhere Swift speaks of "the corrector of a hedge press
in Little Britain," and "a little hedge vicar."

31 Thomas Herbert, eighth Earl of Pembroke, was Lord Lieutenant from
April 1707 to December 1708. A nobleman of taste and learning, he was,
like Swift, very fond of punning, and they had been great friends in
Ireland.

32 See Letter 3, note 11.

33 See Letter 3, note 18.

34 A small town and fortress in what is now the Pas de Calais.

35 Richard Stewart, third son of the first Lord Mountjoy (see Letter 1,
note 11), was M.P. at various times for Castlebar, Strabane, and County
Tyrone. He died in 1728.

Letter 8.

1 See Letter 3, note 1.

2 Swift, Esther Johnson, and Mrs. Dingley seem to have begun their
financial year on the 1st of November. Swift refers to "MD's allowance"
in the Journal for April 23, 1713.

3 Samuel Dopping, an Irish friend of Stella's, who was probably related
to Anthony Dopping, Bishop of Meath (died 1697), and to his son Anthony
(died 1743), who became Bishop of Ossory.

4 See Letter 2, note 17.

5 The wife of Alderman Stoyte, afterwards Lord Mayor of Dublin. Mrs.
Stoyte and her sister Catherine; the Walls; Isaac Manley and his wife;
Dean Sterne, Esther Johnson and Mrs. Dingley, and Swift, were the
principal members of a card club which met at each other's houses for a
number of years.

6 See Letter 1, note 12.

7 "This cypher stands for Presto, Stella, and Dingley; as much as to
say, it looks like us three quite retired from all the rest of the
world" (Deane Swift).

8 Steele's "dear Prue," Mary Scurlock, whom he married as his second
wife in 1707, was a lady of property and a "cried-up beauty." She was
somewhat of a prude, and did not hesitate to complain to her husband, in
and out of season, of his extravagance and other weaknesses. The other
lady to whom Swift alludes is probably the Duchess of Marlborough.

9 See Letter 7, note 7.

10 Remembers: an Irish expression.

11 This new Commission, signed by Narcissus Marsh, Archbishop of Armagh,
and William King, was dated Oct. 24, 1710. In this document Swift was
begged to take the full management of the business of the First-Fruits
into his hands, the Bishops of Ossory and Killala--who were to have
joined with him in the negotiations--having left London before Swift
arrived. But before this commission was despatched the Queen had granted
the First-Fruits and Twentieth Parts to the Irish clergy.

12 Lady Mountjoy, wife of the second Viscount Mountjoy (see Letter
1), was Anne, youngest daughter of Murrough Boyle, first Viscount
Blessington, by his second wife, Anne, daughter of Charles Coote,
second Earl of Mountrath. After Lord Mountjoy's death she married John
Farquharson, and she died in 1741.

13 Forster suggests that Swift wrote "Frond " or "Frowde" and there is
every reason to believe that this was the case. No Colonel Proud appears
in Dalton's Army Lists. A Colonel William Frowde, apparently third son
of Sir Philip Frowde, Knight, by his third wife, Margaret, daughter
of Sir John Ashburnham, was appointed Lieutenant-Colonel in Colonel
Farrington's (see note 18) Regiment of Foot in 1694. He resigned his
commission on his appointment to the First Life Guards in 1702, and he
was in this latter regiment in 1704. In November and December 1711 Swift
wrote of Philip Frowde the elder (Colonel William Frowde's brother) as
"an old fool," in monetary difficulties. It is probable that Swift's
Colonel Proud (? Frowde) was not Colonel William Frowde, but his nephew,
Philip Frowde, junior, who was Addison's friend at Oxford, and the
author of two tragedies and various poems. Nothing seems known of Philip
Frowde's connection with the army, but he is certainly called "Colonel"
by Swift, Addison, and Pope (see Forster's Swift, 159; Addison's Works,
v. 324; Pope's Works, v. 177, vi. 227). Swift wrote to Ambrose Philips
in 1705, "Col. Frond is just as he was, very friendly and grand reveur
et distrait. He has brought his poems almost to perfection." It will
be observed that when Swift met Colonel "Proud" he was in company with
Addison, as was also the case when he was with Colonel "Freind" (see
Letter 3, note 25).

14 Charles Davenant, LL.D., educated at Balliol College, Oxford, was the
eldest son of Sir William Davenant, author of Gondibert. In Parliament
he attacked Ministerial abuses with great bitterness until, in 1703, he
was made secretary to the Commissioners appointed to treat for a union
with Scotland. To this post was added, in 1705, an Inspector-Generalship
of Exports and Imports, which he retained until his death in 1714. Tom
Double, a satire on his change of front after obtaining his place, was
published in 1704. In a Note on Macky's character of Davenant, Swift
says, "He ruined his estate, which put him under a necessity to comply
with the times." Davenant's True Picture of a Modern Whig, in Two Parts,
appeared in 1701-2; in 1707 he published "The True Picture of a Modern
Whig revived, set forth in a third dialogue between Whiglove and
Double," which seems to be the piece mentioned in the text, though Swift
speaks of the pamphlet as "lately put out."

15 Hugh Chamberlen, the younger (1664-1728), was a Fellow of the College
of Physicians and Censor in 1707, 1717, and 1721. Atterbury and the
Duchess of Buckingham and Normanby were among his fashionable patients.
His father, Hugh Chamberlen, M.D., was the author of the Land Bank
Scheme of 1693-94.

16 Sir John Holland (see Letter 3, note 28).

17 Swift may mean either rambling or gambolling.

18 Thomas Farrington was appointed Colonel of the newly raised 29th
Regiment of Foot in 1702. He was a subscriber for a copy of the Tatler
on royal paper (Aitken, Life of Steele, i. 329, 330).

19 In The History of Vanbrugh's House, Swift described everyone as
hunting for it up and down the river banks, and unable to find it, until
at length they--

     "-- in the rubbish spy
      A thing resembling a goose pie."

Sir John Vanbrugh was more successful as a dramatist than as an
architect, though his work at Blenheim and elsewhere has many merits.

20 For the successes of the last campaign.

21 John Sheffield, third Earl of Mulgrave, was created Duke of
Buckingham and Normanby in 1703, and died in 1721. On Queen Anne's
accession he became Lord Privy Seal, and on the return of the Tories
to power in 1710 he was Lord Steward, and afterward (June 1710) Lord
President of the Council. The Duke was a poet, as well as a soldier
and statesman, his best known work being the Essay on Poetry. He was
Dryden's patron, and Pope prepared a collected edition of his works.

22 Laurence Hyde, created Earl of Rochester in 1682, died in 1711. He
was the Hushai of Dryden's Absalom and Achitophel, "the friend of David
in distress." In 1684 he was made Lord President of the Council, and on
the accession of James II., Lord Treasurer; he was, however, dismissed
in 1687. Under William III. Rochester was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, an
office he resigned in 1703; and in September 1710 he again became Lord
President. His imperious temper always stood in the way of popularity or
real success.

23 Sir Thomas Osborne, Charles II.'s famous Minister, was elevated to
the peerage in 1673, and afterwards was made successively Earl of Danby,
Marquis of Caermarthen, and Duke of Leeds. On Nov. 29, 1710, a few days
after this reference to him, the Duke was granted a pension of 3500
pounds a year out of the Post Office revenues. He died in July 1712,
aged eighty-one, and soon afterwards his grandson married Lord Oxford's
daughter.

24 This is, of course, a joke; Swift was never introduced at Court.

25 Captain Delaval (see Letter 5, note 6).

26 Admiral Sir Charles Wager (1666-1743) served in the West Indies from
1707 to 1709, and gained great wealth from the prizes he took. Under
George I. he was Comptroller of the Navy, and in 1733 he became First
Lord of the Admiralty, a post which he held until 1742.

27 See Letter 7, note 27.

28 See Letter 5, note 13.

29 Isaac Bickerstaff's "valentine" sent him a nightcap, finely wrought
by a maid of honour to Queen Elizabeth (Tatler, No. 141). The "nightcap"
was a periwig with a short tie and small round head, and embroidered
nightcaps were worn chiefly by members of the graver professions.

30 Tatler, No. 237.

31 Tatler, No. 230.

32 "Returning home at night, you'll find the sink

    Strike your offended sense with double stink."
    ("Description of a City Shower, 11. 5, 6.)

33 Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin.

34 See Letter 1, note 3.

35 See Letter 8, note 5.

36 See Letter 6, note 4.

37 See Letter 1, note 11.

38 The bellman's accents. Cf. Pepys' Diary, Jan. 16, 1659-60: "I staid
up till the bellman came by with his bell just under my window as I
was writing of this very line, and cried, 'Past one of the clock, and a
cold, frosty, windy morning.'"




LETTER 9.

1 John Freind, M.D. (1675-1728), was a younger brother of the Robert
Freind, of Westminster School, mentioned elsewhere in the Journal.
Educated under Dr. Busby at Westminster, he was in 1694 elected a
student of Christ Church, where he made the acquaintance of Atterbury,
and supported Boyle against Bentley in the dispute as to the authorship
of the letters of Phalaris. In 1705 he attended the Earl of Peterborough
to Spain, and in the following year wrote a defence of that commander
(Account of the Earl of Peterborough's Conduct in Spain). A steady Tory,
he took a share in the defence of Dr. Sacheverell; and in 1723, when
M.P. for Launceston, he fell under the suspicion of the Government, and
was sent to the Tower. On the accession of George II., however, he came
into favour with the Court, and died Physician to the Queen.

2 See Letter 8, note 19.

3 St. John was thirty-two in October 1710. He had been Secretary at
War six years before, resigning with Harley in 1707. Swift repeats
this comparison elsewhere. Temple was forty-six when he refused a
Secretaryship of State in 1674.

4 Sir Henry St. John seems to have continued a gay man to the end of
his life. In his youth he was tried and convicted for the murder of
Sir William Estcourt in a duel (Scott). In 1716, after his son had been
attainted, he was made Viscount St. John. He died in 1742, aged ninety.

5 "Swift delighted to let his pen run into such rhymes as these, which
he generally passes off as old proverbs" (Scott). Many of the charming
scraps of "Old Ballads" and "Old Plays" at the head of Scott's own
chapters are in reality the result of his own imagination.

6 See Letter 3, note 18.

7 Sir Richard Levinge, Bart., had been Solicitor-General for Ireland
from 1704 to 1709, and was Attorney-General from 1711 to 1714.
Afterwards he was Speaker of the Irish House of Commons and
Chief-Justice of the Common Pleas in Ireland.

8 See Letter 2, note 18.

9 Thomas Belasyse, second Viscount Fauconberg, or Falconbridge
(died 1700), a nobleman of hereditary loyalty, married, in 1657, the
Protector's youngest daughter, Mary Cromwell, who is represented as
a lady of high talent and spirit. She died on March 14, 1712. Burnet
describes her as "a wise and worthy woman," who would have had a better
prospect of maintaining her father's post than either of her brothers.

10 Richard Freeman, Chief Baron, was Lord Chancellor of Ireland from
1707 until his death in November 1710.

11 See Letter 7, note 17.

12 Sir Richard Cox, Bart. (1650-1733), was Lord Chancellor of Ireland
from 1703 to 1707. In 1711 he was appointed Chief-Justice of the Queen's
Bench, but he was removed from office on the death of Queen Anne. His
zealous Protestantism sometimes caused his views to be warped, but he
was honest and well-principled.

13 Sir Thomas Hanmer, Bart. (1676-1746), succeeded Bromley as Speaker in
1714. In February 1713 Swift said, "He is the most considerable man in
the House of Commons." His edition of Shakespeare was published by the
University of Oxford in 1743-44. Pope called it "pompous," and sneered
at Hanmer's "superior air" (Dunciad, iv. 105).

14 See Letter 5, note 8.

15 Elliot was keeper of the St. James's Coffee-house (see Letter 1).

16 Forster suggested that the true reading is "writhing." If so, it is
not necessary to suppose that Lady Giffard was the cause of it. Perhaps
it is the word "tiger" that is corrupt.

17 The Hon. Charles Boyle (1676-1731), of the Boyle and Bentley
controversy, succeeded to the peerage as Lord Orrery in 1703. When he
settled in London he became the centre of a Christ Church set, a strong
adherent of Harley's party, and a member of Swift's "club." His son
John, fifth Earl of Orrery, published Remarks on the Life and Writings
of Jonathan Swift in 1751.

18 William Domville, a landed proprietor in County Dublin, whom Swift
called "perfectly as fine a gentleman as I know."

19 On May 16, 1711, Swift wrote, "There will be an old to do." The word
is found in Elizabethan writers in the sense of "more than enough." Cf.
Macbeth, ii. 3: "If a man were porter of hell gate, he should have old
turning the key."

20 See Letter 3, note 10. Clements was related to Pratt, the Deputy
Vice-Treasurer, and was probably the Robert Clements who became Deputy
Vice-Treasurer, and whose grandson Robert was created Earl of Leitrim in
1795.

21 Letter 5, note 11.

22 Swift's sister Jane, who had married a currier in Bride Street, named
Joseph Fenton, a match to which Swift strongly objected. Deane Swift
says that Swift never saw his sister again after the marriage; he had
offered her 500 pounds if she would show a "proper disdain" of Fenton.
On her husband's dying bankrupt, however, Swift paid her an annuity
until 1738, when she died in the same lodging with Esther Johnson's
mother, Mrs. Bridget Mose, at Farnham (Forster's Swift, pp. 118-19).

23 Welbore Ellis, appointed Bishop of Kildare in 1705. He was translated
to Meath in 1731, and died three years later.

24 The expression of the Archbishop is, "I am not to conceal from you
that some expressed a little jealously, that you would not be acceptable
to the present courtiers; intimating that you were under the reputation
of being a favourite of the late party in power" (King to Swift, Nov. 2,
1710).

25 This indignant letter is dated Nov. 23, 1710. It produced an
apologetic reply from the Archbishop (Nov. 30, 1710), who represented
that the letter to Southwell was a snare laid in his way, since if he
declined signing it, it might have been interpreted into disrespect to
the Duke of Ormond. Of the bishops King said, "You cannot do yourself a
greater service than to bring this to a good issue, to their shame and
conviction."




LETTER 10.

1 William Bromley (died 1732) was M.P. for the University of Oxford. A
good debater and a strong High Churchman, he was Secretary of State from
August 1713 until the Queen's death in the following year.

2 Colonel, afterwards Major-General, John Hill (died 1735) was younger
brother of Mrs. Masham, the Queen's favourite, and a poor relation of
the Duchess of Marlborough. He was wounded at Mons in 1709, and in 1711
was sent on an unsuccessful expedition to attack the French settlements
in North America. In 1713 he was appointed to command the troops at
Dunkirk.

3 "The footmen in attendance at the Houses of Parliament used at this
time to form themselves into a deliberative body, and usually debated
the same points with their masters. It was jocularly said that several
questions were lost by the Court party in the menial House of Lords
which were carried triumphantly in the real assembly; which was at
length explained by a discovery that the Scottish peers whose votes
were sometimes decisive of a question had but few representatives in the
convocation of lacqueys. The sable attendant mentioned by Swift, being
an appendage of the brother of Mrs. Masham, the reigning favourite, had
a title to the chair, the Court and Tory interest being exerted in his
favour" (Scott). Steele alludes to the "Footmen's Parliament" in No. 88
of the Spectator.

4 See Letter 1, note 3.

5 A Court of Equity abolished in the reign of Charles I. It met in the
Camera Alba, or Whitehall, and the room appears to have retained the
name of the old Court.

6 See Letter 6, note 2.

7 Swift's first contribution to the Examiner (No. 13) is dated Nov. 2,
1710.

8 Seduced, induced. Dryden (Spanish Friar) has "To debauch a king to
break his laws."

9 Freeman (see Letter 9, note 10).

10 "To make this intelligible, it is necessary to observe, that the
words 'this fortnight', in the preceding sentence, were first written
in what he calls their little language, and afterwards scratched out and
written plain. It must be confessed this little language, which passed
current between Swift and Stella, has occasioned infinite trouble in the
revisal of these papers" (Deane Swift).

11 Trim. An attack upon the liberties of this corporation is among the
political offences of Wharton's Lieutenancy of Ireland set forth in
Swift's Short Character of the Earl of Wharton.

12 Apologies.

13 "A Description of the Morning," in No. 9 of the Tatler.

14 See Letter 6, note 19.

15 William Palliser (died 1726).

16 See Letter 4, note 15.

17 "Here he writ with his eyes shut; and the writing is somewhat
crooked, although as well in other respects as if his eyes had been
open" (Deane Swift).

18 Tatler, No. 249; cf. p. 93. During this visit to London Swift
contributed to only three Tatlers, viz. Nos. 230, 238, and 258.

19 St. Andrew's Day.

20 No. 241.

21 Tatler, No. 258.

22 Lieutenant-General Philip Bragg, Colonel of the 28th Regiment of
Foot, and M.P. for Armagh, died in 1759.

23 James Cecil, fifth Earl of Salisbury, who died in 1728.

24 See Letter 2, note 13.

25 See Letter 8, note 22.

26 Kneller seems never to have painted Swift's portrait.

27 On Nov. 25 and 28.

28 Arthur Annesley, M.P. for Cambridge University, had recently become
fifth Earl of Anglesea, on the death of his brother (see Letter 3, note
35). Under George I. he was Joint Treasurer of Ireland, and Treasurer at
War.

29 A Short Character of the Earl of Wharton, by Swift himself, though
the authorship was not suspected at the time. "Archbishop King," says
Scott, "would have hardly otherwise ventured to mention it to Swift in
his letter of Jan. 9, 1710, as 'a wound given in the dark.'" Elsewhere,
however, in a note, Swift hints that Archbishop King was really aware of
the authorship of the pamphlet.

30 A false report. (See Letter 11, note 4.)

31 None of these Commissioners of Revenue lost their places at this
time. Samuel Ogle was Commissioner from 1699 to 1714; John South from
1696 until his death in 1711; and Sir William St. Quintin, Bart., from
1706 to 1713. Stephen Ludlow succeeded South in September 1711.

32 See Letter 7, note 35.

33 James Hamilton, sixth Earl of Abercorn (1656-1734), a Scotch peer who
had strongly supported the Union of 1706.




LETTER 11.

1 L'Estrange speaks of "insipid twittle twattles." Johnson calls this "a
vile word."

2 A cousin of Swift's; probably a son of William Swift.

3 Nicholas Sankey (died 1722) succeeded Lord Lovelace as Colonel of
a Regiment of Foot in Ireland in 1689. He became Brigadier-General in
1704, Major-General 1707, and Lieutenant-General 1710. He served in
Spain, and was taken prisoner at the battle of the Caya in 1709.

4 See Letter 10, note 30.

5 The Earl of Abercorn (see Letter 10, note 33) married, in 1686,
Elizabeth, only child of Sir Robert Reading, Bart., of Dublin, by Jane,
Dowager Countess of Mountrath. Lady Abercorn survived her husband twenty
years, dying in 1754, aged eighty-six.

6 Charles Lennox, first Duke of Richmond and Gordon (1672-1723), was the
illegitimate son of Charles II. by Madame de Querouaille.

7 Sir Robert Raymond, afterwards Lord Raymond (1673-1733), M.P. for
Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, was appointed Solicitor-General in May
1710, and was knighted in October. He was removed from office on the
accession of George I., but was made Attorney-General in 1720, and in
1724 became a judge of the King's Bench. In the following year he was
made Lord Chief-Justice, and was distinguished both for his learning and
his impartiality.

8 Lynn-Regis.

9 Richard Savage, fourth Earl Rivers, the father of Richard Savage, the
poet. Under the Whigs Lord Rivers was Envoy to Hanover; and after his
conversion by Harley, he was Constable of the Tower under the Tories. He
died in 1712.

10 Chancellor of the Exchequer in Ireland from 1695 until his death in
1717.

11 Lord Shelburne's clever sister, Anne, only daughter of Sir William
Petty, and wife of Thomas Fitzmaurice, Lord of Kerry, afterwards created
first Earl of Kerry.

12 Mrs. Pratt, an Irish friend of Lady Kerry, lodged at Lord Shelburne's
during her visit to London. The reference to Clements (see Letter 9,
note 20), Pratt's relative, in the Journal for April 14, 1711, makes
it clear that Mrs. Pratt was the wife of the Deputy Vice-Treasurer of
Ireland, to whom Swift often alludes (see Letter 3, note 10).

13 Lieutenant-General Thomas Meredith, Major-General Maccartney,
and Brigadier Philip Honeywood. They alleged that their offence only
amounted to drinking a health to the Duke of Marlborough, and confusion
to his enemies. But the Government said that an example must be made,
because various officers had dropped dangerous expressions about
standing by their General, Marlborough, who was believed to be aiming at
being made Captain General for life. For Maccartney see the Journal for
Nov. 15, 1712, seq. Meredith, who was appointed Adjutant-General of
the Forces in 1701, was made a Lieutenant-General in 1708. He saw much
service under William III., and Marlborough, and was elected M.P. for
Midhurst in 1709. He died in 1719 (Dalton's Army Lists, III. 181).
Honeywood entered the army in 1694; was at Namur; and was made a
Brigadier-General before 1711. After the accession of George I. he
became Colonel of a Regiment of Dragoons, and commanded a division at
Dettingen. At his death in 1752 he was acting as Governor of Portsmouth,
with the rank of General (Dalton, iv. 30).

14 Or "malkin"; a counterfeit, or scarecrow.

15 William Cadogan, Lieutenant-General and afterwards Earl Cadogan
(1675-1726), a great friend of Marlborough, was Envoy to the United
Provinces and Spanish Flanders. Cadogan retained the post of Lieutenant
to the Tower until 1715.

16 Earl Cadogan's father, Henry Cadogan, barrister, married Bridget,
daughter of Sir Hardresse Waller, and sister of Elizabeth, Baroness
Shelburne in her own right.

17 See Letter 5, note 30.

18 Cadogan married Margaretta, daughter of William Munter, Counsellor of
the Court of Holland.

19 Presumably the eldest son, William, who succeeded his father as
second Earl of Kerry in 1741, and died in 1747. He was at Eton and
Christ Church, Oxford, and was afterwards a Colonel in the Coldstream
Guards.

20 Henry Petty, third Lord Shelburne, who became Earl of Shelburne in
1719. His son predeceased him, without issue, and on Lord Shelburne's
death, in 1751, his honours became extinct. His daughter Anne also died
without issue.

21 The menagerie, which had been one of the sights of London, was
removed from the Tower in 1834. In his account of the Tory Fox Hunter
in No. 47 of the Freeholder, Addison says, "Our first visit was to the
lions."

22 Bethlehem Hospital, for lunatics, in Moorfields, was a popular
"sight" in the eighteenth century. Cf. the Tatler, No. 30: "On Tuesday
last I took three lads, who are under my guardianship, a rambling, in a
hackney coach, to show them the town: as the lions, the tombs, Bedlam."

23 The Royal Society met at Gresham College from 1660 to 1710. The
professors of the College lectured on divinity, civil law, astronomy,
music, geometry, rhetoric, and physic.

24 The most important of the puppet-shows was Powell's, in the Little
Piazza, Covent Garden, which is frequently mentioned in the Tatler.

25 The precise nature this negligent costume is not known, but it is
always decried by popular writers of the time.

26 Retched. Bacon has "Patients must not keck at them at the first."

27 Swift was born on November 30.

28 Mrs. De la Riviere Manley, daughter of Sir Roger Manley, and cousin
of John Manley, M.P., and Isaac Manley (see Letter 3, note 3), wrote
poems and plays, but is best known for her "Secret Memoirs and Manners
of Several Persons of Quality, of both sexes. From the New Atalantis,
1709," a book abounding in scandalous references to her contemporaries.
She was arrested in October, but was discharged in Feb. 1710. In
May 1710 she brought out a continuation of the New Atalantis, called
"Memoirs of Europe towards the Close of the Eighth Century." In June
1711 she became editress of the Tory Examiner, and wrote political
pamphlets with Swift's assistance. Afterwards she lived with Alderman
Barber, the printer, at whose office she died in 1724. In her will
she mentioned her "much honoured friend, the Dean of St. Patrick, Dr.
Swift."

29 "He seems to have written these words in a whim; for the sake of what
follows" (Deane Swift).

30 See Letter 8, note 33.

31 No. 249 (see Letter 10, note 18).

32 See Letter 5, note 34.

33 In a letter to the Rev. Dr. Tisdall, of Dec. 16, 1703, Swift said:
"I'll teach you a way to outwit Mrs. Johnson: it is a new-fashioned
way of being witty, and they call it a bite. You must ask a bantering
question, or tell some damned lie in a serious manner, and then she will
answer or speak as if you were in earnest; and then cry you, 'Madam,
there's a bite!' I would not have you undervalue this, for it is
the constant amusement in Court, and everywhere else among the great
people." See, too, the Tatler, No. 12, and Spectator, Nos. 47, 504: "In
a word, a Biter is one who thinks you a fool, because you do not think
him a knave."

34 See Letter 9, note 4.

35 "As I hope to be saved;" a favourite phrase in the Journal.

36 See Letter 7, note 12.

37 This statement receives some confirmation from a pamphlet published
in September 1710, called "A Condoling Letter to the Tatler: On Account
of the Misfortunes of Isaac Bickerstaf Esq., a Prisoner in the ---- on
Suspicion of Debt."

38 Dr. Lambert, chaplain to Lord Wharton, was censured in Convocation
for being the author of a libellous letter.

39 Probably the same person as Dr. Griffith, spoken of in the Journal
for March 3, 1713,--when he was ill,--as having been "very tender of"
Stella.

40 See Letter 9, note 22.

41 Vexed, offended. Elsewhere Swift wrote, "I am apt to grate the ears
of more than I could wish."

42 Ambrose Philips, whose Pastorals had been published in the same
volume of Tonson's Miscellany as Pope's. Two years later Swift wrote,
"I should certainly have provided for him had he not run party mad." In
1712 his play, The Distrest Mother, received flattering notice in the
Spectator, and in 1713, to Pope's annoyance, Philips' Pastorals were
praised in the Guardian. His pretty poems to children led Henry Carey to
nickname him "Namby Pamby."

43 An equestrian statue of William III., in College Green, Dublin. It
was common, in the days of party, for students of the University of
Dublin to play tricks with this statue.

44 Lieutenant-General Richard Ingoldsby (died 1712) was Commander of the
Forces in Ireland, and one of the Lords Justices in the absence of the
Lord Lieutenant.

45 This seems to have been a mistake; cf. Journal for July 13, 1711,
Alan Brodrick, afterwards Viscount Midleton, a Whig politician and
lawyer, was made Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench in Ireland in 1709,
but was removed from office in June 1711, when Sir Richard Cox succeeded
him. On the accession of George I. he was appointed Lord Chancellor
for Ireland. Afterwards he declined to accept the dedication to him of
Swift's Drapiers Letters, and supported the prosecution of the author.
He died in 1728.

46 Robert Doyne was appointed Chief Baron of the Exchequer in Ireland
in 1695, and Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in 1703. This appointment
was revoked on the accession of George I.

47 See Letter 9, note 12.

48 Of the University of Dublin.

49 See Letter 2, note 18 and Letter 3, note 4. Sir Thomas Frankland's
eldest son, Thomas, who afterwards succeeded to the baronetcy, acquired
a fortune with his first wife, Dinah, daughter of Francis Topham, of
Agelthorpe, Yorkshire. He died in 1747.

50 See Letter 8, note 21.

51 see Letter 4, note 15.

52 Mary, daughter of Sir John Williams, Bart., and widow of Charles
Petty, second Lord Shelburne, who died in 1696. She had married, as
her second husband, Major-General Conyngham, and, as her third husband,
Colonel Dallway.

53 Dr. John Vesey became Bishop of Limerick in 1672, and Archbishop of
Tuam in 1678. He died in 1716.

54 See Letter 3, note 39.

55 Sex.

56 Toby Caulfeild, third son of the fifth Lord Charlemont. In 1689 he
was Colonel to the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment of Foot, and about 1705
he succeeded to the command of Lord Skerrin's Regiment of Foot. After
serving in Spain his regiment was reduced, having lost most of its men
(Luttrell, vi. 158).

57 John Campbell, second Duke of Argyle (1680-1743), was installed a
Knight of the Garter in December 1710, after he had successfully opposed
a vote of thanks to Marlborough, with whom he had quarrelled. It was of
this nobleman that Pope wrote-- "Argyle, the State's whole thunder born
to wield,      And shake alike the senate and the field."
In a note to Macky's Memoirs, Swift describes the Duke as an "ambitious,
covetous, cunning Scot, who had no principle but his own interests and
greatness."

58 Harley's second wife, Sarah, daughter of Simon Middleton, of
Edmonton, and sister of Sir Hugh Middleton, Bart. She died, without
issue, in 1737.

59 Elizabeth Harley, then unmarried, the daughter of Harley's
first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Foley, of Whitley Court,
Worcestershire. She subsequently married the Marquis of Caermarthen,
afterwards Duke of Leeds.

60 Harcourt (see Letter 3, note 24).

61 William Stawel, the third baron, who succeeded to the title in 1692,
was half-brother to the second Baron Stawel. The brother here referred
to was Edward, who succeeded to the title as fourth baron in 1742.




LETTER 12.

1 Charles Finch, third Earl of Winchelsea, son of Lord Maidstone, and
grandson of Heneage, second Earl of Winchelsea. On his death in 1712
Swift spoke of him as "a worthy honest gentleman, and particular friend
of mine."

2 Vedeau was a shopkeeper, who abandoned his trade for the army
(Journal, March 28, April 4, 1711). Swift calls him "a lieutenant, who
is now broke, and upon half pay" (Journal, Nov. 18, 1712)

3 Sir Edmund Bacon, Bart. (died 1721), of Herringflat, Suffolk,
succeeded his father in the baronetcy in 1686.

4 The reverse at Brihuega.

5 See Letter 8, note 12.

6 John Barber, a printer, became Lord Mayor of London in 1732, and died
in 1741. Mrs. Manley was his mistress, and died at his printing office.
Swift speaks of Barber as his "very good and old friend."

7 Bernage was an officer serving under Colonel Fielding. In August 1710
a difficulty arose through Arbuthnot trying to get his brother George
made Captain over Bernage's head; but ultimately Arbuthnot waived the
business, because he would not wrong a friend of Swift's.

8 See Letter 1, note 52.

9 George Smalridge (1663-1719), the High Church divine and popular
preacher, was made Dean of Carlisle in 1711, and Bishop of Bristol in
1714. Steele spoke of him in the Tatler (Nos. 73, 114) as "abounding in
that sort of virtue and knowledge which makes religion beautiful."

10 St. Albans Street, Pall Mall, was removed in 1815 to make way for
Waterloo Place. It was named after Henry Jermyn, Earl of St. Albans.

11 Ben Portlack, the Duke of Ormond's secretary.

12 Algernon Seymour, Earl of Hertford (1684-1750), only son of Charles
Seymour, Duke of Somerset. Lord Hertford succeeded to the dukedom in
1748. From 1708 to 1722 he was M.P. for Northumberland, and from 1708 to
1713 he took an active part in the war in Flanders.

13 See Letter 4.

14 A Short Character of the Earl of Wharton (see Letter 10. note 29).

15 See Letter 9.

16 Henry Herbert, the last Baron Herbert of Cherbury, succeeded to the
peerage in 1709, and soon afterwards married a sister of the Earl of
Portsmouth. A ruined man, he committed suicide in 1738.

17 Nos. 257, 260.

18 See Letter 6, note 12.

19 "AFTER is interlined" (Deane Swift).

20 With this account may be compared what Pope says, as recorded in
Spence's Anecdotes, p. 223: "Lord Peterborough could dictate letters to
nine amanuenses together, as I was assured by a gentleman who saw him do
it when Ambassador at Turin. He walked round the room, and told each of
them in his turn what he was to write. One perhaps was a letter to the
emperor, another to an old friend, a third to a mistress, a fourth to
a statesman, and so on: yet he carried so many and so different
connections in his head, all at the same time."

21 Francis Atterbury, Dean of Carlisle, had taken an active part in the
defence of Dr. Sacheverell. After a long period of suspense he received
the appointment of Dean of Christ Church, and in 1713 he was made Bishop
of Rochester and Dean of Westminster. Atterbury was on intimate terms
with Swift, Pope, and other writers on the Tory side, and Addison--at
whose funeral the Bishop officiated--described him as "one of the
greatest geniuses of his age."

22 John Carteret, second Baron Carteret, afterwards to be well known as
a statesman, succeeded to the peerage in 1695, and became Earl Granville
and Viscount Carteret on the death of his brother in 1744. He died in
1763. In October 1710, when twenty years of age, he had married Frances,
only daughter of Sir Robert Worsley, Bart., of Appuldurcombe, Isle of
Wight.

23 Dillon Ashe, D.D., Vicar of Finglas, and brother of the Bishop
of Clogher. In 1704 he was made Archdeacon of Clogher, and in 1706
Chancellor of Armagh. He seems to have been too fond of drink.

24 Henley (see Letter 6, note 15) married Mary, daughter of Peregrine
Bertie, the second son of Montagu, Earl of Lindsey, and with her
obtained a fortune of 30,000 pounds. After Henley's death his widow
married her relative, Henry Bertie, third son of James, Earl of
Abingdon.

25 Hebrews v. 6.




LETTER 13.

1 Probably Mrs. Manley and John Barber (see Letter 11, note 28 and
Letter 12, note 6).

2 Sir Andrew Fountaine's (see Letter 5, note 28) father, Andrew
Fountaine, M.P., married Sarah, daughter of Sir Thomas Chicheley, Master
of the Ordnance. Sir Andrew's sister, Elizabeth, married Colonel Edward
Clent. The "scoundrel brother," Brig, died in 1746, aged sixty-four
(Blomefield's Norfolk, vi. 233-36).

3 Dame Overdo, the justice's wife in Ben Jonson's Bartholomew Fair.

4 See Letter 3, note 5.

5 Atterbury, who had recently been elected Prolocutor to the Lower House
of Convocation.

6 Dr. Sterne, Dean of St. Patrick's, was not married.

7 January 6 was Twelfth-night.

8 Garraway's Coffee-house, in Change Alley, was founded by Thomas
Garway, the first coffee-man who sold and retailed tea. A room upstairs
was used for sales of wine "by the candle."

9 Sir Constantine Phipps, who had taken an active part in Sacheverell's
defence. Phipps' interference in elections in the Tory interest made
him very unpopular in Dublin, and he was recalled on the death of Queen
Anne.

10 Joseph Trapp, one of the seven poets alluded to in the distich:--
"Alma novem genuit celebres Rhedycina poetas,      Bubb, Stubb, Gru
 Trapp wrote a tragedy in 1704, and in 1708 was chosen the first
Professor of Poetry at Oxford. In 1710 he published pamphlets on behalf
of Sacheverell, and in 1712 Swift secured for him the post of chaplain
to Bolingbroke. During his latter years he held several good livings.
Elsewhere Swift calls him a "coxcomb."

11 See Letter 7, note 21.

12 The extreme Tories, who afterwards formed the October Club.

13 Crowd. A Jacobean writer speaks of "the lurry of lawyers," and "a
lurry and rabble of poor friars."

14 See Letter 5, note 10.

15 St. John's first wife was Frances, daughter and co-heiress of Sir
Henry Winchcombe, Bart., of Berkshire, and in her right St. John enjoyed
the estates of Bucklebury, which on her death in 1718 passed to her
sister. In April 1711 Swift said that "poor Mrs. St. John" was growing
a great favourite of his; she was going to Bath owing to ill-health, and
begged him to take care of her husband. She "said she had none to trust
but me, and the poor creature's tears came fresh in her eyes." Though
the marriage was, naturally enough, unhappy, she did not leave St.
John's house until 1713, and she returned to him when he fell from
power. There are letters from her to Swift as late as 1716, not
only doing her best to defend his honour, but speaking of him with
tenderness.

16 "Battoon" means (1) a truncheon; (2) a staff of office. Luttrell, in
1704, speaks of "a battoon set with diamonds sent him from the French
king."

17 Edward Harley, second son of Sir Edward Harley, was M.P. for
Leominster and Recorder of the same town. In 1702 he was appointed
Auditor of the Imposts, a post which he held until his death in 1735.
His wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Foley, was a sister of Robert
Harley's wife, and his eldest son eventually became third Earl of
Oxford. Harley published several books on biblical subjects.

18 See Letter 6, note 12. The last number of Steele's Tatler appeared on
Jan. 2, 1711; Harrison's paper reached to fifty-two numbers.

19 Dryden Leach (see Letter 7, note 22).

20 Cf. Letter 7, October 28th.

21 Published by John Baker and John Morphew. See Aitken's Life of
Steele, i. 299-301.

22 In No. 224 of the Tatler, Addison, speaking of polemical
advertisements, says: "The inventors of Strops for Razors have written
against one another this way for several years, and that with great
bitterness." See also Spectator, Nos. 428, 509, and the Postman for
March 23, 1703: "The so much famed strops for setting razors, etc., are
only to be had at Jacob's Coffee-house.... Beware of counterfeits, for
such are abroad."

23 Sir John Holland (see Letter 3, note 28).

24 Addison speaks of a fine flaxen long wig costing thirty guineas
(Guardian, No. 97), and Duumvir's fair wig, which Phillis threw into the
fire, cost forty guineas (Tatler, No. 54)

25 Swift's mother, Abigail Erick, was of a Leicestershire family, and
after her husband's death she spent much of her time with her friends
near her old home. Mr. Worrall, vicar of St. Patrick's, with whom Swift
was on terms of intimacy in 1728-29, was evidently a relative of the
Worralls where Mrs. Swift had lodged, and we may reasonably suppose that
he owed the living to Swift's interest in the family.

26 The title of a humorous poem by Lydgate. A "lickpenny" is a greedy or
grasping person.

27 Small wooden blocks used for lighting fires. See Swift ("Description
of the Morning"),     "The small-coal man was heard with cadence deep,
      Till drowned in shriller notes of chimney-sweep;" and Gay (Trivia, ii.
35),     "When small-coal murmurs in the hoarser throat,
      From smutty dangers guard thy threatened coat."

28 The Tory Ministers.




LETTER 14.

1 See Letter 7, note 22.

2 Thomas Southerne's play of Oroonoko, based on Mrs. Aphra Behn's novel
of the same name, was first acted in 1696.

3 "Mrs." Cross created the part of Mrs. Clerimont in Steele's Tender
Husband in 1705.

4 See Letter 12, note 7.

5 George Granville, afterwards Lord Lansdowne, was M.P. for Cornwall,
and Secretary at War. In December 1711 he was raised to the peerage,
and in 1712 was appointed Comptroller of the Household. He died in 1735,
when the title became extinct. Granville wrote plays and poems, and
was a patron of both Dryden and Pope. Pope called him "Granville the
polite." His Works in Verse and Prose appeared in 1732.

6 Samuel Masham, son of Sir Francis Masham, Bart., had been a page to
the Queen while Princess of Denmark, and an equerry and gentleman of the
bed-chamber to Prince George. He married Abigail Hill (see Letter 16,
note 7), daughter of Francis Hill, a Turkey merchant, and sister of
General John Hill, and through that lady's influence with the Queen he
was raised to the peerage as Baron Masham, in January 1712. Under George
I. he was Remembrancer of the Exchequer. He died in 1758.

7 A roughly printed pamphlet, The Honourable Descent, Life, and True
Character of the... Earl of Wharton, appeared early in 1711, in reply to
Swift's Short Character; but that can hardly be the pamphlet referred
to here, because it is directed against libellers and backbiters, and
cannot be described as "pretty civil."

8 "In that word (the seven last words of the sentence huddled into one)
there were some puzzling characters" (Deane Swift).

9 Sir Robert Worsley, Bart., married, in 1690, Frances, only daughter
of the first Viscount Weymouth. Their daughter Frances married Lord
Carteret (see Letter 12, note 22) in 1710. In a letter to Colonel Hunter
in March 1709 Swift spoke of Lady (then Mrs.) Worsley as one of the
principal beauties in town. See, too, Swift's letter to her of April 19,
1730: "My Lady Carteret has been the best queen we have known in Ireland
these many years; yet is she mortally hated by all the young girls,
because (and it is your fault) she is handsomer than all of them
together."

10 See Letter 3, note 1.

11 See Letter 5, note 17.

12 William Stratford, son of Nicholas Stratford, Bishop of Chester, was
Archdeacon of Richmond and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford, until his
death in 1729.

13 See Letter 3, note 22.

14 James, third Earl of Berkeley (1680-1736), whom Swift calls a "young
rake" (see Letter 16, note 15). The young Countess of Berkeley was
only sixteen on her marriage. In 1714 she was appointed a lady of the
bed-chamber to Caroline, Princess of Wales, and she died of smallpox
in 1717, aged twenty-two. The Earl was an Admiral, and saw much
service between 1701 and 1710; under George I. he was First Lord of the
Admiralty.

15 Edward Wettenhall was Bishop of Kilmore from 1699 to 1713.

16 In the Dedication to The Tale of a Tub Swift had addressed Somers in
very different terms: "There is no virtue, either in public or private
life, which some circumstances of your own have not often produced upon
the stage of the world."

17 Their lodgings, opposite to St. Mary's Church in Stafford Street,
Dublin.




LETTER 15.

1 The Stamp Act was not passed until June 1712: see the Journal for Aug.
7, 1712.

2 Both in St. James's Park. The Canal was formed by Charles II. from
several small ponds, and Rosamond's Pond was a sheet of water in the
south-west corner of the Park, "long consecrated," as Warburton said,
"to disastrous love and elegiac poetry." It is often mentioned as a
place of assignation in Restoration plays. Evelyn (Diary, Dec. 1, 1662)
describes the "scheets" used on the Canal.

3 Mrs. Beaumont.

4 The first direct mention of Hester Vanhomrigh. She is referred to
only in two other places in the Journal (Feb. 14, 1710-11, and Aug, 14,
1711).

5 See Letter 3, note 17.

6 No. 27, by Swift himself.

7 No. 7 of Harrison's series.

8 The printers of the original Tatler.

9 Harley had forwarded to Swift a banknote for fifty pounds (see
Journal, March 7, 1710-11).

10 At Moor Park.

11 Scott says that Swift here alludes to some unidentified pamphlet of
which he was the real or supposed author.

12 See Letter 11, note 13.

13 The Examiner.

14 See Letter 6, note 43.

15 Mistaken.

16 Mrs. De Caudres, "over against St. Mary's Church, near Capel Street,"
where Stella now lodged.

17 "A crease in the sheet" (Deane Swift).

18 "In the original it was, good mallows, little sollahs. But in these
words, and many others, he writes constantly ll for rr" (Deane Swift).

19 See Letter 4, note 19.

20 "Those letters which are in italics in the original are of a
monstrous size, which occasioned his calling himself a loggerhead"
(Deane Swift). (Italics replaced by capitals for the transcription of
this etext.)

21 I.e., to ask whether.




LETTER 16.

1 Harcourt.

2 "A shilling passes for thirteenpence in Ireland" (Deane Swift).

3 Robert Cope, a gentleman of learning with whom Swift corresponded.

4 Archdeacon Morris is not mentioned in Cotton's Fasti Ecclesiae
Hiberniae.

5 See Letter 14, note 6.

6 See Letter 10, note 2.

7 Abigail Hill, afterwards Lady Masham, had been introduced into the
Queens service as bed-chamber woman by the Duchess of Marlborough. Her
High Church and Tory views recommended her to Queen Anne, and in 1707
she was privately married to Mr. Samuel Masham, a gentleman in the
service of Prince George (see Letter 14, note 6). The Duchess of
Marlborough discovered that Mrs. Masham's cousin, Harley, was using her
influence to further his own interests with the Queen; and in spite of
her violence the Duchess found herself gradually supplanted. From
1710 Mrs. Masham's only rival in the royal favour was the Duchess
of Somerset. Afterwards she quarrelled with Harley and joined the
Bolingbroke faction.

8 See Letter 4, note 16.

9 No. 14 of Harrison's series.

10 See Letter 15, note 4.

11 Richard Duke, a minor poet and friend of Dryden's, entered the Church
about 1685. In July 1710 he was presented by the Bishop of Winchester to
the living of Witney, Oxfordshire, which was worth 700 pounds a year.

12 Sir Jonathan Trelawney, one of the seven bishops committed to the
Tower in 1688, was translated to Winchester in 1707, when he appointed
Duke to be his chaplain.

13 See Letter 4, note 3.

14 See Letter 3, note 39.

15 See Letter 14, note 14.

16 See Letter 7, note 28.

17 Cf. Feb. 22, 1711.

18 Esther Johnson lodged opposite St. Mary's in Dublin.

19 This famous Tory club began with the meeting together of a few
extreme Tories at the Bell in Westminster. The password to the
Club--"October"--was one easy of remembrance to a country gentleman who
loved his ale.

20 "Duke" Disney, "not an old man, but an old rake," died in 1731. Gay
calls him "facetious Disney," and Swift says that all the members of the
Club "love him mightily." Lady M. W. Montagu speaks of his

     "Broad plump face, pert eyes, and ruddy skin,
      Which showed the stupid joke which lurked within."

Disney was a French Huguenot refugee, and his real name was Desaulnais.
He commanded an Irish regiment, and took part in General Hill's
expedition to Canada in 1711 (Kingsford's Canada, ii. 465). By his will
(Wentworth papers, 109) he "left nothing to his poor relations, but very
handsome to his bottle companions."

21 There were several Colonel Fieldings in the first half of the
eighteenth century, and it is not clear which is the one referred to by
Swift. Possibly he was the Edmund Fielding--grandson of the first
Earl of Denbigh--who died a Lieutenant-General in 1741, at the age of
sixty-three, but is best known as the father of Henry Fielding, the
novelist.

22 Cf. Feb. 17, 1711.

23 See Letter 3, note 37.

24 "It is a measured mile round the outer wall; and far beyond any the
finest square in London" (Deane Swift).

25 "The common fare for a set-down in Dublin" (ib.).

26 "Mrs. Stoyte lived at Donnybrook, the road to which from Stephen's
Green ran into the country about a mile from the south-east corner"
(ib.).

27 "Those words in italics are written in a very large hand, and so
is the word large" (ib.). (Italics replaced by capitals for the
transcription of this etext.)

28 Deane Swift alters "lele" to "there," but in a note states how he
here altered Swift's "cypher way of writing." No doubt "lele" and other
favourite words occurred frequently in the MS., as they do in the later
letters.




LETTER 17.

1 Sir Thomas Mansel, Bart., Comptroller of the Household to Queen Anne,
and a Lord of the Treasury, was raised to the peerage in December 1711
as Baron Mansel of Margam. He died in 1723.

2 Lady Betty Butler and Lady Betty Germaine (see Letter 3, note 40 and
Letter 4, note 3).

3 James Eckershall, "second clerk of the Queen's Privy Kitchen."
Chamberlayne (Magnae Britanniae Notitia, 1710, p. 536) says that his
wages were 11 pounds, 8 shillings and a penny-ha'penny, and board-wages
138 pounds, 11 shillings and tenpence-ha'penny, making 150 pounds in
all. Afterwards Eckershall was gentleman usher to Queen Anne; he died at
Drayton in 1753, aged seventy-four. Pope was in correspondence with him
in 1720 on the subject of contemplated speculations in South Sea and
other stocks.

4 In October 1710 (see Letter 6, note 44) Swift wrote as if he knew
about the preparation of these Miscellanies. The volume was published
by Morphew instead of Tooke, and it is frequently referred to in the
Journal.

5 In 1685 the Duke of Ormond (see Letter 2, note 10) married, as his
second wife, Lady Mary Somerset, eldest surviving daughter of Henry,
first Duke of Beaufort.

6 Arthur Moore, M.P., was a Commissioner of Trade and Plantations from
1710 until his death in 1730. Gay calls him "grave," and Pope ("Prologue
to the Satires," 23) says that Moore blamed him for the way in which his
"giddy son," James Moore Smythe, neglected the law.

7 James, Lord Paisley, who succeeded his father (see Letter 10, note
33) as seventh Earl of Abercorn in 1734, married, in 1711, Anne, eldest
daughter of Colonel John Plumer, of Blakesware, Herts.

8 Harley's ill-health was partly due to his drinking habits.

9 Crowd or confusion.

10 The first wife of Charles Seymour, sixth Duke of Somerset, was
Lady Elizabeth Percy, only daughter of Joscelyn, eleventh Earl of
Northumberland, and heiress of the house of Percy. She married the Duke,
her third husband, at the age of eighteen.

11 John Richardson, D.D., rector of Armagh, Cavan, and afterwards
chaplain to the Duke of Ormond. In 1711 he published a Proposal for the
Conversion of the Popish Natives of Ireland to the Established Religion,
and in 1712 a Short History of the Attempts to Convert the Popish
Natives of Ireland. In 1709 the Lower House of Convocation in Ireland
had passed resolutions for printing the Bible and liturgy in Irish,
providing Irish preachers, etc. In 1711 Thomas Parnell, the poet, headed
a deputation to the Queen on the subject, when an address was presented;
but nothing came of the proposals, owing to fears that the English
interest in Ireland might be injured. In 1731 Richardson was given the
small deanery of Kilmacluagh.

12 See Feb. 27, 1711.

13 Harley.

14 "Bank bill for fifty pound," taking the alternate letters (see Letter
15, note 9).

15 See Letter 5, note 17.

16 See Nos. 27 and 29, by Swift himself.

17 "Print cannot do justice to whims of this kind, as they depend wholly
upon the awkward shape of the letters" (Deane Swift).

18 See Letter 8, note 2.

19 "Here is just one specimen given of his way of writing to Stella in
these journals. The reader, I hope, will excuse my omitting it in all
other places where it occurs. The meaning of this pretty language is:
'And you must cry There, and Here, and Here again. Must you imitate
Presto, pray? Yes, and so you shall. And so there's for your letter.
Good-morrow'" (Deane Swift). What Swift really wrote was probably as
follows: "Oo must cly Lele and Lele and Lele aden. Must oo mimitate
Pdfr, pay? Iss, and so oo sall. And so lele's fol oo rettle.
Dood-mallow."

20 Lady Catherine Morice (died 1716) was the eldest daughter of Thomas
Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, and wife of Sir Nicholas Morice, Bart., M.P.
for Newport.

21 Perhaps Henry Arundell, who succeeded his father as fifth Baron
Arundell of Wardour in 1712, and died in 1726.

22 Antoine, Abbe de Bourlie and Marquis de Guiscard, was a cadet of a
distinguished family of the south of France. He joined the Church,
but having been driven from France in consequence of his licentious
excesses, he came to England, after many adventures in Europe, with a
recommendation from the Duke of Savoy. Godolphin gave him the command
of a regiment of refugees, and employed him in projects for effecting a
landing in France. These schemes proving abortive, Guiscard's regiment
was disbanded, and he was discharged with a pension of 500 pounds
a year. Soon after the Tories came to power Guiscard came to the
conclusion that there was no hope of employment for him, and
little chance of receiving his pension; and he began a treacherous
correspondence with the French. When this was detected he was brought
before the Privy Council, and finding that everything was known, and
wishing a better death than hanging, he stabbed Harley in the breast.
Mrs. Manley, under Swift's directions, wrote a Narrative of Guiscard's
Examination, and the incident greatly added to the security of Harley's
position, and to the strength of the Government.

23 Harley's surgeon, Mr. Green.

24 See Letter 9, note 20.

25 Mrs. Walls' baby (see Feb 5, 1711).

26 The phrase had its origin in the sharp practices in the horse and
cattle markets. Writing to Arbuthnot in 1727, Swift said that Gay "had
made a pretty good bargain (that is a Smithfield) for a little place in
the Custom House."

27 "There."




LETTER 18.

1 See Swift's paper in the Examiner, No. 32, and Mrs. Manley's pamphlet,
already mentioned.

2 Presumably Mrs. Johnson's palsy-water (see Letter 5, note 17).

3 Thomas Wentworth, Baron Raby (1672-1739), was created Viscount
Wentworth and Earl of Strafford in June 1711. Lord Raby was Envoy and
Ambassador at Berlin for some years, and was appointed Ambassador at
the Hague in March 1711. In November he was nominated as joint
Plenipotentiary with the Bishop of Bristol to negotiate the terms of
peace. He objected to Prior as a colleague; Swift says he was "as
proud as hell." In 1715 it was proposed to impeach Strafford, but the
proceedings were dropped. In his later years he was, according to Lord
Hervey, a loquacious and illiterate, but constant, speaker in the House
of Lords.

4 A beauty, to whom Swift addressed verses in 1708. During the frost of
January 1709 Swift wrote: "Mrs. Floyd looked out with both her eyes, and
we had one day's thaw; but she drew in her head, and it now freezes as
hard as ever." She was a great friend of Lady Betty Germaine's.

5 Swift never had the smallpox.

6 See Letter 12, note 22.

7 Heart.

8 The first number of the Spectator appeared on March 1, 1711.

9 In one of his poems Swift speaks of Stella "sossing in an easy-chair."

10 See Letter 4, note 20.

11 "It is reasonable to suppose that Swift's acquaintance with Arbuthnot
commenced just about this time; for in the original letter Swift
misspells his name, and writes it Arthbuthnet, in a clear large hand,
that MD might not mistake any of the letters" (Deane Swift). Dr. John
Arbuthnot had been made Physician in Ordinary to the Queen; he was one
of Swift's dearest friends.

12 Clobery Bromley, M.P. for Coventry, son of William Bromley, M.P. (see
Letter 10, note 1), died on March 20, 1711, and Boyer (Political State,
i. 255) says that the House, "out of respect to the father, and to give
him time, both to perform the funeral rites and to indulge his just
affliction," adjourned until the 26th.

13 See Letter 5, note 4.

14 See Letter 17, note 11.

15 Sir John Perceval, Bart. (died 1748), was created Baron Perceval
1715, Viscount Perceval 1722, and Earl of Egmont 1733, all in the Irish
peerage. He married, in 1710, Catherine, eldest daughter of Sir Philip
Parker A'Morley, Bart., of Erwarton, Suffolk; and his son (born Feb. 27,
1710-11) was made Baron Perceval and Holland, in the English peerage, in
1762.

16 This report was false. The Old Pretender did not marry until 1718,
when he was united to the Princess Clementina Maria, daughter of Prince
James Sobieski.


Letter 19.

1 John Hartstonge, D.D. (died 1717), was Bishop of Ossory from 1693 to
1714, when he was translated to Derry.

2 See Letter 15, note 16.

3 Thomas Proby was Chirurgeon-General in Ireland from 1699 until his
death in 1761. In his Short Character of Thomas, Earl of Wharton, Swift
speaks of him as "a person universally esteemed," who had been badly
treated by Lord Wharton. In 1724 Proby's son, a captain in the army, was
accused of popery, and Swift wrote to Lord Carteret that the charge
was generally believed to be false: "The father is the most universally
beloved of any man I ever knew in his station.... You cannot do
any personal thing more acceptable to the people of Ireland than
in inclining towards lenity to Mr. Proby and his family." Proby was
probably a near relative of Sir Thomas Proby, Bart., M.P., of Elton,
Hunts, at whose death in 1689 the baronetcy expired. Mrs. Proby seems to
have been a Miss Spencer.

4 Meliora, daughter of Thomas Coningsby, Baron of Clanbrassil and
Earl of Coningsby, and wife of Sir Thomas Southwell, afterwards Baron
Southwell, one of the Commissioners of Revenue in Ireland, and a member
of the Irish Privy Council. Lady Southwell died in 1736.

5 Lady Betty Rochfort was the daughter of Henry Moore, third Earl of
Drogheda. Her husband, George Rochfort, M.P. for Westmeath, was son of
Robert Rochfort, an Irish judge, and brother of Robert Rochford, M.P.,
to whose wife Swift addressed his Advice to a very Young Lady on her
Marriage. Lady Betty's son Robert was created Earl of Belvedere in 1757.

6 See Letter 17, note 23. Mr. Bussiere, of Suffolk Street, had been
called in directly after the outrage, but Radcliffe would not consult
him.

7 The letter from Dr. King dated March 17, 1711, commenting on
Guiscard's attack upon Harley.

8 See Feb. 10, 1710-11.

9 The word "trangram" or "tangram" ordinarily means a toy or gimcrack,
or trumpery article. Cf. Wycherley (Plain Dealer, iii. 1), "But go,
thou trangram, and carry back those trangrams which thou hast stolen or
purloined." Apparently "trangum" here means a tally.

10 See Letter 12, note 2.

11 Swift means Godolphin, the late Lord Treasurer.

12 Sir John Holland (see Letter 3, note 28).

13 "It caused a violent daub on the paper, which still continues much
discoloured in the original" (Deane Swift).

14 "He forgot here to say, 'At night.' See what goes before" (Deane
Swift).

15 See Letter 17, note 1.

16 Irishman. "Teague" was a term of contempt for an Irishman.

17 To "Mr. Harley, wounded by Guiscard." In this piece Prior said,
"Britain with tears shall bathe thy glorious wound," a wound which could
not have been inflicted by any but a stranger to our land.

18 Sir Thomas Mansel married Martha, daughter and heiress of Francis
Millington, a London merchant.

19 Slatterning, consuming carelessly.

20 "The candle grease mentioned before, which soaked through, deformed
this part of the paper on the second page" (Deane Swift).

21 Harcourt.

22 William Rollinson, formerly a wine merchant, settled afterwards in
Oxfordshire, where he died at a great age. He was a friend of Pope,
Bolingbroke, and Gay.

23 In relation to the banknote (see Letter 17, note 14).

24 "Swift was, at this time, their great support and champion" (Deane
Swift).

25 See Letter 14, note 15.

26 See Letter 17, note 25.

27 "Stella, with all her wit and good sense, spelled very ill; and Dr.
Swift insisted greatly upon women spelling well" (Deane Swift).

28 "The slope of the letters in the words THIS WAY, THIS WAY, is to
the left hand, but the slope of the words THAT WAY, THAT WAY, is to the
right hand" (Deane Swift).

29 See Letter 17, note 24.

30 See Letter 5, note 11 and Letter 10, note 28.




LETTER 20.

1 By the Act 9 Anne, cap. 23, the number of hackney coaches was
increased to 800, and it was provided that they were to go a mile and a
half for one shilling, two miles for one shilling and sixpence, and so
on.

2 See Letter 11, note 39.

3 In a letter to Swift, of March 17, 1711, King said that it might have
been thought that Guiscard's attack would have convinced the world that
Harley was not in the French interest; but it did not have that effect
with all, for some whispered the case of Fenius Rufus and Scevinus in
the 15th book of Tacitus: "Accensis indicibus ad prodendum Fenium Rufum,
quem eundem conscium et inquisitorem non tolerabant." Next month Swift
told King that it was reported that the Archbishop had applied this
passage in a speech made to his clergy, and explained at some length the
steps he had taken to prevent the story being published in the Postboy.
King thanked Swift for this action, explaining that he had been arguing
on Harley's behalf when someone instanced the story of Rufus.

4 A Tory paper, published thrice weekly by Abel Roper.

5 Sir Charles Duncombe, banker, died on April 9, 1711. The first wife of
the Duke of Argyle (see Letter 11, note 57) was Duncombe's niece,
Mary Browne, daughter of Ursula Duncombe and Thomas Browne, of St.
Margaret's, Westminster. Duncombe was elected Lord Mayor in 1700, and
was the richest commoner in England.

6 The Rev. Dillon Ashe (see Letter 12, note 23).

7 John, fourth Baron Poulett, was created Earl Poulett in 1706, after
serving as one of the Commissioners for the Treaty of Union with
Scotland. From August 1710 to May 1711 he was First Lord of the
Treasury, and from June 1711 to August 1714 he was Lord Steward of the
Household.

8 Lost or stupid person.

9 Sir William Read, a quack who advertised largely in the Tatler and
other papers. He was satirised in No. 547 of the Spectator. In 1705
he was knighted for his services in curing many seamen and soldiers of
blindness gratis, and he was appointed Oculist in Ordinary to the Queen.
Read died in 1715, but his business was continued by his widow.

10 General John Webb was not on good terms with Marlborough. He was a
Tory, and had gained distinction in the war at Wynendale (1708), though
the Duke's secretary gave the credit, in the despatch, to Cadogan. There
is a well-known account of Webb in Thackeray's Esmond. He was severely
wounded at Malplaquet in 1709, and in 1710 was given the governorship of
the Isle of Wight. He died in 1724.

11 Henry Campion, M.P. for Penryn, is mentioned in the Political State
for February 1712 as one of the leading men of the October Club. Campion
seems to have been Member, not for Penryn, but for Bossiney.

12 See Letter 3, note 32.

13 Sir George Beaumont, Bart., M.P. for Leicester, and an acquaintance
of Swift's mother, was made a Commissioner of the Privy Seal in 1712,
and one of the Lords of the Admiralty in 1714. He died in 1737.

14 Heneage Finch, afterwards second Earl of Aylesford, was the son of
Heneage Finch, the chief counsel for the seven bishops, who was created
Baron Guernsey in 1703, and Earl of Aylesford in 1714.

15 James, Lord Compton, afterwards fifth Earl of Northampton, was the
eldest son of George, the fourth Earl. He was summoned to the House of
Lords in December 1711, and died in 1754.

16 See Letter 11, note 12.




LETTER 21.

1 In 1670 Temple thanked the Grand Duke of Tuscany for "an entire
vintage of the finest wines of Italy" (Temple's Works, 1814, ii.
155-56).

2 Mrs. Manley (see Letter 17, note 22).

3 Charles Caesar, M.P. for Hertford, was appointed Treasurer of the Navy
in June 1711, in the room of Robert Walpole.

4 Joseph I. His successor was his brother Charles, the King of Spain
recognised by England.

5 Simon Harcourt, M.P. for Wallingford. He married Elizabeth, sister of
Sir John Evelyn, Bart., and died in 1720, aged thirty-five, before his
father. He was secretary to the society of "Brothers," wrote verses, and
was a friend of the poets. His son Simon was created Earl Harcourt in
1749, and was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

6 Doiley, a seventeenth-century linen-draper,--probably "Thomas Doyley,
at the Nun, in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden,"--invented stuffs which
"might at once be cheap and genteel" (Spectator, No. 283).

7 A special envoy. The Resident from Venice in 1710 was Signor Bianchi.

8 See Letter 17, note 5.

9 Nanfan Coote, second Earl of Bellamont, who died in 1708, married, in
1705, Lucia Anna, daughter of Henry de Nassau, Lord of Auverquerque, and
sister of Henry, first Earl of Grantham. She died in 1744.

10 "Farnese" (Deane Swift).

11 See Letter 20, note 3.

12 Swift's changes of residence during the period covered by the Journal
were numerous. On Sept. 20, 1710, he moved from Pall Mall to Bury
Street, "where I suppose I shall continue while in London." But on Dec.
28 he went to new lodgings in St. Albans Street, Haymarket. On April 26,
1711, he moved to Chelsea, and from there to Suffolk Street, to be near
the Vanhomrighs. He next moved to St. Martins Street, Leicester Fields;
and a month later to Panton Street, Haymarket. In 1712 he lodged for a
time at Kensington Gravel Pits.

13 At raffling for books.

14 James Brydges, Paymaster-General, and afterwards Duke of Chandos (see
Letter 3, note 31).

15 Thomas Foley, M.P. for Worcestershire, was created Baron Foley in
December 1711, and died in 1733.

16 See 25th April, 1711 and Letter 20, note 3.

17 See Letter 19, note 3.

18 Charles Dering, second son of Sir Edward Dering, Bart., M.P. for
Kent, was Auditor of the Exchequer in Ireland, and M.P. for Carlingford.

19 See Letter 11, note 44.

20 See Letter 17, note 4.

21 A Whig paper, for the most part by Mainwaring and Oldmixon, in
opposition to the Examiner. It appeared weekly from October 1710 to
August 1711.

22 See Letter 17, note 22.

23 See Spectator, No. 50, by Addison.

24 In all probability a mistake for "Wesley" (see Letter 1, note 12).




LETTER 22.

1 Lord Paisley (see Letter 17, note 7).

2 See Letter 11, note 5.

3 Sir Hovenden Walker. The "man midwife" was Sir Chamberlen Walker, his
younger brother. The "secret expedition" against Quebec conveyed upwards
of 5000 soldiers, under the command of General John Hill (see Letter
10, note 2), but owing to the want of due preparations and the severe
weather encountered, the fleet was compelled to return to England
without accomplishing anything.

4 Robert Freind, elder brother of John Freind, M.D. (see Letter 9,
note 1), became headmaster of Westminster School in 1711, and held the
appointment until 1733. He was Rector of Witney, and afterwards Canon of
Windsor, Prebendary of Westminster, and Canon of Christ Church. He died
in 1751, aged eighty-four.

5 Christopher Musgrave was Clerk of the Ordnance.

6 Atterbury's wife, Katherine Osborn, has been described as "the
inspiration of his youth and the solace of his riper years."

7 The original Chelsea Bun House, in Jew's Row, was pulled down in
1839. Sir R. Philips, writing in 1817, said, "Those buns have afforded a
competency, and even wealth, to four generations of the same family; and
it is singular that their delicate flavour, lightness, and richness have
never been successfully imitated."

8 See Letter 8, note 22. King wrote to Swift (May 15, 1711), "The death
of the Earl of Rochester is a great blow to all good men, and even his
enemies cannot but do justice to his character. What influence it will
have on public affairs God only knows."

9 See Letter 11, note 11.

10 See Letter 17, note 6.

11 See Letter 18, note 4.

12 See Letter 20, note 13.

13 Swift's curate at Laracor.

14 Queen Anne was the last sovereign who exercised the supposed royal
gift of healing by touch. Dr. Johnson was touched by her, but without
effect.

15 Richard Thornhill was tried at the Old Bailey on May 18, 1711, for
the murder of Sir Cholmley Dering, M.P. for Kent, and found guilty
of manslaughter only; but he was shortly afterwards assassinated (see
Journal for Aug. 21, 1711; Spectator, No. 84). The quarrel began on
April 27, when they fell to blows, and Thornhill being knocked down, had
some teeth struck out by Sir C. Dering stamping on him. The spectators
then interfered, and Dering expressed himself as ready to beg pardon;
but Thornhill not thinking this was sufficient satisfaction, gave Dering
the lie, and on May 9 sent him a challenge.

16 Tothill Fields, Westminster, was a favourite place for duels in the
seventeenth century.

17 See Letter 13, note 17.

18 Benjamin Burton, a Dublin banker, and brother-in-law of Swift's
friend Stratford (see Letter 3, note 22). Swift says he hated this
"rogue."




LETTER 23.

1 The day on which the Club met. See letter from Swift to St. John, May
11, 1711.

2 Henry Barry, fourth Lord Barry of Santry (1680-1734), was an Irish
Privy Councillor, and Governor of Derry. In 1702 he married Bridget,
daughter of Sir Thomas Domville, Bart., and in an undated letter (about
1735) to Lady Santry Swift spoke of his esteem for her, "although I had
hardly the least acquaintance with your lord, nor was at all desirous
to cultivate it, because I did not at all approve of his conduct." Lord
Santry's only son and heir, who was born in 1710, was condemned to death
for the murder of a footman in 1739, when the barony became extinct by
forfeiture. See B. W. Adams's History of Santry.

3 Probably Captain Cammock, of the Speedwell, of 28 guns and 125 men
(Luttrell, vi. 331), who met on July 13, 1708, off Scotland, two French
privateers, one of 16, the other of 18 guns, and fought them several
hours. The first privateer got off, much shattered; the other was
brought into Carrickfergus.

4 See Letter 7, note 21.

5 See Letter 13, note 10.

6 This valuable pamphlet is signed "J.G.," and is believed to be by John
Gay.

7 Edmund Curll's collection of Swift's Miscellanies, published in 1711,
was an expansion of a pamphlet of 1710, "A Meditation upon a Broomstick,
and somewhat beside, of the same Author's."

8 "In this passage DD signifies both Dingley and Stella" (Deane Swift).

9 Sir Henry Craik's reading. The old editions have, "It would do: DD
goes as well as Presto," which is obviously corrupt.

10 Cf. Journal, June 17, 1712.

11 Cf. "old doings" (see Letter 9, note 19.)

12 See Letter 17, note 11.

13 Rymer's Foedera, in three volumes, which Swift obtained for Trinity
College, Dublin.

14 See Letter 6, note 43 and 9th Feb. 1710-11.

15 Stephen Colledge, "the Protestant joiner," was hanged in 1681. He had
published attacks on the Roman Catholics, and had advocated resistance
to Charles II.

16 See Letter 3, note 39.

17 Mitford Crowe was appointed Governor of Barbados in 1706, and before
his departure for that island went to Spain, "to settle the accounts of
our army there, of which he is paymaster" (Luttrell, vi. 104). In 1710
charges of bribery brought against him by merchants were inquired into
by the Privy Council, but he seems to have cleared himself, for in June
1711 Swift speaks of him as Governor of Jamaica. He died in 1719.

18 See Letter 8, note 21.

19 Swift's uncle Adam "lived and died in Ireland," and left no son.
Another daughter of his became Mrs. Whiteway.

20 William Lowndes, M.P., secretary to the Treasury, whom Walpole called
"as able and honest a servant as ever the Crown had."

21 The Lord Treasurer's staff: since the dismissal of Godolphin, the
Treasurership had been held in commission.

22 "As I hope to be saved."

23 Stella's maid.

24 See letter from King to Swift, May 15, 1711. Alderman Constantine,
a High Churchman, indignant at being passed over by a junior in the
contest for the mayoralty, brought the matter before the Council
Board, and produced an old by-law by which aldermen, according to their
ancientry, were required to keep their mayoralty. King took the side of
the city, but the majority was for the by-law, and disapproved of the
election; whereupon the citizens repealed the by-law and re-elected the
same alderman as before.




LETTER 24.

1 The Lord Treasurer's staff.

2 Swift's "little parson cousin," the resident chaplain at Moor Park. He
pretended to have had some part in The Tale of a Tub, and Swift always
professed great contempt for him. Thomas Swift was son of an Oxford
uncle of Swift's, of the same name, and was at school and college with
Swift. He became Rector of Puttenham, Surrey, and died in 1752, aged
eighty-seven.

3 The Duke of Ormond's daughter, Lady Mary Butler (see Letter 7, notes 2
and 3.)

4 Thomas Harley, the Lord Treasurer's cousin, was secretary to the
Treasury.

5 Lord Oxford's daughter Elizabeth married, in 1712, the Marquis of
Caermarthen.

6 Henry Tenison, M.P. for County Louth, was one of the Commissioners of
the Revenue in Ireland from 1704 until his death in 1709 (Luttrell, v.
381, vi. 523). Probably he was related to Dr. Tenison, Bishop of Meath,
who died in 1705.

7 Anne Finch (died 1720), daughter of Sir William Kingsmill, and wife
of Heneage Finch, who became fourth Earl of Winchelsea in 1712. Lady
Winchelsea published a volume of poems in 1713, and was a friend of Pope
and Rowe. Wordsworth recognised the advance in the growth of attention
to "external nature" shown in her writings.

8 See Letter 23, note 24 and Letter 30, note 13.

9 This was a mistake. Charles Hickman, D.D., Bishop of Derry, died in
November 1713.

10 "These words in italics are written in a large round hand" (Deane
Swift). (Italics replaced by capitals for the transcription of this
etext.)

11 "This entry is interlined in the original" (Deane Swift).

12 Colonel James Graham (1649-1730) held various offices under James
II., and was granted a lease of a lodge in Bagshot Park. Like his
brother, Viscount Preston, he was suspected of treasonable practices in
1691, and he was arrested in 1692 and 1696. Under Queen Anne and George
I., Colonel Graham was M.P. for Appleby and Westmorland.

13 Mr. Leslie Stephen has pointed out that this is the name of an inn
(now the Jolly Farmer) near Frimley, on the hill between Bagshot and
Farnborough. This inn is still called the Golden Farmer on the Ordnance
map.

14 "Soley" is probably a misreading for "sollah," a form often used
by Swift for "sirrah," and "figgarkick" may be "pilgarlick" (a poor
creature) in Swift's "little language" (cf. 20th Oct. 1711).

15 See Letter 14, note 14.

16 Probably a misprint for "Bertie." This Mr. Bertie may have been the
Hon. James Bertie, second son of the first Earl of Abingdon, and M.P.
for Middlesex.

17 Evelyn Pierrepont, fifth Earl of Kingston, was made Marquis of
Dorchester in 1706. He became Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull in 1715, and
died in 1726. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu was his daughter.

18 See Letter 12, note 22.

19 Sir Thomas Thynne, first Viscount Weymouth, who died in 1714, aged
seventy-four, married Frances, daughter of Heneage Finch, second Earl of
Winchelsea.

20 See Letter 7, note 31.

21 Swift is referring to St. John's defence of Brydges (see Letter 21,
note 14.)

22 "He does not mean smoking, which he never practised, but snuffing
up cut-and-dry tobacco, which sometimes was just coloured with Spanish
snuff; and this he used all his life, but would not own that he took
snuff" (Deane Swift).

23 Beaumont (see Letter 1, note 2).

24 Sir Alexander Cairnes, M.P. for Monaghan, a banker, was created a
baronet in 1706, and died in 1732.

25 See Letter 6, note 44 and Letter 17, note 4.

26 Isaac Manley (see Letter 3, note 3.)

27 Sir Thomas Frankland.

28 See Letter 5, note 8.

29 Hockley-in-the-Hole, Clerkenwell, a place of public diversion, was
famous for its bear and bull baitings.

30 Sir William Seymour, second son of Sir Edward Seymour, Bart., of
Berry Pomeroy, retired from the army in 1717, and died in 1728 (Dalton's
Army Lists). He was wounded at Landen and Vigo, and saw much service
between his appointment as a Captain of Fusiliers in 1686 and his
promotion to the rank of Lieutenant-General in 1707.

31 No. 45.

32 "And now I conceive the main design I had in writing these papers is
fully executed. A great majority of the nation is at length thoroughly
convinced that the Queen proceeded with the highest wisdom, in changing
her Ministry and Parliament" (Examiner, No. 45).

33 Edward Harley (see Letter 13, note 17).

34 See Letter 24, note 2.

35 Tom Ashe was an elder brother of the Bishop of Clogher. He had an
estate of more than 1000 pounds a year in County Meath, and Nichols
describes him as of droll appearance, thick and short in person: "a
facetious, pleasant companion, but the most eternal unwearied punster
that ever lived."

36 "Even Joseph Beaumont, the son, was at this time an old man, whose
grey locks were venerable; yet his father lived until about 1719" (Deane
Swift).


Letter 25.

1 Sir William Wyndham, Bart. (1687-1740), was M.P. for Somerset. He was
a close partisan of Bolingbroke's, and in 1713 introduced the Schism
Bill, which drove Oxford from office. Wyndham became Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and was afterwards a leading opponent of Walpole. His wife,
Lady Catherine Seymour (died 1713), was the second daughter of Charles,
Duke of Somerset (see Letter 28, note 8).

2 Swift was afterwards President of this Club, which is better known as
"the Society."

3 Perhaps Daniel Reading, M.P. for Newcastle, Co. Dublin.

4 Afterwards Congreve formed a friendship with the Whigs; or, as Swift
put it,     "Took proper principles to thrive,
      And so might every dunce alive."

5 Atterbury.

6 This pamphlet, published in February 1712, was called "A Proposal for
Correcting, Improving, and Ascertaining the English Tongue, in a Letter
to the... Lord High Treasurer."

7 No. 47

8 Francis Gastrell, Canon of Christ Church, was made Bishop of Chester
in 1713. His valuable Notitia Cestriensis was published in 1845-50.

9 Near Fulham.

10 See Letter 12, note 21.

11 The daughters of Meinhardt Schomberg, Duke of Leinster, in Ireland,
and third Duke of Schomberg. Lady Mary married Count Dagenfeldt, and
Lady Frederica married, first, the Earl of Holderness, and, secondly,
Earl Fitz Walter.

12 Thomas Harley.

13 See Letter 19, note 3.




LETTER 26.

1 The widow of Sir John Lyndon, who was appointed a justice of the Court
of King's Bench in Ireland in 1682, and died in 1699.

2 "Marmaduke Coghill, LL.D., was judge of the Prerogative Court in
Ireland. About this time he courted a lady, and was soon to have been
married to her; but unfortunately a cause was brought to trial before
him, wherein a man was sued for beating his wife. When the matter was
agitated, the Doctor gave his opinion, 'That although a man had no right
to beat his wife unmercifully, yet that, with such a little cane or
switch as he then held in his hand, a husband was at liberty, and was
invested with a power, to give his wife moderate correction'; which
opinion determined the lady against having the Doctor. He died an old
man and a bachelor" (Deane Swift). See also Lascelles, Liber Muner.
Hibern., part ii. p. 80.

3 This was a common exclamation of the time, but the spelling varies in
different writers. It seems to be a corruption of "God so," or "God
ho," but there may have been a confusion with "cat-so," derived from the
Italian "cazzo."

4 See Letter 9, note 28. Mrs. Manley was now editing the Examiner.

5 Sir Henry Belasyse was sent to Spain as Commissioner to inquire into
the state of the English forces in that country. The son of Sir Richard
Belasyse, Knight of Ludworth, Durham, Sir Henry finished a chequered
career in 1717, when he was buried in Westminster Abbey (Dalton's
Army Lists, ii. 228). In his earlier years he served under the
United Provinces, and after the accession of William was made a
Brigadier-General in the English army, and in 1694, Lieutenant-General.
In 1702 he was second in command of the expedition to Cadiz, but he was
dismissed the service in consequence of the looting of Port St. Mary.
Subsequently he was elected M.P. for Durham, and in 1713 was appointed
Governor of Berwick.

6 Atterbury.

7 See Letter 3, note 20.

8 Sir John Powell, a Judge of the Queen's Bench, died in 1713, aged
sixty-eight. He was a kindly as well as able judge.

9 See June 7th, 1711.

10 This Tisdall has been described as a Dublin merchant; but in all
probability he was Richard Tisdall, Registrar of the Irish Court of
Chancery, and M.P. for Dundalk (1707-1713) and County Louth (1713-1727).
He married Marian, daughter of Richard Boyle, M.P., and died in 1742.
Richard Tisdall was a relative of Stella's suitor, the Rev. William
Tisdall, and years afterwards Swift took an interest in his son Philip,
who became a Secretary of State and Leader of the Irish House of
Commons.

11 "In Ireland there are not public paths from place to place, as in
England" (Deane Swift).

12 See Letter 24, note 6.

13 Probably a son of John Manley, M.P. (see Letter 5, note 8).

14 See Letter 11, note 45.

15 Dr. George Stanhope, who was Vicar of Lewisham as well as of
Deptford. He was a popular preacher and a translator of Thomas a Kempis
and other religious writers.

16 See Letter 3, note 17.

17 A favourite word with Swift, when he wished to indicate anything
obscure or humble.

18 See Letter 17, note 11.

19 See June 7th, 1711 and notes.

20 See Letter 17, note 23.

21 Thomas Mills (1671-1740) was made Bishop of Waterford and Lismore in
1708. A man of learning and a liberal contributor to the cost of church
restorations, he is charged by Archbishop King with giving all the
valuable livings in his gift to his non-resident relatives.

22 Tooke was appointed printer of the London Gazette in 1711 (see Letter
3, note 8).

23 See Letter 5, note 10

24 Lady Jane Hyde, the elder daughter of Henry Hyde, Earl of Rochester
(see Letter 5, note 11), married William Capel, third Earl of Essex. Her
daughter Charlotte's husband, the son of the Earl of Jersey, was created
Earl of Clarendon in 1776. Lady Jane's younger sister, Catherine,
who became the famous Duchess of Queensberry, Gay's patroness, is
represented by Prior, in The Female Phaeton, as jealous, when a young
girl, of her sister, "Lady Jenny," who went to balls, and "brought home
hearts by dozens."

25 See Letter 3, note 2.

26 John Holles, Duke of Newcastle, had held the Privy Seal from 1705,
and was regarded by the Ministers as a possible plenipotentiary in the
event of their negotiations for a peace being successful. He married
Lady Margaret Cavendish, daughter and co-heiress of Henry Cavendish,
second Duke of Newcastle, and was one of the richest nobles in
England. His death, on July 15, 1711, was the result of a fall while
stag-hunting. The Duke's only daughter married, in 1713, Edward, Lord
Harley, the Earl of Oxford's son.




LETTER 27.

1 Alexander Forbes, fourth Lord Forbes, who was afterwards attainted for
his share in the Rebellion of 1745.

2 Obscure (cf. Letter 7, note 30).

3 Jacob Tonson the elder, who died in 1736, outlived his nephew, Jacob
Tonson the younger, by a few months. The elder Tonson, the secretary
of the Kit-Cat Club, published many of Dryden's works, and the firm
continued to be the chief publishers of the time during the greater part
of the eighteenth century.

4 John Barber.

5 By his will Swift left to Deane Swift his "large silver standish,
consisting of a large silver plate, an ink-pot, and a sand-box."

6 I.e., we are only three hours in getting there.

7 Cf. Letter 15, note 9.

8 The Examiner was revived in December 1711, under Oldisworth's
editorship, and was continued by him until 1714.

9 James Douglas, fourth Duke of Hamilton, was created Duke of Brandon in
the English peerage in September 1711, and was killed by Lord Mohun in
a duel in 1712. Swift calls him "a worthy good-natured person, very
generous, but of a middle understanding." He married, in 1698, as his
second wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Digby, Lord Gerard, a
lady to whom Swift often refers in the Journal. She outlived the Duke
thirty-two years.

10 See August 27th, 1711.

11 William Fitzmaurice (see Letter 11, note 19).

12 The Duke of Shrewsbury (see Letter 3, note 32) married an Italian
lady, Adelhida, daughter of the Marquis of Paliotti, of Bologna,
descended maternally from Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Queen
Elizabeth's favourite. Lady Cowper (Diary, pp. 8, 9) says that the
Duchess "had a wonderful art of entertaining and diverting people,
though she would sometimes exceed the bounds of decency;... but then,
with all her prate and noise, she was the most cunning, designing woman
alive, obliging to people in prosperity, and a great party-woman." As
regards the name "Presto," see Letter 2, note 11.

13 Probably a cousin.

14 Presumptuous: claiming much.

15 See Letter 13, note 15. John Winchcombe, a weaver of Newbury, marched
with a hundred of his workmen, at his own expenses, against the Scots in
1513.

16 Thomas Coke, M.P., of Derbyshire, was appointed a Teller of the
Exchequer in 1704, and Vice-Chamberlain to the Queen in 1706. In 1706
he married--as his second wife--Mrs. Hale, one of the maids of honour
(Luttrell, v. 411, 423; vi. 113, 462; Lady Cowper's Diary, 15, 16), a
lady whose "piercing" beauty it was, apparently, that Steele described
under the name of Chloe, in No. 4 of the Tatler. Jervas painted her as
a country girl, "with a liveliness that shows she is conscious, but not
affected, of her perfections." Coke was the Sir Plume of Pope's Rape of
the Lock.

17 The committee of management of the Royal household.

18 Francesca Margherita de l'Epine, the famous singer, and principal
rival of Mrs. Tofts, came to England in 1692, and constantly sang in
opera until her retirement in 1718, when she married Dr. Pepusch. She
died in 1746. Her sister, Maria Gallia, also a singer, did not attain
the same popularity.

19 Charles Scarborow and Sir William Foster were the Clerks of the Board
of Green Cloth.

20 See Letter 27, note 16 on Thomas Coke.

21 The Earl of Sunderland's second wife, Lady Anne Churchill, who died
in 1716, aged twenty-eight. She was the favourite daughter of the Duke
of Marlborough, and was called "the little Whig." Verses were written in
honour of her beauty and talent by Charles Montagu, Earl of Halifax, Dr.
Watts and others, and her portrait was painted by Lely and Kneller.

22 Mary, daughter of Sir William Forester, of Dothill, Shropshire.
In 1700, at the age of thirteen, she had been secretly married to her
cousin, George Downing, a lad of fifteen. Three years later, Downing,
on his return from abroad, refused to acknowledge his wife, and in 1715
both parties petitioned the House of Lords for leave to bring in a
Bill declaring the marriage to be void; but leave was refused (Lords'
Journals, xx. 41, 45). Downing had become Sir George Downing, Bart., in
1711, and had been elected M.P. for Dunwich; he died without issue in
1749, and was the founder of Downing College, Cambridge.

23 In a discussion upon what would be the result if beards became the
fashion, Budgell (Spectator, No. 331) says, "Besides, we are not certain
that the ladies would not come into the mode, when they take the air
on horseback. They already appear in hats and feathers, coats and
periwigs."




LETTER 28.

1 Horse-racing was much encouraged by Charles II., who, as Strutt tells
us, appointed races to be made in Datchet Mead, when he was residing
at Windsor. By Queen Anne's time horse-racing was becoming a regular
institution: see Spectator, No. 173.

2 John Montagu, second Duke of Montagu, married Lady Mary Churchill,
youngest daughter of the Duke of Marlborough.

3 Of Clogher.

4 John Adams, Prebendary of Canterbury and Canon of Windsor. He was made
Provost of King's College, Cambridge, in 1712, and died in 1720.

5 The Hon. and Rev. George Verney, Canon of Windsor (died 1728), became
fourth Lord Willoughby de Broke on the death of his father (Sir Richard
Verney, the third Baron), in July 1711. Lord Willoughby became Dean of
Windsor in 1713.

6 Thomas Hare, Under Secretary of State in Bolingbroke's office.

7 Richard Sutton was the second son of Robert Sutton, the nephew of the
Robert Sutton who was created Viscount Lexington by Charles I. Sutton
served under William III. and Marlborough in Flanders, and was made a
Brigadier-General in 1710, in which year also he was elected M.P.
for Newark. In 1711 he was appointed Governor of Hull, and he died, a
Lieutenant-General, in 1737 (Dalton's Army Lists, iii. 153)

8 Charles Seymour, sixth Duke of Somerset (1662-1748), known as
"the proud Duke of Somerset." Through the influence which his
wife--afterwards Mistress of the Robes (see Letter 17, note 10)--had
obtained over the Queen, he bore no small part in bringing about the
changes of 1710. His intrigues during this period were, however, mainly
actuated by jealousy of Marlborough, and he had really no sympathies
with the Tories. His intrigues with the Whigs caused the utmost alarm to
St. John and to Swift.

9 The third and last reference to Vanessa in the Journal.

10 "Pray God preserve her life, which is of great importance" (Swift
to Archbishop King, Aug. 15, 1711). St. John was at this moment very
anxious to conciliate Mrs. Masham, as he felt that she was the only
person capable of counteracting the intrigues of the Duchess of Somerset
with the Queen.

11 Pontack, of Abchurch Lane, son of Arnaud de Pontac, President of
the Parliament of Bordeaux, was proprietor of the most fashionable
eating-house in London. There the Royal Society met annually at dinner
until 1746. Several writers speak of the dinners at a guinea a head
and upwards served at Pontack's, and Swift comments on the price of the
wine.

12 "His name was Read" (Scott).

13 Up to the end of 1709 the warrants for the payment of the works
at Blenheim had been regularly issued by Godolphin and paid at the
Treasury; over 200,000 pounds was expended in this manner. But after
the dismissal of the Whigs the Queen drew tight the purse-strings. The
20,000 pounds mentioned by Swift was paid in 1711, but on June 1, 1712,
Anne gave positive orders that nothing further should be allowed for
Blenheim, though 12,000 pounds remained due to the contractors.

14 The piercing of the lines before Bouchain, which Villars had declared
to be the non plus ultra of the Allies, one of the most striking proofs
of Marlborough's military genius.

15 See Letter 22, note 15.

16 A fashionable gaming-house in St. James's Street.

17 See Letter 6, note 15. The Grange, near Alresford, Hampshire, was
Henley's seat. His wife (see Letter 12, note 24) was the daughter of
Peregrine Bertie, son of Montagu Bertie, second Earl of Lindsey; and
Earl Poulett (see Letter 20, note 7) married Bridget, an elder daughter
of Bertie's.

18 William Henry Hyde, Earl of Danby, grandson of the first Duke of
Leeds (see Letter 8, note 22), and eldest son of Peregrine Osborne,
Baron Osborne and Viscount Dunblane, who succeeded to the dukedom in
1712. Owing to this young man's death (at the age of twenty-one), his
brother, Peregrine Hyde, Marquis of Caermarthen, who married Harley's
daughter Elizabeth, afterwards became third Duke of Leeds.

19 See Letter 8, note 2.

20 See Letter 3, note 7.

21 William Gregg was a clerk in Harley's office when the latter was
Secretary of State under the Whig Administration. In 1707-8 he was in
treasonable correspondence with M. de Chamillart, the French Secretary
of State. When he was detected he was tried for high treason, and hanged
on April 28. The Lords who examined Gregg did their utmost to establish
Harley's complicity, which Gregg, however, with his dying breath
solemnly denied.

22 By Swift himself. The title was, Some Remarks upon a Pamphlet
entitled, A Letter to the Seven Lords of the Committee appointed to
examine Gregg.

23 See Letter 13, note 10. There is no copy in the British Museum.

24 Thomas Parnell, the poet, married, in 1706, Anne, daughter of Thomas
Minchin, of Tipperary. In 1711 Parnell was thirty-two years of age,
and was Archdeacon of Clogher and Vicar of Clontibret. Swift took much
trouble to obtain for Parnell the friendship of Bolingbroke and other
persons of note, and Parnell became a member of the Scriblerus Club.
In 1716 he was made Vicar of Finglas, and after his death in 1718
Pope prepared an edition of his poems. The fits of depression to which
Parnell was liable became more marked after his wife's death, and he
seems to have to some extent given way to drink. His sincerity and charm
of manner made him welcome with men of both parties.

25 Dr. Henry Compton had been Bishop of London since 1675. He was
dangerously ill early in 1711, but he lived until 1713, when he was
eighty-one.

26 See Letter 26, note 10.

27 See Letter 7, note 21.

28 L'Estrange speaks of "a whiffling fop" and Swift says, "Every
whiffler in a laced coat, who frequents the chocolate-house, shall talk
of the Constitution."

29 Prior's first visit to France with a view to the secret negotiations
with that country which the Ministers were now bent on carrying
through, had been made in July, when he and Gaultier reached Calais in
a fishing-boat and proceeded to Fontainbleau under assumed names. He
returned to England in August, but was recognised at Dover, whence the
news spread all over London, to the great annoyance of the Ministers.
The officer who recognised Prior was John Macky, reputed author of those
Characters upon which Swift wrote comments. Formerly a secret service
agent under William III., Macky had been given the direction of the
Ostend mail packets by Marlborough, to whom he communicated the news of
Prior's journey. Bolingbroke threatened to hang Macky, and he was thrown
into prison; but the accession of George I. again brought him favour and
employment.

30 See Letter 12, note 7.




LETTER 29.

1 See Letter 3, note 4.

2 See Letter 6, note 4.

3 Edward Villiers (1656-1711), created Viscount Villiers in 1691, was
made Earl of Jersey in 1697. Under William III. he was Lord Chamberlain
and Secretary of State, but he was dismissed from office in 1704. When
he died he had been nominated as a plenipotentiary at the Congress of
Utrecht, and was about to receive the appointment of Lord Privy Seal.
Lord Jersey married, in 1681, when she was eighteen, Barbara, daughter
of William Chiffinch, closet-keeper to Charles II.; she died in 1735.

4 Lord Paisley was the Earl of Abercorn's eldest surviving son (see
Letter 17, note 7).

5 The Hon. John Hamilton, the Earl's second surviving son, died in 1714.

6 Dr. John Robinson (1650-1723) had gone out as chaplain to the Embassy
at the Court of Sweden in 1682, and had returned in 1708 with the double
reputation of being a thorough Churchman and a sound diplomatist. He was
soon made Dean of Windsor, and afterwards Bishop of Bristol. He was now
introduced to the Council Board, and it was made known to those in
the confidence of Ministers that he would be one of the English
plenipotentiaries at the coming Peace Congress. In 1713 Dr. Robinson was
made Bishop of London.

7 John Erskine, Earl of Mar (1675-1732), who was attainted for his
part in the Rebellion of 1715. His first wife, Lady Margaret Hay, was a
daughter of Lord Kinnoull.

8 Thomas Hay, sixth Earl of Kinnoull (died 1719), a Commissioner for
the Treaty of Union between England and Scotland, and one of the Scotch
representative peers in the first Parliament of Great Britain. His son
and heir, Viscount Dupplin, afterwards Baron Hay (see Letter 5, note
34), who married Harley's daughter Abigail, is often mentioned in the
Journal.

9 See Letter 3, note 5.

10 The title of the pamphlet was, "A New Journey to Paris, together
with some Secret Transactions between the French King and an English
Gentleman. By the Sieur du Baudrier. Translated from the French."

11 See Letter 11, note 44.

12 See Letter 28, note 6.

13 The Earl of Strafford (see Letter 18, note 3) married, on Sept.
6, 1711, Anne, only daughter and heiress of Sir Henry Johnson, of
Bradenham, Buckinghamshire, a wealthy shipbuilder. Many of Lady
Strafford's letters to her husband are given in the Wentworth Papers,
1883.

14 Samuel Pratt, who was also Clerk of the Closet.

15 Alice Hill, woman of the bed-chamber to the Queen, died in 1762.

16 Enniscorthy, the name of a town in the county of Wexford.

17 Scrambling.

18 "These words in italics are written in strange, misshapen letters,
inclining to the right hand, in imitation of Stella's writing" (Deane
Swift). (Italics replaced by capitals for the transcription of this
etext.)

19 Senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin.

20 John Pooley, appointed Bishop of Raphoe in 1702.

21 These words in italics are miserably scrawled, in imitation of
Stella's hand (Deane Swift). (Italics replaced by capitals for the
transcription of this etext.)

22 See Letter 8, note 2.




LETTER 30.

1 See Letter 25, note 1.

2 See Letter 9, note 22.

3 See Letter 29, note 10.

4 Cf. the entry on the 11th (note 3 above).

5 See Letter 6, note 4.

6 William, Lord Villiers, second Earl of Jersey (died 1721), a strong
Jacobite, had been M.P. for Kent before his father's death. He married,
in 1704, Judith, only daughter of a City merchant, Frederick Herne, son
of Sir Nathaniel Herne, Alderman; she died in 1735. Lord Jersey, one of
"the prettiest young peers in England," was a companion of Bolingbroke,
and stories in the Wentworth Papers (pp. 149, 230, 395, 445), show that
he had a bad reputation.

7 See Letter 28, note 4.

8 The name of Arbuthnot's wife is not known: she died in 1730.

9 James Lovet, one of the "Yeomen Porters" at Court.

10 Richard Jones, Earl of Ranelagh, who died without male issue in
January 1712. Writing to Archbishop King on Jan. 8, Swift said, "Lord
Ranelagh died on Sunday morning; he was very poor and needy, and could
hardly support himself for want of a pension which used to be paid him."

11 Arabella Churchill, maid of honour to the Duchess of York, and
mistress of James II., afterwards married Colonel Charles Godfrey,
Clerk Comptroller of the Green Cloth and Master of the Jewel Office. Her
second son by James II. was created Duke of Albemarle.

12 See Letter 28, note 4.

13 The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of Dublin, elected in August 1711, "not
being approved of by the Government, the City was obliged to proceed
to another election, which occasioned a great ferment among the vulgar
sort" (Boyer, Political State, 1711, p. 500). After two other persons
had been elected and disapproved of, Alderman Gore was elected Lord
Mayor, and approved (ib. pp. 612-17).

14 "These words in italics are written enormously large" (Deane Swift).
(Italics replaced by capitals for the transcription of this etext.)

15 See Letter 3, note 39.

16 Henry Lowman, First Clerk of the Kitchen.

17 "The Doctor was always a bad reckoner, either of money or anything
else; and this is one of his rapid computations. For, as Stella was
seven days in journey, although Dr. Swift says only six, she might well
have spent four days at Inish-Corthy, and two nights at Mrs. Proby's
mother's, the distance from Wexford to Dublin being but two easy days'
journey" (Deane Swift).

18 Mrs. Fenton.




LETTER 31.

1 See Letter 10, note 31.

2 Charles Paulet, second Duke of Bolton, was appointed Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland in 1717, and died in 1722. In a note on Macky's character of
the Duke, Swift calls him "a great booby"; and Lady Cowper (Diary, p.
154) says that he was generally to be seen with his tongue lolling out
of his mouth.

3 Stella's maid.

4 See Letter 12, note 7.

5 Colonel Fielding (see Letter 16, note 21).

6 The envoys were Menager and the Abbe du Bois; the priest was the Abbe
Gaultier.

7 See Letter 18, note 3.

8 Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe, General, who died in 1702, married Eleanor,
daughter of Richard Wall, of Rogane, Tipperary. She died in 1732, and
Swift described her as so "cunning a devil that she had great influence
as a reconciler of the differences at Court." One of her sons was
General James Oglethorpe, the philanthropist, and friend of Dr. Johnson.

9 "Worrit," trouble, tease.

10 Sir John Walter, Bart. (died 1722), was M.P. for the city of
Oxford. He and Charles Godfrey (see Letter 30, note 11) were the Clerks
Comptrollers of the Green Cloth.

11 See Letter 17, note 3.

12 No doubt one of the daughters of Mervyn Tuchet, fourth Earl of
Castlehaven, who died in 1686.

13 Henrietta Maria, daughter of Charles Scarborow (see Letter 27,
note 19). She married, in 1712, Sir Robert Jenkinson, Bart., M.P. for
Oxfordshire, who died without issue in 1717. See Wentworth Papers, 244.

14 In July 1712 a Commission passed empowering Conyers Darcy and George
Fielding (an equerry to the Queen) to execute the office of Master of
the Horse.

15 At Killibride, about four miles from Trim.

16 Swift's "mistress," Lady Hyde (see Letter 5, note 11), whose husband
had become Earl of Rochester in May 1711. She was forty-one in 1711.

17 See Sept. 19, 1711.

18 See Letter 29, note 14.

19 See Letter 22, note 3.

20 See Letter 27, note 9.

21 See Letter 26, note 10.

22 "This happens to be the only single line written upon the margin of
any of his journals. By some accident there was a margin about as broad
as the back of a razor, and therefore he made this use of it" (Deane
Swift).




LETTER 32.

1 Lieutenant-Colonel Barton, of Colonel Kane's regiment.

2 A nickname for the High Church party.

3 See Letter 29, note 10.

4 "From this pleasantry of my Lord Oxford, the appellative Martinus
Scriblerus took its rise" (Deane Swift).

5 Cf. the Imitation of the Sixth Satire of the Second Book of Horace,
1714, where Swift says that, during their drives together, Harley would

          "gravely try to read the lines
      Writ underneath the country signs."

6 See Letter 23, note 15.

7 See Letter 18, note 4.

8 See Letter 23, note 17.

9 Lord Pembroke (see Letter 7, note 31) married, in 1708, as his second
wife, Barbara, Dowager Baroness Arundell of Trerice, formerly widow of
Sir Richard Mauleverer, and daughter of Sir Thomas Slingsby. She died in
1722.

10 Caleb Coatesworth, who died in 1741, leaving a large fortune.

11 Abel Boyer, Whig journalist and historian, attacked Swift in
his pamphlet, An Account of the State and Progress of the Present
Negotiations for Peace. Boyer says that he was released from custody by
Harley; and in the Political State for 1711 (p. 646) he speaks of Swift
as "a shameless and most contemptible ecclesiastical turncoat, whose
tongue is as swift to revile as his mind is swift to change." The
Postboy said that Boyer would "be prosecuted with the utmost severity of
the law" for this attack.

12 The "Edgar." Four hundred men were killed.

13 William Bretton, or Britton, was made Lieutenant-Colonel in 1702,
Colonel of a new Regiment of Foot 1705, Brigadier-General 1710, and
Colonel of the King's Own Borderers in April 1711 (Dalton, Army Lists,
iii. 238). In December 1711 he was appointed Envoy Extraordinary to the
King of Prussia (Postboy, Jan. 1, 1712), and he died in December 1714 or
January 1715.

14 See Letter 24, note 14.

15 It is not clear which of several Lady Gores is here referred to.
It may be (1) the wife of Sir William Gore, Bart., of Manor Gore, and
Custos Rotulorum, County Leitrim, who married Hannah, eldest daughter
and co-heir of James Hamilton, Esq., son of Sir Frederick Hamilton, and
niece of Gustavus Hamilton, created Viscount Boyne. She died 1733.
Or (2) the wife of Sir Ralph Gore, Bart. (died 1732), M.P. for County
Donegal, and afterwards Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. He
married Miss Colville, daughter of Sir Robert Colville, of Newtown,
Leitrim, and, as his second wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of Dr. Ashe,
Bishop of Clogher. Or (3) the wife of Sir Arthur Gore, Bart. (died
1727), of Newtown Gore, Mayo, who married Eleanor, daughter of Sir
George St. George, Bart., of Carrick, Leitrim, and was ancestor of the
Earls of Arran.

16 "Modern usage has sanctioned Stella's spelling" (Scott). Swift's
spelling was "wast."

17 Mrs. Manley.

18 Swift's own lines, "Mrs. Frances Harris's Petition."

19 Thomas Coote was a justice of the Court of Queen's Bench, in Ireland,
from 1692 until his removal in 1715.

20 Probably a relative of Robert Echlin, Dean of Tuam, who was killed by
some of his own servants in April 1712, at the age of seventy-three. His
son John became Prebendary and Vicar-General of Tuam, and died in 1764,
aged eighty-three. In August 1731 Bolingbroke sent Swift a letter by
the hands of "Mr. Echlin," who would, he said, tell Swift of the general
state of things in England.

21 "This column of words, as they are corrected, is in Stella's hand"
(Deane Swift).




LETTER 33.

1 Swift's verses, "The Description of a Salamander," are a scurrilous
attack on John, Lord Cutts (died 1707), who was famous for his
bravery. Joanna Cutts, the sister who complained of Swift's abuse, died
unmarried.

2 See Letter 6, note 5.

3 Fourteen printers or publishers were arrested, under warrants signed
by St. John, for publishing pamphlets directed against the Government.
They appeared at the Court of Queens Bench on Oct. 23, and were
continued on their own recognisances till the end of the term.

4 Robert Benson (see Letter 6, note 36).

5 "The South Sea Whim," printed in Scott's Swift, ii. 398.

6 See Letter 21, Apr. 24, 1711, Letter 22, Apr. 28, 1711, and Letter 34,
17 Nov. 1711.

7 Count Gallas was dismissed with a message that he might depart from
the kingdom when he thought fit. He published the preliminaries of peace
in the Daily Courant.

8 William, second Viscount Hatton, who died without issue in 1760. His
half-sister Anne married Daniel Finch, second Earl of Nottingham, and
Lord Hatton was therefore uncle to his fellow-guest, Mr. Finch.

9 Crinkle or contract. Gay writes: "Showers soon drench the camblet's
cockled grain."

10 The Countess of Jersey (see Letter 30, note 6), like her husband, was
a friend of Bolingbroke's. Lady Strafford speaks of her having lately
(November 1711) "been in pickle for her sins," at which she was not
surprised. Before the Earl succeeded to the title, Lady Wentworth wrote
to her son: "It's said Lord Villors Lady was worth fower scoar thoussand
pd; you might have got her, as wel as Lord Villors.... He (Lord Jersey)
has not don well by his son, the young lady is not yoused well as I hear
amongst them, which in my openion is not well." Wentworth Papers (pp.
214, 234).

11 Cf. Letter 9, Nov. 11, 1710, and Letter 9, note 3.

12 Charles Crow, appointed Bishop of Cloyne in 1702.

13 Swift.

14 Mrs. Manley.

15 The titles of these pamphlets are as follows: (1) A True Narrative
of.. . the Examination of the Marquis de Guiscard; (2) Some Remarks upon
a Pamphlet entitled, A Letter to the Seven Lords; (3) A New Journey to
Paris; (4) The Duke of Marlborough's Vindication; (5) A Learned Comment
on Dr. Hare's Sermon.

16 See the pun this day above.




LETTER 34.

1 See Letter 3, note 17.

2 See Letter 11, note 44.

3 Pratt (see Letter 2, note 14).

4 Stella and Dingley.

5 "Noah's Dove, an Exhortation to Peace, set forth in a Sermon preached
on the Seventh of November, 1710, a Thanksgiving Day, by Thomas Swift,
A.M., formerly Chaplain to Sir William Temple, now Rector of Puttenham
in Surrey." Thomas Swift was Swift's "little parson cousin" (see Letter
24, note 2).

6 See Letter 6, note 11. The book referred to is, apparently, An
Impartial Enquiry into the Management of the War in Spain, post-dated
1712.

7 Lord Harley (afterwards second Earl of Oxford) (see Letter 5, note
35) married, on Oct. 31, 1713, Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles, only
daughter of John Holles, last Duke of Newcastle of that family (see
Letter 26, note 26).

8 Bolingbroke afterwards said that the great aim (at length
accomplished) of Harley's administration was to marry his son to
this young lady. Swift wrote a poetical address to Lord Harley on his
marriage.

9 Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham, married, as his second wife, Lady
Grace Holles, daughter of the Earl of Clare and sister of the Duke of
Newcastle. Their eldest son, Thomas, who succeeded to the barony in
1712, was afterwards created Earl of Clare and Duke of Newcastle,

10 Francis Higgins, Rector of Baldruddery, called "the Sacheverell
of Ireland," was an extreme High Churchman, who had been charged with
sedition on account of sermons preached in London in 1707. In 1711 he
was again prosecuted as "a disloyal subject and disturber of the public
peace." At that time he was Prebendary of Christ Church, Dublin; in 1725
he was made Archdeacon of Cashel.

11 Swift's pamphlet, The Conduct of the Allies.

12 Lord Oxford's daughter Abigail married, in 1709, Viscount Dupplin,
afterwards seventh Earl of Kinnoull (see Letter 5, note 34). She died in
1750, and her husband in 1758, when the eldest son, Thomas, became Earl.
The second son, Robert, was made Archbishop of York in 1761.

13 Kensington Gravel Pits was then a famous health resort.

14 Draggled. Pope has, "A puppy, daggled through the town."

15 Writing of Peperharrow, Manning and Bray state (Surrey, ii. 32, 47)
that Oxenford Grange was conveyed to Philip Froud (died 1736) in 1700,
and was sold by him in 1713 to Alan Broderick, afterwards Viscount
Midleton. This Froud (Swift's "old Frowde") had been Deputy
Postmaster-General; he was son of Sir Philip Frowde, who was knighted in
1665 (Le Neve's Knights, Harleian Society, p. 190), and his son Philip
was Addison's friend (see Letter 8, note 13).

16 Probably the Charles Child, Esq., of Farnham, whose death is recorded
in the Gentleman's Magazine for 1754.

17 Grace Spencer was probably Mrs. Proby's sister (see Letter 19, note
3).

18 Cf. Shakespeare, As You Like It, v. 3: "Shall we clap into 't
roundly, without hawking or spitting, which are the only prologues to a
bad voice?"

19 In the "Verses on his own Death," 1731, Swift says

     "When daily howd'y's come of course,
      And servants answer, 'Worse and worse!'"

Cf. Steele (Tatler, No. 109),

"After so many howdies, you proceed to visit or not, as you like the run
of each other's reputation or fortune,"

and (Spectator, No. 143),

     "the howd'ye servants of our women."




LETTER 35.

1 See Letter 31, note 8.

2 See Letter 14, note 9.

3 The Tories alleged that the Duke of Marlborough, the Duke of Montagu,
Steele, etc., were to take part in the procession (cf. Spectator,
No. 269). Swift admits that the images seized were worth less than 40
pounds, and not 1000 pounds, as he had said, and that the Devil was not
like Harley; yet he employed someone to write a lying pamphlet, A True
Relation of the Several Facts and Circumstances of the Intended Riot and
Tumult, etc.

4 A brother of Jemmy Leigh (see Letter 2, note 16), and one of Stella's
card-playing acquaintances.

5 Of The Conduct of the Allies (see Letter 34, Nov. 10, 1711, and Letter
35, Nov. 24, 1711).

6 Sir Thomas Hanmer (see Letter 9, note 13) married, in 1698, Isabella,
widow of the first Duke of Grafton, and only daughter and heiress of
Henry, Earl of Arlington. She died in 1723.

7 James, Duke of Hamilton (see Letter 27, note 9), married, in 1698,
as his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter and sole heir of Digby, Lord
Gerard. She died in 1744.

8 The Conduct of the Allies.

9 See Letter 25, note 6.

10 Sir Matthew Dudley (see Letter 3, note 2) married Lady Mary O'Bryen,
youngest daughter of Henry, Earl of Thomond.

11 See Letter 31, note 10.

12 Sir John St. Leger (died 1743) was M.P. for Doneraile and a Baron of
the Exchequer in Ireland from 1714 to 1741. His elder brother, Arthur,
was created Viscount Doneraile in 1703.

13 "Relation of the Facts and Circumstances of the Intended Riot on
Queen Elizabeth's Birthday."

14 The Conduct of the Allies.

15 See Letter 9, note 18.

16 The first motto was "Partem tibi Gallia nostri eripuit," etc.
(Horace, 2 Od. 17-24).

17 See Plautus's Amphitrus, or Dryden's Amphitryon.

18 It is not known whether or no this was Dr. William Savage, Master
of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. No copy of the sermon--if it was
printed--has been found. See Courtenay's Memoirs of Sir William Temple.

19 Of The Conduct of the Allies, a pamphlet which had a very wide
circulation. See a paper by Edward Solly in the Antiquarian Magazine,
March 1885.

20 Allen Bathurst, M.P. (1684-1775), created Baron Bathurst in December
1711, and Earl Bathurst in 1772. His second and eldest surviving son
was appointed Lord Chancellor in the year preceding the father's
death. Writing to her son in January 1711 (Wentworth Papers, 173), Lady
Wentworth said of Bathurst, "He is, next to you, the finest gentleman
and the best young man I know; I love him dearly."

21 See Letter 9, note 17.

22 See Letter 16, note 20.

23 Swift is alluding to the quarrel between Lord Santry (see Letter
23, note 2) and Francis Higgins (see Letter 34, note 10), which led
to Higgins's prosecution. The matter is described at length in Boyer s
Political State, 1711, pp. 617 seq.

24 See Letter 19, note 1.

25 No doubt the same as Colonel Newburgh (see Journal, March 5,
1711-12).

26 Beaumont (see Letter 1, note 2 and Letter 26, Jul. 6, 1711).

27 See Letter 31, note 1.

28 Cf. Letter 15, Feb. 9, 1710-11.

29 See Letter 35, note 3.




LETTER 36.

1 See Letter 34, note 15. Debtors could not be arrested on Sunday.

2 Sir George Pretyman, Bart., dissipated the fortune of the family. The
title became dormant in 1749.

3 See the Introduction.

4 For the Whites of Farnham, see Manning and Bray's Surrey, iii. 177.

5 The Conduct of the Allies.

6 The Percevals were among Swift's principal friends in the
neighbourhood of Laracor. In a letter to John Temple in 1706 (Forster's
Life of Swift, 182) Swift alludes to Perceval; in spite of different
views in politics, "I always loved him," says Swift, "very well as a man
of very good understanding and humour." Perceval was related to Sir John
Perceval, afterwards Earl of Egmont (see Letter 18, note 15).

7 See Letter 1, note 12.

8 See Letter 8, note 14.

9 The Examiner was resumed on Dec. 6, 1711, under Oldisworth's
editorship, and was continued by him until July 1714.

10 Daniel Finch, second Earl of Nottingham, a staunch Tory, had
quarrelled with the Government and the Court. On Dec. 7, 1711, he
carried, by six votes, an amendment to the Address, to the effect that
no peace would be acceptable which left Spain in the possession of the
House of Bourbon. Harley's counter-stroke was the creation of twelve new
peers. The Whigs rewarded Nottingham by withdrawing their opposition to
the Occasional Conformity Bill:

11 This "Song" begins:

     "An orator dismal of Nottinghamshire,
      Who had forty years let out his conscience for hire."

12 The Conduct of the Allies.

13 Robert Bertie, Lord Willoughby de Eresby, and fourth Earl of Lindsey,
was created Marquis of Lindsay in 1706, and Duke of Ancaster and
Kesteven in 1715. He died in 1723.

14 Lady Sunderland (see Letter 27, note 21) and Lady Rialton, ladies of
the bed-chamber to the Queen.

15 Hugh Cholmondeley (died 1724), the second Viscount, was created
Viscount Malpas and Earl of Cholmondeley in 1706, and in 1708 was
appointed Treasurer of Her Majesty's Household, an office which he held
until 1713, in spite of his Whig sympathies. "Good for nothing, so far
as ever I knew," Swift wrote of him.

16 Prov. xxv. 3.

17 See Letter 31, note 8.

18 Thomas Parker, afterwards created Earl of Macclesfield, was appointed
Lord Chief-Justice in March 1710. In September 1711 he declined Harley's
offer of the Lord Chancellorship, a post which he accepted under a Whig
Government in the next reign.

19 The Bill against Occasional Conformity.




LETTER 37.

1 The proposed visit to London of Prince Eugene of Savoy, the renowned
General, and friend of Marlborough, was viewed by the Government with
considerable alarm.

2 Swift's "An excellent new Song; being the intended Speech of a famous
orator against Peace," a ballad "two degrees above Grub Street" (see
Letter 36, note 11).

3 Robert Walpole was then M.P. for King's Lynn, and Leader of the
Opposition in the House of Commons. He had been Secretary at War
from February 1708 to September 1710, and the Commissioners of Public
Accounts having reported, on Dec. 21, 1711, that he had been guilty of
venality and corruption, he was expelled from the House of Commons, and
taken to the Tower.

4 William King, D.C.L., author of the Journey to London in 1698,
Dialogues of the Dead, The Art of Cookery, and other amusing works, was,
at the end of the month, appointed Gazetteer, in succession to Steele,
on Swift's recommendation. Writing earlier in the year, Gay said that
King deserved better than to "languish out the small remainder of his
life in the Fleet Prison." The duties of Gazetteer were too much for his
easy-going nature and failing health, and he resigned the post in July
1712. He died in the following December.

5 At the bottom of St. James's Street, on the west side.

6 The Rev. John Shower, pastor of the Presbyterian Congregation at
Curriers' Hall, London Wall.

7 The Windsor Prophecy, in which the Duchess of Somerset (see Letter 17,
note 10) is attacked as "Carrots from Northumberland."

8 Merlin's Prophecy, 1709, written in pseudo-mediaeval English.

9 See Letter 3, note 18.

10 Dorothy, daughter of Sir Edward Leach, of Shipley, Derbyshire.

11 Sir James Long, Bart. (died 1729), was at this time M.P. for
Chippenham.

12 The number containing this paragraph is not in the British Museum.

13 Joseph Beaumont (see Letter 1, note 2, Letter 26, Jul. 6, 1711 and
Letter 35, note 26)

14 See Letter 4, note 13.

15 Apparently a misprint for "whether."

16 See Letter 32, note 19.

17 James Compton, afterwards fifth Earl of Northampton (died 1754),
was summoned to the House of Lords as Baron Compton in December 1711.
Charles Bruce, who succeeded his father as third Earl of Aylesbury in
1741, was created Lord Bruce, of Whorlton, at the same time.

18 James, Lord Compton, eldest son of the Earl of Northampton; Charles,
Lord Bruce, eldest son of the Earl of Aylesbury; Henry Paget, son of
Lord Paget; George Hay, Viscount Dupplin, the son-in-law of the Lord
Treasurer, created Baron Hay; Viscount Windsor, created Baron Montjoy;
Sir Thomas Mansel, Baron Mansel; Sir Thomas Willoughby, Baron Middleton;
Sir Thomas Trevor, Baron Trevor; George Granville, Baron Lansdowne;
Samuel Masham, Baron Masham; Thomas Foley, Baron Foley; and Allen
Bathurst, Baron Bathurst.




LETTER 38.

1 Juliana, widow of the second Earl of Burlington, and daughter of the
Hon. Henry Noel, was Mistress of the Robes to Queen Anne. She died in
1750, aged seventy-eight.

2 Thomas Windsor, Viscount Windsor (died 1738), an Irish peer, who had
served under William III. in Flanders, was created Baron Montjoy, of the
Isle of Wight, in December 1711. He married Charlotte, widow of
John, Baron Jeffries, of Wem, and daughter of Philip Herbert, Earl of
Pembroke.

3 The Hon. Russell Robartes, brother of Lord Radnor (see Letter 3, note
7), was Teller of the Exchequer, and M.P. for Bodmin. His son became
third Earl of Radnor in 1723.

4 Gay (Trivia, ii. 92) speaks of "the slabby pavement."

5 See Letter 17, note 1.

6 George Granville (see Letter 14, note 5), now Baron Lansdowne, married
Lady Mary Thynne, widow of Thomas Thynne, and daughter of Edward, Earl
of Jersey (see Letter 29, note 3). In October 1710 Lady Wentworth wrote
to her son, "Pray, my dear, why will you let Lady Mary Thynne go? She is
young, rich, and not unhandsome, some say she is pretty; and a virtuous
lady, and of the nobility, and why will you not try to get her?"
(Wentworth papers, 149).

7 See Letter 24, note 4.

8 Harness.

9 On his birthday Swift read the third chapter of Job.

10 See Letter 33, note 12.

11 Sir George St. George of Dunmore, Co. Galway, M.P. for Co. Leitrim
from 1661 to 1692, and afterwards for Co. Galway, died in December 1711.

12 See Letter 35, note 11 and Letter 31, note 10.

13 See Letter 4, note 16.

14 Dr. Pratt (see Letter 2, note 14).

15 King Henry VIII., act iv. sc. 2; "An old man broken with the storms,"
etc.

16 "These words in the manuscript imitate Stella's writing, and are
sloped the wrong way" (Deane Swift),

17 Archibald Douglas, third Marquis of Douglas, was created Duke of
Douglas in 1703. He died, without issue, in 1761.

18 Arbuthnot and Freind.




LETTER 39.

1 Sir Stephen Evance, goldsmith, was knighted in 1690.

2 Because of the refusal of the House of Lords to allow the Duke of
Hamilton (see Letter 27, note 9), a Scottish peer who had been raised
to the peerage of Great Britain as Duke of Brandon, to sit under that
title. The Scottish peers discontinued their attendance at the House
until the resolution was partially amended; and the Duke of Hamilton
always sat as a representative Scottish peer.

3 Sir William Robinson (1655-1736), created a baronet in 1689, was M.P.
for York from 1697 to 1722. His descendants include the late Earl De
Grey and the Marquis of Ripon.

4 See Letter 16, note 19. The full title was, Some Advice humbly offered
to the Members of the October Club, in a Letter from a Person of Honour.

5 See Letter 38, note 11.

6 "It is the last of the page, and written close to the edge of the
paper" (Deane Swift).

7 Henry Somerset, second Duke of Beaufort. In September 1711 the
Duke--who was then only twenty-seven--married, as his third wife, Mary,
youngest daughter of the Duke of Leeds. In the following January Lady
Strafford wrote, "The Duke and Duchess of Beaufort are the fondest of
one another in the world; I fear 'tis too hot to hold.... I own I fancy
people may love one another as well without making so great a rout"
(Wentworth Papers, 256). The Duke died in 1714, at the age of thirty.

8 "Upon the 10th and 17th of this month the Examiner was very severe
upon the Duke of Marlborough, and in consequence of this report pursued
him with greater virulence in the following course of his papers" (Deane
Swift).

9 A term of execration. Scott (Kenilworth) has, "A pize on it."

10 See Letter 11, note 13.

11 In a letter to Swift of Jan. 31, 1712, Sacheverell, after expressing
his indebtedness to St. John and Harley, said, "For yourself, good
Doctor, who was the first spring to move it, I can never sufficiently
acknowledge the obligation," and in a postscript he hinted that a place
in the Custom House which he heard was vacant might suit his brother.

12 Thomas Yalden, D.D., (1671-1736), Addison's college friend, succeeded
Atterbury as preacher of Bridewell Hospital in 1713. In 1723 he was
arrested on suspicion of being involved in the Atterbury plot.

13 Tablets.

14 Sir Solomon de Medina, a Jew, was knighted in 1700.

15 Davenant had been said to be the writer of papers which Swift
contributed to the Examiner.

16 Henry Withers, a friend of "Duke" Disney (see Letter 16, note 20),
was appointed Lieutenant-General in 1707, and Major-General in 1712. On
his death in 1729 he was buried in Westminster Abbey.

17 See Letter 36, note 18.

18 Dyer's News Letter, the favourite reading of Sir Roger de Coverley
(Spectator, No. 127), was the work of John Dyer, a Jacobite journalist.
In the Tatler (No. 18) Addison says that Dyer was "justly looked upon by
all the fox-hunters in the nation as the greatest statesman our country
has produced." Lord Chief-Justice Holt referred to the News Letter as "a
little scandalous paper of a scandalous author" (Howell's State Trials,
xiv. 1150).


Letter 40.

1 Dr. John Sharp, made Archbishop of York in 1691, was called by Swift
"the harmless tool of others' hate." Swift believed that Sharp, owing to
his dislike of The Tale of a Tub, assisted in preventing the bishopric
of Hereford being offered to him. Sharp was an excellent preacher, with
a taste for both poetry and science.

2 An edition of the Countess d'Aulnoy's Les Contes des Fees appeared in
1710, in four volumes.

3 Francis Godolphin, Viscount Rialton, the eldest son of Sidney, Earl
of Godolphin, succeeded his father as second Earl on Sept. 15, 1712. He
held 3 various offices, including that of Lord Privy Seal (1735-1740),
and died in 1766, aged eighty-eight. He married, in 1698, Lady Henrietta
Churchill, who afterwards was Duchess of Marlborough in her own right.
She died in 1733.

4 See Letter 26, note 24. Ladies of the bed-chamber received 1000 pounds
a year.

5 William O'Brien, third Earl of Inchiquin, succeeded his father in
1691, and died in 1719.

6 Lady Catherine Hyde was an unmarried daughter of Laurence Hyde, first
Earl of Rochester (see Letter 8, note 22). Notwithstanding Swift's
express statement that the lady to whom he here refers was the late
Earl's daughter, and the allusion to her sister, Lady Dalkeith, in
Letter 60, note 26, she has been confused by previous editors with her
niece, Lady Catherine Hyde (see Letter 26, note 24), daughter of the
second Earl, and afterwards Duchess of Queensberry. That lady, not long
afterwards to be celebrated by Prior, was a child under twelve when
Swift wrote.

7 Sir John Trevor (1637-1717), formerly Speaker of the House of Commons.

8 See Letter 11, note 44.

9 See Letter 34, note 10.

10 See Letter 23, note 2.

11 Charles Trimnel, made Bishop of Norwich in 1708, and Bishop of
Winchester in 1721, was strongly opposed to High Church doctrines.

12 Jibe or jest.

13 See Letter 22, note 4.

14 The treaty concluded with Holland in 1711.

15 Feb. 2 is the Purification of the Virgin Mary.

16 See Letter 29, note 7.

17 See Letter 11, note 53.

18 Lady Mary Butler (see Letter 7, note 2 and Letter 3, note 40),
daughter of the Duke of Ormond, who married, in 1710, John, third Lord
Ashburnham, afterwards Earl of Ashburnham.

19 See Letter 2, note 5.

20 See Letter 36, note 14.

21 Scroop Egerton, fifth Earl and first Duke of Bridgewater, married,
in 1703, Lady Elizabeth Churchill, third daughter of the Duke of
Marlborough. She died in 1714, aged twenty-six.

22 See Letter 30, note 6.

23 Heart.

24 Edward Fowler, D.D., appointed Bishop of Gloucester in 1691, died in
1714.

25 Isaac Manley (see Letter 3, note 3).




LETTER 41.

1 This letter, the first of the series published by Hawkesworth, of
which we have the originals (see Preface), was addressed "To Mrs.
Johnson at her Lodgings over against St. Mary's Church, near Capell
Street, Dublin, Ireland"; and was endorsed by her "Recd. Mar. 1st."

2 See Letter 10, note 28.

3 See Letter 12, note 22.

4 See Letter 23, note 2.

5 Charles Ross, son of the eleventh Baron Ross, was Colonel of the Royal
Irish Dragoons from 1695 to 1705. He was a Lieutenant-General under the
Duke of Ormond in Flanders, and died in 1732 (Dalton, ii. 212, iii. 34).

6 Charles Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, succeeded his father (see
Letter 31, note 2) as third Duke of Bolton in 1722. He married, as his
second wife, Lavinia Fenton, the actress who took the part of Polly
Peacham in Gay's Beggars Opera in 1728, and he died in 1754.

7 John Blith, or Bligh, son of the Right Hon. Thomas Bligh, M.P. of
Rathmore, Co. Meath (see Letter 4, note 22). In August 1713 he married
Lady Theodosia Hyde, daughter of Edward, third Earl of Clarendon. Lord
Berkeley of Stratton wrote, "Lady Theodosia Hyde... is married to an
Irish Mr. Blythe, of a good estate, who will soon have enough of her,
if I can give any guess" (Wentworth Papers, 353). In 1715 Bligh was
made Baron Clifton, of Rathmore, and Earl of Darnley in 1725. He died in
1728.

8 Obliterated.

9 Word obliterated; probably "found." Forster reads "oors, dee MD."

10 Words obliterated.

11 See Letter 31, note 1 and Letter 10, note 31.

12 See Letter 20, Apr. 13-14, 1711 and Letter 9, note 20.

13 Words obliterated. Forster reads "fourth. Euge, euge, euge."

14 Words obliterated; one illegible.

15 See Letter 2, note 14.

16 See Letter 1, note 12.

17 Service.

18 "Aplon"--if this is the right word--means, of course, apron--the
apron referred to on Letter 39, Jan. 25, 1711-12.

19 Words obliterated.

20 As the son of a "brother" of the Club.

21 The Archbishop, Dr. King.

22 See Tacitus, Annals, book ii. Cn. Calpurnius Piso, who was said to
have poisoned Germanicus, was found with his throat cut.

23 This satire on Marlborough concludes-- "And Midas now neglected
stands,      With asses' ears and dirty hands."

24 Dr. Robinson, Bishop of Bristol.

25 Some Remarks on the Barrier Treaty.

26 Several words are obliterated. Forster reads "MD MD, for we
must always write to MD MD MD, awake or asleep;" but the passage is
illegible.

27 See Letter 11, note 39 and Letter 61, note 5.

28 A long erasure. Forster reads "Go to bed. Help pdfr. Rove pdfr. MD
MD. Nite darling rogues."

29 Word obliterated. Forster reads "saucy."

30 Letter from.

31 Words partially obliterated.

32 Swift wrote by mistake, "On Europe Britain's safety lies"; the slip
was pointed out by Hawkesworth. All the verse is written in the MSS. as
prose.

33 "Them" (MS.).

34 See Wyons Queen Anne, ii. 366-7.

35 A Proposal for Correcting, Improving, and Ascertaining the English
Tongue, in a Letter to the Most Honourable Robert, Earl of Oxford, 1712.

36 "Help him to draw up the representation" (omitting every other
letter).

37 See Letter 23, note 13.

38 Robert Benson.

39 The Story of the St. Albans Ghost, 1712.

40 "Usually" (MS.).

41 These words are partially obliterated.

42 This sentence is obliterated. Forster reads, "Farewell, mine deelest
rife deelest char Ppt, MD MD MD Ppt, FW, Lele MD, ME ME ME ME aden FW MD
Lazy ones Lele Lele all a Lele."




LETTER 42.

1 Endorsed by Stella "Recd. Mar. 19."

2 "Would" (MS.).

3 Conversation.

4 John Guillim's Display of Heraldrie appeared first in 1610. The
edition to which Swift refers was probably that of 1679, which is
wrongly described as the "fifth edition," instead of the seventh.

5 "One of the horses here mentioned may have been the celebrated
Godolphin Arabian from whom descends all the blue blood of the
racecourse, and who was the grandfather of Eclipse" (Larwood's Story of
the London Parks, 99).

6 See Letter 36, note 6.

7 Dorothea, daughter of James Stopford, of New Hall, County Meath, and
sister of Lady Newtown-Butler, was the second wife of Edward, fourth
Earl of Meath, who died without issue in 1707. She afterwards married
General Richard Gorges (see Journal, April 5, 1713), of Kilbrue, County
Meath, and Swift wrote an epitaph on them--"Doll and Dickey."

8 Here follow some obliterated words.

9 Barber (see Letter 12, note 6).

10 "The editors supposed Zinkerman (which they printed in capitals)
to mean some outlandish or foreign distinction; but it is the little
language for 'gentleman'" (Forster).

11 The Hon. Charles Butler, second son of Thomas, Earl of Ossory, eldest
son of James, Duke of Ormond, was elevated to the peerage of Ireland in
1693 as Earl of Arran, and was also created a peer of England, as Baron
Butler. He held various offices under William III. and Queen Anne, and
died without issue in 1759.

12 "They" (MS.).

13 See Letter 31, Jan. 12, 1711-12 and Letter 3, note 22.

14 See Letter 11, note 13.

15 Sir William Wyndham, Bart., of Orchard Wyndham, married Lady
Catherine Seymour, daughter of the sixth Duke of Somerset (see Letter
25, note 1). Their eldest son, Charles, succeeded his uncle, the Duke of
Somerset, as Earl of Egremont; and the second son, Percy, was afterwards
created Earl of Thomond. The Wyndhams' house was in Albemarle Street;
the loss was over 20,000 pounds; but they were "much more concerned for
their servants than for all the other losses" (Wentworth Papers, 274).
The Duke of Ormond "worked as hard as any of the ordinary men, and gave
many guineas about to encourage the men to work hard." The Queen gave
the Wyndhams temporary lodgings in "St. James's house."

16 See Letter 3, note 31.

17 What.

18 Devil's.

19 "To" (MS.).

20 See Letter 35, note 25.

21 See Letter 41, note 34.

22 See Letter 12, Jan. 1, 1710-11.

23 Peregrine Hyde Osborne, Earl of Danby, afterwards Marquis of
Caermarthen and third Duke of Leeds (see Letter 56, note 6). His sister
Mary was married to the Duke of Beaufort (see Letter 39, note 7).

24 See Letter 9, note 17.

25 Several undecipherable words. Forster reads, "Pidy Pdfr, deelest
Sollahs."

26 "K" (MS.). It should, of course, be "Queen's."

27 See Letter 22, note 18.




LETTER 43.

1 Addressed "To Mrs. Johnson, at her lodgings over against St. Mary's
Church, near Capel Street, Dublin, Ireland." Endorsed "Mar. 30."

2 See Letter 9, note 1.

3 The Mohocks succeeded the Scowrers of William III.'s reign. Gay
(Trivia, iii. 325) says     "Who has not heard the Scowrers' midnight fame?
      Who has not trembled at the Mohocks' name?"
Lady Wentworth (Wentworth Papers, 277) says: "They put an old woman into
a hogshead, and rolled her down a hill; they cut off some noses, others'
hands, and several barbarous tricks, without any provocation. They are
said to be young gentlemen; they never take any money from any." See
also the Spectator, Nos. 324, 332, and 347 (where Budgell alludes to
"the late panic fear"), and Defoe's Review for March 15, 1712. Swift was
in considerable alarm about the Mohocks throughout March, and said that
they were all Whigs. The reports that numbers of persons, including men
of figure, had joined together to commit assaults in the streets, made
many fear to leave their houses at night. A proclamation was issued for
the suppressing of riots and the discovery of those guilty of the
late outrages; but it seems probable that the disorders were not more
frequent than might be expected from time to time in a great city.

4 Henry Davenant, son of Charles Davenant (see Letter 8, note 14), was
Resident at Frankfort. Macky described him as "very giddy-headed, with
some wit," to which Swift added, "He is not worth mentioning."

5 Thomas Burnet, youngest son of Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury,
was at this time a young man about town of no good reputation.
Afterwards he turned his attention to the law, and was appointed a judge
of the Court of Common Pleas in 1741. He was knighted in 1745, and died
in 1753.

6 By Arbuthnot, written to recommend the peace proposals of the
Government. The full title was, Law is a Bottomless Pit. Exemplified in
the case of the Lord Strutt, John Bull, Nicholas Frog, and Lewis Baboon;
who spent all they had in a Law Suit.

7 See Letter 25, note 6 and Letter 41, note 35.

8 Our little language.

9 Forster reads, "two deelest nauty nown MD."

10 See Letter 6, note 12.

11 William Diaper, son of Joseph Diaper of Bridgewater, was sent to
Balliol College, Oxford, in 1699, at the age of fourteen. He entered
the Church, and was curate at Brent, Somerset; but he died in 1717, aged
twenty-nine.

12 The Examiner (vol. ii. No. 15) complained of general bribery and
oppression on the part of officials and underlings in the public
service, especially in matters connected with the army; but the writer
said that the head (Lord Lansdowne) was just and liberal in his nature,
and easy in his fortune, and a man of honour and virtue.

13 Sealed documents given to show that a merchant's goods are entered.

14 Thomas Lawrence, First Physician to Queen Anne, and Physician-General
to the Army, died in 1714 (Gentleman's Magazine, 1815, ii. 17). His
daughter Elizabeth was second wife to Lord Mohun.

15 See Letter 17, note 11.

16 See Letter 26, note 2.

17 No officer named Newcomb appears in Dalton's Army Lists; but
the allusion to General Ross, further on in Letter 43, adds to the
probability that Swift was referring to one of the sons of Sir Thomas
Newcomen, Bart., who was killed at the siege of Enniskillen.
Beverley Newcomen (Dalton, iii. 52, iv. 60), who was probably Swift's
acquaintance, was described in a petition of 1706 as a Lieutenant
who had served at Killiecrankie, and had been in Major-General Ross's
regiment ever since 1695.

18 Atterbury.

19 Evidently a familiar quotation at the time. Forster reads,
incorrectly, "But the more I lite MD."

20 See Letter 41, note 5.

21 See Letter 12, note 1.

22 In 1681, Elizabeth, only daughter and heiress of John Ayres, of the
City of London, then aged about twenty, became the fourth and last wife
of Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsea, who died in 1689. She lived until
1745.

23 See Letter 23, note 17.

24 Enoch Sterne (see Letter 4, note 17).

25 Lieut.-Col. Robert Sterne was in Col. Frederick Hamilton's Regiment
in 1695.

26 Letter.

27 See Letter 13, note 10.

28 The title was, John Bull in his Senses: being the Second Part of Law
is a Bottomless Pit.

29 See Letter 36, note 6.

30 Cf. note 9 above. Forster reads "nautyas," when the words would mean
"as naughty as nine," apparently.

31 See note 19 above.

32 In 1549, James, second Earl of Arran, was made Duke of Chatelherault
by Henry II. of France. His eldest son died without issue; the second,
John, became first Marquis of Hamilton, and was great-grandfather of
Lady Anne Hamilton (Duchess of Hamilton), mother of the Duke of Swift's
Journal. The Earl of Abercorn, on the other hand, was descended from
Claud, third son of the Earl of Arran, but in the male line; and
his claim was therefore the stronger, according to the French law of
inheritance.

33 Madams.

34 This word is doubtful. Forster reads "cobbled."

35 A mistake, apparently, for "writing." The letter was begun on March
8.

36 Silly jade.

37 O Lord, what a clutter.

38 On the death of Dr. William Graham, Dean of Wells, it was reported
that Swift was to be his successor. Dr. Brailsford, however, received
the appointment.

39 Abel Roper (1665-1726), a Tory journalist, published, thrice weekly,
the Postboy, to which Swift sometimes sent paragraphs. Boyer (Political
State, 1711, p. 678) said that Roper was only the tool of a party;
"there are men of figure and distinction behind the curtain, who furnish
him with such scandalous reflections as they think proper to cast upon
their antagonists."

40 Joe Beaumont.

41 Beg your pardon, Madams, I'm glad you like your apron (see Letter 41,
note 18).

42 This word was smudged by Swift.

43 I cannot find Somers in contemporary lists of officials. Cf. Letter
30, note 16 and Letter 17, note 3.

44 Obliterated and doubtful.

45 Words obliterated and illegible. Forster reads, conjecturally, "Pray
send Pdfr the ME account that I may have time to write to Parvisol."




LETTER 44.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Apr. 14."

2 "Is" (MS.).

3 The words after "yet" are partially obliterated.

4 See Letter 7, note 35.

5 John Cecil, sixth Earl of Exeter (died 1721).

6 See Letter 22, note 5.

7 Arbuthnot.

8 A resort of the Tories.

9 Deane Swift, a son of Swift's uncle Godwin, was a merchant in Lisbon.

10 Winces. Lyly says, "Rubbe there no more, least I winch."

11 Probably William Whiston, who was deprived of the Lucasian
professorship at Cambridge in 1710 for his heterodox views. Parliament
having offered a reward for the discovery of means of finding the
longitude, Whiston made several attempts (1714 and 1721).

12 Word obliterated.

13 Distilled water prepared with rosemary flowers. In Fielding's Joseph
Andrews, a lady gives up to a highway robber, in her fright, a silver
bottle which, the ruffian said, contained some of the best brandy he had
ever tasted; this she "afterwards assured the company was a mistake of
her maid, for that she had ordered her to fill the bottle with Hungary
water."

14 As I hope to be saved.

15 Added on the fourth page, as the letter was folded.


Letter 45.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Johnson," etc. Endorsed "May 1st."

2 A kind of clover, used for soothing purposes.




LETTER 46.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "May 15."

2 Madam Ayris.

3 Simpleton.

4 Robert Benson (see Letter 6, note 36).

5 See Letter 41, note 35 and Letter 43, note 7.

6 The title was, An Appendix to John Bull still in his Senses: or, Law
is a Bottomless Pit.

7 Arbuthnot.

8 Enquiries by servants.

9 See Letter 17, note 5.

10 Sick.

11 Afterwards Rector of Letcombe, Berks. It was to his house that Swift
repaired a few weeks before the Queen's death. On June 8, 1714, he
wrote, "I am at a clergyman's house, whom I love very well, but he is
such a melancholy, thoughtful man, partly from nature, and partly by a
solitary life, that I shall soon catch the spleen from him. His wife has
been this month twenty miles off at her father's, and will not return
these ten days, and perhaps the house will be worse when she comes."
Swift spells the name "Geree"; later on in the Journal he mentions two
of Mr. Gery's sisters, Betty (Mrs. Elwick) and Moll (Mrs. Wigmore);
probably he made the acquaintance of the family when he was living with
the Temples at Moor Park (see Letter 59, note 11).

12 Because she is a good girl in other things.




LETTER 47.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "June 5."

2 Sice, the number six at dice.

3 At Laracor Swift had "a canal and river-walk and willows."

4 Splenetic fellow.

5 One of them was by Oldmixon: Reflections on Dr. Swift's Letter to the
Earl of Oxford.

6 Beg your pardon.

7 See Letter 25, note 9.

8 On May 28, Lord Halifax moved an Address to the Queen that the
instructions given to the Duke of Ormond might be laid before the House,
and that further orders might be issued to him to act offensively, in
concert with the Allies. Wharton and Nottingham supported the motion,
but it was negatived by 68 votes against 40. A similar motion in the
House of Commons was defeated by 203 against 73.

9 See Letter 34, note 10.

10 See Letter 23, note 13.

11 "Some Reasons to prove that no Person is obliged by his Principles,
as a Whig, to oppose Her Majesty: in a Letter to a Whig Lord."

12 Several words obliterated.

13 Several words obliterated.

14 The bellman.

15 This present writing.

16 Please.




LETTER 48.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Rebecca Dingley," etc. Endorsed "June 23d."

2 Mr. Ryland reads "second."

3 As I hope to be saved.

4 See Letter 30, Sept. 18, 1711.

5 Glad at heart.

6 The threepenny pamphlet mentioned in Letter 47, note 11.

7 I.e., for.




LETTER 49.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley." Endorsed "July 8."

2 See Letter 28, note 24.

3 See Letter 10, note 2.

4 See Letter 3, note 11.

5 See Letter 48, note 4.

6 Dr. William Lloyd--one of the Seven Bishops of 1688--was eighty-four
years of age at this time; he died five years later. He was a strong
antipapist, and a great student of the Apocalypse, besides being a
hard-working bishop. A curious letter from him to Lord Oxford about a
coming war of religion is given in the Welbeck Papers (Hist. MSS. Comm.)
v. 128.

7 "Toland's Invitation to Dismal to dine with the Calf's Head Club."
The Earl of Nottingham (Dismal) had deserted the Tories, and Swift's
imitation of Horace (Epist. I. v.) is an invitation from Toland to dine
with "his trusty friends" in celebration of the execution of Charles I.
The Calf's Head Club was in the habit of toasting "confusion to the race
of kings."

8 Bolingbroke.

9 George Fitzroy, Duke of Northumberland (died 1716), a natural son of
Charles II., was also Viscount Falmouth and Baron of Pontefract. See
Notes and Queries, viii. i. 135.

10 Enoch Sterne.

11 Templeoag (see Letter 48, Jun. 17, 1712).

12 Swift probably was only repeating an inaccurate rumour, for there is
no evidence that Steele was arrested. His gambling scheme was withdrawn
directly an information was laid under the new Act of Parliament against
gambling (Aitken's Life of Steele, i. 347).

13 Dr. William Moreton (1641-1715), Swift's diocesan, was translated
from the see of Kildare to that of Meath in 1705.

14 Words obliterated. Forster reads conjecturally, "when ME wants me to
send. She ought to have it," etc.




LETTER 50.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "July 23."

2 "N.33" seems a mistake. Letter No. 32 was received after Swift had
left Kensington and gone to Windsor; see Letter 51, Aug. 7, 1712 and
Letter 52, Sept. 18, 1712 (Ryland).

3 Dr. Moreton (see Letter 49, note 13).

4 Memoranda.

5 Again.

6 O Lord, drunken slut.

7 There's for you now, and there's for your letter, and every kind of
thing.

8 Bolingbroke.

9 See Letter 13, note 10.

10 Grub Street pamphlet. The title was, A Supposed Letter from the
Pretender to another Whig Lord.

11 Arnold Joost Van Keppel, created Earl of Albemarle in 1697. He died
in 1718. The action referred to was at Denain, where the Dutch were
defeated by Villars.




LETTER 51.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Aug. 14."

2 Perhaps this was influenza.

3 By the Stamp Act passed on June 10, 1712--which was repealed in
1859--a duty of one halfpenny was levied on all pamphlets and newspapers
contained in half a sheet or less, and a duty of one penny on those of
more than half but not exceeding a whole sheet. Swift opposed the idea
in January 1711 (see Letter 15, note 1), and Defoe argued against the
Bill in the Review for April 26, 1712, and following numbers. Addison,
in the Spectator, No. 445, spoke of the mortality among authors
resulting from the Stamp Act as "the fall of the leaf."

4 The title is, "Lewis Baboon turned honest, and John Bull politician.
Being the Fourth Part of Law is a Bottomless Pit." This pamphlet--really
the fifth of the series--appeared on July 31, 1712.

5 Poor Laracor.

6 See Letter 12, note 1.

7 On the death of the third Earl in 1712, the title of Earl of
Winchelsea passed to his uncle, Heneage Finch, who had married Anne,
daughter of Sir William Kingsmill (see Letter 24, note 7).




LETTER 52.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Oct. 1st. At Portraune"
(Portraine).

2 Oxford and Bolingbroke.

3 Including Hester Vanhomrigh.

4 He died on Sept. 15, 1712.

5 Elizabeth Villiers, eldest daughter of Sir Edward Villiers, Knight
Marischal of England, and sister of the first Earl of Jersey. In
1695 she married Lord George Hamilton (son of Lord William Douglas,
afterwards Duke of Hamilton), who was raised to the peerage of Scotland
in 1696 as Earl of Orkney. William III. gave her an Irish estate worth
26,000 pounds a year. Swift's opinion of her wisdom is confirmed by Lord
Lansdowne, who speaks, in his Progress of Poetry, of

     "Villiers, for wisdom and deep judgment famed,
      Of a high race, victorious beauty brings
      To grace our Courts, and captivate our Kings."

The "beauty" seems a poetic licence; Swift says the lady squinted "like
a dragon."

6 Cliefden.

7 See Letter 12, note 7.

8 Swift's sister (see Letter 9, note 22).

9 Forster reads "returned."

10 See Swift's letter to General Hill of Aug. 12, 1712

11 Swift's housekeeper at Laracor.

12 I.e., be made freemen of the City.




LETTER 53.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Octr. 18. At Portraune."

2 "Sometimes, when better company was not to be had, he (Swift) was
honoured by being invited to play at cards with his patron; and on such
occasions Sir William was so generous as to give his antagonist a little
silver to begin with" (Macaulay, History of England, chap. xix.).

3 The History of the Works of the Learned, a quarto periodical, was
published from 1699 to 1711.

4 See Letter 35, note 4.

5 See Letter 28, note 25.

6 Lady Elizabeth Savage, daughter of Richard, fourth Earl Rivers (see
Letter 11, note 9), was the second wife of James Barry, fourth Earl of
Barrymore. Of Earl Rivers' illegitimate children, one, Bessy, married
(1) Frederick Nassau, third Earl of Rochford, and (2) a clergyman
named Carter; while another, Richard Savage, was the poet. Earl Rivers'
successor, John Savage, the fifth Earl, was a Roman Catholic priest,
the grandson of John, first Earl Rivers. On his death in 1728 the title
became extinct.

7 No. 32.

8 Very sick.

9 From "but I" to "agreeable" is partially obliterated.

10 Mrs. Swanton was the eldest daughter of Willoughby Swift, and
therefore Swift's second cousin. In her will Esther Johnson left to
Swift "a bond of thirty pounds, due to me by Dr. Russell, in trust for
the use of Mrs. Honoria Swanton."

11 This sentence is partially obliterated.

12 See Letter 51, note 2.

13 See Letter 5, note 16.

14 The latter half of this sentence is partially obliterated.

15 Partly obliterated.

16 See Letter 8, note 2.

17 Wise.

18 Partly obliterated.

19 See Letter 6, note 45.

20 This sentence is almost obliterated.




LETTER 54.

1 The MS. of this letter has not been preserved.

2 See Letter 26, note 2.

3 Swift's friend, Dr. Pratt (see Letter 2, note 14), was then Provost of
Trinity College, Dublin.

4 Samuel Molyneux, then aged twenty-three, was the son of William
Molyneux (1656-1698), M.P. for Dublin University, a writer on
philosophical and scientific subjects, and the friend of Locke. Samuel
Molyneux took his M.A. degree in Dublin in 1710, and in 1712 visited
England. He was befriended by the Duke of Marlborough at Antwerp, and in
1714 was sent by the Duke on a mission to the Court of Hanover. He
held office under George I., but devoted most of his attention to
astronomical research, until his death in 1728.

5 Probably "The Case of Ireland's being bound by Acts of Parliament in
England stated" (1698).

6 Oxford and Bolingbroke.

7 See Letter 36, note 18.

8 See Letter 51, Aug. 7, 1712.

9 George Ridpath (died 1726), a Whig journalist, of whom Pope (Dunciad,
i. 208) wrote-- "To Dulness Ridpath is as dear as Mist." He edited the
Flying Post for some years, and also wrote for the Medley in 1712.
In September William Hurt and Ridpath were arrested for libellous
and seditious articles, but were released on bail. On October 23 they
appeared before the Court of Queen's Bench, and were continued on their
recognizances. In February 1713 Ridpath was tried and, in spite of
an able defence by leading Whig lawyers, was convicted. Sentence was
postponed, and when Ridpath failed to appear, as ordered, in April, his
recognizances were escheated, and a reward offered for his discovery;
but he had fled to Scotland, and from thence to Holland.

10 See Letter 52, note 5.

11 Lady Orkney's sister, Barbara Villiers, who married John Berkeley,
fourth Viscount Fitz-Hardinge, had been governess to the Duke of
Gloucester, Queen Anne's son. She died in 1708, in her fifty-second
year; and on her husband's death four years later the peerage became
extinct.

12 For the street criers, see the Spectator, No. 251.




LETTER 55.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley." Endorsed "Nov. 26, just come from
Portraine"; and "The band-box plot--D: Hamilton's murther."

2 Charles Mohun, fifth Baron Mohun, had been twice arraigned of murder,
but acquitted; and during his short but turbulent life he had taken part
in many duels. Even Burnet could say nothing in his favour.

3 This duel between the Duke of Hamilton (see Letter 27, note 9) and
Lord Mohun, who had married nieces of Lord Macclesfield, had its origin
in a protracted dispute about some property. The challenge came from
Lord Mohun, and the combatants fought like "enraged lions." Tory writers
suggested that the duel was a Whig conspiracy to get rid of the Duke of
Hamilton (Examiner, Nov. 20, 1712). The whole subject is discussed from
the Whig point of view in Boyer's Political State for 1712, pp. 297-326.

4 "Will" (MS.).

5 See Letter 27, note 9.

6 George Maccartney (see Letter 11, note 13 and Letter 39, Jan. 22,
1711-12 ) fought at Almanza, Malplaquet, and Douay. After the duel,
Maccartney escaped to Holland, but on the accession of George I. he
returned to England, and was tried for murder (June 1716), when Colonel
Hamilton gave evidence against him. Hamilton's evidence was discredited,
and he found it necessary to sell his commission and leave the country.
Maccartney was found guilty as an accessory, and "burnt" in the hand.
Within a month he was given an appointment in the army; and promoted to
be Lieutenant-General. He died in 1730.

7 Colonel John Hamilton, of the Scots Guards. He surrendered himself,
and was tried at the Old Bailey on Dec. 12, 1712, when he was found
guilty of manslaughter, on two indictments; and on the following day
he was "burnt" in the hand. Hamilton died in October 1716, soon after
Maccartney's trial, from a sudden vomiting of blood.

8 "That" (MS.).

9 The story (as told in the Tory Postboy of Nov. 11 to 13) was that on
Nov. 4 a bandbox was sent to the Earl of Oxford by post. When he began
to open it he saw a pistol, whereupon a gentleman present (Swift) asked
for the box, and opening it, by the window, found powder, nails, etc.,
so arranged that, if opened in the ordinary way, the whole would have
been fired, and two barrels discharged different ways. No doubt a box
so packed was received, but whether anything serious was intended, or
whether it was a hoax, cannot be said with any certainty. The Earl of
Oxford is said to have met allusions to the subject with a smile, and
Swift seems to have been annoyed at the reports which were put into
circulation.

10 "We have received a more particular account relating to the box sent
to the Lord Treasurer, as mentioned in our last, which is as follows,"
etc. (Evening News, Nov. 11 to 13, 1712).

11 Either "A Letter to the People, to be left for them at the
Booksellers, with a word or two of the Bandbox Plot" (by T. Burnet),
1712, or "An Account of the Duel..., with Previous Reflections on Sham
Plots" (by A. Boyer), 1712. Swift's connection with the Bandbox Plot was
ridiculed in the Flying Post for Nov. 20 to 22.

12 Cf. Letter 16, Feb. 20, 1710-11.

13 This sentence is partially obliterated.

14 Part of this sentence has been obliterated.

15 See Letter 43, note 39. I have not been able to find a copy of the
paper containing Swift's paragraph.

16 This sentence is partially obliterated.

17 See Letter 12, note 2.

18 Apparently Humphrey Griffith, who was one of the Commissioners of
Salt; but Swift gives the name as "Griffin" throughout.

19 See Letter 53, note 13 and Letter 5, note 16.

20 For these shorter letters Swift folded the folio sheet before
writing.




LETTER 56.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Decr. 18."

2 Vengeance.

3 Charles Connor, scholar of Trinity College, Dublin, who took his B.A.
degree in the same year as Swift (1686), and his M.A. degree in 1691.

4 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

5 See Letter 55, note 7.

6 Lord Oxford's daughter Elizabeth married, on Dec. 16, 1712, Peregrine
Hyde, Marquis of Caermarthen, afterwards third Duke of Leeds (see Letter
42, note 23 and Letter 24, note 5). She died on Nov. 20, 1713, a few
days after the birth of a son. Swift called her "a friend I extremely
loved."

7 "Is" (MS.).

8 Disorders.

9 See Letter 34, note 10.

10 John Francis, Rector of St. Mary's, Dublin, was made Dean of Leighlin
in 1705.

11 See Letter 9, note 7.

12 Possibly "have."

13 See Letter 55, notes 9, 10, 11.

14 This clause is omitted by Mr. Ryland.

15 See Letter 31, note 6.

16 See Letter 54, Oct. 30, 1712.

17 Thomas Jones, Esq., was M.P. for Trim in the Parliament of 1713-4.

18 A Dutch agent employed in the negotiations with Lewis XIV.

19 When I come home.




LETTER 57.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Jan. 13."

2 "Ay, marry, this is something like." The earlier editions give,
"How agreeable it is in a morning." The words in the MS. are partially
obliterated.

3 In this letter (Dec. 20, 1712) Swift paid many compliments to the
Duchess of Ormond (see Letter 17, note 5): "All the accomplishments of
your mind and person are so deeply printed in the heart, and represent
you so lively to my imagination, that I should take it for a high
affront if you believed it in the power of colours to refresh my
memory."

4 Tisdall's Conduct of the Dissenters in Ireland (see Letter 61, note
7).

5 See Letter 9, note 20 and Letter 20, Apr. 13, 1711.

6 Monteleon.

7 See Letter 5, note 8 and Letter 3, note 3.

8 Utrecht, North and South Holland, and West Frieseland.

9 See Letter 46, note 11.

10 See Letter 46, note 11.

11 "On Queen Anne's Peace."

12 See Letter 43, note 11. The poem was "Dryades, or the Nymph's
Prophecy."

13 See Letter 35, note 4.

14 See Letter 17, note 3.

15 Dr. Tobias Pullen (1648-1713) was made Bishop of Dromore in 1695.

16 Lord Charles Douglas, Earl of Selkirk, died unmarried in 1739. When
his father, William, first Earl of Selkirk, married Anne, Duchess of
Hamilton, the Duchess obtained for her husband, in 1660, the title of
Duke of Hamilton, for life. James II. conferred the Earldom of Selkirk
on his Grace's second and younger sons, primogenitively; and the second
son having died without issue, the third, Charles, became Earl. The
fifth son, George, was created Earl of Orkney (see Letter 52, note 5).
The difference between Lord Selkirk and the Earl of Abercorn (see Letter
10, note 33) to which Swift alludes was in connection with the claim to
the Dukedom of Chatelherault (see Letter 43, note 32).

17 Heart.

18 This sentence is almost illegible.

19 A reward of 500 pounds was offered by the Crown for Maccartney's
apprehension, and 200 pounds by the Duchess of Hamilton.

20 In the proposed History of the Peace of Utrecht.

21 Mr. Ryland's reading. Forster has "Iss." These words are obliterated.

22 Hoist. Cf."Hoised up the mainsail" (Acts xxvii. 40).

23 It was afterwards found that Miss Ashe was suffering from smallpox.

24 We are told in the Wentworth Papers, p. 268, that the Duchess of
Shrewsbury remarked to Lady Oxford, "Madam, I and my Lord are so weary
of talking politics; what are you and your Lord?" whereupon Lady Oxford
sighed and said she knew no Lord but the Lord Jehovah. The Duchess
rejoined, "Oh, dear! Madam, who is that? I believe 'tis one of the new
titles, for I never heard of him before."

25 A thousand merry new years. The words are much obliterated.

26 Lady Anne Hamilton, daughter of James, first Duke of Hamilton, became
Duchess on the death of her uncle William, the second Duke, at the
battle of Worcester.

27 The quarrel between Oxford and Bolingbroke.

28 See Letter 19, note 1.

29 Burnet (History, iv. 382) says that the Duc d'Aumont was "a
goodnatured and generous man, of profuse expense, throwing handfuls of
money often out of his coach as he went about the streets. He was not
thought a man of business, and seemed to employ himself chiefly in
maintaining the dignity of his character and making himself acceptable
to the nation."

30 Partially obliterated.

31 For the most part illegible. Forster reads, "Go, play cards, and be
melly, deelest logues, and rove Pdfr. Nite richar MD, FW oo roves Pdfr.
FW lele lele ME ME MD MD MD MD MD MD. MD FW FW FW ME ME FW FW FW FW FW
ME ME ME."

32 On the third page of the paper.

33 See Letter 7, note 3.




LETTER 58.

1 To "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Feb. 4."

2 This sentence is scribbled over. Forster reads the last word as
"lastalls," i.e. rascals, but it seems rather to be "ledles."

3 Dr. Peter Brown was appointed Bishop of Cork in 1709.

4 See Letter 5, note 22.

5 See Letter 5, note 3.

6 See Letter 5, note 11.

7 Dr. H. Humphreys, Bishop of Hereford, died on Nov. 20, 1712. His
successor was Dr. Philip Bisse (1667-1721), Bishop of St. David's (see
Letter 3, note 36).

8 Thomas Keightley, a Commissioner of the Great Seal in Ireland.

9 Nearly obliterated. Mr. Ryland reads, "deelest MD."

10 See Letter 57, note 14.

11 In the Examiner for Jan. 5 to 9, 1712(-13), there is an account of
the game of Similitudes. One person thinks of a subject, and the others,
not knowing what it is, name similitudes, and when the subject is
proclaimed, must make good the comparisons. On the occasion described,
the subject chosen was Faction. The prize was given to a Dutchman, who
argued that Faction was like butter, because too much fire spoiled its
consistency.

12 Earl Poulett (see Letter 20, note 7).

13 "Say" (MS.).

14 Dr. Pratt.

15 See Letter 13, Jan. 6, 1710-11.

16 This sentence is partially obliterated.

17 See Letter 31, note 10 and, in the same letter, Oct. 5, 1711.

18 Cf. the account of Beatrix's feelings on the death of the Duke in
"Esmond", book iii. chaps. 6 and 7.

19 See Letter 21, note 3.

20 "Her Majesty is all goodness and tenderness to her people and her
Allies. She has now prorogued the best Parliament that ever assembled in
her reign and respited her own glory, and the wishes, prayers, and wants
of her people, only to give some of her Allies an opportunity to
think of the returns they owe her, and try if there be such a thing as
gratitude, justice, or humanity in Europe. The conduct of Her Majesty
is without parallel. Never was so great a condescension made to the
unreasonable clamours of an insolent faction now dwindled to the most
contemptible circumstances."--Examiner, Jan. 12-16, 1712(-13).

21 Mr. Collins's "Discourse of Freethinking, put into plain English
by way of Abstract, for the use of the Poor," an ironical pamphlet on
Arthur Collins's Discourse of Freethinking, 1713.

22 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

23 A line here has been erased. Forster imagined that he read, "Nite
dear MD, drowsy drowsy dear."

24 Hereford.

25 Very well.

26 Sentence obliterated. Forster professes to read, "Pay can oo walk
oftener--oftener still?"

27 See Letter 57, note 15.

28 Dr. Bisse, translated from St. David's.

29 See Letter 58, note 7 and Letter 19, note 1.




LETTER 59.

1 To "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Febr. 26."

2 See Letter 58, note 21.

3 See Letter 28, note 11.

4 See Letter 55, note 9.

5 A result of confusion between Erasmus Lewis and Henry Lewis, a Hamburg
merchant. See Swift's paper in the Examiner of Jan. 30 to Feb. 2,
reprinted in his Works under the title, "A Complete Refutation of the
Falsehoods alleged against Erasmus Lewis, Esq."

6 Lord Dupplin (see Letter 5, note 34) had been created Baron Hay in
December 1711.

7 A composition of inflammable materials.

8 Assessors.

9 See Letter 6, note 12.

10 See Letter 59, note 5.

11 See Letter 46, note 11.

12 See Letter 3, notes 21 and 22, Letter 39, Jan. 12, 1711-12 and Letter
42, Mar. 1, 1711-12.

13 Dr. Bisse.

14 See Letter 33, note 10.

15 Forster reads, "something."

16 Hardly legible.

17 See Letter 7, note 31.

18 Stella's brother-in-law (See Letter 53, note 13, Letter 5, note 16
and Letter 55, Nov. 18, 1712).

19 Forster guesses, "Oo are so 'recise; not to oor health."

20 For "poo Ppt's." Mr. Ryland reads, "people's."

21 See Letter 57, 21 Dec. 1712.

22 See Letter 57, note 23.

23 See Letter 14, note 9.

24 Obliterated; Forster's reading.

25 Writing in October 1713, Lord Berkeley of Stratton told Lord
Strafford of "a fine prank of the widow Lady Jersey" (see Letter 29,
note 3). "It is well known her lord died much in debt, and she, after
taking upon her the administration, sold everything and made what money
she could, and is run away into France without paying a farthing of the
debts, with only one servant and unknown to all her friends, and hath
taken her youngest son, as 'tis supposed to make herself a merit in
breeding him a papist. My Lord Bolingbroke sent after her, but too late,
and they say the Queen hath writ a letter with her own hand to the King
of France to send back the boy" (Wentworth Papers, p. 357). See also
Letter 63, note 8. I am not sure whether in the present passage Swift is
referring to the widow or the younger Lady Jersey (see Letter 33, note
10).

26 Sir Thomas Clarges, Bart. (died 1759), M.P. for Lostwithiel,
married Barbara, youngest daughter of John Berkeley, fourth Viscount
Fitz-Hardinge, and of Barbara Villiers (see Letter 54, note 11),
daughter of Sir Edward Villiers.

27 See Letter 43, Mar. 21, 1711-12 and Letter 49, Jul. 1, 1712.

28 Altered from "11" in the MS. It is not certain where the error in the
dates began; but the entry of the 6th must be correctly dated, because
the Feb. 6 was the Queen's Birthday.

29 See Letter 43, note 11 and Letter 57, note 12.


Letter 60.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Mar. 7."

2 See Letter 5, note 23.

3 Sedan chairs were then comparatively novel (see Gay's Trivia).

4 Some words obliterated. Forster reads, "Nite MD, My own deelest MD."

5 Peter Wentworth wrote to Lord Strafford, on Feb. 17, 1713, "Poor Mr.
Harrison is very much lamented; he died last Saturday. Dr. Swift told me
that he had told him... he owed about 300 pounds, and the Queen owed him
500 pounds, and that if you or some of your people could send an account
of his debts, that I might give it to him, he would undertake to solicit
Lord Treasurer and get this 500 pounds, and give the remainder to his
mother and sister" (Wentworth Papers, 320).

6 George St. John (eldest son of Sir Harry St. John by his second
marriage) was Secretary to the English Plenipotentiaries at Utrecht. He
died at Venice in 1716 (Lady Cowper's Diary, 65).

7 Forster wrongly reads, "poor."

8 "Putt" (MS.).

9 See Letter 59, note 26.

10 Montagu Bertie, second Earl of Abingdon (died 1743), was a strong
Tory.

11 See Letter 11, note 61. These friends were together again on an
expedition to Bath in 1715, when Jervas wrote to Pope (Aug. 12, 1715)
that Arbuthnot, Disney, and he were to meet at Hyde Park Corner,
proceed to Mr. Hill's at Egham, meet Pope next day, and then go to Lord
Stawell's to lodge the night. Lord Stawell's seat, Aldermaston, was
seventeen miles from Binfield.

12 See Letter 16, note 20.

13 "I" (MS.).

14 Obliterated. Forster reads, "devil," and Mr. Ryland, "bitch."

15 See Letter 40, note 6.

16 Victor Marie, duc d'Estrees, Marshal of France (died 1727).

17 See Letter 55, note 18.

18 Several words are obliterated. Forster reads, "the last word, God
'give me"; but "'give me" is certainly wrong.

19 See Letter 9, note 13. Sir Thomas Hanmer married, in 1698, at the age
of twenty-two, Isabella, Dowager Duchess of Grafton, daughter of Henry,
Earl of Arlington, and Countess of Arlington in her own right. Hanmer
was not made Secretary of State, but he succeeded Bromley as Speaker of
the House of Commons.

20 William Fitzmaurice (see Letter 11, note 19 and Letter 27, note 11)
entered Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on March 10, 1712-13, at
the age of eighteen.

21 See Letter 11, note 11.

22 William Bromley, second son of Bromley the Speaker (see Letter 10,
note 1), was a boy of fourteen at this time. In 1727 he was elected M.P.
for Warwick, and he died in 1737, shortly after being elected Member for
Oxford University.

23 See Letter 14, note 12.

24 Sometimes "list" means to border or edge; at others, to sew together,
so as to make a variegated display, or to form a border. Probably it
here means the curling of the bottom of the wig.

25 The last eight words have been much obliterated, and the reading is
doubtful.

26 Lady Henrietta Hyde, second daughter of Laurence Hyde, first Earl
of Rochester (see Letter 8, note 22), married James Scott, Earl of
Dalkeith, son of the Duke of Monmouth. Lord Dalkeith died in 1705,
leaving a son, who succeeded his grandmother (Monmouth's widow) as
second Duke of Buccleuch. Lady Catherine Hyde (see Letter 40, note 6)
was a younger sister of Lady Dalkeith.

27 Swift first wrote "I frequent."

28 See Letter 52, note 5.

29 D'Estrees.

30 Little (almost illegible).




LETTER 61.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Mar. 27."

2 See Letter 3, note 20.

3 Formerly Lady Rialton (see Letter 40, note 3).

4 See Letter 58, note 8.

5 See Letter 11, note 39 and Letter 41, note 27.

6 Pun on "gambol."

7 See Letter 57, note 4.

8 See Letter 41, note 7.

9 "Upon Tuesday last, the house where His Grace the late Duke of
Hamilton and Brandon lived was hired for that day, where there was a
fine ball and entertainment; and it is reported in town, that a great
lady, lately gone to travel, left one hundred guineas, with orders that
it should be spent in that manner, and in that house" (Postboy, Feb.
26-28, 1712-13). The "great lady" was, presumably, the Duchess of
Marlborough.

10 See Letter 36, note 14 and Letter 40, note 21.

11 Trinity College, Dublin.

12 See Letter 60, note 19.

13 See Letter 36, note 15.

14 Dr. Pratt, Provost of Trinity College.

15 Obliterated, and doubtful.

16 A deal at cards, that draws the whole tricks.

17 Previous editors have misread "Trevor" as "Treasurer." Thomas Trevor,
Chief-Justice of the Common Pleas, was created Baron Trevor, of Bromham,
in January 1712. By commission of March 9, 1713, he occupied the
woolsack during the illness of the Lord Keeper, Harcourt.

18 This is the only reference to Pope in the Journal. In his "Windsor
Forest" the young poet assisted the Tories by his reference to the peace
of Utrecht, then awaiting ratification.

19 Several words have been obliterated. Forster reads, "Rove Pdfr, poo
Pdfr, Nite MD MD MD," but this is more than the space would contain.

20 William Oldisworth (1680-1734), a Tory journalist and pamphleteer,
who published various works, including a translation of the Iliad. He
died in a debtors' prison.

21 Some words obliterated. The reading is Forster's, and seems to be
correct.

22 Susan Armine, elder daughter of Sir William Armine, Bart., of
Osgodby, Lincolnshire, was created a life peeress in 1674, as Baroness
Belasyse of Osgodby. She died March 6, 1713. Her first husband was the
Honourable Sir Henry Belasyse, son and heir of John, Baron Belasyse, of
Worlaby; and her second, Mr. Fortney, of Chequers.

23 See Letter 7, note 9.

24 A word before "Ppt" is illegible. Forster's reading, "yes," does not
seem right.

25 In November 1711 it was reported that Miss Kingdom was privately
married to Lord Conway (Wentworth Papers, 207), but this was not the
case. Lord Conway was a widower in 1713, but he married an Irish lady
named Bowden.

26 Forster reads, "Nite, my own dee sollahs. Pdfr roves MD"; but the
last three words, at least, do not seem to be in the MS.

27 Probably the Bishop of Raphoe's son (see Letter 29, note 20).

28 What.

29 As Master of the Savoy.

30 William Burgh was Comptroller and Accountant-General for Ireland from
1694 to 1717, when his patent was revoked. He was succeeded by Eustace
Budgell.

31 William Paget, sixth Lord Paget, died in March 1713, aged
seventy-six. He spent a great part of his life as Ambassador at Vienna
and Constantinople.

32 Pocket.

33 Forster reads, "Lele lele logues"; Mr. Ryland, "Lele lele... "




LETTER 62.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Apr. 13."

2 Esther Johnson's brother-in-law, Filby (see Letter 55, note 19).

3 Earl Poulett (see Letter 20, note 7).

4 Francis Annesley, M.P. for Westbury. His colleague in the
representation of that borough was Henry Bertie (third son of James,
Earl of Abingdon), who married Earl Poulett's sister-in-law, Anthony
Henley's widow (see Letter 12, note 24).

5 "Has" (MS.).

6 A dozen words are erased. The reading is Forster's, and appears to be
correct.

7 The British Ambassadress's Speech to the French King. The printer was
sent to the pillory and fined.

8 The Examiner (vol. iii. No. 35) said that Swift--"a gentleman of the
first character for learning, good sense, wit, and more virtues than
even they can set off and illustrate"--was not the author of that
periodical. "Out of pure regard to justice, I strip myself of all the
honour that lucky untruth did this paper."

9 A purgative electuary.

10 Bargains.

11 Three or four words illegible. Forster reads, "Nite, nite, own MD."

12 Forster reads, "devil's brood "; probably the second word is "bawd:"
Cf. Letter 60, note 14 and Feb. 18, 1712-13.

13 Several "moving pictures," mostly brought from Germany, were on view
in London at about this time. See Tatler, No. 129, and Gay's Fables, No.
6.

14 See Letter 6, note 45.

15 "Mr. Charles Grattan, afterwards master of a free school at
Enniskillen" (Scott).

16 So given in the MS. Forster suggests that it is a mistake for "wood."

17 See Letter 28, note 11.

18 It is probable that this is Pope's friend, William Cleland, who died
in 1741, aged sixty-seven. William Cleland served in Spain under Lord
Rivers, but was not a Colonel, though he seems to have been a
Major. Afterwards he was a Commissioner of Customs in Scotland and a
Commissioner of the Land Tax in England. Colonel Cleland cannot, as
Scott suggested (Swift's Works, iii. 142, xviii. 137-39, xix. 8), have
been the son of the Colonel William Cleland, Covenanter and poet, who
died in 1689, at the age of twenty-eight. William Cleland allowed his
name to be appended to a letter of Pope's prefixed to the Dunciad, and
Pope afterwards described him as "a person of universal learning, and an
enlarged conversation; no man had a warmer heart for his friends, or
a sincerer attachment to the constitution of his country." Swift,
referring to this letter, wrote to Pope, "Pray tell me whether your
Colonel (sic) Cleland be a tall Scots gentleman, walking perpetually in
the Mall, and fastening upon everybody he meets, as he has often done
upon me?" (Pope's Works, iv. 48, vii. 214).

19 Henry Grey, Lord Lucas (died 1741), who became twelfth Earl of Kent
in 1702, was made Duke of Kent in 1710. He held various offices under
George I. and George II.

20 Forster found, among the MSS. at Narford, the "lie" thus prepared for
All Fools' Day. Richard Noble, an attorney, ran away with a lady who
was the wife of John Sayer and daughter of Admiral Nevill; and he killed
Sayer on the discovery of the intrigue. The incident was made use of by
Hogarth in the fifth scene of "Marriage a la Mode."

21 See Letter 5, note 3.

22 See Letter 13, note 10.

23 Charles XII.

24 "Is" (MS.).

25 Cibber says that he saw four acts of Cato in 1703; the fifth act,
according to Steele, was written in less than a week. The famous first
performance was on April 14, 1713.

26 The first number of the Guardian appeared on March 12, and the paper
was published daily until Oct. 1, 1713. Pope, Addison, and Berkeley were
among the contributors.

27 See Letter 52, note 6.

28 See Letter 39, note 16.

29 The first preached after the period of his suspension by the House
of Lords. It was delivered at St. Saviour's, Southwark, before his
installation at St. Andrew's, and was published with the title, "The
Christian's Triumph, or the Duty of praying for our Enemies".

30 Swift's curate at Laracor.

31 Richard Gorges (died 1728) was eldest son and heir of Dr. Robert
Gorges, of Kilbrue, County Meath, by Jane, daughter of Sir Arthur
Loftus, and sister of Adam, Viscount Lisburne. He was appointed
Adjutant-General of the Forces in Ireland 1697, Colonel of a
new Regiment of Foot 1703, Major-General of the Forces 1707, and
Lieutenant-General 1710 (Dalton's Army Lists, iii. 75).

32 See Letter 60, note 10.

33 Mrs. Oldfield.

34 See Letter 56, note 6.

35 Never saw the like.

36 See Letter 53, note 10.

37 The remainder has been partially obliterated.




LETTER 63.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "May 4."

2 Lord Cholmondeley (see Letter 36, note 15).

3 Harcourt.

4 Forster's reading; the last two words are doubtful.

5 See Letter 7, note 27.

6 Francis Palmes, who was wounded at Blenheim, was made a
Lieutenant-General in 1709. In 1707 he was elected M.P. for West Loo;
in 1708 he was sent as Envoy Extraordinary to the Duke of Savoy, and in
1710 to Vienna.

7 Apparently "so heed."

8 Henry Villiers (died 1743), second son of the first Earl of Jersey
and of Barbara, daughter of William Chiffinch (see Letter 29, note 3 and
Letter 59, note 25).

9 See Letter 61, Mar. 8, 1712-13. The Speech and Address are in the
Commons' Journals, xvii. 278, 280. For the draft Address, in Swift's
handwriting, see the Portland Papers (1899), v. 276.

10 Scoffed, jeered.

11 Dr. Gastrell (see Letter 25, note 8).

12 George Berkeley, afterwards Bishop of Cloyne, but then a young man
of twenty-eight, came to London in January 1713. He was already known
by his "New Theory of Vision" and "Treatise on the Principles of Human
Knowledge", and he brought with him his "Three Dialogues between Hylas
and Philonous". Steele was among the first to welcome him, and he soon
made the acquaintance of Addison, Pope, and Swift. On March 27, Berkeley
wrote to Sir John Perceval of the breach between Swift and the Whigs:
"Dr. Swift's wit is admired by both of them (Addison and Steele),
and indeed by his greatest enemies, and... I think him one of the
best-matured and agreeable men in the world." In November 1713
Swift procured for Berkeley the chaplaincy and secretaryship to Lord
Peterborough, the new Envoy to Sicily.

13 Forster reads, "all oo sawcy Ppt can say oo may see me"; but the
words are illegible.

14 Possibly "see," written in mistake for "say."

15 "J" (MS.).

16 Obliterated. Forster imagined that he read, "Nite dee logues. Poo
Mr."

17 There were two General Hamiltons at this time; probably Swift's
acquaintance was Gustavus Hamilton (1639-1723), who was created Viscount
Boyne in 1717. Hamilton distinguished himself at the battle of the Boyne
and the capture of Athlone, and was made Brigadier-General in 1696, and
Major General in 1703. He took part in the siege of Vigo, and was made a
member of the Privy Council in 1710.

18 See Letter 43, note 38.

19 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

20 This is Forster's reading, and appears to be correct. The last word,
which he gives as "iss truly," is illegible.

21 Belonging to Ireland.

22 See Letter 40, note 1.

23 Another excellent reading of Forster's. I cannot decipher the last
word, which he gives as "dee rogues."

24 Sentence obliterated.

25 The number at the beginning of each entry in the Journal.

26 Mr. Ryland's reading. Forster has "morning, dee."

27 Dr. Thomas Lindsay (see Letter 6, note 45).

28 I think the "MD" is right, though Forster gives "M." The "Pr" is
probably an abbreviation of "Pdfr."

29 The last three lines have been obliterated.


Letter 64.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "May 22."

2 Illegible. Forster reads, "and dee deelest Ppt."

3 The last few words have been partially obliterated.

4 Am very angry. The last word is scribbled over.

5 The History of the Peace of Utrecht.

6 The signature has been cut off.


Letter 65.

1 Addressed to "Mrs. Dingley," etc. Endorsed "Chester Letter."

2 "Others" (MS.).

3 See Letter 10, note 31 and Letter 31, note 1.

4 See Letter 7, note 7.






THE POEMS OF JONATHAN SWIFT, D.D., VOLUME I

Edited by

WILLIAM ERNST BROWNING

Barrister, Inner Temple
Author of "The Life of Lord Chesterfield"

London
G. Bell and Sons, Ltd.

1910







[Illustration: Jonathan Swift
From the bust by Cunningham in St. Patrick's Cathedral]




PREFACE

The works of Jonathan Swift in prose and verse so mutually illustrate
each other, that it was deemed indispensable, as a complement to the
standard edition of the Prose Works, to issue a revised edition of the
Poems, freed from the errors which had been allowed to creep into the
text, and illustrated with fuller explanatory notes. My first care,
therefore, in preparing the Poems for publication, was to collate them
with the earliest and best editions available, and this I have done.

But, thanks to the diligence of the late John Forster, to whom every
lover of Swift must confess the very greatest obligation, I have been
able to do much more. I have been able to enrich this edition with some
pieces not hitherto brought to light--notably, the original version of
"Baucis and Philemon," in addition to the version hitherto printed; the
original version of the poem on "Vanbrugh's House"; the verses entitled
"May Fair"; and numerous variations and corrections of the texts of
nearly all the principal poems, due to Forster's collation of them with
the transcripts made by Stella, which were found by him at Narford
formerly the seat of Swift's friend, Sir Andrew Fountaine--see Forster's
"Life of Swift," of which, unfortunately, he lived to publish only the
first volume. From Swift's own copy of the "Miscellanies in Prose and
Verse," 1727-32, with notes in his own handwriting, sold at auction last
year, I was able to make several corrections of the poems contained in
those four volumes, which serve to show how Swift laboured his works, and
revised and improved them whenever he had an opportunity of doing so. It
is a mistake to suppose that he was indifferent to literary fame: on the
contrary, he kept some of his works in manuscript for years in order to
perfect them for publication, of which "The Tale of a Tub," "Gulliver's
Travels," and the "Verses on his own Death" are examples.

I am indebted to Miss Wilmot-Chetwode, of Wordbrooke, for the loan of a
manuscript volume, from which I obtained some various readings. By the
advice of Mr. Elrington Ball, I applied to the librarians of Trinity
College and of the National Library, and from the latter I received a
number of pieces; but I found that the harvest had already been reaped so
fully, that there was nothing left to glean which could with certainty be
ascribed to Swift. On the whole, I believe that this edition of the Poems
will be found as complete as it is now possible to make it.

In the arrangement of the poems, I have adopted nearly the same order as
in the Aldine edition, for the pieces seem to fall naturally into those
divisions; but with this difference, that I have placed the pieces in
their chronological order in each division. With regard to the notes in
illustration of the text, many of them in the Dublin editions were
evidently written by Swift, especially the notes to the "Verses on his
own Death." And as to the notes of previous editors, I have retained them
so far as they were useful and correct: but to many of them I have made
additions or alterations wherever, on reference to the authorities cited,
or to other works, correction became necessary. For my own notes, I can
only say that I have sought to make them concise, appropriate to the
text, and, above all, accurate.

Swift and the educated men of his time thought in the classics, and his
poems, as well as those of his friends, abound with allusions to the
Greek and Roman authors, especially to the latter. I have given all the
references, and except in the imitations and paraphrases of so familiar a
writer as Horace, I have appended the Latin text. Moreover, Swift was,
like Sterne, very fond of curious and recondite reading, in which it is
not always easy to track him without some research; but I believe that I
have not failed to illustrate any matter that required elucidation.

W. E. B.

May 1910.


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I


Introduction  xv

Ode to Doctor William Sancroft
Ode to Sir William Temple
Ode to King William
Ode to The Athenian Society
To Mr. Congreve
Occasioned by Sir William Temple's late illness and recovery
Written in a Lady's Ivory Table Book
Mrs. Frances Harris's Petition
A Ballad on the game of Traffic
A Ballad to the tune of the Cutpurse
The Discovery
The Problem
The Description of a Salamander
To Charles Mordaunt, Earl of Peterborough
On the Union
On Mrs. Biddy Floyd
The Reverse
Apollo Outwitted
Answer to Lines from May Fair
Vanbrugh's House
Vanbrugh's House
Baucis and Philemon
Baucis and Philemon
The History of Vanbrugh's House
A Grub Street Elegy
The Epitaph
A Description of the Morning
A Description of a City Shower
On the Little House
A Town Eclogue
A Conference
To Lord Harley on his Marriage
Phyllis
Horace, Book IV, Ode ix
To Mr. Delany
An Elegy
To Mrs. Houghton
Verses written on a Window
On another Window
Apollo to the Dean
News from Parnassus
Apollo's Edict
The Description of an Irish Feast
The Progress of Beauty
The Progress of Marriage
The Progress of Poetry
The South Sea Project
Fabula Canis et Umbrae
A Prologue
Epilogue
Prologue
Epilogue
Answer to Prologue and Epilogue
On Gaulstown House
The Country Life
Dr. Delany's Villa
On one of the Windows at Delville
Carberiae Rupes
Carbery Rocks
Copy of the Birthday Verses on Mr. Ford
On Dreams
Dr. Delany to Dr. Swift
The Answer
A Quiet Life and a Good Name
Advice
A Pastoral Dialogue
Desire and Possession
On Censure
The Furniture of a Woman's Mind
Clever Tom Clinch
Dr. Swift to Mr. Pope
A Love Poem
Bouts Rimez
Helter Skelter
The Puppet Show
The Journal of a Modern Lady
The Logicians Refuted
The Elephant; or the Parliament Man
Paulus; an Epigram
The Answer
A Dialogue
On burning a dull Poem
An excellent new Ballad
On Stephen Duck
The Lady's Dressing Room
The Power of Time
Cassinus and Peter
A Beautiful young Nymph
Strephon and Chloe
Apollo; or a Problem solved
The Place of the Damned
The Day of Judgment
Judas
An Epistle to Mr. Gay
To a Lady
Epigram on Busts in Richmond Hermitage
Another
A Conclusion from above Epigrams
Swift's Answer
To Swift on his Birthday with a Paper Book from the Earl of Orrery
Verses on Swift's Birthday with a Silver Standish
Verses occasioned by foregoing Presents
Verses sent to the Dean with an Eagle quill
An Invitation, by Dr. Delany
The Beasts' Confession
The Parson's Case
The hardship upon the Ladies
A Love Song
The Storm
Ode on Science
A Young Lady's Complaint
On the Death of Dr. Swift
On Poetry, a Rhapsody
Verses sent to the Dean on his Birthday
Epigram by Mr. Bowyer
On Psyche
The Dean and Duke
Written by Swift on his own Deafness
The Dean's Complaint
The Dean's manner of living
Epigram by Mr. Bowyer
Verses made for Fruit Women
On Rover, a Lady's Spaniel
Epigrams on Windows
To Janus, on New Year's Day
A Motto for Mr. Jason Hasard
To a Friend
Catullus de Lesbia
On a Curate's complaint of hard duty
To Betty, the Grisette
Epigram from the French
Epigram
Epigram added by Stella
Joan cudgels Ned
Verses on two modern Poets
Epitaph on General Gorges and Lady Meath
Verses on I know not what
Dr. Swift to himself
An Answer to a Friend's question
Epitaph
Epitaph
Verses written during Lord Carteret's administration
An Apology to Lady Carteret
The Birth of Manly Virtue
On Paddy's Character of the "Intelligencer"
An Epistle to Lord Carteret by Delany
An Epistle upon an Epistle
A Libel on Dr. Delany and Lord Carteret
To Dr. Delany
Directions for a Birthday Song
The Pheasant and the Lark by Delany
Answer to Delany's Fable
Dean Smedley's Petition to the Duke of Grafton
The Duke's Answer by Swift
Parody on a character of Dean Smedley





INTRODUCTION


Dr. Johnson, in his "Life of Swift," after citing with approval Delany's
character of him, as he describes him to Lord Orrery, proceeds to say:
"In the poetical works there is not much upon which the critic can
exercise his powers. They are often humorous, almost always light, and
have the qualities which recommend such compositions, easiness and
gaiety. They are, for the most part, what their author intended. The
diction is correct, the numbers are smooth, and the rhymes exact. There
seldom occurs a hard laboured expression or a redundant epithet; all his
verses exemplify his own definition of a good style--they consist of
'proper words in proper places.'"

Of his earliest poems it is needless to say more than that if nothing
better had been written by him than those Pindaric Pieces, after the
manner of Cowley--then so much in vogue--the remark of Dryden, "Cousin
Swift, you will never be a Poet," would have been fully justified. But
conventional praise and compliments were foreign to his nature, for his
strongest characteristic was his intense sincerity. He says of himself
that about that time he had writ and burnt and writ again upon all manner
of subjects more than perhaps any man in England; and it is certainly
remarkable that in so doing his true genius was not sooner developed, for
it was not till he became chaplain in Lord Berkeley's household that his
satirical humour was first displayed--at least in verse--in "Mrs. Frances
Harris' Petition."--His great prose satires, "The Tale of a Tub," and
"Gulliver's Travels," though planned, were reserved to a later time.--In
other forms of poetry he soon afterwards greatly excelled, and the title
of poet cannot be refused to the author of "Baucis and Philemon"; the
verses on "The Death of Dr. Swift"; the "Rhapsody on Poetry"; "Cadenus
and Vanessa"; "The Legion Club"; and most of the poems addressed to
Stella, all of which pieces exhibit harmony, invention, and imagination.

Swift has been unduly censured for the coarseness of his language upon
Certain topics; but very little of this appears in his earlier poems, and
what there is, was in accordance with the taste of the period, which
never hesitated to call a spade a spade, due in part to the reaction from
the Puritanism of the preceding age, and in part to the outspeaking
frankness which disdained hypocrisy. It is shown in Dryden, Pope, Prior,
of the last of whom Johnson said that no lady objected to have his poems
in her library; still more in the dramatists of that time, whom Charles
Lamb has so humorously defended, and in the plays of Mrs. Aphra Behn,
who, as Pope says, "fairly puts all characters to bed." But whatever
coarseness there may be in some of Swift's poems, such as "The Lady's
Dressing Room," and a few other pieces, there is nothing licentious,
nothing which excites to lewdness; on the contrary, such pieces create
simply a feeling of repulsion. No one, after reading the "Beautiful young
Nymph going to bed," or "Strephon and Chloe," would desire any personal
acquaintance with the ladies, but there is a moral in these pieces, and
the latter poem concludes with excellent matrimonial advice. The
coarseness of some of his later writings must be ascribed to his
misanthropical hatred of the "animal called man," as expressed in his
famous letter to Pope of September 1725, aggravated as it was by his
exile from the friends he loved to a land he hated, and by the reception
he met with there, about which he speaks very freely in his notes to the
"Verses on his own Death."

On the morning of Swift's installation as Dean, the following scurrilous
lines by Smedley, Dean of Clogher, were affixed to the doors of St.
Patrick's Cathedral:

To-day this Temple gets a Dean
  Of parts and fame uncommon,
Us'd both to pray and to prophane,
  To serve both God and mammon.
When Wharton reign'd a Whig he was;
  When Pembroke--that's dispute, Sir;
In Oxford's time, what Oxford pleased,
  Non-con, or Jack, or Neuter.
This place he got by wit and rhime,
  And many ways most odd,
And might a Bishop be in time,
  Did he believe in God.
Look down, St. Patrick, look, we pray,
  On thine own church and steeple;
Convert thy Dean on this great day,
  Or else God help the people.
And now, whene'er his Deanship dies,
  Upon his stone be graven,
A man of God here buried lies,
  Who never thought of heaven.

It was by these lines that Smedley earned for himself a niche in "The
Dunciad." For Swift's retaliation, see the poems relating to Smedley at
the end of the first volume, and in volume ii, at p. 124, note.

This bitterness of spirit reached its height in "Gulliver's Travels,"
surely the severest of all satires upon humanity, and writ, as he tells
us, not to divert, but to vex the world; and ultimately, in the fierce
attack upon the Irish Parliament in the poem entitled "The Legion Club,"
dictated by his hatred of tyranny and oppression, and his consequent
passion for exhibiting human nature in its most degraded aspect.

But, notwithstanding his misanthropical feelings towards mankind in
general, and his "scorn of fools by fools mistook for pride," there never
existed a warmer or sincerer friend to those whom he loved--witness the
regard in which he was held by Oxford, Bolingbroke, Pope, Gay, Arbuthnot,
and Congreve, and his readiness to assist those who needed his help,
without thought of party or politics. Although, in some of his poems,
Swift rather severely exposed the follies and frailties of the fair sex,
as in "The Furniture of a Woman's Mind," and "The Journal of a Modern
Lady," he loved the companionship of beautiful and accomplished women,
amongst whom he could count some of his dearest and truest friends; but
  He loved to be bitter at
  A lady illiterate;
and therefore delighted in giving them literary instruction, most notably
in the cases of Stella and Vanessa, whose relations with him arose
entirely from the tuition in letters which they received from him. Again,
when on a visit at Sir Arthur Acheson's, he insisted upon making Lady
Acheson read such books as he thought fit to advise, and in the doggerel
verses entitled "My Lady's Lamentation," she is supposed to resent his
"very imperious" manner of instruction:

No book for delight
Must come in my sight;
But instead of new plays,
Dull Bacon's Essays,
And pore every day on
That nasty Pantheon.

As a contrast to his imperiousness, there is an affectionate simplicity
in the fancy names he used to bestow upon his female friends. Sir William
Temple's wife, Dorothea, became Dorinda; Esther Johnson, Stella; Hester
Vanhomrigh, Vanessa; Lady Winchelsea, Ardelia; while to Lady Acheson he
gave the nicknames of Skinnybonia, Snipe, and Lean. But all was taken by
them in good part; for his rather dictatorial ways were softened by the
fascinating geniality and humour which he knew so well how to employ when
he used to "deafen them with puns and rhyme."

Into the vexed question of the relations between Swift and Stella I do
not purpose to enter further than to record my conviction that she was
never more to him than "the dearest friend that ever man had." The
suggestion of a concealed marriage is so inconsistent with their whole
conduct to each other from first to last, that if there had been such a
marriage, instead of Swift having been, as he was, a man of _intense
sincerity_, he must be held to have been a most consummate hypocrite.
In my opinion, Churton Collins settled this question in his essays on
Swift, first published in the "Quarterly Review," 1881 and 1882. Swift's
relation with Vanessa is the saddest episode in his life. The story is
amply told in his poem, "Cadenus and Vanessa," and in the letters which
passed between them: how the pupil became infatuated with her tutor; how
the tutor endeavoured to dispel her passion, but in vain, by reason; and
how, at last, she died from love for the man who was unable to give love
in return. That Swift ought, as soon as Hester disclosed her passion for
him, at once to have broken off the intimacy, must be conceded; but how
many men possessed of his kindness of heart would have had the courage to
have acted otherwise than he did? Swift seems, in fact, to have been
constitutionally incapable of the _passion_ of love, for he says,
himself, that he had never met the woman he wished to marry. His annual
tributes to Stella on her birthdays express the strongest regard and
esteem, but he "ne'er admitted love a guest," and he had been so long
used to this Platonic affection, that he had come to regard women as
friends, but never as lovers. Stella, on her part, had the same feeling,
for she never expressed the least discontent at her position, or ever
regarded Swift otherwise than as her tutor, her counsellor, her friend.
In her verses to him on his birthday, 1721, she says:

  Long be the day that gave you birth
Sacred to friendship, wit, and mirth;
Late dying may you cast a shred
Of your rich mantle o'er my head;
To bear with dignity my sorrow
One day alone, then die tomorrow.

Stella naturally expected to survive Swift, but it was not to be. She
died in the evening of the 28th January 1727-8; and on the same night he
began the affecting piece, "On the Death of Mrs. Johnson." (See "Prose
Works," vol. xi.)

With the death of Stella, Swift's real happiness ended, and he became
more and more possessed by the melancholy which too often accompanies the
broadest humour, and which, in his case, was constitutional. It was, no
doubt, to relieve it, that he resorted to the composition of the doggerel
verses, epigrams, riddles, and trifles exchanged betwixt himself and
Sheridan, which induced Orrery's remark that "Swift composing Riddles is
Titian painting draught-boards;" on which Delany observes that "a Riddle
may be as fine painting as any other in the world. It requires as strong
an imagination, as fine colouring, and as exact a proportion and keeping
as any other historical painting"; and he instances "Pethox the Great,"
and should also have alluded to the more learned example--"Louisa to
Strephon."

On Orrery's seventh Letter, Delany says that if some of the "coin is
base," it is the fine impression and polish which adds value to it, and
cites the saying of another nobleman, that "there is indeed some stuff
in it, but it is Swift's stuff." It has been said that Swift has never
taken a thought from any writer ancient or modern. This is not literally
true, but the instances are not many, and in my notes I have pointed out
the lines snatched from Milton, Denham, Butler--the last evidently a
great favourite.

It seems necessary to state shortly the causes of Swift not having
obtained higher preferment. Besides that Queen Anne would never be
reconciled to the author of the "Tale of a Tub"--the true purport of
which was so ill-understood by her--he made an irreconcilable enemy of
her friend, the Duchess of Somerset, by his lampoon entitled "The Windsor
Prophecy." But Swift seldom allowed prudence to restrain his wit and
humour, and admits of himself that he "had too much satire in his vein";
and that "a genius in the reverend gown must ever keep its owner down";
and says further:

Humour and mirth had place in all he writ;
He reconciled divinity and wit.

But that was what his enemies could not do.

Whatever the excellences and defects of the poems, Swift has erected, not
only by his works, but by his benevolence and his charities, a
_monumentum aere perennius,_ and his writings in prose and verse
will continue to afford instruction and delight when the malevolence of
Jeffrey, the misrepresentations of Macaulay, and the sneers and false
statements of Thackeray shall have been forgotten.





#POEMS OF JONATHAN SWIFT#

ODE TO DOCTOR WILLIAM SANCROFT[1]
LATE LORD BISHOP OF CANTERBURY

WRITTEN IN MAY, 1689,
AT THE DESIRE OF THE LATE LORD BISHOP OF ELY


I

Truth is eternal, and the Son of Heaven,
    Bright effluence of th'immortal ray,
Chief cherub, and chief lamp, of that high sacred Seven,
Which guard the throne by night, and are its light by day;
    First of God's darling attributes,
    Thou daily seest him face to face,
Nor does thy essence fix'd depend on giddy circumstance
    Of time or place,
Two foolish guides in every sublunary dance;
  How shall we find Thee then in dark disputes?
  How shall we search Thee in a battle gain'd,
  Or a weak argument by force maintain'd?
In dagger contests, and th'artillery of words,
(For swords are madmen's tongues, and tongues are madmen's swords,)
    Contrived to tire all patience out,
    And not to satisfy the doubt?


II

  But where is even thy Image on our earth?
    For of the person much I fear,
Since Heaven will claim its residence, as well as birth,
And God himself has said, He shall not find it here.
For this inferior world is but Heaven's dusky shade,
By dark reverted rays from its reflection made;
  Whence the weak shapes wild and imperfect pass,
  Like sunbeams shot at too far distance from a glass;
       Which all the mimic forms express,
Though in strange uncouth postures, and uncomely dress;
    So when Cartesian artists try
  To solve appearances of sight
    In its reception to the eye,
And catch the living landscape through a scanty light,
    The figures all inverted show,
    And colours of a faded hue;
  Here a pale shape with upward footstep treads,
    And men seem walking on their heads;
    There whole herds suspended lie,
  Ready to tumble down into the sky;
  Such are the ways ill-guided mortals go
  To judge of things above by things below.
Disjointing shapes as in the fairy land of dreams,
  Or images that sink in streams;
  No wonder, then, we talk amiss
  Of truth, and what, or where it is;
  Say, Muse, for thou, if any, know'st,
Since the bright essence fled, where haunts the reverend ghost?


III

If all that our weak knowledge titles virtue, be
(High Truth) the best resemblance of exalted Thee,
    If a mind fix'd to combat fate
With those two powerful swords, submission and humility,
    Sounds truly good, or truly great;
Ill may I live, if the good Sancroft, in his holy rest,
    In the divinity of retreat,
  Be not the brightest pattern earth can show
    Of heaven-born Truth below;
  But foolish man still judges what is best
    In his own balance, false and light,
    Following opinion, dark and blind,
    That vagrant leader of the mind,
Till honesty and conscience are clear out of sight.


IV

And some, to be large ciphers in a state,
Pleased with an empty swelling to be counted great,
Make their minds travel o'er infinity of space,
  Rapt through the wide expanse of thought,
  And oft in contradiction's vortex caught,
To keep that worthless clod, the body, in one place;
Errors like this did old astronomers misguide,
Led blindly on by gross philosophy and pride,
    Who, like hard masters, taught the sun
    Through many a heedless sphere to run,
Many an eccentric and unthrifty motion make,
  And thousand incoherent journeys take,
    Whilst all th'advantage by it got,
    Was but to light earth's inconsiderable spot.
The herd beneath, who see the weathercock of state
  Hung loosely on the church's pinnacle,
Believe it firm, because perhaps the day is mild and still;
But when they find it turn with the first blast of fate,
    By gazing upward giddy grow,
    And think the church itself does so;
  Thus fools, for being strong and num'rous known,
  Suppose the truth, like all the world, their own;
And holy Sancroft's motion quite irregular appears,
    Because 'tis opposite to theirs.


V

In vain then would the Muse the multitude advise,
  Whose peevish knowledge thus perversely lies
    In gath'ring follies from the wise;
  Rather put on thy anger and thy spite,
    And some kind power for once dispense
  Through the dark mass, the dawn of so much sense,
To make them understand, and feel me when I write;
  The muse and I no more revenge desire,
Each line shall stab, shall blast, like daggers and like fire;
  Ah, Britain, land of angels! which of all thy sins,
    (Say, hapless isle, although
    It is a bloody list we know,)
Has given thee up a dwelling-place to fiends?
    Sin and the plague ever abound
In governments too easy, and too fruitful ground;
     Evils which a too gentle king,
     Too flourishing a spring,
     And too warm summers bring:
   Our British soil is over rank, and breeds
   Among the noblest flowers a thousand pois'nous weeds,
   And every stinking weed so lofty grows,
   As if 'twould overshade the Royal Rose;
   The Royal Rose, the glory of our morn,
      But, ah! too much without a thorn.


VI

Forgive (original mildness) this ill-govern'd zeal,
'Tis all the angry slighted Muse can do
     In the pollution of these days;
  No province now is left her but to rail,
  And poetry has lost the art to praise,
     Alas, the occasions are so few:
     None e'er but you,
     And your Almighty Master, knew
  With heavenly peace of mind to bear
(Free from our tyrant passions, anger, scorn, or fear)
The giddy turns of popular rage,
And all the contradictions of a poison'd age;
  The Son of God pronounced by the same breath
    Which straight pronounced his death;
  And though I should but ill be understood,
  In wholly equalling our sin and theirs,
  And measuring by the scanty thread of wit
  What we call holy, and great, and just, and good,
(Methods in talk whereof our pride and ignorance make use,)
  And which our wild ambition foolishly compares
    With endless and with infinite;
  Yet pardon, native Albion, when I say,
Among thy stubborn sons there haunts that spirit of the Jews,
  That those forsaken wretches who to-day
    Revile his great ambassador,
  Seem to discover what they would have done
  (Were his humanity on earth once more)
To his undoubted Master, Heaven's Almighty Son.


VII

But zeal is weak and ignorant, though wondrous proud,
  Though very turbulent and very loud;
    The crazy composition shows,
Like that fantastic medley in the idol's toes,
  Made up of iron mixt with clay,
  This crumbles into dust,
  That moulders into rust,
  Or melts by the first shower away.
Nothing is fix'd that mortals see or know,
Unless, perhaps, some stars above be so;
    And those, alas, do show,
  Like all transcendent excellence below;
    In both, false mediums cheat our sight,
And far exalted objects lessen by their height:
    Thus primitive Sancroft moves too high
    To be observed by vulgar eye,
    And rolls the silent year
    On his own secret regular sphere,
And sheds, though all unseen, his sacred influence here.


VIII

Kind star, still may'st thou shed thy sacred influence here,
  Or from thy private peaceful orb appear;
  For, sure, we want some guide from Heaven, to show
  The way which every wand'ring fool below
    Pretends so perfectly to know;
  And which, for aught I see, and much I fear,
     The world has wholly miss'd;
  I mean the way which leads to Christ:
Mistaken idiots! see how giddily they run,
  Led blindly on by avarice and pride,
    What mighty numbers follow them;
    Each fond of erring with his guide:
  Some whom ambition drives, seek Heaven's high Son
  In Caesar's court, or in Jerusalem:
    Others, ignorantly wise,
Among proud doctors and disputing Pharisees:
What could the sages gain but unbelieving scorn;
  Their faith was so uncourtly, when they said
That Heaven's high Son was in a village born;
    That the world's Saviour had been
    In a vile manger laid,
    And foster'd in a wretched inn?


IX

Necessity, thou tyrant conscience of the great,
Say, why the church is still led blindfold by the state;
  Why should the first be ruin'd and laid waste,
  To mend dilapidations in the last?
And yet the world, whose eyes are on our mighty Prince,
    Thinks Heaven has cancell'd all our sins,
And that his subjects share his happy influence;
Follow the model close, for so I'm sure they should,
But wicked kings draw more examples than the good:
  And divine Sancroft, weary with the weight
Of a declining church, by faction, her worst foe, oppress'd,
    Finding the mitre almost grown
    A load as heavy as the crown,
  Wisely retreated to his heavenly rest.


X

  Ah! may no unkind earthquake of the state,
    Nor hurricano from the crown,
Disturb the present mitre, as that fearful storm of late,
  Which, in its dusky march along the plain,
    Swept up whole churches as it list,
    Wrapp'd in a whirlwind and a mist;
Like that prophetic tempest in the virgin reign,
  And swallow'd them at last, or flung them down.
  Such were the storms good Sancroft long has borne;
  The mitre, which his sacred head has worn,
Was, like his Master's Crown, inwreath'd with thorn.
Death's sting is swallow'd up in victory at last,
    The bitter cup is from him past:
    Fortune in both extremes
  Though blasts from contrariety of winds,
    Yet to firm heavenly minds,
Is but one thing under two different names;
And even the sharpest eye that has the prospect seen,
  Confesses ignorance to judge between;
And must to human reasoning opposite conclude,
To point out which is moderation, which is fortitude.


XI

Thus Sancroft, in the exaltation of retreat,
  Shows lustre that was shaded in his seat;
    Short glimm'rings of the prelate glorified;
Which the disguise of greatness only served to hide.
    Why should the Sun, alas! be proud
    To lodge behind a golden cloud?
Though fringed with evening gold the cloud appears so gay,
'Tis but a low-born vapour kindled by a ray:
    At length 'tis overblown and past,
    Puff'd by the people's spiteful blast,
The dazzling glory dims their prostituted sight,
  No deflower'd eye can face the naked light:
  Yet does this high perfection well proceed
    From strength of its own native seed,
This wilderness, the world, like that poetic wood of old,
    Bears one, and but one branch of gold,
  Where the bless'd spirit lodges like the dove,
And which (to heavenly soil transplanted) will improve,
To be, as 'twas below, the brightest plant above;
  For, whate'er theologic levellers dream,
    There are degrees above, I know,
    As well as here below,
  (The goddess Muse herself has told me so),
  Where high patrician souls, dress'd heavenly gay,
  Sit clad in lawn of purer woven day.
There some high-spirited throne to Sancroft shall be given,
    In the metropolis of Heaven;
Chief of the mitred saints, and from archprelate here,
    Translated to archangel there.


XII

Since, happy saint, since it has been of late
  Either our blindness or our fate,
  To lose the providence of thy cares
Pity a miserable church's tears,
  That begs the powerful blessing of thy prayers.
  Some angel, say, what were the nation's crimes,
  That sent these wild reformers to our times:
    Say what their senseless malice meant,
    To tear religion's lovely face:
  Strip her of every ornament and grace;
In striving to wash off th'imaginary paint?
  Religion now does on her death-bed lie,
Heart-sick of a high fever and consuming atrophy;
How the physicians swarm to show their mortal skill,
And by their college arts methodically kill:
Reformers and physicians differ but in name,
  One end in both, and the design the same;
Cordials are in their talk, while all they mean
  Is but the patient's death, and gain--
  Check in thy satire, angry Muse,
  Or a more worthy subject choose:
Let not the outcasts of an outcast age
Provoke the honour of my Muse's rage,
  Nor be thy mighty spirit rais'd,
  Since Heaven and Cato both are pleas'd--

[The rest of the poem is lost.]

[Footnote 1: Born Jan., 1616-17; died 1693. For his life, see "Dictionary
of National Biography."--_W. E. B._]



ODE TO THE HON. SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE

WRITTEN AT MOOR-PARK IN JUNE 1689


I

Virtue, the greatest of all monarchies!
      Till its first emperor, rebellious man,
    Deposed from off his seat,
  It fell, and broke with its own weight
Into small states and principalities,
    By many a petty lord possess'd,
But ne'er since seated in one single breast.
      'Tis you who must this land subdue,
      The mighty conquest's left for you,
      The conquest and discovery too:
      Search out this Utopian ground,
      Virtue's Terra Incognita,
      Where none ever led the way,
Nor ever since but in descriptions found;
    Like the philosopher's stone,
With rules to search it, yet obtain'd by none.


II

      We have too long been led astray;
Too long have our misguided souls been taught
      With rules from musty morals brought,
      'Tis you must put us in the way;
      Let us (for shame!) no more be fed
      With antique relics of the dead,
    The gleanings of philosophy;
    Philosophy, the lumber of the schools,
    The roguery of alchymy;
      And we, the bubbled fools,
Spend all our present life, in hopes of golden rules.


III

But what does our proud ignorance Learning call?
    We oddly Plato's paradox make good,
Our knowledge is but mere remembrance all;
Remembrance is our treasure and our food;
Nature's fair table-book, our tender souls,
We scrawl all o'er with old and empty rules,
    Stale memorandums of the schools:
    For learning's mighty treasures look
      Into that deep grave, a book;
  Think that she there does all her treasures hide,
And that her troubled ghost still haunts there since she died;
Confine her walks to colleges and schools;
    Her priests, her train, and followers, show
    As if they all were spectres too!
    They purchase knowledge at th'expense
    Of common breeding, common sense,
    And grow at once scholars and fools;
    Affect ill-manner'd pedantry,
Rudeness, ill-nature, incivility,
    And, sick with dregs and knowledge grown,
    Which greedily they swallow down,
Still cast it up, and nauseate company.


IV

    Curst be the wretch! nay, doubly curst!
      (If it may lawful be
    To curse our greatest enemy,)
  Who learn'd himself that heresy first,
    (Which since has seized on all the rest,)
That knowledge forfeits all humanity;
Taught us, like Spaniards, to be proud and poor,
  And fling our scraps before our door!
Thrice happy you have 'scaped this general pest;
Those mighty epithets, learned, good, and great,
Which we ne'er join'd before, but in romances meet,
We find in you at last united grown.
      You cannot be compared to one:
    I must, like him that painted Venus' face,
    Borrow from every one a grace;
Virgil and Epicurus will not do,
      Their courting a retreat like you,
Unless I put in Caesar's learning too:
    Your happy frame at once controls
    This great triumvirate of souls.


V

Let not old Rome boast Fabius' fate;
    He sav'd his country by delays,
      But you by peace.[1]
    You bought it at a cheaper rate;
Nor has it left the usual bloody scar,
      To show it cost its price in war;
War, that mad game the world so loves to play,
      And for it does so dearly pay;
For, though with loss, or victory, a while
      Fortune the gamesters does beguile,
Yet at the last the box sweeps all away.


VI

      Only the laurel got by peace
        No thunder e'er can blast:
      Th'artillery of the skies
        Shoots to the earth and dies:
And ever green and flourishing 'twill last,
Nor dipt in blood, nor widows' tears, nor orphans' cries.
      About the head crown'd with these bays,
      Like lambent fire, the lightning plays;
Nor, its triumphal cavalcade to grace,
    Makes up its solemn train with death;
It melts the sword of war, yet keeps it in the sheath.


VII

The wily shafts of state, those jugglers' tricks,
Which we call deep designs and politics,
(As in a theatre the ignorant fry,
    Because the cords escape their eye,
      Wonder to see the motions fly,)
    Methinks, when you expose the scene,
    Down the ill-organ'd engines fall;
Off fly the vizards, and discover all:
      How plain I see through the deceit!
      How shallow, and how gross, the cheat!
  Look where the pulley's tied above!
  Great God! (said I) what have I seen!
      On what poor engines move
The thoughts of monarchs and designs of states!
  What petty motives rule their fates!
How the mouse makes the mighty mountains shake!
The mighty mountain labours with its birth,
  Away the frighten'd peasants fly,
  Scared at the unheard-of prodigy,
Expect some great gigantic son of earth;
        Lo! it appears!
  See how they tremble! how they quake!
Out starts the little beast, and mocks their idle fears.


VIII

  Then tell, dear favourite Muse!
  What serpent's that which still resorts,
  Still lurks in palaces and courts?
    Take thy unwonted flight,
    And on the terrace light.
      See where she lies!
    See how she rears her head,
    And rolls about her dreadful eyes,
To drive all virtue out, or look it dead!
'Twas sure this basilisk sent Temple thence,
And though as some ('tis said) for their defence
    Have worn a casement o'er their skin,
      So wore he his within,
Made up of virtue and transparent innocence;
    And though he oft renew'd the fight,
And almost got priority of sight,
    He ne'er could overcome her quite,
In pieces cut, the viper still did reunite;
    Till, at last, tired with loss of time and ease,
Resolved to give himself, as well as country, peace.


IX

Sing, beloved Muse! the pleasures of retreat,
And in some untouch'd virgin strain,
Show the delights thy sister Nature yields;
Sing of thy vales, sing of thy woods, sing of thy fields;
        Go, publish o'er the plain
    How mighty a proselyte you gain!
How noble a reprisal on the great!
      How is the Muse luxuriant grown!
        Whene'er she takes this flight,
        She soars clear out of sight.
These are the paradises of her own:
      Thy Pegasus, like an unruly horse,
        Though ne'er so gently led,
To the loved pastures where he used to feed,
Runs violent o'er his usual course.
    Wake from thy wanton dreams,
      Come from thy dear-loved streams,
    The crooked paths of wandering Thames.
        Fain the fair nymph would stay,
      Oft she looks back in vain,
    Oft 'gainst her fountain does complain,
      And softly steals in many windings down,
      As loth to see the hated court and town;
And murmurs as she glides away.


X

    In this new happy scene
  Are nobler subjects for your learned pen;
    Here we expect from you
More than your predecessor Adam knew;
Whatever moves our wonder, or our sport,
Whatever serves for innocent emblems of the court;
    How that which we a kernel see,
(Whose well-compacted forms escape the light,
  Unpierced by the blunt rays of sight,)
    Shall ere long grow into a tree;
Whence takes it its increase, and whence its birth,
Or from the sun, or from the air, or from the earth,
    Where all the fruitful atoms lie;
  How some go downward to the root,
    Some more ambitious upwards fly,
  And form the leaves, the branches, and the fruit.
You strove to cultivate a barren court in vain,
Your garden's better worth your nobler pain,
Here mankind fell, and hence must rise again.


XI

Shall I believe a spirit so divine
      Was cast in the same mould with mine?
Why then does Nature so unjustly share
Among her elder sons the whole estate,
      And all her jewels and her plate?
Poor we! cadets of Heaven, not worth her care,
Take up at best with lumber and the leavings of a fare:
      Some she binds 'prentice to the spade,
      Some to the drudgery of a trade:
Some she does to Egyptian bondage draw,
Bids us make bricks, yet sends us to look out for straw:
      Some she condemns for life to try
To dig the leaden mines of deep philosophy:
Me she has to the Muse's galleys tied:
In vain I strive to cross the spacious main,
    In vain I tug and pull the oar;
    And when I almost reach the shore,
Straight the Muse turns the helm, and I launch out again:
      And yet, to feed my pride,
Whene'er I mourn, stops my complaining breath,
With promise of a mad reversion after death.


XII

Then, Sir, accept this worthless verse,
  The tribute of an humble Muse,
'Tis all the portion of my niggard stars;
  Nature the hidden spark did at my birth infuse,
And kindled first with indolence and ease;
    And since too oft debauch'd by praise,
'Tis now grown an incurable disease:
In vain to quench this foolish fire I try
    In wisdom and philosophy:
    In vain all wholesome herbs I sow,
      Where nought but weeds will grow
Whate'er I plant (like corn on barren earth)
      By an equivocal birth,
    Seeds, and runs up to poetry.

[Footnote 1: Sir William Temple was ambassador to the States of Holland,
and had a principal share in the negotiations which preceded the treaty
of Nimeguen, 1679.]



ODE TO KING WILLIAM

ON HIS SUCCESSES IN IRELAND


To purchase kingdoms and to buy renown,
  Are arts peculiar to dissembling France;
You, mighty monarch, nobler actions crown,
  And solid virtue does your name advance.

Your matchless courage with your prudence joins,
  The glorious structure of your fame to raise;
With its own light your dazzling glory shines,
  And into adoration turns our praise.

Had you by dull succession gain'd your crown,
  (Cowards are monarchs by that title made,)
Part of your merit Chance would call her own,
  And half your virtues had been lost in shade.

But now your worth its just reward shall have:
  What trophies and what triumphs are your due!
Who could so well a dying nation save,
  At once deserve a crown, and gain it too.

You saw how near we were to ruin brought,
  You saw th'impetuous torrent rolling on;
And timely on the coming danger thought,
  Which we could neither obviate nor shun.

Britannia stripp'd of her sole guard, the laws,
  Ready to fall Rome's bloody sacrifice;
You straight stepp'd in, and from the monster's jaws
  Did bravely snatch the lovely, helpless prize.

Nor this is all; as glorious is the care
  To preserve conquests, as at first to gain:
In this your virtue claims a double share,
  Which, what it bravely won, does well maintain.

Your arm has now your rightful title show'd,
  An arm on which all Europe's hopes depend,
To which they look as to some guardian God,
  That must their doubtful liberty defend.

Amazed, thy action at the Boyne we see!
  When Schomberg started at the vast design:
The boundless glory all redounds to thee,
  The impulse, the fight, th'event, were wholly thine.

The brave attempt does all our foes disarm;
  You need but now give orders and command,
Your name shall the remaining work perform,
  And spare the labour of your conquering hand.

France does in vain her feeble arts apply,
  To interrupt the fortune of your course:
Your influence does the vain attacks defy
  Of secret malice, or of open force.

Boldly we hence the brave commencement date
  Of glorious deeds, that must all tongues employ;
William's the pledge and earnest given by fate,
  Of England's glory, and her lasting joy.




ODE TO THE ATHENIAN SOCIETY[1]

_Moor Park, Feb._ 14, 1691.


I

As when the deluge first began to fall,
  That mighty ebb never to flow again,
When this huge body's moisture was so great,
  It quite o'ercame the vital heat;
That mountain which was highest, first of all
Appear'd above the universal main,
To bless the primitive sailor's weary sight;
And 'twas perhaps Parnassus, if in height
  It be as great as 'tis in fame,
  And nigh to Heaven as is its name;
So, after the inundation of a war,
When learning's little household did embark,
With her world's fruitful system, in her sacred ark,
  At the first ebb of noise and fears,
Philosophy's exalted head appears;
And the Dove-Muse will now no longer stay,
But plumes her silver wings, and flies away;
  And now a laurel wreath she brings from far,
  To crown the happy conqueror,
  To show the flood begins to cease,
And brings the dear reward of victory and peace.


II

The eager Muse took wing upon the waves' decline,
  When war her cloudy aspect just withdrew,
  When the bright sun of peace began to shine,
And for a while in heavenly contemplation sat,
  On the high top of peaceful Ararat;
And pluck'd a laurel branch, (for laurel was the first that grew,
The first of plants after the thunder, storm and rain,)
  And thence, with joyful, nimble wing,
  Flew dutifully back again,
And made an humble chaplet for the king.[2]
  And the Dove-Muse is fled once more,
(Glad of the victory, yet frighten'd at the war,)
  And now discovers from afar
  A peaceful and a flourishing shore:
    No sooner did she land
  On the delightful strand,
  Than straight she sees the country all around,
  Where fatal Neptune ruled erewhile,
Scatter'd with flowery vales, with fruitful gardens crown'd,
    And many a pleasant wood;
  As if the universal Nile
  Had rather water'd it than drown'd:
It seems some floating piece of Paradise,
  Preserved by wonder from the flood,
Long wandering through the deep, as we are told
      Famed Delos[3] did of old;
  And the transported Muse imagined it
To be a fitter birth-place for the God of wit,
      Or the much-talk'd-of oracular grove;
  When, with amazing joy, she hears
An unknown music all around,
      Charming her greedy ears
      With many a heavenly song
Of nature and of art, of deep philosophy and love;
While angels tune the voice, and God inspires the tongue.
  In vain she catches at the empty sound,
In vain pursues the music with her longing eye,
  And courts the wanton echoes as they fly.


III

Pardon, ye great unknown, and far-exalted men,
The wild excursions of a youthful pen;
  Forgive a young and (almost) virgin Muse,
  Whom blind and eager curiosity
      (Yet curiosity, they say,
Is in her sex a crime needs no excuse)
      Has forced to grope her uncouth way,
After a mighty light that leads her wandering eye:
No wonder then she quits the narrow path of sense
  For a dear ramble through impertinence;
Impertinence! the scurvy of mankind.
And all we fools, who are the greater part of it,
  Though we be of two different factions still,
    Both the good-natured and the ill,
  Yet wheresoe'er you look, you'll always find
We join, like flies and wasps, in buzzing about wit.
  In me, who am of the first sect of these,
  All merit, that transcends the humble rules
    Of my own dazzled scanty sense,
Begets a kinder folly and impertinence
    Of admiration and of praise.
And our good brethren of the surly sect,
  Must e'en all herd us with their kindred fools:
  For though possess'd of present vogue, they've made
Railing a rule of wit, and obloquy a trade;
Yet the same want of brains produces each effect.
  And you, whom Pluto's helm does wisely shroud
    From us, the blind and thoughtless crowd,
  Like the famed hero in his mother's cloud,
Who both our follies and impertinences see,
Do laugh perhaps at theirs, and pity mine and me.


IV

      But censure's to be understood
      Th'authentic mark of the elect,
The public stamp Heaven sets on all that's great and good,
  Our shallow search and judgment to direct.
      The war, methinks, has made
Our wit and learning narrow as our trade;
Instead of boldly sailing far, to buy
A stock of wisdom and philosophy,
      We fondly stay at home, in fear
      Of every censuring privateer;
Forcing a wretched trade by beating down the sale,
      And selling basely by retail.
  The wits, I mean the atheists of the age,
Who fain would rule the pulpit, as they do the stage,
  Wondrous refiners of philosophy,
    Of morals and divinity,
By the new modish system of reducing all to sense,
  Against all logic, and concluding laws,
    Do own th'effects of Providence,
    And yet deny the cause.


V

This hopeful sect, now it begins to see
How little, very little, do prevail
      Their first and chiefest force
    To censure, to cry down, and rail,
Not knowing what, or where, or who you be,
    Will quickly take another course:
      And, by their never-failing ways
    Of solving all appearances they please,
We soon shall see them to their ancient methods fall,
And straight deny you to be men, or anything at all.
  I laugh at the grave answer they will make,
Which they have always ready, general, and cheap:
  'Tis but to say, that what we daily meet,
    And by a fond mistake
Perhaps imagine to be wondrous wit,
And think, alas! to be by mortals writ,
Is but a crowd of atoms justling in a heap:
      Which, from eternal seeds begun,
Justling some thousand years, till ripen'd by the sun:
  They're now, just now, as naturally born,
  As from the womb of earth a field of corn.


VI

    But as for poor contented me,
Who must my weakness and my ignorance confess,
That I believe in much I ne'er can hope to see;
    Methinks I'm satisfied to guess,
  That this new, noble, and delightful scene,
Is wonderfully moved by some exalted men,
Who have well studied in the world's disease,
(That epidemic error and depravity,
    Or in our judgment or our eye,)
That what surprises us can only please.
We often search contentedly the whole world round,
  To make some great discovery,
    And scorn it when 'tis found.
Just so the mighty Nile has suffer'd in its fame,
  Because 'tis said (and perhaps only said)
We've found a little inconsiderable head,
    That feeds the huge unequal stream.
Consider human folly, and you'll quickly own,
    That all the praises it can give,
By which some fondly boast they shall for ever live,
  Won't pay th'impertinence of being known:
    Else why should the famed Lydian king,[4]
(Whom all the charms of an usurped wife and state,
With all that power unfelt, courts mankind to be great,
  Did with new unexperienced glories wait,)
Still wear, still dote on his invisible ring?


VII

  Were I to form a regular thought of Fame,
  Which is, perhaps, as hard t'imagine right,
    As to paint Echo to the sight,
I would not draw the idea from an empty name;
    Because, alas! when we all die,
  Careless and ignorant posterity,
  Although they praise the learning and the wit,
    And though the title seems to show
  The name and man by whom the book was writ,
    Yet how shall they be brought to know,
Whether that very name was he, or you, or I?
Less should I daub it o'er with transitory praise,
    And water-colours of these days:
These days! where e'en th'extravagance of poetry
  Is at a loss for figures to express
  Men's folly, whimseys, and inconstancy,
  And by a faint description makes them less.
Then tell us what is Fame, where shall we search for it?
Look where exalted Virtue and Religion sit,
      Enthroned with heavenly Wit!
      Look where you see
  The greatest scorn of learned vanity!
  (And then how much a nothing is mankind!
Whose reason is weigh'd down by popular air,
  Who, by that, vainly talks of baffling death;
  And hopes to lengthen life by a transfusion of breath,
    Which yet whoe'er examines right will find
  To be an art as vain as bottling up of wind!)
And when you find out these, believe true Fame is there,
  Far above all reward, yet to which all is due:
  And this, ye great unknown! is only known in you.


VIII

  The juggling sea-god,[5] when by chance trepann'd
By some instructed querist sleeping on the sand,
  Impatient of all answers, straight became
  A stealing brook, and strove to creep away
    Into his native sea,
  Vex'd at their follies, murmur'd in his stream;
  But disappointed of his fond desire,
  Would vanish in a pyramid of fire.
  This surly, slippery God, when he design'd
    To furnish his escapes,
  Ne'er borrow'd more variety of shapes
Than you, to please and satisfy mankind,
And seem (almost) transform'd to water, flame, and air,
  So well you answer all phenomena there:
Though madmen and the wits, philosophers and fools,
With all that factious or enthusiastic dotards dream,
And all the incoherent jargon of the schools;
  Though all the fumes of fear, hope, love, and shame,
Contrive to shock your minds with many a senseless doubt;
Doubts where the Delphic God would grope in ignorance and night,
    The God of learning and of light
  Would want a God himself to help him out.


IX

  Philosophy, as it before us lies,
Seems to have borrow'd some ungrateful taste
  Of doubts, impertinence, and niceties,
    From every age through which it pass'd,
But always with a stronger relish of the last.
  This beauteous queen, by Heaven design'd
  To be the great original
For man to dress and polish his uncourtly mind,
In what mock habits have they put her since the fall!
  More oft in fools' and madmen's hands than sages',
    She seems a medley of all ages,
With a huge farthingale to swell her fustian stuff,
  A new commode, a topknot, and a ruff,
  Her face patch'd o'er with modern pedantry,
      With a long sweeping train
Of comments and disputes, ridiculous and vain,
    All of old cut with a new dye:
    How soon have you restored her charms,
  And rid her of her lumber and her books,
    Drest her again genteel and neat,
      And rather tight than great!
How fond we are to court her to our arms!
  How much of heaven is in her naked looks!


X

Thus the deluding Muse oft blinds me to her ways,
  And ev'n my very thoughts transfers
  And changes all to beauty and the praise
    Of that proud tyrant sex of hers.
    The rebel Muse, alas! takes part,
    But with my own rebellious heart,
And you with fatal and immortal wit conspire
      To fan th'unhappy fire.
    Cruel unknown! what is it you intend?
Ah! could you, could you hope a poet for your friend!
  Rather forgive what my first transport said:
May all the blood, which shall by woman's scorn be shed,
  Lie upon you and on your children's head!
For you (ah! did I think I e'er should live to see
  The fatal time when that could be!)
  Have even increased their pride and cruelty.
  Woman seems now above all vanity grown,
  Still boasting of her great unknown
Platonic champions, gain'd without one female wile,
    Or the vast charges of a smile;
  Which 'tis a shame to see how much of late
  You've taught the covetous wretches to o'errate,
And which they've now the consciences to weigh
    In the same balance with our tears,
  And with such scanty wages pay
  The bondage and the slavery of years.
Let the vain sex dream on; the empire comes from us;
      And had they common generosity,
        They would not use us thus.
    Well--though you've raised her to this high degree,
    Ourselves are raised as well as she;
  And, spite of all that they or you can do,
'Tis pride and happiness enough to me,
Still to be of the same exalted sex with you.


XI

    Alas, how fleeting and how vain
Is even the nobler man, our learning and our wit!
        I sigh whene'er I think of it:
      As at the closing an unhappy scene
      Of some great king and conqueror's death,
    When the sad melancholy Muse
Stays but to catch his utmost breath.
I grieve, this nobler work, most happily begun,
So quickly and so wonderfully carried on,
May fall at last to interest, folly, and abuse.
      There is a noontide in our lives,
      Which still the sooner it arrives,
Although we boast our winter sun looks bright,
And foolishly are glad to see it at its height,
Yet so much sooner comes the long and gloomy night.
    No conquest ever yet begun,
And by one mighty hero carried to its height,
E'er flourished under a successor or a son;
It lost some mighty pieces through all hands it pass'd,
And vanish'd to an empty title in the last.
  For, when the animating mind is fled,
    (Which nature never can retain,
      Nor e'er call back again,)
The body, though gigantic, lies all cold and dead.


XII

    And thus undoubtedly 'twill fare
    With what unhappy men shall dare
  To be successors to these great unknown,
    On learning's high-establish'd throne.
    Censure, and Pedantry, and Pride,
Numberless nations, stretching far and wide,
Shall (I foresee it) soon with Gothic swarms come forth
    From Ignorance's universal North,
And with blind rage break all this peaceful government:
Yet shall the traces of your wit remain,
  Like a just map, to tell the vast extent
  Of conquest in your short and happy reign:
    And to all future mankind shew
    How strange a paradox is true,
  That men who lived and died without a name
Are the chief heroes in the sacred lists of fame.


[Footnote 1: "I have been told, that Dryden having perused these verses,
said, 'Cousin Swift, you will never be a poet;' and that this
denunciation was the motive of Swift's perpetual malevolence to
Dryden."--Johnson in his "Life of Swift."--_W. E. B._

In Malone's "Life of Dryden," p. 241, it is stated that John Dunton,
the original projector of the Athenian Society, in his "Life and
Errours," 1705, mentions this Ode, "which being an ingenious poem, was
prefixed to the fifth Supplement of the Athenian Mercury."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: The Ode I writ to the king in Ireland.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 3: The floating island, which, by order of Neptune, became
fixed for the use of Latona, who there brought forth Apollo and Diana.
See Ovid, "Metam.," vi, 191, etc.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Gyges, who, thanks to the possession of a golden ring, which
made him invisible, put Candaules to death, married his widow, and
mounted the throne, 716 B.C. See the story in Cicero, "De Off.," iii,
9.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: Proteus. See Ovid, "Fasti," lib. i.--_W. E. B._]



TO MR. CONGREVE

WRITTEN IN NOVEMBER, 1693


Thrice, with a prophet's voice, and prophet's power,
  The Muse was called in a poetic hour,
And insolently thrice the slighted maid
Dared to suspend her unregarded aid;
Then with that grief we form in spirits divine,
Pleads for her own neglect, and thus reproaches mine.
  Once highly honoured! false is the pretence
You make to truth, retreat, and innocence!
Who, to pollute my shades, bring'st with thee down
The most ungenerous vices of the town;
Ne'er sprung a youth from out this isle before
I once esteem'd, and loved, and favour'd more,
Nor ever maid endured such courtlike scorn,
So much in mode, so very city-born;
'Tis with a foul design the Muse you send,
Like a cast mistress, to your wicked friend;
But find some new address, some fresh deceit,
Nor practise such an antiquated cheat;
These are the beaten methods of the stews,
Stale forms, of course, all mean deceivers use,
Who barbarously think to 'scape reproach,
By prostituting her they first debauch.
  Thus did the Muse severe unkindly blame
This offering long design'd to Congreve's fame;
First chid the zeal as unpoetic fire,
Which soon his merit forced her to inspire;
Then call this verse, that speaks her largest aid,
The greatest compliment she ever made,
And wisely judge, no power beneath divine
Could leap the bounds which part your world and mine;
For, youth, believe, to you unseen, is fix'd
A mighty gulf, unpassable betwixt.
  Nor tax the goddess of a mean design
To praise your parts by publishing of mine;
That be my thought when some large bulky writ
Shows in the front the ambition of my wit;
There to surmount what bears me up, and sing
Like the victorious wren perch'd on the eagle's wing.
This could I do, and proudly o'er him tower,
Were my desires but heighten'd to my power.
  Godlike the force of my young Congreve's bays,
Softening the Muse's thunder into praise;
Sent to assist an old unvanquish'd pride
That looks with scorn on half mankind beside;
A pride that well suspends poor mortals' fate,
Gets between them and my resentment's weight,
Stands in the gap 'twixt me and wretched men,
T'avert th'impending judgments of my pen.
  Thus I look down with mercy on the age,
By hopes my Congreve will reform the stage:
For never did poetic mind before
Produce a richer vein, or cleaner ore;
The bullion stamp'd in your refining mind
Serves by retail to furnish half mankind.
With indignation I behold your wit
Forced on me, crack'd, and clipp'd, and counterfeit,
By vile pretenders, who a stock maintain
From broken scraps and filings of your brain.
Through native dross your share is hardly known,
And by short views mistook for all their own;
So small the gains those from your wit do reap,
Who blend it into folly's larger heap,
Like the sun's scatter'd beams which loosely pass,
When some rough hand breaks the assembling glass.
  Yet want your critics no just cause to rail,
Since knaves are ne'er obliged for what they steal.
These pad on wit's high road, and suits maintain
With those they rob, by what their trade does gain.
Thus censure seems that fiery froth which breeds
O'er the sun's face, and from his heat proceeds,
Crusts o'er the day, shadowing its partent beam,
As ancient nature's modern masters dream;
This bids some curious praters here below
Call Titan sick, because their sight is so;
And well, methinks, does this allusion fit
To scribblers, and the god of light and wit;
Those who by wild delusions entertain
A lust of rhyming for a poet's vein,
Raise envy's clouds to leave themselves in night,
But can no more obscure my Congreve's light,
Than swarms of gnats, that wanton in a ray
Which gave them birth, can rob the world of day.
  What northern hive pour'd out these foes to wit?
Whence came these Goths to overrun the pit?
How would you blush the shameful birth to hear
Of those you so ignobly stoop to fear;
For, ill to them, long have I travell'd since,
Round all the circles of impertinence,
Search'd in the nest where every worm did lie
Before it grew a city butterfly;
I'm sure I found them other kind of things
Than those with backs of silk and golden wings;
A search, no doubt, as curious and as wise
As virtuosoes' in dissecting flies:
For, could you think? the fiercest foes you dread,
And court in prologues, all are country bred;
Bred in my scene, and for the poet's sins
Adjourn'd from tops and grammar to the inns;
Those beds of dung, where schoolboys sprout up beaux
Far sooner than the nobler mushroom grows:
These are the lords of the poetic schools,
Who preach the saucy pedantry of rules;
Those powers the critics, who may boast the odds
O'er Nile, with all its wilderness of gods;
Nor could the nations kneel to viler shapes,
Which worshipp'd cats, and sacrificed to apes;
And can you think the wise forbear to laugh
At the warm zeal that breeds this golden calf?
   Haply you judge these lines severely writ
Against the proud usurpers of the pit;
Stay while I tell my story, short, and true;
To draw conclusions shall be left to you;
Nor need I ramble far to force a rule,
But lay the scene just here at Farnham[1] school.
   Last year, a lad hence by his parents sent
With other cattle to the city went;
Where having cast his coat, and well pursued
The methods most in fashion to be lewd,
Return'd a finish'd spark this summer down,
Stock'd with the freshest gibberish of the town;
A jargon form'd from the lost language, wit,
Confounded in that Babel of the pit;
Form'd by diseased conceptions, weak and wild,
Sick lust of souls, and an abortive child;
Born between whores and fops, by lewd compacts,
Before the play, or else between the acts;
Nor wonder, if from such polluted minds
Should spring such short and transitory kinds,
Or crazy rules to make us wits by rote,
Last just as long as every cuckoo's note:
What bungling, rusty tools are used by fate!
'Twas in an evil hour to urge my hate,
My hate, whose lash just Heaven has long decreed
Shall on a day make sin and folly bleed:
When man's ill genius to my presence sent
This wretch, to rouse my wrath, for ruin meant;
Who in his idiom vile, with Gray's-Inn grace,
Squander'd his noisy talents to my face;
Named every player on his fingers' ends,
Swore all the wits were his peculiar friends;
Talk'd with that saucy and familiar ease
Of Wycherly, and you, and Mr. Bayes:[2]
Said, how a late report your friends had vex'd,
Who heard you meant to write heroics next;
For, tragedy, he knew, would lose you quite,
And told you so at Will's[3] but t'other night.
  Thus are the lives of fools a sort of dreams,
Rendering shades things, and substances of names;
Such high companions may delusion keep,
Lords are a footboy's cronies in his sleep.
As a fresh miss, by fancy, face, and gown,
Render'd the topping beauty of the town,
Draws every rhyming, prating, dressing sot,
To boast of favours that he never got;
Of which, whoe'er lacks confidence to prate,
Brings his good parts and breeding in debate;
And not the meanest coxcomb you can find,
But thanks his stars, that Phillis has been kind;
Thus prostitute my Congreve's name is grown
To every lewd pretender of the town.
Troth, I could pity you; but this is it,
You find, to be the fashionable wit;
These are the slaves whom reputation chains,
Whose maintenance requires no help from brains.
For, should the vilest scribbler to the pit,
Whom sin and want e'er furnish'd out a wit;
Whose name must not within my lines be shown,
Lest here it live, when perish'd with his own;[4]
Should such a wretch usurp my Congreve's place,
And choose out wits who ne'er have seen his face;
I'll bet my life but the dull cheat would pass,
Nor need the lion's skin conceal the ass;
Yes, that beau's look, that vice, those critic ears,
Must needs be right, so well resembling theirs.
  Perish the Muse's hour thus vainly spent
In satire, to my Congreve's praises meant;
In how ill season her resentments rule,
What's that to her if mankind be a fool?
Happy beyond a private Muse's fate,
In pleasing all that's good among the great,[5]
Where though her elder sisters crowding throng,
She still is welcome with her innocent song;
Whom were my Congreve blest to see and know,
What poor regards would merit all below!
How proudly would he haste the joy to meet,
And drop his laurel at Apollo's feet!
  Here by a mountain's side, a reverend cave
Gives murmuring passage to a lasting wave:
'Tis the world's watery hour-glass streaming fast,
Time is no more when th'utmost drop is past;
Here, on a better day, some druid dwelt,
And the young Muse's early favour felt;
Druid, a name she does with pride repeat,
Confessing Albion once her darling seat;
Far in this primitive cell might we pursue
Our predecessors' footsteps still in view;
Here would we sing--But, ah! you think I dream,
And the bad world may well believe the same;
Yes: you are all malicious slanders by,
While two fond lovers prate, the Muse and I.
  Since thus I wander from my first intent,
Nor am that grave adviser which I meant,
Take this short lesson from the god of bays,
And let my friend apply it as he please:
Beat not the dirty paths where vulgar feet have trod,
      But give the vigorous fancy room.
  For when, like stupid alchymists, you try
      To fix this nimble god,
        This volatile mercury,
  The subtile spirit all flies up in fume;
  Nor shall the bubbled virtuoso find
More than _fade_ insipid mixture left behind.[6]
  While thus I write, vast shoals of critics come,
And on my verse pronounce their saucy doom;
The Muse like some bright country virgin shows
Fallen by mishap among a knot of beaux;
They, in their lewd and fashionable prate,
Rally her dress, her language, and her gait;
Spend their base coin before the bashful maid,
Current like copper, and as often paid:
She, who on shady banks has joy'd to sleep
Near better animals, her father's sheep,
Shamed and amazed, beholds the chattering throng,
To think what cattle she is got among;
But with the odious smell and sight annoy'd,
In haste she does th'offensive herd avoid.
  'Tis time to bid my friend a long farewell,
The muse retreats far in yon crystal cell;
Faint inspiration sickens as she flies,
Like distant echo spent, the spirit dies.
  In this descending sheet you'll haply find
Some short refreshment for your weary mind,
Nought it contains is common or unclean,
And once drawn up, is ne'er let down again.[7]


[Footnote 1: Where Swift lived with Sir William Temple, who had bought an
estate near Farnham, called Compton Hall, which he afterwards named Moor
Park. See "Prose Works," vol. xi, 378.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Dryden. See "The Rehearsal," and _post_, p. 43.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Will's coffee-house in Russell Street, Covent Garden, where
the wits of that time used to assemble. See "The Tatler," No. I, and
notes, edit. 1786.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: To this resolution Swift always adhered; for of the infinite
multitude of libellers who personally attacked him, there is not the name
mentioned of any one of them throughout his works; and thus, together
with their writings, have they been consigned to eternal oblivion.--_S._]

[Footnote 5: This alludes to Sir William Temple, to whom he presently
gives the name of Apollo.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6: Out of an Ode I writ, inscribed "The Poet." The rest of it
is lost.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 7: For an account of Congreve, see Leigh Hunt's edition of
"Wycherley, Congreve, Vanbrugh, and Farquhar."--_W. E. B._]




OCCASIONED BY SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE'S LATE ILLNESS AND RECOVERY

WRITTEN IN DECEMBER, 1693


Strange to conceive, how the same objects strike
At distant hours the mind with forms so like!
Whether in time, Deduction's broken chain
Meets, and salutes her sister link again;
Or haunted Fancy, by a circling flight,
Comes back with joy to its own seat at night;
Or whether dead Imagination's ghost
Oft hovers where alive it haunted most;
Or if Thought's rolling globe, her circle run,
Turns up old objects to the soul her sun;
Or loves the Muse to walk with conscious pride
O'er the glad scene whence first she rose a bride:
  Be what it will; late near yon whispering stream,
Where her own Temple was her darling theme;
There first the visionary sound was heard,
When to poetic view the Muse appear'd.
Such seem'd her eyes, as when an evening ray
Gives glad farewell to a tempestuous day;
Weak is the beam to dry up Nature's tears,
Still every tree the pendent sorrow wears;
Such are the smiles where drops of crystal show
Approaching joy at strife with parting woe.
  As when, to scare th'ungrateful or the proud,
Tempests long frown, and thunder threatens loud,
Till the blest sun, to give kind dawn of grace,
Darts weeping beams across Heaven's watery face;
When soon the peaceful bow unstring'd is shown,
A sign God's dart is shot, and wrath o'erblown:
Such to unhallow'd sight the Muse divine
Might seem, when first she raised her eyes to mine.
  What mortal change does in thy face appear,
Lost youth, she cried, since first I met thee here!
With how undecent clouds are overcast
Thy looks, when every cause of grief is past!
Unworthy the glad tidings which I bring,
Listen while the Muse thus teaches thee to sing:
  As parent earth, burst by imprison'd winds,
Scatters strange agues o'er men's sickly minds,
And shakes the atheist's knees; such ghastly fear
Late I beheld on every face appear;
Mild Dorothea,[1] peaceful, wise, and great,
Trembling beheld the doubtful hand of fate;
Mild Dorothea, whom we both have long
Not dared to injure with our lowly song;
Sprung from a better world, and chosen then
The best companion for the best of men:
As some fair pile, yet spared by zeal and rage,
Lives pious witness of a better age;
So men may see what once was womankind,
In the fair shrine of Dorothea's mind.
  You that would grief describe, come here and trace
Its watery footsteps in Dorinda's[2] face:
Grief from Dorinda's face does ne'er depart
Farther than its own palace in her heart:
Ah, since our fears are fled, this insolent expel,
At least confine the tyrant to his cell.
And if so black the cloud that Heaven's bright queen
Shrouds her still beams; how should the stars be seen?
Thus when Dorinda wept, joy every face forsook,
And grief flung sables on each menial look;
The humble tribe mourn'd for the quick'ning soul,
That furnish'd spirit and motion through the whole;
So would earth's face turn pale, and life decay,
Should Heaven suspend to act but for a day;
So nature's crazed convulsions make us dread
That time is sick, or the world's mind is dead.--
Take, youth, these thoughts, large matter to employ
The fancy furnish'd by returning joy;
And to mistaken man these truths rehearse,
Who dare revile the integrity of verse:
Ah, favourite youth, how happy is thy lot!--
But I'm deceived, or thou regard'st me not;
Speak, for I wait thy answer, and expect
Thy just submission for this bold neglect.
  Unknown the forms we the high-priesthood use
At the divine appearance of the Muse,
Which to divulge might shake profane belief,
And tell the irreligion of my grief;
Grief that excused the tribute of my knees,
And shaped my passion in such words as these!
  Malignant goddess! bane to my repose,
Thou universal cause of all my woes;
Say whence it comes that thou art grown of late
A poor amusement for my scorn and hate;
The malice thou inspirest I never fail
On thee to wreak the tribute when I rail;
Fool's commonplace thou art, their weak ensconcing fort,
Th'appeal of dulness in the last resort:
Heaven, with a parent's eye regarding earth,
Deals out to man the planet of his birth:
But sees thy meteor blaze about me shine,
And passing o'er, mistakes thee still for mine:
Ah, should I tell a secret yet unknown,
That thou ne'er hadst a being of thy own,
But a wild form dependent on the brain,
Scattering loose features o'er the optic vein;
Troubling the crystal fountain of the sight,
Which darts on poets' eyes a trembling light;
Kindled while reason sleeps, but quickly flies,
Like antic shapes in dreams, from waking eyes:
In sum, a glitt'ring voice, a painted name,
A walking vapour, like thy sister fame.
But if thou be'st what thy mad votaries prate,
A female power, loose govern'd thoughts create;
Why near the dregs of youth perversely wilt thou stay,
So highly courted by the brisk and gay?
Wert thou right woman, thou should'st scorn to look
On an abandon'd wretch by hopes forsook;
Forsook by hopes, ill fortune's last relief,
Assign'd for life to unremitting grief;
For, let Heaven's wrath enlarge these weary days,
If hope e'er dawns the smallest of its rays.
Time o'er the happy takes so swift a flight,
And treads so soft, so easy, and so light,
That we the wretched, creeping far behind,
Can scarce th'impression of his footsteps find;
Smooth as that airy nymph so subtly born
With inoffensive feet o'er standing corn;[3]
Which bow'd by evening breeze with bending stalks,
Salutes the weary traveller as he walks;
But o'er the afflicted with a heavy pace
Sweeps the broad scythe, and tramples on his face.
Down falls the summer's pride, and sadly shows
Nature's bare visage furrow'd as he mows:
See, Muse, what havoc in these looks appear,
These are the tyrant's trophies of a year;
Since hope his last and greatest foe is fled,
Despair and he lodge ever in its stead;
March o'er the ruin'd plain with motion slow,
Still scattering desolation where they go.
To thee I owe that fatal bent of mind,
Still to unhappy restless thoughts inclined;
To thee, what oft I vainly strive to hide,
That scorn of fools, by fools mistook for pride;
From thee whatever virtue takes its rise,
Grows a misfortune, or becomes a vice;
Such were thy rules to be poetically great:
"Stoop not to interest, flattery, or deceit;
Nor with hired thoughts be thy devotion paid;
Learn to disdain their mercenary aid;
Be this thy sure defence, thy brazen wall,
Know no base action, at no guilt turn pale;[4]
And since unhappy distance thus denies
T'expose thy soul, clad in this poor disguise;
Since thy few ill-presented graces seem
To breed contempt where thou hast hoped esteem--"
   Madness like this no fancy ever seized,
Still to be cheated, never to be pleased;
Since one false beam of joy in sickly minds
Is all the poor content delusion finds.--
There thy enchantment broke, and from this hour
I here renounce thy visionary power;
And since thy essence on my breath depends
Thus with a puff the whole delusion ends.


[Footnote 1: Dorothy, Sir William Temple's wife, a daughter of Sir Peter
Osborne. She was in some way related to Swift's mother, which led to
Temple taking Swift into his family. Dorothy died in January, 1695, at
Moor Park, aged 65, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Sir William died
in January, 1698, "and with him," says Swift, "all that was good and
amiable among men." He was buried in Westminster Abbey by the side of his
wife.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Swift's poetical name for Dorothy, Lady Temple.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3:  "--when swift Camilla scours the plain,
    Flies o'er th'unbending corn, and skims along the main."
POPE, _Essay on Criticism_, 372-3.]

[Footnote 4:    "Hic murus aheneus esto,
  Nil conseire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa."
HOR., _Epist. 1_, I, 60.]



WRITTEN IN A LADY'S IVORY TABLE-BOOK, 1698


Peruse my leaves thro' ev'ry part,
And think thou seest my owner's heart,
Scrawl'd o'er with trifles thus, and quite
As hard, as senseless, and as light;
Expos'd to ev'ry coxcomb's eyes,
But hid with caution from the wise.
Here you may read, "Dear charming saint;"
Beneath, "A new receipt for paint:"
Here, in beau-spelling, "Tru tel deth;"
There, in her own, "For an el breth:"
Here, "Lovely nymph, pronounce my doom!"
There, "A safe way to use perfume:"
Here, a page fill'd with billets-doux;
On t'other side, "Laid out for shoes"--
"Madam, I die without your grace"--
"Item, for half a yard of lace."
Who that had wit would place it here,
For ev'ry peeping fop to jeer?
To think that your brains' issue is
Exposed to th'excrement of his,
In pow'r of spittle and a clout,
Whene'er he please, to blot it out;
And then, to heighten the disgrace,
Clap his own nonsense in the place.
Whoe'er expects to hold his part
In such a book, and such a heart,
If he be wealthy, and a fool,
Is in all points the fittest tool;
Of whom it may be justly said,
He's a gold pencil tipp'd with lead.




MRS. FRANCES HARRIS'S PETITION, 1699


This, the most humorous example of _vers de socit_ in the English
language, well illustrates the position of a parson in a family of
distinction at that period.--_W. E. B._


To their Excellencies the Lords Justices of Ireland,[1]
  The humble petition of Frances Harris,
Who must starve and die a maid if it miscarries;
Humbly sheweth, that I went to warm myself in Lady Betty's[2] chamber,
  because I was cold;
And I had in a purse seven pounds, four shillings, and sixpence,
  (besides farthings) in money and gold;
So because I had been buying things for my lady last night,
I was resolved to tell my money, to see if it was right.
Now, you must know, because my trunk has a very bad lock,
Therefore all the money I have, which, God knows, is a very small stock,
I keep in my pocket, ty'd about my middle, next my smock.
So when I went to put up my purse, as God would have it, my smock was
  unript,
And instead of putting it into my pocket, down it slipt;
Then the bell rung, and I went down to put my lady to bed;
And, God knows, I thought my money was as safe as my maidenhead.
So, when I came up again, I found my pocket feel very light;
But when I search'd, and miss'd my purse, Lord! I thought I should have
  sunk outright.
"Lord! madam," says Mary, "how d'ye do?"--"Indeed," says I, "never worse:
But pray, Mary, can you tell what I have done with my purse?"
"Lord help me!" says Mary, "I never stirr'd out of this place!"
"Nay," said I, "I had it in Lady Betty's chamber, that's a  plain case."
So Mary got me to bed, and cover'd me up warm:
However, she stole away my garters, that I might do myself no harm.
So I tumbled and toss'd all night, as you may very well think,
But hardly ever set my eyes together, or slept a wink.
So I was a-dream'd, methought, that I went and search'd the folks round,
And in a corner of Mrs. Duke's[3] box, ty'd in a rag, the money was
  found.
So next morning we told Whittle,[4] and he fell a swearing:
Then my dame Wadgar[5] came, and she, you know, is thick of hearing.
"Dame," said I, as loud as I could bawl, "do you know what a loss I have
  had?"
"Nay," says she, "my Lord Colway's[6] folks are all very sad:
For my Lord Dromedary[7] comes a Tuesday without fail."
"Pugh!" said I, "but that's not the business that I ail."
Says Cary,[8] says he, "I have been a servant this five and twenty years
  come spring,
And in all the places I lived I never heard of such a thing."
"Yes," says the steward,[9] "I remember when I was at my Lord
  Shrewsbury's,
Such a thing as this happen'd, just about the time of _gooseberries_."
So I went to the party suspected, and I found her full of grief:
(Now, you must know, of all things in the world I hate a thief:)
However, I was resolved to bring the discourse slily about:
"Mrs. Duke," said I, "here's an ugly accident has happened out:
'Tis not that I value the money three skips of a louse:[10]
But the thing I stand upon is the credit of the house.
'Tis true, seven pounds, four shillings, and sixpence makes a great hole
  in my wages:
Besides, as they say, service is no inheritance in these ages.
Now, Mrs. Duke, you know, and everybody understands,
That though 'tis hard to judge, yet money can't go without hands."
"The _devil_ take me!" said she, (blessing herself,) "if ever I saw't!"
So she roar'd like a bedlam, as thof I had call'd her all to naught.
So, you know, what could I say to her any more?
I e'en left her, and came away as wise as I was before.
Well; but then they would have had me gone to the cunning man:
"No," said I, "'tis the same thing, the CHAPLAIN[11] will be here anon."
So the Chaplain came in. Now the servants say he is my sweetheart,
Because he's always in my chamber, and I always take his part.
So, as the _devil_ would have it, before I was aware, out I blunder'd,
"_Parson_" said I, "can you cast a _nativity_, when a body's plunder'd?"
(Now you must know, he hates to be called _Parson_, like the _devil!_)
"Truly," says he, "Mrs. Nab, it might become you to be more civil;
If your money be gone, as a learned _Divine_ says,[12] d'ye see,
You are no _text_ for my handling; so take that from me:
I was never taken for a _Conjurer_ before, I'd have you to know."
"Lord!" said I, "don't be angry, I am sure I never thought you so;
You know I honour the cloth; I design to be a Parson's wife;
I never took one in _your coat_ for a conjurer in all my life."
With that he twisted his girdle at me like a rope, as who should say,
"Now you may go hang yourself for me!" and so went away.
Well: I thought I should have swoon'd. "Lord!" said I, "what shall I do?
I have lost my money, and shall lose my true love too!"
Then my lord call'd me: "Harry,"[13] said my lord, "don't cry;
I'll give you something toward thy loss." "And," says my lady, "so will
 I."
Oh! but, said I, what if, after all, the Chaplain won't come to?
For that, he said (an't please your Excellencies), I must petition you.
  The premisses tenderly consider'd, I desire your Excellencies'
  protection,
And that I may have a share in next Sunday's collection;
And, over and above, that I may have your Excellencies' letter,
With an order for the Chaplain aforesaid, or, instead of him, a better:
And then your poor petitioner, both night and day,
Or the Chaplain (for 'tis his _trade_,[14]) as in duty bound, shall ever
  _pray_.


[Footnote 1: The Earl of Berkeley and the Earl of Galway.]

[Footnote 2: Lady Betty Berkeley, afterwards Germaine.]

[Footnote 3: Wife to one of the footmen.]

[Footnote 4: The Earl of Berkeley's valet.]

[Footnote 5: The old deaf housekeeper.]

[Footnote 6: Galway.]

[Footnote 7: The Earl of Drogheda, who, with the primate, was to succeed
the two earls, then lords justices of Ireland.]

[Footnote 8: Clerk of the kitchen.]

[Footnote 9: Ferris; whom the poet terms in his Journal to Stella, 21st
Dec., 1710, a "beast," and a "Scoundrel dog." See "Prose Works," ii, p.
79--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 10: A usual saying of hers.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 11: Swift.]

[Footnote 12: Dr. Bolton, one of the chaplains.--_Faulkner_.]

[Footnote 13: A cant word of Lord and Lady Berkeley to Mrs. Harris.]

[Footnote 14: Swift elsewhere terms his own calling a _trade_. See his
letter to Pope, 29th Sept., 1725, cited in Introduction to Gulliver,
"Prose Works," vol. viii, p. xxv.--_W. E. B_.]




A BALLAD ON THE GAME OF TRAFFIC

WRITTEN AT THE CASTLE OF DUBLIN, 1699


My Lord,[1] to find out who must deal,
  Delivers cards about,
But the first knave does seldom fail
  To find the doctor out.

But then his honour cried, Gadzooks!
  And seem'd to knit his brow:
For on a knave he never looks
  But he thinks upon Jack How.[2]

My lady, though she is no player,
  Some bungling partner takes,
And, wedged in corner of a chair,
  Takes snuff, and holds the stakes.

Dame Floyd[3] looks out in grave suspense
  For pair royals and sequents;
But, wisely cautious of her pence,
  The castle seldom frequents.

Quoth Herries,[4] fairly putting cases,
  I'd won it, on my word,
If I had but a pair of aces,
  And could pick up a third.

But Weston has a new-cast gown
  On Sundays to be fine in,
And, if she can but win a crown,
  'Twill just new dye the lining.

"With these is Parson Swift,[5]
  Not knowing how to spend his time,
Does make a wretched shift,
  To deafen them with puns and rhyme."



[Footnote 1: The Earl of Berkeley.]

[Footnote 2: Paymaster to the Forces, "Prose Works," ii, 23.]

[Footnote 3: A beauty and a favourite with Swift. See his verses on her,
_post_, p. 50. He often mentions her in the Journal to Stella, especially
with respect to her having the smallpox, and her recovery. "Prose Works,"
ii, 138, 141, 143. 259.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Mrs. Frances Harris, the heroine of the preceding poem.]

[Footnote 5: Written by Lady Betty Berkeley, afterwards wife of Sir John
Germaine.]




A BALLAD TO THE TUNE OF THE CUT-PURSE[1]

WRITTEN IN AUGUST, 1702


I

Once on a time, as old stories rehearse,
  A friar would need show his talent in Latin;
But was sorely put to 't in the midst of a verse,
  Because he could find no word to come pat in;
           Then all in the place
           He left a void space,
    And so went to bed in a desperate case:
When behold the next morning a wonderful riddle!
He found it was strangely fill'd up in the middle.
  CHO. Let censuring critics then think what they list on't;
    Who would not write verses with such an assistant?


II

This put me the friar into an amazement;
  For he wisely consider'd it must be a sprite;
That he came through the keyhole, or in at the casement;
  And it needs must be one that could both read and write;
         Yet he did not know,
         If it were friend or foe,
  Or whether it came from above or below;
Howe'er, it was civil, in angel or elf,
For he ne'er could have fill'd it so well of himself.
    CHO. Let censuring, &c.


III

Even so Master Doctor had puzzled his brains
  In making a ballad, but was at a stand;
He had mixt little wit with a great deal of pains,
  When he found a new help from invisible hand.
        Then, good Doctor Swift
        Pay thanks for the gift,
  For you freely must own you were at a dead lift;
And, though some malicious young spirit did do't,
You may know by the hand it had no cloven foot.
    CHO. Let censuring, &c.


[Footnote 1: Lady Betty Berkeley, finding the preceding verses in the
author's room unfinished, wrote under them the concluding stanza, which
gave occasion to this ballad, written by the author in a counterfeit
hand, as if a third person had done it.--_Swift_.

The _Cut-Purse_ is a ballad sung by Nightingale, the ballad-singer, in
Ben Jonson's "Bartholomew Fair," Act III, Sc. I. The burthen of the
ballad is:
     "Youth, youth, thou had'st better been starv'd by thy nurse
      Than live to be hang'd for cutting a purse."--_W. E. B._]




THE DISCOVERY

When wise Lord Berkeley first came here,[1]
  Statesmen and mob expected wonders,
Nor thought to find so great a peer
  Ere a week past committing blunders.
Till on a day cut out by fate,
  When folks came thick to make their court,
Out slipt a mystery of state
  To give the town and country sport.
Now enters Bush[2] with new state airs,
  His lordship's premier minister;
And who in all profound affairs,
  Is held as needful as his clyster.[2]
With head reclining on his shoulder,
  He deals and hears mysterious chat,
While every ignorant beholder
  Asks of his neighbour, who is that?
With this he put up to my lord,
  The courtiers kept their distance due,
He twitch'd his sleeve, and stole a word;
  Then to a corner both withdrew.
Imagine now my lord and Bush
  Whispering in junto most profound,
Like good King Phys and good King Ush,[3]
  While all the rest stood gaping round.
At length a spark, not too well bred,
  Of forward face and ear acute,
Advanced on tiptoe, lean'd his head,
  To overhear the grand dispute;
To learn what Northern kings design,
  Or from Whitehall some new express,
Papists disarm'd, or fall of coin;
  For sure (thought he) it can't be less.
My lord, said Bush, a friend and I,
  Disguised in two old threadbare coats,
Ere morning's dawn, stole out to spy
  How markets went for hay and oats.
With that he draws two handfuls out,
  The one was oats, the other hay;
Puts this to's excellency's snout,
  And begs he would the other weigh.
My lord seems pleased, but still directs
  By all means to bring down the rates;
Then, with a congee circumflex,
  Bush, smiling round on all, retreats.
Our listener stood awhile confused,
  But gathering spirits, wisely ran for't,
Enraged to see the world abused,
  By two such whispering kings of Brentford.[4]


[Footnote 1: To Ireland, as one of the Lords Justices.]

[Footnote 2: Who, by insinuating that the post of secretary was
unsuitable for a clergyman, obtained it for himself, though it had been
promised to Swift; and when Swift claimed the Deanery of Derry, in virtue
of Lord Berkeley's promise of the "first good preferment that should fall
in his gift," the earl referred him to Bush, who told him that it was
promised to another, but that if he would lay down a thousand pounds for
it he should have the preference. Swift, enraged at the insult,
immediately left the castle; but was ultimately pacified by being
presented with the Rectory of Agher and the Vicarages of Laracor and
Rathbeggan. See Forster's "Life of Swift," p. 111; Birkbeck Hill's
"Letters of Swift," and "Prose Works," vol. xi, 380.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: Always taken before my lord went to council.--_Dublin
Edition_.]

[Footnote 3: The usurping kings in "The Rehearsal"; the celebrated farce
written by the Duke of Buckingham, in conjunction with Martin Clifford,
Butler, Sprat, and others, in ridicule of the rhyming tragedies then in
vogue, and especially of Dryden in the character of Bayes.--See Malone's
"Life of Dryden," p. 95.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: The usurping kings in "The Rehearsal," Act I, Sc. 1; Act II,
Sc. 1; always whispering each other.--_W. E. B_.]




THE PROBLEM,

"THAT MY LORD BERKELEY STINKS WHEN HE IS IN LOVE"


Did ever problem thus perplex,
Or more employ the female sex?
So sweet a passion who would think,
Jove ever form'd to make a stink?
The ladies vow and swear, they'll try,
Whether it be a truth or lie.
Love's fire, it seems, like inward heat,
Works in my lord by stool and sweat,
Which brings a stink from every pore,
And from behind and from before;
Yet what is wonderful to tell it,
None but the favourite nymph can smell it.
But now, to solve the natural cause
By sober philosophic laws;
Whether all passions, when in ferment,
Work out as anger does in vermin;
So, when a weasel you torment,
You find his passion by his scent.
We read of kings, who, in a fright,
Though on a throne, would fall to sh--.
Beside all this, deep scholars know,
That the main string of Cupid's bow,
Once on a time was an a-- gut;
Now to a nobler office put,
By favour or desert preferr'd
From giving passage to a t--;
But still, though fix'd among the stars,
Does sympathize with human a--.
Thus, when you feel a hard-bound breech,
Conclude love's bow-string at full stretch,
Till the kind looseness comes, and then,
Conclude the bow relax'd again.
  And now, the ladies all are bent,
To try the great experiment,
Ambitious of a regent's heart,
Spread all their charms to catch a f--
Watching the first unsavoury wind,
Some ply before, and some behind.
My lord, on fire amid the dames,
F--ts like a laurel in the flames.
The fair approach the speaking part,
To try the back-way to his heart.
For, as when we a gun discharge,
Although the bore be none so large,
Before the flame from muzzle burst,
Just at the breech it flashes first;
So from my lord his passion broke,
He f--d first and then he spoke.
  The ladies vanish in the smother,
To confer notes with one another;
And now they all agreed to name
Whom each one thought the happy dame.
Quoth Neal, whate'er the rest may think,
I'm sure 'twas I that smelt the stink.
You smell the stink! by G--d, you lie,
Quoth Ross, for I'll be sworn 'twas I.
Ladies, quoth Levens, pray forbear;
Let's not fall out; we all had share;
And, by the most I can discover,
My lord's a universal lover.




THE DESCRIPTION OF A SALAMANDER, 1705

From Pliny, "Hist. Nat.," lib. x, 67; lib. xxix.

As mastiff dogs, in modern phrase, are
Call'd _Pompey, Scipio_, and _Caesar;_
As pies and daws are often styl'd
With Christian nicknames, like a child;
As we say _Monsieur_ to an ape,
Without offence to human shape;
So men have got, from bird and brute,
Names that would best their nature suit.
The _Lion, Eagle, Fox_, and _Boar_,
Were heroes' titles heretofore,
Bestow'd as hi'roglyphics fit
To show their valour, strength, or wit:
For what is understood by _fame_,
Besides the getting of a _name?_
But, e'er since men invented guns,
A diff'rent way their fancy runs:
To paint a hero, we inquire
For something that will conquer _fire._
Would you describe _Turenne_[1] or _Trump?_[2]
Think of a _bucket_ or a _pump._
Are these too low?--then find out grander,
Call my LORD CUTTS a _Salamander._[3]
'Tis well;--but since we live among
Detractors with an evil tongue,
Who may object against the term,
Pliny shall prove what we affirm:
Pliny shall prove, and we'll apply,
And I'll be judg'd by standers by.
First, then, our author has defined
This reptile of the serpent kind,
With gaudy coat, and shining train;
But loathsome spots his body stain:
Out from some hole obscure he flies,
When rains descend, and tempests rise,
Till the sun clears the air; and then
Crawls back neglected to his den.[4]
  So, when the war has raised a storm,
I've seen a snake in human form,
All stain'd with infamy and vice,
Leap from the dunghill in a trice,
Burnish and make a gaudy show,
Become a general, peer, and beau,
Till peace has made the sky serene,
Then shrink into its hole again.
"All this we grant--why then, look yonder,
Sure that must be a Salamander!"
  Further, we are by Pliny told,
This serpent is extremely cold;
So cold, that, put it in the fire,
'Twill make the very flames expire:
Besides, it spues a filthy froth
(Whether thro' rage or lust or both)
Of matter purulent and white,
Which, happening on the skin to light,
And there corrupting to a wound,
Spreads leprosy and baldness round.[5]
  So have I seen a batter'd beau,
By age and claps grown cold as snow,
Whose breath or touch, where'er he came,
Blew out love's torch, or chill'd the flame:
And should some nymph, who ne'er was cruel,
Like Carleton cheap, or famed Du-Ruel,
Receive the filth which he ejects,
She soon would find the same effects
Her tainted carcass to pursue,
As from the Salamander's spue;
A dismal shedding of her locks,
And, if no leprosy, a pox.
"Then I'll appeal to each bystander,
If this be not a Salamander?"


[Footnote 1: The famous Mareschal Turenne, general of the French forces,
called the greatest commander of the age.]

[Footnote 2: Admiral of the States General in their war with England,
eminent for his courage and his victories.]

[Footnote 3: Who obtained this name from his coolness under fire at the
siege of Namur. See Journal to Stella, "Prose Works," vol. ii, p.
267.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 4: "Animal lacertae figura, stellatum, numquam nisi magnis
imbribus proveniens et serenitate desinens."--Pliny, "Hist. Nat.," lib.
x, 67.]

[Footnote 5: "Huic tantus rigor ut ignem tactu restinguat non alio modo
quam glacies. ejusdem sanie, quae lactea ore vomitur, quacumque parte
corporis humani contacta toti defluunt pili, idque quod contactum est
colorem in vitiliginem mutat."--Lib. x, 67. "Inter omnia venenata
salamandrae scelus maximum est. . . . nam si arbori inrepsit omnia poma
inficit veneno, et eos qui ederint necat frigida vi nihil aconito
distans."--Lib. xxix, 4, 23.--_W. E. B._]




TO CHARLES MORDAUNT, EARL OF PETERBOROUGH[1]


  Mordanto fills the trump of fame,
The Christian world his deeds proclaim,
And prints are crowded with his name.

  In journeys he outrides the post,
Sits up till midnight with his host,
Talks politics, and gives the toast.

  Knows every prince in Europe's face,
Flies like a squib from place to place,
And travels not, but runs a race.

  From Paris gazette -la-main,
This day arriv'd, without his train,
Mordanto in a week from Spain.

  A messenger comes all a-reek
Mordanto at Madrid to seek;
He left the town above a week.

  Next day the post-boy winds his horn,
And rides through Dover in the morn:
Mordanto's landed from Leghorn.

  Mordanto gallops on alone,
The roads are with his followers strewn,
This breaks a girth, and that a bone;

  His body active as his mind,
Returning sound in limb and wind,
Except some leather lost behind.

  A skeleton in outward figure,
His meagre corps, though full of vigour,
Would halt behind him, were it bigger.

  So wonderful his expedition,
When you have not the least suspicion,
He's with you like an apparition.

  Shines in all climates like a star;
In senates bold, and fierce in war;
A land commander, and a tar:

  Heroic actions early bred in,
Ne'er to be match'd in modern reading,
But by his namesake, Charles of Sweden.[2]


[Footnote 1: Who in the year 1705 took Barcelona, and in the winter
following with only 280 horse and 900 foot enterprized and accomplished
the conquest of Valentia.--_Pope_.

  "--he whose lightning pierc'd th'Iberian lines,
  Now forms my quincunx, and now ranks my vines,
  Or tames the genius of the stubborn plain
  Almost as quickly as he conquer'd Spain."
      POPE, _Imitations of Horace_, ii, Sat. 1.

Lord Peterborough seems to have been equally famous for his skill in
cookery. See note to above Satire, Pope's Works, edit. Elwin and
Courthope, iii, 298.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: See Voltaire's "History of Charles the Twelfth of Sweden."
  "He left the name at which the world grew pale,
  To point a moral or adorn a tale."
     JOHNSON, _Vanity of Human Wishes_.]




ON THE UNION

The queen has lately lost a part
Of her ENTIRELY-ENGLISH[1] heart,
For want of which, by way of botch,
She pieced it up again with SCOTCH.
Blest revolution! which creates
Divided hearts, united states!
See how the double nation lies,
Like a rich coat with skirts of frize:
As if a man, in making posies,
Should bundle thistles up with roses.
Who ever yet a union saw
Of kingdoms without faith or law?[2]
Henceforward let no statesman dare
A kingdom to a ship compare;
Lest he should call our commonweal
A vessel with a double keel:
Which, just like ours, new rigg'd and mann'd,
And got about a league from land,
By change of wind to leeward side,
The pilot knew not how to guide.
So tossing faction will o'erwhelm
Our crazy double-bottom'd realm.


[Footnote 1: The motto on Queen Anne's coronation medal.--_N_.]

[Footnote 2: _I.e._, Differing in religion and law.]




ON MRS. BIDDY FLOYD;

OR, THE RECEIPT TO FORM A BEAUTY. 1707


When Cupid did his grandsire Jove entreat
To form some Beauty by a new receipt, Jove sent, and found, far in a
country scene,
Truth, innocence, good nature, look serene:
From which ingredients first the dext'rous boy
Pick'd the demure, the awkward, and the coy.
The Graces from the court did next provide
Breeding, and wit, and air, and decent pride:
These Venus cleans'd from ev'ry spurious grain
Of nice coquet, affected, pert, and vain.
Jove mix'd up all, and the best clay employ'd;
Then call'd the happy composition FLOYD.




THE REVERSE

(TO SWIFT'S VERSES ON BIDDY FLOYD); OR, MRS. CLUDD

Venus one day, as story goes,
But for what reason no man knows,
In sullen mood and grave deport,
Trudged it away to Jove's high court;
And there his Godship did entreat
To look out for his best receipt:
And make a monster strange and odd,
Abhorr'd by man and every god.
Jove, ever kind to all the fair,
Nor e'er refused a lady's prayer,
Straight oped 'scrutoire, and forth he took
A neatly bound and well-gilt book;
Sure sign that nothing enter'd there,
But what was very choice and rare.
Scarce had he turn'd a page or two,--
It might be more, for aught I knew;
But, be the matter more or less,
'Mong friends 'twill break no squares, I guess.
Then, smiling, to the dame quoth he,
Here's one will fit you to a T.
But, as the writing doth prescribe,
'Tis fit the ingredients we provide.
Away he went, and search'd the stews,
And every street about the Mews;
Diseases, impudence, and lies,
Are found and brought him in a trice.
From Hackney then he did provide,
A clumsy air and awkward pride;
From lady's toilet next he brought
Noise, scandal, and malicious thought.
These Jove put in an old close-stool,
And with them mix'd the vain, the fool.
  But now came on his greatest care,
Of what he should his paste prepare;
For common clay or finer mould
Was much too good, such stuff to hold.
At last he wisely thought on mud;
So raised it up, and call'd it--_Cludd._
With this, the lady well content,
Low curtsey'd, and away she went.




APOLLO OUTWITTED

TO THE HONOURABLE MRS. FINCH,[1] UNDER HER NAME OF ARDELIA


Phoebus, now short'ning every shade,
  Up to the northern _tropic_ came,
And thence beheld a lovely maid,
  Attending on a royal dame.

The god laid down his feeble rays,
  Then lighted from his glitt'ring coach;
But fenc'd his head with his own bays,
  Before he durst the nymph approach.

Under those sacred leaves, secure
  From common lightning of the skies,
He fondly thought he might endure
  The flashes of Ardelia's eyes.

The nymph, who oft had read in books
  Of that bright god whom bards invoke,
Soon knew Apollo by his looks,
  And guess'd his business ere he spoke.

He, in the old celestial cant,
  Confess'd his flame, and swore by Styx,
Whate'er she would desire, to grant--
  But wise Ardelia knew his tricks.

Ovid had warn'd her to beware
  Of strolling gods, whose usual trade is,
Under pretence of taking air,
  To pick up sublunary ladies.

Howe'er, she gave no flat denial,
  As having malice in her heart;
And was resolv'd upon a trial,
  To cheat the god in his own art.

"Hear my request," the virgin said;
  "Let which I please of all the Nine
Attend, whene'er I want their aid,
  Obey my call, and only mine."

By vow oblig'd, by passion led,
  The god could not refuse her prayer:
He way'd his wreath thrice o'er her head,
  Thrice mutter'd something to the air.

And now he thought to seize his due;
  But she the charm already try'd:
Thalia heard the call, and flew
  To wait at bright Ardelia's side.

On sight of this celestial _prude_,
  Apollo thought it vain to stay;
Nor in her presence durst be rude,
  But made his leg and went away.

He hop'd to find some lucky hour,
  When on their queen the Muses wait;
But Pallas owns Ardelia's power:
  For vows divine are kept by Fate.

Then, full of rage, Apollo spoke:
  "Deceitful nymph! I see thy art;
And, though I can't my gift revoke,
  I'll disappoint its nobler part.

"Let stubborn pride possess thee long,
  And be thou negligent of fame;
With ev'ry Muse to grace thy song,
  May'st thou despise a poet's name!

"Of modest poets be thou first;
  To silent shades repeat thy verse,
Till Fame and Echo almost burst,
  Yet hardly dare one line rehearse.

"And last, my vengeance to compleat,
  May you descend to take renown,
Prevail'd on by the thing you hate,
  A Whig! and one that wears a gown!"


[Footnote 1: Afterwards Countess of Winchelsea.--_Scott_. See
Journal to Stella Aug. 7, 1712. The Countess was one of Swift's intimate
friends and correspondents. See "Prose Works," xi, 121.--_W. E. B._]




ANSWER TO LINES FROM MAY FAIR[1]

NOW FIRST PUBLISHED


I

In pity to the empty'ng Town,
  Some God May Fair invented,
When Nature would invite us down,
  To be by Art prevented.

II

What a corrupted taste is ours
  When milk maids in mock state
Instead of garlands made of Flowers
  Adorn their pails with plate.

III

So are the joys which Nature yields
  Inverted in May Fair,
In painted cloth we look for fields,
  And step in Booths for air.

IV

Here a Dog dancing on his hams
  And puppets mov'd by wire,
Do far exceed your frisking lambs,
  Or song of feather'd quire.

V
Howe'er, such verse as yours I grant
  Would be but too inviting:
Were fair Ardelia not my Aunt,
  Or were it Worsley's writing.[2]


[Footnote 1: Some ladies, among whom were Mrs. Worsley and Mrs. Finch, to
the latter of whom Swift addressed, under the name of Ardelia, the
preceding poem, appear to have written verses to him from May Fair,
offering him such temptations as that fashionable locality supplied to
detain him from the country and its pleasures: and thus he
replies.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 1: There is some playful allusion in this last stanza, not now
decipherable.--_Forster_.]




VANBRUGH'S HOUSE[1]

BUILT FROM THE RUINS OF WHITEHALL THAT WAS BURNT, 1703


In times of old, when Time was young,
And poets their own verses sung,
A verse would draw a stone or beam,
That now would overload a team;
Lead 'em a dance of many a mile,
Then rear 'em to a goodly pile.
Each number had its diff'rent power;
Heroic strains could build a tower;
Sonnets and elegies to Chloris,
Might raise a house about two stories;
A lyric ode would slate; a catch
Would tile; an epigram would thatch.
  Now Poets feel this art is lost,
Both to their own and landlord's cost.
Not one of all the tuneful throng
Can hire a lodging for a song.
For Jove consider'd well the case,
That poets were a numerous race;
And if they all had power to build,
The earth would very soon be fill'd:
Materials would be quickly spent,
And houses would not give a rent.
The God of Wealth was therefore made
Sole patron of the building trade;
Leaving to wits the spacious air,
With license to build castles there:
In right whereof their old pretence
To lodge in garrets comes from thence.
There is a worm by Phoebus bred,
By leaves of mulberry is fed,
Which unprovided where to dwell,
Conforms itself to weave a cell;
Then curious hands this texture take,
And for themselves fine garments make.
Meantime a pair of awkward things
Grow to his back instead of wings;
He flutters when he thinks he flies,
Then sheds about his spawn and dies.
Just such an insect of the age
Is he that scribbles for the stage;
His birth he does from Phoebus raise,
And feeds upon imagin'd bays;
Throws all his wit and hours away
In twisting up an ill spun Play:
This gives him lodging and provides
A stock of tawdry shift besides.
With the unravell'd shreds of which
The under wits adorn their speech:
And now he spreads his little fans,
(For all the Muses Geese are Swans)
And borne on Fancy's pinions, thinks
He soars sublimest when he sinks:
But scatt'ring round his fly-blows, dies;
Whence broods of insect-poets rise.
  Premising thus, in modern way,
The greater part I have to say;
Sing, Muse, the house of Poet Van,
In higher strain than we began.
  Van (for 'tis fit the reader know it)
Is both a Herald and a Poet;
No wonder then if nicely skill'd
In each capacity to build.
As Herald, he can in a day
Repair a house gone to decay;
Or by achievements, arms, device,
Erect a new one in a trice;
And poets, if they had their due,
By ancient right are builders too:
This made him to Apollo pray
For leave to build--the poets way.
His prayer was granted, for the God
Consented with the usual nod.
  After hard throes of many a day
Van was delivered of a play,
Which in due time brought forth a house,
Just as the mountain did the mouse.
One story high, one postern door,
And one small chamber on a floor,
Born like a phoenix from the flame:
But neither bulk nor shape the same;
As animals of largest size
Corrupt to maggots, worms, and flies;
A type of modern wit and style,
The rubbish of an ancient pile;
So chemists boast they have a power,
From the dead ashes of a flower
Some faint resemblance to produce,
But not the virtue, taste, nor juice.
So modern rhymers strive to blast
The poetry of ages past;
Which, having wisely overthrown,
They from its ruins build their own.


[Footnote 1: This is the earlier version of the Poem discovered by
Forster at Narford, the residence of Mr. Fountaine. See Forster's "Life
of Swift," p. 163.--_W. E. B._]




VANBRUGH'S HOUSE,[1]

BUILT FROM THE RUINS OF WHITEHALL THAT WAS BURNT, 1703

In times of old, when Time was young,
And poets their own verses sung,
A verse would draw a stone or beam,
That now would overload a team;
Lead 'em a dance of many a mile,
Then rear 'em to a goodly pile.
Each number had its diff'rent power;
Heroic strains could build a tower;
Sonnets, or elegies to Chloris,
Might raise a house about two stories;
A lyric ode would slate; a catch
Would tile; an epigram would thatch.
  But, to their own or landlord's cost,
Now Poets feel this art is lost.
Not one of all our tuneful throng
Can raise a lodging for a song.
For Jove consider'd well the case,
Observed they grew a numerous race;
And should they build as fast as write,
'Twould ruin undertakers quite.
This evil, therefore, to prevent,
He wisely changed their element:
On earth the God of Wealth was made
Sole patron of the building trade;
Leaving the Wits the spacious air,
With license to build castles there:
And 'tis conceived their old pretence
To lodge in garrets comes from thence.
  Premising thus, in modern way,
The better half we have to say;
Sing, Muse, the house of Poet Van,
In higher strains than we began.
  Van (for 'tis fit the reader know it)
Is both a Herald[2] and a Poet;
No wonder then if nicely skill'd
In both capacities to build.
As Herald, he can in a day
Repair a house gone to decay;
Or, by achievements, arms, device,
Erect a new one in a trice;
And as a poet, he has skill
To build in speculation still.
"Great Jove!" he cried, "the art restore
To build by verse as heretofore,
And make my Muse the architect;
What palaces shall we erect!
No longer shall forsaken Thames
Lament his old Whitehall in flames;
A pile shall from its ashes rise,
Fit to invade or prop the skies."
  Jove smiled, and, like a gentle god,
Consenting with the usual nod,
Told Van, he knew his talent best,
And left the choice to his own breast.
So Van resolved to write a farce;
But, well perceiving wit was scarce,
With cunning that defect supplies:
Takes a French play as lawful prize;[3]
Steals thence his plot and ev'ry joke,
Not once suspecting Jove would smoke;
And (like a wag set down to write)
Would whisper to himself, "a _bite_."
Then, from this motley mingled style,
Proceeded to erect his pile.
So men of old, to gain renown, did
Build Babel with their tongues confounded.
Jove saw the cheat, but thought it best
To turn the matter to a jest;
Down from Olympus' top he slides,
Laughing as if he'd burst his sides:
Ay, thought the god, are these your tricks,
Why then old plays deserve old bricks;
And since you're sparing of your stuff,
Your building shall be small enough.
He spake, and grudging, lent his aid;
Th'experienced bricks, that knew their trade,
(As being bricks at second hand,)
Now move, and now in order stand.
  The building, as the Poet writ,
Rose in proportion to his wit--
And first the prologue built a wall;
So wide as to encompass all.
The scene, a wood, produc'd no more
Than a few scrubby trees before.
The plot as yet lay deep; and so
A cellar next was dug below;
But this a work so hard was found,
Two acts it cost him under ground.
Two other acts, we may presume,
Were spent in building each a room.
Thus far advanc'd, he made a shift
To raise a roof with act the fift.
The epilogue behind did frame
A place, not decent here to name.
  Now, Poets from all quarters ran,
To see the house of brother Van;
Looked high and low, walk'd often round;
But no such house was to be found.
One asks the watermen hard by,
"Where may the Poet's palace lie?"
Another of the Thames inquires,
If he has seen its gilded spires?
At length they in the rubbish spy
A thing resembling a goose-pie.
Thither in haste the Poets throng,
And gaze in silent wonder long,
Till one in raptures thus began
To praise the pile and builder Van:
  "Thrice happy Poet! who may'st trail
Thy house about thee like a snail:
Or harness'd to a nag, at ease
Take journeys in it like a chaise;
Or in a boat whene'er thou wilt,
Can'st make it serve thee for a tilt!
Capacious house! 'tis own'd by all
Thou'rt well contrived, tho' thou art small:
For ev'ry Wit in Britain's isle
May lodge within thy spacious pile.
Like Bacchus thou, as Poets feign,
Thy mother burnt, art born again,
Born like a phoenix from the flame:
But neither bulk nor shape the same;
As animals of largest size
Corrupt to maggots, worms, and flies;
A type of modern wit and style,
The rubbish of an ancient pile;
So chemists boast they have a power,
From the dead ashes of a flower
Some faint resemblance to produce,
But not the virtue, taste, or juice.
So modern rhymers wisely blast
The poetry of ages past;
Which, after they have overthrown,
They from its ruins build their own."


[Footnote 1: Here follows the later version of the poem, as printed in
all editions of Swift's works.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: Sir John Vanbrugh at that time held the office of
Clarencieux king of arms.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 3: Several of Vanbrugh's plays are taken from
Molire.--_Scott_. This is a very loose statement. That Vanbrugh was
indebted for some of his plays to French sources is true; but the only
one taken from Molire was "The Mistake," adapted from "Le Dpit
Amoureux"; while his two best plays, "The Relapse" and "The Provoked
Wife," were original.--_W. E. B_.]




BAUCIS AND PHILEMON[1]

ON THE EVER-LAMENTED LOSS OF THE TWO YEW-TREES
IN THE PARISH OF CHILTHORNE, SOMERSET. 1706.
IMITATED FROM THE EIGHTH BOOK OF OVID


In ancient time, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about, but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.
  It happen'd on a winter's night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Came to a village hard by Rixham,[2]
Ragged and not a groat betwixt 'em.
It rain'd as hard as it could pour,
Yet they were forced to walk an hour
From house to house, wet to the skin,
Before one soul would let 'em in.
They call'd at every door: "Good people,
My comrade's blind, and I'm a creeple!
Here we lie starving in the street,
'Twould grieve a body's heart to see't,
No Christian would turn out a beast,
In such a dreadful night at least;
Give us but straw and let us lie
In yonder barn to keep us dry."
Thus in the stroller's usual cant,
They begg'd relief, which none would grant.
No creature valued what they said,
One family was gone to bed:
The master bawled out half asleep,
"You fellows, what a noise you keep!
So many beggars pass this way,
We can't be quiet, night nor day;
We cannot serve you every one;
Pray take your answer, and be gone."
One swore he'd send 'em to the stocks;
A third could not forbear his mocks;
But bawl'd as loud as he could roar
"You're on the wrong side of the door!"
One surly clown look't out and said,
"I'll fling the p--pot on your head:
You sha'nt come here, nor get a sous!
You look like rogues would rob a house.
Can't you go work, or serve the King?
You blind and lame! 'Tis no such thing.
That's but a counterfeit sore leg!
For shame! two sturdy rascals beg!
If I come down, _I'll_ spoil your trick,
And cure you both with a good stick."
  Our wand'ring saints, in woful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having thro' all the village past,
To a small cottage came at last
Where dwelt a good old honest ye'man,
Call'd thereabout good man Philemon;
Who kindly did the saints invite
In his poor house to pass the night;
And then the hospitable sire
Bid Goody Baucis mend the fire;
Whilst he from out the chimney took
A flitch of bacon off the hook,
And freely from the fattest side
Cut out large slices to be fry'd;
Which tost up in a pan with batter,
And served up in an earthen platter,
Quoth Baucis, "This is wholesome fare,
Eat, honest friends, and never spare,
And if we find our victuals fail,
We can but make it out in ale."
  To a small kilderkin of beer,
Brew'd for the good time of the year,
Philemon, by his wife's consent,
Stept with a jug, and made a vent,
And having fill'd it to the brink,
Invited both the saints to drink.
When they had took a second draught,
Behold, a miracle was wrought;
For, Baucis with amazement found,
Although the jug had twice gone round,
It still was full up to the top,
As they ne'er had drunk a drop.
You may be sure so strange a sight,
Put the old people in a fright:
Philemon whisper'd to his wife,
"These men are--Saints--I'll lay my life!"
The strangers overheard, and said,
"You're in the right--but be'nt afraid:
No hurt shall come to you or yours:
But for that pack of churlish boors,
Not fit to live on Christian ground,
They and their village shall be drown'd;
Whilst you shall see your cottage rise,
And grow a church before your eyes."
  Scarce had they spoke, when fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose ev'ry beam and rafter;
The heavy wall went clambering after.
The chimney widen'd, and grew higher,
Became a steeple with a spire.
The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fastened to a joist,
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below:
In vain; for a superior force
Applied at bottom stops its course:
Doom'd ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.
  The wooden jack, which had almost
Lost by disuse the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increas'd by new intestine wheels;
But what adds to the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower.
The flyer, altho't had leaden feet,
Would turn so quick you scarce could see't;
But, now stopt by some hidden powers,
Moves round but twice in twice twelve hours,
While in the station of a jack,
'Twas never known to turn its back,
A friend in turns and windings tried,
Nor ever left the chimney's side.
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But, up against the steeple rear'd,
Became a clock, and still adher'd;
And still its love to household cares,
By a shrill voice at noon declares,
Warning the cookmaid not to burn
That roast meat, which it cannot turn.
  The groaning-chair began to crawl,
Like a huge insect, up the wall;
There stuck, and to a pulpit grew,
But kept its matter and its hue,
And mindful of its ancient state,
Still groans while tattling gossips prate.
The mortar only chang'd its name,
In its old shape a font became.
  The porringers, that in a row,
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring show,
To a less noble substance chang'd,
Were now but leathern buckets rang'd.
  The ballads, pasted on the wall,
Of Chevy Chase, and English Mall,[3]
Fair Rosamond, and Robin Hood,
The little Children in the Wood,
Enlarged in picture, size, and letter,
And painted, lookt abundance better,
And now the heraldry describe
Of a churchwarden, or a tribe.
A bedstead of the antique mode,
Composed of timber many a load,
Such as our grandfathers did use,
Was metamorphos'd into pews;
Which yet their former virtue keep
By lodging folk disposed to sleep.
  The cottage, with such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees,
The holy men desired their host
To ask for what he fancied most.
Philemon, having paused a while,
Replied in complimental style:
"Your goodness, more than my desert,
Makes you take all things in good part:
You've raised a church here in a minute,
And I would fain continue in it;
I'm good for little at my days,
Make me the parson if you please."
  He spoke, and presently he feels
His grazier's coat reach down his heels;
The sleeves new border'd with a list,
Widen'd and gather'd at his wrist,
But, being old, continued just
As threadbare, and as full of dust.
A shambling awkward gait he took,
With a demure dejected look,
Talk't of his offerings, tythes, and dues,
Could smoke and drink and read the news,
Or sell a goose at the next town,
Decently hid beneath his gown.
Contriv'd to preach old sermons next,
Chang'd in the preface and the text.
At christ'nings well could act his part,
And had the service all by heart;
Wish'd women might have children fast,
And thought whose sow had farrow'd last;
Against dissenters would repine.
And stood up firm for "right divine;"
Carried it to his equals higher,
But most obedient to the squire.
Found his head fill'd with many a system;
But classic authors,--he ne'er mist 'em.
  Thus having furbish'd up a parson,
Dame Baucis next they play'd their farce on.
Instead of homespun coifs, were seen
Good pinners edg'd with colberteen;[4]
Her petticoat, transform'd apace,
Became black satin, flounced with lace.
"Plain Goody" would no longer down,
'Twas "Madam," in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes.
Amaz'd to see her look so prim,
And she admir'd as much at him.
  Thus happy in their change of life,
Were several years this man and wife:
When on a day, which prov'd their last,
Discoursing o'er old stories past,
They went by chance, amidst their talk,
To the churchyard, to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cry'd out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"--
"Sprout;" quoth the man; "what's this you tell us?
I hope you don't believe me jealous!
But yet, methinks, I feel it true,
And really yours is budding too--
Nay,--now I cannot stir my foot;
It feels as if 'twere taking root."
  Description would but tire my Muse,
In short, they both were turn'd to yews.
Old Goodman Dobson of the Green
Remembers he the trees has seen;
He'll talk of them from noon till night,
And goes with folk to show the sight;
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there;
Points out the place of either yew,
Here Baucis, there Philemon, grew:
Till once a parson of our town,
To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
At which, 'tis hard to be believ'd
How much the other tree was griev'd,
Grew scrubby, dy'd a-top, was stunted,
So the next parson stubb'd and burnt it.



[Footnote 1: I here give the original version of this poem, which Forster
found in Swift's handwriting at Narford; and which has never been
published. It is well known that, at Addison's suggestion, Swift made
extensive changes in this, "one of the happiest of his poems," concerning
which Forster says, in his "Life of Swift," at p. 165: "The poem, as
printed, contains one hundred and seventy-eight lines; the poem, as I
found it at Narford, has two hundred and thirty; and the changes in the
latter bringing it into the condition of the former, by which only it has
been thus far known, comprise the omission of ninety-six lines, the
addition of forty-four, and the alteration of twenty-two. The question
can now be discussed whether or not the changes were improvements, and,
in my opinion, the decision must be adverse to Addison."--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: The "village hard by Rixham" of the original has as little
connection with "Chilthorne" as the "village down in Kent" of the altered
version, and Swift had probably no better reason than his rhyme for
either.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 3: See the next poem for note on this line. Chevy Chase seems
more suitable to the characters than the Joan of Arc of the altered
version.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: A lace so called after the celebrated French Minister, M.
Colbert Planch's "Costume," p. 395.--_W. E. B_.]



BAUCIS AND PHILEMON[1]

ON THE EVER-LAMENTED LOSS OF THE TWO YEW-TREES IN THE PARISH OF
CHILTHORNE, SOMERSET. 1706.
IMITATED FROM THE EIGHTH BOOK OF OVID

In ancient times, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about, but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.
  It happen'd on a winter night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Disguis'd in tatter'd habits, went
To a small village down in Kent;
Where, in the strollers' canting strain,
They begg'd from door to door in vain,
Try'd ev'ry tone might pity win;
But not a soul would let them in.
  Our wand'ring saints, in woful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having thro' all the village past,
To a small cottage came at last
Where dwelt a good old honest ye'man,
Call'd in the neighbourhood Philemon;
Who kindly did these saints invite
In his poor hut to pass the night;
And then the hospitable sire
Bid Goody Baucis mend the fire;
While he from out the chimney took
A flitch of bacon off the hook,
And freely from the fattest side
Cut out large slices to be fry'd;
Then stepp'd aside to fetch 'em drink,
Fill'd a large jug up to the brink,
And saw it fairly twice go round;
Yet (what was wonderful) they found
'Twas still replenished to the top,
As if they ne'er had touch'd a drop.
The good old couple were amaz'd,
And often on each other gaz'd;
For both were frighten'd to the heart,
And just began to cry, "What _art_!"
Then softly turn'd aside, to view
Whether the lights were burning blue.
The gentle pilgrims, soon aware on't,
Told them their calling and their errand:
"Good folk, you need not be afraid,
We are but saints," the hermits said;
"No hurt shall come to you or yours:
But for that pack of churlish boors,
Not fit to live on Christian ground,
They and their houses shall be drown'd;
While you shall see your cottage rise,
And grow a church before your eyes."
  They scarce had spoke, when fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose ev'ry beam and rafter;
The heavy wall climb'd slowly after.
  The chimney widen'd, and grew higher
Became a steeple with a spire.
  The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fasten'd to a joist,
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below:
In vain; for a superior force
Applied at bottom stops its course:
Doom'd ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.
  A wooden jack, which had almost
Lost by disuse the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increas'd by new intestine wheels;
And, what exalts the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower.
The flyer, though it had leaden feet,
Turn'd round so quick you scarce could see't;
But, slacken'd by some secret power,
Now hardly moves an inch an hour.
The jack and chimney, near ally'd,
Had never left each other's side;
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But, up against the steeple rear'd,
Became a clock, and still adher'd;
And still its love to household cares,
By a shrill voice at noon, declares,
Warning the cookmaid not to burn
That roast meat, which it cannot turn.
The groaning-chair began to crawl,
Like an huge snail, half up the wall;
There stuck aloft in public view,
And with small change, a pulpit grew.
  The porringers, that in a row
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring show,
To a less noble substance chang'd,
Were now but leathern buckets rang'd.
  The ballads, pasted on the wall,
Of Joan[2] of France, and English Mall,[3]
Fair Rosamond, and Robin Hood,
The little Children in the Wood,
Now seem'd to look abundance better,
Improved in picture, size, and letter:
And, high in order plac'd, describe
The heraldry of ev'ry tribe.[4]
  A bedstead of the antique mode,
Compact of timber many a load,
Such as our ancestors did use,
Was metamorphos'd into pews;
Which still their ancient nature keep
By lodging folk disposed to sleep.
  The cottage, by such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees,
The hermits then desired their host
To ask for what he fancy'd most.
Philemon, having paused a while,
Return'd them thanks in homely style;
Then said, "My house is grown so fine,
Methinks, I still would call it mine.
I'm old, and fain would live at ease;
Make me the parson if you please."
  He spoke, and presently he feels
His grazier's coat fall down his heels:
He sees, yet hardly can believe,
About each arm a pudding sleeve;
His waistcoat to a cassock grew,
And both assumed a sable hue;
But, being old, continued just
As threadbare, and as full of dust.
His talk was now of tithes and dues:
Could smoke his pipe, and read the news;
Knew how to preach old sermons next,
Vamp'd in the preface and the text;
At christ'nings well could act his part,
And had the service all by heart;
Wish'd women might have children fast,
And thought whose sow had farrow'd last;
Against dissenters would repine,
And stood up firm for "right divine;"
Found his head fill'd with many a system;
But classic authors,--he ne'er mist 'em.
  Thus having furbish'd up a parson,
Dame Baucis next they play'd their farce on.
Instead of homespun coifs, were seen
Good pinners edg'd with colberteen;
Her petticoat, transform'd apace,
Became black satin, flounced with lace.
"Plain Goody" would no longer down,
'Twas "Madam," in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes.
Amaz'd to see her look so prim,
And she admir'd as much at him.
  Thus happy in their change of life,
Were several years this man and wife:
When on a day, which prov'd their last,
Discoursing o'er old stories past,
They went by chance, amidst their talk,
[5]To the churchyard to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cry'd out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"--
"Sprout;" quoth the man; "what's this you tell us?
I hope you don't believe me jealous!
But yet, methinks, I feel it true,
And really yours is budding too--Nay,--now
I cannot stir my foot;
It feels as if 'twere taking root."
  Description would but tire my Muse,
In short, they both were turn'd to yews.
Old Goodman Dobson of the Green
Remembers he the trees has seen;
He'll talk of them from noon till night,
And goes with folk to show the sight;
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there;
Points out the place of either yew,
Here Baucis, there Philemon, grew:
Till once a parson of our town,
To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
At which, 'tis hard to be believ'd
How much the other tree was griev'd,
Grew scrubby, dy'd a-top, was stunted,
So the next parson stubb'd and burnt it.


[Footnote 1: This is the version of the poem as altered by Swift in
accordance with Addison's suggestions.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: La Pucelle d'Orlans. See "Hudibras," "Lady's Answer," verse
285, and note in Grey's edition, ii, 439.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Mary Ambree, on whose exploits in Flanders the popular
ballad was written. The line in the text is from "Hudibras," Part I,
c. 2, 367, where she is compared with Trulla:
  "A bold virago, stout and tall,
  As Joan of France, or English Mall."
The ballad is preserved in Percy's "Reliques of English Poetry," vol. ii,
239.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: The tribes of Israel were sometimes distinguished in country
churches by the ensigns given to them by Jacob.--_Dublin Edition_.]


[Footnote 5: In the churchyard to fetch a walk.--_Dublin Edition_.]




THE HISTORY OF VANBRUGH'S HOUSE
1708

When Mother Cludd[1] had rose from play,
And call'd to take the cards away,
Van saw, but seem'd not to regard,
How Miss pick'd every painted card,
And, busy both with hand and eye,
Soon rear'd a house two stories high.
Van's genius, without thought or lecture
Is hugely turn'd to architecture:
He view'd the edifice, and smiled,
Vow'd it was pretty for a child:
It was so perfect in its kind,
He kept the model in his mind.
  But, when he found the boys at play
And saw them dabbling in their clay,
He stood behind a stall to lurk,
And mark the progress of their work;
With true delight observed them all
Raking up mud to build a wall.
The plan he much admired, and took
The model in his table-book:
Thought himself now exactly skill'd,
And so resolved a house to build:
A real house, with rooms and stairs,
Five times at least as big as theirs;
Taller than Miss's by two yards;
Not a sham thing of play or cards:
And so he did; for, in a while,
He built up such a monstrous pile,
That no two chairmen could be found
Able to lift it from the ground.
Still at Whitehall it stands in view,
Just in the place where first it grew;
There all the little schoolboys run,
Envying to see themselves outdone.
  From such deep rudiments as these,
Van is become, by due degrees,
For building famed, and justly reckon'd,
At court,[2] Vitruvius the Second:[3]
No wonder, since wise authors show,
That best foundations must be low:
And now the duke has wisely ta'en him
To be his architect at Blenheim.
  But raillery at once apart,
If this rule holds in every art;
Or if his grace were no more skill'd in
The art of battering walls than building,
We might expect to see next year
A mouse-trap man chief engineer.


[Footnote 1: See _ante_, p. 51, "The Reverse."--_W, E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Vitruvius Pollio, author of the treatise "De
Architectura."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Sir John Vanbrugh held the office of Comptroller-General of
his majesty's works.--_Scott_.]




A GRUB-STREET ELEGY

ON THE SUPPOSED DEATH OF PARTRIDGE THE ALMANACK MAKER.[1] 1708


Well; 'tis as Bickerstaff has guest,
Though we all took it for a jest:
Partridge is dead; nay more, he dy'd,
Ere he could prove the good 'squire ly'd.
Strange, an astrologer should die
Without one wonder in the sky;
Not one of all his crony stars
To pay their duty at his hearse!
No meteor, no eclipse appear'd!
No comet with a flaming beard!
The sun hath rose and gone to bed,
Just as if Partridge were not dead;
Nor hid himself behind the moon
To make a dreadful night at noon.
He at fit periods walks through Aries,
Howe'er our earthly motion varies;
And twice a-year he'll cut th' Equator,
As if there had been no such matter.
  Some wits have wonder'd what analogy
There is 'twixt cobbling[2] and astrology;
How Partridge made his optics rise
From a shoe-sole to reach the skies.
  A list the cobbler's temples ties,
To keep the hair out of his eyes;
From whence 'tis plain the diadem
That princes wear derives from them;
And therefore crowns are now-a-days
Adorn'd with golden stars and rays;
Which plainly shows the near alliance
'Twixt cobbling and the planet's science.
  Besides, that slow-paced sign Btes,
As 'tis miscall'd, we know not who 'tis;
But Partridge ended all disputes;
He knew his trade, and call'd it _boots_.[3]
  The horned moon,[4] which heretofore
Upon their shoes the Romans wore,
Whose wideness kept their toes from corns,
And whence we claim our shoeing-horns,
Shows how the art of cobbling bears
A near resemblance to the spheres.
A scrap of parchment hung by geometry,
(A great refiner in barometry,)
Can, like the stars, foretell the weather;
And what is parchment else but leather?
Which an astrologer might use
Either for almanacks or shoes.
  Thus Partridge, by his wit and parts,
At once did practise both these arts:
And as the boding owl (or rather
The bat, because her wings are leather)
Steals from her private cell by night,
And flies about the candle-light;
So learned Partridge could as well
Creep in the dark from leathern cell,
And in his fancy fly as far
To peep upon a twinkling star.
  Besides, he could confound the spheres,
And set the planets by the ears;
To show his skill, he Mars could join
To Venus in aspect malign;
Then call in Mercury for aid,
And cure the wounds that Venus made.
  Great scholars have in Lucian read,
When Philip King of Greece was dead
His soul and spirit did divide,
And each part took a different side;
One rose a star; the other fell
Beneath, and mended shoes in Hell.[5]
  Thus Partridge still shines in each art,
The cobbling and star-gazing part,
And is install'd as good a star
As any of the Caesars are.
  Triumphant star! some pity show
On cobblers militant below,
Whom roguish boys, in stormy nights,
Torment by pissing out their lights,
Or through a chink convey their smoke,
Enclosed artificers to choke.
  Thou, high exalted in thy sphere,
May'st follow still thy calling there.
To thee the Bull will lend his hide,
By Phoebus newly tann'd and dry'd;
For thee they Argo's hulk will tax,
And scrape her pitchy sides for wax:
Then Ariadne kindly lends
Her braided hair to make thee ends;
The points of Sagittarius' dart
Turns to an awl by heavenly art;
And Vulcan, wheedled by his wife,
Will forge for thee a paring-knife.
For want of room by Virgo's side,
She'll strain a point, and sit[6] astride,
To take thee kindly in between;
And then the Signs will be Thirteen.



[Footnote 1: For details of the humorous persecution of this impostor by
Swift, see "Prose Works," vol. i, pp. 298 _et seq.--W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: Partridge was a cobbler.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 3: See his Almanack.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 4: Allusion to the crescent-shaped ornament of gold or silver
which distinguished the wearer as a senator.
  "Appositam nigrae lunam subtexit alutae."--Juvenal, _Sat_. vii, 192; and
Martial, i, 49, "Lunata nusquam pellis."--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 5: Luciani Opera, xi, 17.]

[Footnote 6:
    "ipse tibi iam brachia contrahit ardens
  Scorpios, et coeli iusta plus parte reliquit."
VIRG., _Georg._, i, 34.]




THE EPITAPH

Here, five feet deep, lies on his back
A cobbler, starmonger, and quack;
Who to the stars, in pure good will,
Does to his best look upward still.
Weep, all you customers that use
His pills, his almanacks, or shoes;
And you that did your fortunes seek,
Step to his grave but once a-week;
This earth, which bears his body's print,
You'll find has so much virtue in't,
That I durst pawn my ears, 'twill tell
Whate'er concerns you full as well,
In physic, stolen goods, or love,
As he himself could, when above.




A DESCRIPTION OF THE MORNING

WRITTEN IN APRIL 1709, AND FIRST PRINTED IN "THE TATLER"[1]


Now hardly here and there an hackney-coach
Appearing, show'd the ruddy morn's approach.
Now Betty from her master's bed had flown,
And softly stole to discompose her own;
The slip-shod 'prentice from his master's door
Had pared the dirt, and sprinkled round the floor.
Now Moll had whirl'd her mop with dext'rous airs,
Prepared to scrub the entry and the stairs.
The youth with broomy stumps began to trace
The kennel's edge, where wheels had worn the place.[2]
The small-coal man was heard with cadence deep,
Till drown'd in shriller notes of chimney-sweep:
Duns at his lordship's gate began to meet;
And brickdust Moll had scream'd through half the street.
The turnkey now his flock returning sees,
Duly let out a-nights to steal for fees:[3]
The watchful bailiffs take their silent stands,
And schoolboys lag with satchels in their hands.


[Footnote 1: No. 9. See the excellent edition in six vols., with notes,
1786.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: To find old nails.--_Faulkner_.]

[Footnote 3: To meet the charges levied upon them by the keeper of the
prison.--_W. E. B._]




A DESCRIPTION OF A CITY SHOWER[1]

WRITTEN IN OCT., 1710; AND FIRST PRINTED IN "THE TATLER," NO. 238


Careful observers may foretell the hour,
(By sure prognostics,) when to dread a shower.
While rain depends, the pensive cat gives o'er
Her frolics, and pursues her tail no more.
Returning home at night, you'll find the sink
Strike your offended sense with double stink.
If you be wise, then, go not far to dine:
You'll spend in coach-hire more than save in wine.
A coming shower your shooting corns presage,
Old a-ches[2] throb, your hollow tooth will rage;
Sauntering in coffeehouse is Dulman seen;
He damns the climate, and complains of spleen.
Meanwhile the South, rising with dabbled wings,
A sable cloud athwart the welkin flings,
That swill'd more liquor than it could contain,
And, like a drunkard, gives it up again.
Brisk Susan whips her linen from the rope,
While the first drizzling shower is borne aslope;
Such is that sprinkling which some careless quean
Flirts on you from her mop, but not so clean:
You fly, invoke the gods; then, turning, stop
To rail; she singing, still whirls on her mop.
Not yet the dust had shunn'd the unequal strife,
But, aided by the wind, fought still for life,
And wafted with its foe by violent gust,
'Twas doubtful which was rain, and which was dust.[3]
Ah! where must needy poet seek for aid,
When dust and rain at once his coat invade?
Sole[4] coat! where dust, cemented by the rain,
Erects the nap, and leaves a cloudy stain!
Now in contiguous drops the flood comes down,
Threatening with deluge this _devoted_ town.
To shops in crowds the daggled females fly,
Pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy.
The Templar spruce, while every spout's abroach,
Stays till 'tis fair, yet seems to call a coach.
The tuck'd-up sempstress walks with hasty strides,
While streams run down her oil'd umbrella's sides.
Here various kinds, by various fortunes led,
Commence acquaintance underneath a shed.
Triumphant Tories, and desponding Whigs,[5]
Forget their feuds, and join to save their wigs.
Box'd in a chair the beau impatient sits,
While spouts run clattering o'er the roof by fits,
And ever and anon with frightful din
The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed,
Pregnant with Greeks impatient to be freed,
(Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Instead of paying chairmen, ran them through,)
Laocoon[6] struck the outside with his spear,
And each imprison'd hero quaked for fear.
  Now from all parts the swelling kennels flow,
And bear their trophies with them as they go:
Filth of all hues and odour, seem to tell
What street they sail'd from, by their sight and smell.
They, as each torrent drives with rapid force,
From Smithfield to St. Pulchre's shape their course,
And in huge confluence join'd at Snowhill ridge,
Fall from the conduit prone to Holborn bridge.[7]
Sweeping from butchers' stalls, dung, guts, and blood,
Drown'd puppies, stinking sprats, all drench'd in mud,
Dead cats, and turnip-tops, come tumbling down the flood.


[Footnote 1: Swift was very proud of the "Shower," and so refers to it in
the Journal to Stella. See "Prose Works," vol. ii, p. 33: "They say 'tis
the best thing I ever writ, and I think so too. I suppose the Bishop of
Clogher will show it you. Pray tell me how you like it." Again, p. 41:
"there never was such a Shower since Dane's," etc.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: "Aches" is two syllables, but modern printers, who had lost
the right pronunciation, have _aches_ as one syllable; and then to
complete the metre have foisted in "aches _will_ throb." Thus, what the
poet and the linguist wish to preserve, is altered and finally lost. See
Disraeli's "Curiosities of Literature," vol. i, title "Errata," p. 81,
edit. 1858. A good example occurs in "Hudibras," Part III, canto 2, line
407, where persons are mentioned who
  "Can by their Pangs and _Aches_ find
  All turns and changes of the wind."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: "'Twas doubtful which was sea and which was sky." GARTH'S
_Dispensary_.]

[Footnote 4: Originally thus, but altered when Pope published the
"Miscellanies":
  "His only coat, where dust confused with rain,
  Roughens the nap, and leaves a mingled stain."--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 5: Alluding to the change of ministry at that time.]

[Footnote 6: Virg., "Aeneid," lib. ii.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: Fleet Ditch, in which Pope laid the famous diving scene in
"The Dunciad"; celebrated also by Gay in his "Trivia." There is a view of
Fleet Ditch as an illustration to "The Dunciad" in Warburton's edition
of Pope, 8vo, 1751.--_W. E. B._]




ON THE LITTLE HOUSE BY THE CHURCHYARD OF CASTLENOCK
1710

Whoever pleases to inquire
Why yonder steeple wants a spire,
The grey old fellow, Poet Joe,[1]
The philosophic cause will show.
Once on a time a western blast,
At least twelve inches overcast,
Reckoning roof, weathercock, and all,
Which came with a prodigious fall;
And, tumbling topsy-turvy round,
Lit with its bottom on the ground:
For, by the laws of gravitation,
It fell into its proper station.
  This is the little strutting pile
You see just by the churchyard stile;
The walls in tumbling gave a knock,
And thus the steeple got a shock;
From whence the neighbouring farmer calls
The steeple, Knock; the vicar, Walls.[2]
  The vicar once a-week creeps in,
Sits with his knees up to his chin;
Here cons his notes, and takes a whet,
Till the small ragged flock is met.
  A traveller, who by did pass,
Observed the roof behind the grass;
On tiptoe stood, and rear'd his snout,
And saw the parson creeping out:
Was much surprised to see a crow
Venture to build his nest so low.
  A schoolboy ran unto't, and thought
The crib was down, the blackbird caught.
A third, who lost his way by night,
Was forced for safety to alight,
And, stepping o'er the fabric roof,
His horse had like to spoil his hoof.
  Warburton[3] took it in his noddle,
This building was design'd a model;
Or of a pigeon-house or oven,
To bake one loaf, or keep one dove in.
  Then Mrs. Johnson[4] gave her verdict,
And every one was pleased that heard it;
All that you make this stir about
Is but a still which wants a spout.
The reverend Dr. Raymond[5] guess'd
More probably than all the rest;
He said, but that it wanted room,
It might have been a pigmy's tomb.
  The doctor's family came by,
And little miss began to cry,
Give me that house in my own hand!
Then madam bade the chariot stand,
Call'd to the clerk, in manner mild,
Pray, reach that thing here to the child:
That thing, I mean, among the kale;
And here's to buy a pot of ale.
  The clerk said to her in a heat,
What! sell my master's country seat,
Where he comes every week from town!
He would not sell it for a crown.
Poh! fellow, keep not such a pother;
In half an hour thou'lt make another.
  Says Nancy,[6] I can make for miss
A finer house ten times than this;
The dean will give me willow sticks,
And Joe my apron-full of bricks.


[Footnote 1: Mr. Beaumont of Trim, remarkable, though not a very old man,
for venerable white locks.--_Scott_. He had a claim on the Irish
Government, which Swift assisted him in getting paid. See "Prose Works,"
vol. ii, Journal to Stella, especially at p. 174, respecting Joe's desire
for a collector's place.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Archdeacon Wall, a correspondent of Swift's.--_Dublin
Edition_.]

[Footnote 3: Dr. Swift's curate at Laracor.]

[Footnote 4: Stella.]

[Footnote 5: Minister of Trim.]

[Footnote 6: The waiting-woman.]




A TOWN ECLOGUE. 1710[1]

_Scene, the Royal Exchange_

CORYDON

Now the keen rigour of the winter's o'er,
No hail descends, and frost can pinch no more,
While other girls confess the genial spring,
And laugh aloud, or amorous ditties sing,
Secure from cold, their lovely necks display,
And throw each useless chafing-dish away;
Why sits my Phillis discontented here,
Nor feels the turn of the revolving year?
Why on that brow dwell sorrow and dismay,
Where Loves were wont to sport, and Smiles to play?

PHILLIS

Ah, Corydon! survey the 'Change around,
Through all the 'Change no wretch like me is found:
Alas! the day, when I, poor heedless maid,
Was to your rooms in Lincoln's Inn betray'd;
Then how you swore, how many vows you made!
Ye listening Zephyrs, that o'erheard his love,
Waft the soft accents to the gods above.
Alas! the day; for (O, eternal shame!)
I sold you handkerchiefs, and lost my fame.

CORYDON

When I forget the favour you bestow'd,
Red herrings shall be spawn'd in Tyburn Road:
Fleet Street, transform'd, become a flowery green,
And mass be sung where operas are seen.
The wealthy cit, and the St. James's beau,
Shall change their quarters, and their joys forego;
Stock-jobbing, this to Jonathan's shall come,
At the Groom Porter's, that play off his plum.

PHILLIS

But what to me does all that love avail,
If, while I doze at home o'er porter's ale,
Each night with wine and wenches you regale?
My livelong hours in anxious cares are past,
And raging hunger lays my beauty waste.
On templars spruce in vain I glances throw,
And with shrill voice invite them as they go.
Exposed in vain my glossy ribbons shine,
And unregarded wave upon the twine.
The week flies round, and when my profit's known,
I hardly clear enough to change a crown.

CORYDON

Hard fate of virtue, thus to be distrest,
Thou fairest of thy trade, and far the best;
As fruitmen's stalls the summer market grace,
And ruddy peaches them; as first in place
Plumcake is seen o'er smaller pastry ware,
And ice on that: so Phillis does appear
In playhouse and in Park, above the rest
Of belles mechanic, elegantly drest.

PHILLIS

And yet Crepundia, that conceited fair,
Amid her toys, affects a saucy air,
And views me hourly with a scornful eye.

CORYDON

She might as well with bright Cleora vie.

PHILLIS

With this large petticoat I strive in vain
To hide my folly past, and coming pain;
'Tis now no secret; she, and fifty more,
Observe the symptoms I had once before:
A second babe at Wapping must be placed,
When I scarce bear the charges of the last.

CORYDON

What I could raise I sent; a pound of plums,
Five shillings, and a coral for his gums;
To-morrow I intend him something more.

PHILLIS

I sent a frock and pair of shoes before.

CORYDON

However, you shall home with me to-night,
Forget your cares, and revel in delight,
I have in store a pint or two of wine,
Some cracknels, and the remnant of a chine.

  And now on either side, and all around,
The weighty shop-boards fall, and bars resound;
Each ready sempstress slips her pattens on,
And ties her hood, preparing to be gone.

L. B.  W. H.  J. S.  S. T.


[Footnote 1: Swift and Pope delighted to ridicule Philips' "Pastorals,"
and wrote several parodies upon them, the fame of which has been eclipsed
by Gay's "Shepherd's Week."--_Scott_.]


A CONFERENCE

BETWEEN SIR HARRY PIERCE'S CHARIOT, AND MRS. D. STOPFORD'S CHAIR [1]


CHARIOT

My pretty dear Cuz, tho' I've roved the town o'er,
To dispatch in an hour some visits a score;
Though, since first on the wheels, I've been every day
At the 'Change, at a raffling, at church, or a play;
And the fops of the town are pleased with the notion
Of calling your slave the perpetual motion;--
Though oft at your door I have whined [out] my love
As my Knight does grin his at your Lady above;
Yet, ne'er before this, though I used all my care,
I e'er was so happy to meet my dear Chair;
And since we're so near, like birds of a feather,
Let's e'en, as they say, set our horses together.

CHAIR

By your awkward address, you're that thing which should carry,
With one footman behind, our lover Sir Harry.
By your language, I judge, you think me a wench;
He that makes love to me, must make it in French.
Thou that's drawn by two beasts, and carry'st a brute,
Canst thou vainly e'er hope, I'll answer thy suit?
Though sometimes you pretend to appear with your six,
No regard to their colour, their sexes you mix:
Then on the grand-paw you'd look very great,
With your new-fashion'd glasses, and nasty old seat.
Thus a beau I have seen strut with a cock'd hat,
And newly rigg'd out, with a dirty cravat.
You may think that you make a figure most shining,
But it's plain that you have an old cloak for a lining.
Are those double-gilt nails? Where's the lustre of Kerry,
To set off the Knight, and to finish the Jerry?
If you hope I'll be kind, you must tell me what's due
In George's-lane for you, ere I'll buckle to.

CHARIOT

Why, how now, Doll Diamond, you're very alert;
Is it your French breeding has made you so pert?
Because I was civil, here's a stir with a pox:
Who is it that values your ---- or your fox?
Sure 'tis to her honour, he ever should bed
His bloody red hand to her bloody red head.
You're proud of your gilding; but I tell you each nail
Is only just tinged with a rub at her tail;
And although it may pass for gold on a ninny,
Sure we know a Bath shilling soon from a guinea.
Nay, her foretop's a cheat; each morn she does black it,
Yet, ere it be night, it's the same with her placket.
I'll ne'er be run down any more with your cant;
Your velvet was wore before in a mant,
On the back of her mother; but now 'tis much duller,--
The fire she carries hath changed its colour.
Those creatures that draw me you never would mind,
If you'd but look on your own Pharaoh's lean kine;
They're taken for spectres, they're so meagre and spare,
Drawn damnably low by your sorrel mare.
We know how your lady was on you befriended;
You're not to be paid for 'till the lawsuit is ended:
But her bond it is good, he need not to doubt;
She is two or three years above being out.
Could my Knight be advised, he should ne'er spend his vigour
On one he can't hope of e'er making _bigger_.


[Footnote 1: Mrs. Dorothy Stopford, afterwards Countess of Meath, of whom
Swift says, in his Journal to Stella, Feb. 23, 1711-12, "Countess Doll
of Meath is such an owl, that, wherever I visit, people are asking me,
whether I know such an Irish lady, and her figure and her foppery."
See, _post_, the Poem entitled, "Dicky and Dolly."--_W. E. B._]




TO LORD HARLEY, ON HIS MARRIAGE[1]
OCTOBER 31, 1713

Among the numbers who employ
Their tongues and pens to give you joy,
Dear Harley! generous youth, admit
What friendship dictates more than wit.
Forgive me, when I fondly thought
(By frequent observations taught)
A spirit so inform'd as yours
Could never prosper in amours.
The God of Wit, and Light, and Arts,
With all acquired and natural parts,
Whose harp could savage beasts enchant,
Was an unfortunate gallant.
Had Bacchus after Daphne reel'd,
The nymph had soon been brought to yield;
Or, had embroider'd Mars pursued,
The nymph would ne'er have been a prude.
Ten thousand footsteps, full in view,
Mark out the way where Daphne[2] flew;
For such is all the sex's flight,
They fly from learning, wit, and light;
They fly, and none can overtake
But some gay coxcomb, or a rake.
  How then, dear Harley, could I guess
That you should meet, in love, success?
For, if those ancient tales be true,
Phoebus was beautiful as you;
Yet Daphne never slack'd her pace,
For wit and learning spoil'd his face.
And since the same resemblance held
In gifts wherein you both excell'd,
I fancied every nymph would run
From you, as from Latona's son.
Then where, said I, shall Harley find
A virgin of superior mind,
With wit and virtue to discover,
And pay the merit of her lover?
This character shall Ca'endish claim,
Born to retrieve her sex's fame.
The chief among the glittering crowd,
Of titles, birth, and fortune proud,
(As fools are insolent and vain)
Madly aspired to wear her chain;
But Pallas, guardian of the maid,
Descending to her charge's aid,
Held out Medusa's snaky locks,
Which stupified them all to stocks.
The nymph with indignation view'd
The dull, the noisy, and the lewd;
For Pallas, with celestial light,
Had purified her mortal sight;
Show'd her the virtues all combined,
Fresh blooming, in young Harley's mind.
  Terrestrial nymphs, by formal arts,
Display their various nets for hearts:
Their looks are all by method set,
When to be prude, and when coquette;
Yet, wanting skill and power to chuse,
Their only pride is to refuse.
But, when a goddess would bestow
Her love on some bright youth below,
Round all the earth she casts her eyes;
And then, descending from the skies,
Makes choice of him she fancies best,
And bids the ravish'd youth be bless'd.
Thus the bright empress of the morn[3]
Chose for her spouse a mortal born:
The goddess made advances first;
Else what aspiring hero durst?
Though, like a virgin of fifteen,
She blushes when by mortals seen;
Still blushes, and with speed retires,
When Sol pursues her with his fires.
  Diana thus, Heaven's chastest queen
Struck with Endymion's graceful mien
Down from her silver chariot came,
And to the shepherd own'd her flame.
  Thus Ca'endish, as Aurora bright,
And chaster than the Queen of Night
Descended from her sphere to find
A mortal of superior kind.


[Footnote 1: Lord Harley, only son of the first Earl of Oxford, married
Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles, only daughter of John, Duke of
Newcastle. He took no part in public affairs, but delighted in the
Society of the poets and men of letters of his day, especially Pope and
Swift.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Pursued in vain by Apollo, and changed by him into a laurel
tree. Ovid, "Metam.," i, 452; "Heroides," xv, 25.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Aurora, who married Tithonus, and took him up to Heaven;
hence in Ovid, "Tithonia conjux.," "Fasti," lib. iii, 403.--_W. E. B._]




PHYLLIS; OR, THE PROGRESS OF LOVE, 1716


Desponding Phyllis was endu'd
With ev'ry talent of a prude:
She trembled when a man drew near;
Salute her, and she turn'd her ear:
If o'er against her you were placed,
She durst not look above your waist:
She'd rather take you to her bed,
Than let you see her dress her head;
In church you hear her, thro' the crowd,
Repeat the absolution loud:
In church, secure behind her fan,
She durst behold that monster man:
There practis'd how to place her head,
And bite her lips to make them red;
Or, on the mat devoutly kneeling,
Would lift her eyes up to the ceiling.
And heave her bosom unaware,
For neighb'ring beaux to see it bare.
  At length a lucky lover came,
And found admittance to the dame,
Suppose all parties now agreed,
The writings drawn, the lawyer feed,
The vicar and the ring bespoke:
Guess, how could such a match be broke?
See then what mortals place their bliss in!
Next morn betimes the bride was missing:
The mother scream'd, the father chid;
Where can this idle wench be hid?
No news of Phyl! the bridegroom came,
And thought his bride had skulk'd for shame;
Because her father used to say,
The girl had such a bashful way!
  Now John the butler must be sent
To learn the road that Phyllis went:
The groom was wish'd[1] to saddle Crop;
For John must neither light nor stop,
But find her, wheresoe'er she fled,
And bring her back alive or dead.
  See here again the devil to do!
For truly John was missing too:
The horse and pillion both were gone!
Phyllis, it seems, was fled with John.
  Old Madam, who went up to find
What papers Phyl had left behind,
A letter on the toilet sees,
"To my much honour'd father--these--"
('Tis always done, romances tell us,
When daughters run away with fellows,)
Fill'd with the choicest common-places,
By others used in the like cases.
"That long ago a fortune-teller
Exactly said what now befell her;
And in a glass had made her see
A serving-man of low degree.
It was her fate, must be forgiven;
For marriages were made in Heaven:
His pardon begg'd: but, to be plain,
She'd do't if 'twere to do again:
Thank'd God, 'twas neither shame nor sin;
For John was come of honest kin.
Love never thinks of rich and poor;
She'd beg with John from door to door.
Forgive her, if it be a crime;
She'll never do't another time.
She ne'er before in all her life
Once disobey'd him, maid nor wife."
One argument she summ'd up all in,
"The thing was done and past recalling;
And therefore hoped she should recover
His favour when his passion's over.
She valued not what others thought her,
And was--his most obedient daughter."
Fair maidens all, attend the Muse,
Who now the wand'ring pair pursues:
Away they rode in homely sort,
Their journey long, their money short;
The loving couple well bemir'd;
The horse and both the riders tir'd:
Their victuals bad, their lodgings worse;
Phyl cried! and John began to curse:
Phyl wish'd that she had strain'd a limb,
When first she ventured out with him;
John wish'd that he had broke a leg,
When first for her he quitted Peg.
  But what adventures more befell 'em,
The Muse hath now no time to tell 'em;
How Johnny wheedled, threaten'd, fawn'd,
Till Phyllis all her trinkets pawn'd:
How oft she broke her marriage vows,
In kindness to maintain her spouse,
Till swains unwholesome spoil'd the trade;
For now the surgeon must be paid,
To whom those perquisites are gone,
In Christian justice due to John.
  When food and raiment now grew scarce,
Fate put a period to the farce,
And with exact poetic justice;
For John was landlord, Phyllis hostess;
They keep, at Stains, the Old Blue Boar,
Are cat and dog, and rogue and whore.


[Footnote 1: A tradesman's phrase.--_Swift_.]




HORACE, BOOK IV, ODE IX
ADDRESSED TO ARCHBISHOP KING,[1] 1718

Virtue conceal'd within our breast
Is inactivity at best:
But never shall the Muse endure
To let your virtues lie obscure;
Or suffer Envy to conceal
Your labours for the public weal.
Within your breast all wisdom lies,
Either to govern or advise;
Your steady soul preserves her frame,
In good and evil times, the same.
Pale Avarice and lurking Fraud,
Stand in your sacred presence awed;
Your hand alone from gold abstains,
Which drags the slavish world in chains.
  Him for a happy man I own,
Whose fortune is not overgrown;[2]
And happy he who wisely knows
To use the gifts that Heaven bestows;
Or, if it please the powers divine,
Can suffer want and not repine.
The man who infamy to shun
Into the arms of death would run;
That man is ready to defend,
With life, his country or his friend.


[Footnote 1: With whom Swift was in constant correspondence, more or less
friendly. See Journal to Stella, "Prose Works," vol. ii, _passim_; and
an account of King, vol. iii, p. 241, note.--_W. E. B._]


[Footnote 2:
  "Non possidentem multa vocaveris
  recte beatum: rectius occupat
    nomen beati, qui deorum
      muneribus sapienter uti
  duramque callet pauperiem pati,
  pejusque leto flagitium timet."]


TO MR. DELANY,[1]

OCT. 10, 1718 NINE IN THE MORNING

To you whose virtues, I must own
With shame, I have too lately known;
To you, by art and nature taught
To be the man I long have sought,
Had not ill Fate, perverse and blind,
Placed you in life too far behind:
Or, what I should repine at more,
Placed me in life too far before:
To you the Muse this verse bestows,
Which might as well have been in prose;
No thought, no fancy, no sublime,
But simple topics told in rhyme.
  Three gifts for conversation fit
Are humour, raillery, and wit:
The last, as boundless as the wind,
Is well conceived, though not defined;
For, sure by wit is only meant
Applying what we first invent.
What humour is, not all the tribe
Of logic-mongers can describe;
Here only nature acts her part,
Unhelp'd by practice, books, or art:
For wit and humour differ quite;
That gives surprise, and this delight,
Humour is odd, grotesque, and wild,
Only by affectation spoil'd;
'Tis never by invention got,
Men have it when they know it not.
  Our conversation to refine,
True humour must with wit combine:
From both we learn to rally well,
Wherein French writers most excel;
[2]Voiture, in various lights, displays
That irony which turns to praise:
His genius first found out the rule
For an obliging ridicule:
He flatters with peculiar air
The brave, the witty, and the fair:
And fools would fancy he intends
A satire where he most commends.
  But as a poor pretending beau,
Because he fain would make a show,
Nor can afford to buy gold lace,
Takes up with copper in the place:
So the pert dunces of mankind,
Whene'er they would be thought refined,
Because the diff'rence lies abstruse
'Twixt raillery and gross abuse,
To show their parts will scold and rail,
Like porters o'er a pot of ale.
  Such is that clan of boisterous bears,
Always together by the ears;
Shrewd fellows and arch wags, a tribe
That meet for nothing but to gibe;
Who first run one another down,
And then fall foul on all the town;
Skill'd in the horse-laugh and dry rub,
And call'd by excellence The Club.
I mean your butler, Dawson, Car,
All special friends, and always jar.
  The mettled and the vicious steed
Do not more differ in their breed,
Nay, Voiture is as like Tom Leigh,
As rudeness is to repartee.
  If what you said I wish unspoke,
'Twill not suffice it was a joke:
Reproach not, though in jest, a friend
For those defects he cannot mend;
His lineage, calling, shape, or sense,
If named with scorn, gives just offence.
  What use in life to make men fret,
Part in worse humour than they met?
Thus all society is lost,
Men laugh at one another's cost:
And half the company is teazed
That came together to be pleased:
For all buffoons have most in view
To please themselves by vexing you.
  When jests are carried on too far,
And the loud laugh begins the war,
You keep your countenance for shame,
Yet still you think your friend to blame;
For though men cry they love a jest,
'Tis but when others stand the test;
And (would you have their meaning known)
They love a jest when 'tis their own.
  You wonder now to see me write
So gravely where the subject's light;
Some part of what I here design
Regards a friend[3]  of yours and mine;
Who full of humour, fire, and wit,
Not always judges what is fit,
But loves to take prodigious rounds,
And sometimes walks beyond his bounds,
You must, although the point be nice,
Venture to give him some advice;
Few hints from you will set him right,
And teach him how to be polite.
Bid him like you, observe with care,
Whom to be hard on, whom to spare;
Nor indiscreetly to suppose
All subjects like Dan Jackson's[4] nose.
To study the obliging jest,
By reading those who teach it best;
For prose I recommend Voiture's,
For verse (I speak my judgment) yours.
He'll find the secret out from thence,
To rhyme all day without offence;
And I no more shall then accuse
The flirts of his ill-manner'd Muse.
  If he be guilty, you must mend him;
  If he be innocent, defend him.



[Footnote 1: The Rev. Patrick Delany, one of Swift's most valued friends,
born about 1685. When Lord Carteret became Lord Lieutenant, Swift urged
Delany's claims to preferment, and he was appointed Chancellor of St.
Patrick's. He appears to have been warm-hearted and impetuous, and too
hospitable for his means. He died at Bath, 1768.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Famous as poet and letter writer, born 1598, died
1648.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Dr. Sheridan.]

[Footnote 4: Mentioned in "The Country Life," as one of that lively
party, _post_, p. 137.--_W. E. B_.]




AN ELEGY[1]

ON THE DEATH OF DEMAR, THE USURER;
WHO DIED ON THE 6TH OF JULY, 1720

Know all men by these presents, Death, the tamer,
By mortgage has secured the corpse of Demar;
Nor can four hundred thousand sterling pound
Redeem him from his prison underground.
His heirs might well, of all his wealth possesst
Bestow, to bury him, one iron chest.
Plutus, the god of wealth, will joy to know
His faithful steward in the shades below.
He walk'd the streets, and wore a threadbare cloak;
He din'd and supp'd at charge of other folk:
And by his looks, had he held out his palms,
He might be thought an object fit for alms.
So, to the poor if he refus'd his pelf,
He us'd 'em full as kindly as himself.
  Where'er he went, he never saw his betters;
Lords, knights, and squires, were all his humble debtors;
And under hand and seal, the Irish nation
Were forc'd to own to him their obligation.
  He that cou'd once have half a kingdom bought,
In half a minute is not worth a groat.
His coffers from the coffin could not save,
Nor all his int'rest keep him from the grave.
A golden monument would not be right,
Because we wish the earth upon him light.
  Oh London Tavern![2] thou hast lost a friend,
Tho' in thy walls he ne'er did farthing spend;
He touch'd the pence when others touch'd the pot;
The hand that sign'd the mortgage paid the shot.
  Old as he was, no vulgar known disease
On him could ever boast a pow'r to seize;
"[3]But as the gold he weigh'd, grim death in spight
Cast in his dart, which made three moidores light;
And, as he saw his darling money fail,
Blew his last breath to sink the lighter scale."
He who so long was current, 'twould be strange
If he should now be cry'd down since his change.
  The sexton shall green sods on thee bestow;
Alas, the sexton is thy banker now!
A dismal banker must that banker be,
Who gives no bills but of mortality!


[Footnote 1: The subject was John Demar, a great merchant in Dublin who
died 6th July, 1720. Swift, with some of his usual party, happened to be
in Mr. Sheridan's, in Capel Street, when the news of Demar's death was
brought to them; and the elegy was the joint composition of the
company.--_C. Walker_.]

[Footnote 2: A tavern in Dublin, where Demar kept his office.--_F_.]

[Footnote 3: These four lines were written by Stella.--_F_.]




EPITAPH ON THE SAME

Beneath this verdant hillock lies
Demar, the wealthy and the wise,
His heirs,[1] that he might safely rest,
Have put his carcass in a chest;
The very chest in which, they say,
His other self, his money, lay.
And, if his heirs continue kind
To that dear self he left behind,
I dare believe, that four in five
Will think his better self alive.


[Footnote 1:
  "His heirs for winding sheet bestow'd
  His money bags together sew'd
  And that he might securely rest,"
Variation--From the Chetwode MS.--_W. E. B_.]



TO MRS. HOUGHTON OF BOURMONT,
ON PRAISING HER HUSBAND TO DR. SWIFT

You always are making a god of your spouse;
But this neither Reason nor Conscience allows;
Perhaps you will say, 'tis in gratitude due,
And you adore him, because he adores you.
Your argument's weak, and so you will find;
For you, by this rule, must adore all mankind.




VERSES
WRITTEN ON A WINDOW, AT THE DEANERY HOUSE, ST. PATRICK'S

Are the guests of this house still doom'd to be cheated?
Sure the Fates have decreed they by halves should be treated.
In the days of good John[1] if you came here to dine,
You had choice of good meat, but no choice of good wine.
In Jonathan's reign, if you come here to eat,
You have choice of good wine, but no choice of good meat.
O Jove! then how fully might all sides be blest,
Wouldst thou but agree to this humble request!
Put both deans in one; or, if that's too much trouble,
Instead of the deans, make the deanery double.


[Footnote 1: Dr. Sterne, the predecessor of Swift in the deanery of St.
Patrick's, and afterwards Bishop of Clogher, was distinguished for his
hospitality. See Journal to Stella, _passim_, "Prose Works," vol.
ii--_W. E. B._]



ON ANOTHER WINDOW[1]

A bard, on whom Phoebus his spirit bestow'd,
Resolving t'acknowledge the bounty he owed,
Found out a new method at once of confessing,
And making the most of so mighty a blessing:
To the God he'd be grateful; but mortals he'd chouse,
By making his patron preside in his house;
And wisely foresaw this advantage from thence,
That the God would in honour bear most of th'expense;
So the bard he finds drink, and leaves Phoebus to treat
With the thoughts he inspires, regardless of meat.
Hence they that come hither expecting to dine,
Are always fobb'd off with sheer wit and sheer wine.


[Footnote 1: Written by Dr. Delany, in conjunction with Stella, as
appears from the verses which follow.--_Scott_.]



APOLLO TO THE DEAN.[1] 1720

Right Trusty, and so forth--we let you know
We are very ill used by you mortals below.
For, first, I have often by chemists been told,
(Though I know nothing on't,) it is I that make gold;
Which when you have got, you so carefully hide it,
That, since I was born, I hardly have spied it.
Then it must be allow'd, that, whenever I shine,
I forward the grass, and I ripen the vine;
To me the good fellows apply for relief,
Without whom they could get neither claret nor beef:
Yet their wine and their victuals, those curmudgeon lubbards
Lock up from my sight in cellars and cupboards.
That I have an ill eye, they wickedly think,
And taint all their meat, and sour all their drink.
But, thirdly and lastly, it must be allow'd,
I alone can inspire the poetical crowd:
This is gratefully own'd by each boy in the College,
Whom, if I inspire, it is not to my knowledge.
This every pretender in rhyme will admit,
Without troubling his head about judgment or wit.
These gentlemen use me with kindness and freedom,
And as for their works, when I please I may read 'em.
They lie open on purpose on counters and stalls,
And the titles I view, when I shine on the walls.
  But a comrade of yours, that traitor Delany,
Whom I for your sake have used better than any,
And, of my mere motion, and special good grace,
Intended in time to succeed in your place,
On Tuesday the tenth, seditiously came,
With a certain false trait'ress, one Stella by name,
To the Deanery-house, and on the North glass,
Where for fear of the cold I never can pass,
Then and there, vi et armis, with a certain utensil,
Of value five shillings, in English a pencil,
Did maliciously, falsely, and trait'rously write,
While Stella, aforesaid, stood by with a[3] light.
My sister[2] hath lately deposed upon oath,
That she stopt in her course to look at them both;
That Stella was helping, abetting, and aiding;
And still as he writ, stood smiling and reading:
That her eyes were as bright as myself at noon-day,
But her graceful black locks were all mingled with grey:
And by the description, I certainly know,
'Tis the nymph that I courted some ten years ago;
Whom when I with the best of my talents endued,
On her promise of yielding, she acted the prude:
That some verses were writ with felonious intent,
Direct to the North, where I never once went:
That the letters appear'd reversed through the pane,
But in Stella's bright eyes were placed right again;
Wherein she distinctly could read ev'ry line,[4]
And presently guessed the fancy was mine.
She can swear to the Parson whom oft she has seen
At night between Cavan Street and College Green.
  Now you see why his verses so seldom are shown,
The reason is plain, they are none of his own;
And observe while you live that no man is shy
To discover the goods he came honestly by.
If I light on a thought, he will certainly steal it,
And when he has got it, find ways to conceal it.
Of all the fine things he keeps in the dark,
There's scarce one in ten but what has my mark;
And let them be seen by the world if he dare,
I'll make it appear they are all stolen ware.
But as for the poem he writ on your sash,
I think I have now got him under my lash;
My sister transcribed it last night to his sorrow,
And the public shall see't, if I live till to-morrow.
Thro' the zodiac around, it shall quickly be spread
In all parts of the globe where your language is read.
  He knows very well, I ne'er gave a refusal,
When he ask'd for my aid in the forms that are usual:
But the secret is this; I did lately intend
To write a few verses on you as my friend:
I studied a fortnight, before I could find,
As I rode in my chariot, a thought to my mind,
And resolved the next winter (for that is my time,
When the days are at shortest) to get it in rhyme;
Till then it was lock'd in my box at Parnassus;
When that subtle companion, in hopes to surpass us,
Conveys out my paper of hints by a trick
(For I think in my conscience he deals with old Nick,)
And from my own stock provided with topics,
He gets to a window beyond both the tropics,
There out of my sight, just against the north zone,
Writes down my conceits, and then calls them his own;
And you, like a cully, the bubble can swallow:
Now who but Delany that writes like Apollo?
High treason by statute! yet here you object,
He only stole hints, but the verse is correct;
Though the thought be Apollo's, 'tis finely express'd;
So a thief steals my horse, and has him well dress'd.
Now whereas the said criminal seems past repentance,
We Phoebus think fit to proceed to his sentence.
Since Delany hath dared, like Prometheus his sire,
To climb to our region, and thence to steal fire;
We order a vulture in shape of the Spleen,
To prey on his liver, but not to be seen.
And we order our subjects of every degree
To believe all his verses were written by me:
And under the pain of our highest displeasure,
To call nothing his but the rhyme and the measure.
And, lastly, for Stella, just out of her prime,
I'm too much revenged already by Time,
In return of her scorn, I sent her diseases,
But will now be her friend whenever she pleases.
And the gifts I bestow'd her will find her a lover
Though she lives till she's grey as a badger all over.


[Footnote 1: Collated with the original MS. in Swift's writing, and also
with the copy transcribed by Stella.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 2: Stella's copy has "the."--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 3: Diana.]

[Footnote 4: As originally written, this passage ran:
  "Wherein she distinctly could read ev'ry line
  And found by the wit the Fancy was mine
  For none of his poems were ever yet shown
  Which he in his conscience could claim for his own."
_Forster_.]



NEWS FROM PARNASSUS
BY DR. DELANY

OCCASIONED BY "APOLLO TO THE DEAN" 1720


Parnassus, February the twenty-seventh.
The poets assembled here on the eleventh,
Convened by Apollo, who gave them to know
He'd have a vicegerent in his empire below;
But declared that no bard should this honour inherit,
Till the rest had agreed he surpass'd them in merit:
Now this, you'll allow, was a difficult case,
For each bard believed he'd a right to the place;
So, finding the assembly grow warm in debate,
He put them in mind of his Phaethon's fate:
'Twas urged to no purpose; disputes higher rose,
Scarce Phoebus himself could their quarrels compose;
Till at length he determined that every bard
Should (each in his turn) be patiently heard.
  First, one who believed he excell'd in translation,[1]
Founds his claim on the doctrine of man's transmigration:
"Since the soul of great Milton was given to me,
I hope the convention will quickly agree."--
"Agree;" quoth Apollo: "from whence is this fool?
Is he just come from reading Pythagoras at school?
Begone, sir, you've got your subscriptions in time,
And given in return neither reason nor rhyme."
To the next says the God, "Though now I won't chuse you,
I'll tell you the reason for which I refuse you:
Love's Goddess has oft to her parents complain'd,
Of my favouring a bard who her empire disdain'd;
That at my instigation, a poem you writ,
Which to beauty and youth preferr'd judgment and wit;
That, to make you a Laureate, I gave the first voice,
Inspiring the Britons t'approve of my choice.
Jove sent her to me, her power to try;
The Goddess of Beauty what God can deny?
She forbids your preferment; I grant her desire.
Appease the fair Goddess: you then may rise higher."
  The next[2] that appear'd had good hopes of succeeding,
For he merited much for his wit and his breeding.
'Twas wise in the Britons no favour to show him,
He else might expect they should pay what they owe him.
And therefore they prudently chose to discard
The Patriot, whose merits they would not reward:
The God, with a smile, bade his favourite advance,
"You were sent by Astraea her envoy to France:
You bend your ambition to rise in the state;
I refuse you, because you could stoop to be great."
  Then a bard who had been a successful translator,[3]
"The convention allows me a versificator."
Says Apollo, "You mention the least of your merit;
By your works, it appears you have much of my spirit.
I esteem you so well, that, to tell you the truth,
The greatest objection against you's your youth;
Then be not concern'd you are now laid aside;
If you live you shall certainly one day preside."
  Another, low bending, Apollo thus greets,
"'Twas I taught your subjects to walk through the streets."[4]
  You taught them to walk! why, they knew it before;
But give me the bard that can teach them to soar.
Whenever he claims, 'tis his right, I'll confess,
Who lately attempted my style with success;
Who writes like Apollo has most of his spirit,
And therefore 'tis just I distinguish his merit:
Who makes it appear, by all he has writ,
His judgment alone can set bounds to his wit;
Like Virgil correct, with his own native ease,
But excels even Virgil in elegant praise:
Who admires the ancients, and knows 'tis their due
Yet writes in a manner entirely new;
Though none with more ease their depths can explore,
Yet whatever he wants he takes from my store;
Though I'm fond of his virtues, his pride I can see,
In scorning to borrow from any but me:
It is owing to this, that, like Cynthia,[5] his lays
Enlighten the world by reflecting my rays.
This said, the whole audience soon found out his drift:
The convention was summon'd in favour of SWIFT.


[Footnote 1: Dr. Trapp or Trap, ridiculed by Swift in "The Tatler," No.
66, as parson Dapper. He was sent to Ireland as chaplain to Sir
Constantine Phipps, Lord Chancellor, in 1710-11. But in July, 1712, Swift
writes to Stella, "I have made Trap chaplain to Lord Bolingbroke, and
he is mighty happy and thankful for it." He translated the "Aeneid" into
blank verse.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Prior, concerning whose "Journey to France," Swift wrote a
"formal relation, all pure invention," which had a great sale, and was a
"pure bite." See Journal to Stella, Sept., 1711.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Pope, and his translations of the "Iliad" and
"Odyssey."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Gay; alluding to his "Trivia."--_N_.]

[Footnote 5: Diana.]




APOLLO'S EDICT
OCCASIONED BY "NEWS FROM PARNASSUS"

Ireland is now our royal care,
We lately fix'd our viceroy there.
How near was she to be undone,
Till pious love inspired her son!
What cannot our vicegerent do,
As poet and as patriot too?
Let his success our subjects sway,
Our inspirations to obey,
And follow where he leads the way:
Then study to correct your taste;
Nor beaten paths be longer traced.
  No simile shall be begun,
With rising or with setting sun;
And let the secret head of Nile
Be ever banish'd from your isle.
  When wretched lovers live on air,
I beg you'll the chameleon spare;
And when you'd make a hero grander,
Forget he's like a salamander.[1]
  No son of mine shall dare to say,
Aurora usher'd in the day,
Or ever name the milky-way.
You all agree, I make no doubt,
Elijah's mantle is worn out.
  The bird of Jove shall toil no more
To teach the humble wren to soar.
Your tragic heroes shall not rant,
Nor shepherds use poetic cant.
Simplicity alone can grace
The manners of the rural race.
Theocritus and Philips be
Your guides to true simplicity.
  When Damon's soul shall take its flight,
Though poets have the second-sight,
They shall not see a trail of light.
Nor shall the vapours upwards rise,
Nor a new star adorn the skies:
For who can hope to place one there,
As glorious as Belinda's hair?
Yet, if his name you'd eternize,
And must exalt him to the skies;
Without a star this may be done:
So Tickell mourn'd his Addison.
  If Anna's happy reign you praise,
Pray, not a word of halcyon days:
Nor let my votaries show their skill
In aping lines from Cooper's Hill;[2]
For know I cannot bear to hear
The mimicry of "deep, yet clear."
  Whene'er my viceroy is address'd,
Against the phoenix I protest.
When poets soar in youthful strains,
No Phaethon to hold the reins.
  When you describe a lovely girl,
No lips of coral, teeth of pearl.
  Cupid shall ne'er mistake another,
However beauteous, for his mother;
Nor shall his darts at random fly
From magazine in Celia's eye.
With woman compounds I am cloy'd,
Which only pleased in Biddy Floyd.[3]
For foreign aid what need they roam,
Whom fate has amply blest at home?
  Unerring Heaven, with bounteous hand,
Has form'd a model for your land,
Whom Jove endued with every grace;
The glory of the Granard race;
Now destined by the powers divine
The blessing of another line.
Then, would you paint a matchless dame,
Whom you'd consign to endless fame?
Invoke not Cytherea's aid,
Nor borrow from the blue-eyed maid;
Nor need you on the Graces call;
Take qualities from Donegal.[4]


[Footnote 1: See the "Description of a Salamander," _ante_, p.
46.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: Denham's Poem.]

[Footnote 3: _Ante_, p. 50.]

[Footnote 4: Lady Catherine Forbes, daughter of the first Earl of
Granard, and second wife of Arthur, third Earl of Donegal.--_Scott_.]




THE DESCRIPTION OF AN IRISH FEAST

Given by O'Rourke, a powerful chieftain of Ulster in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, previously to his making a visit to her court. A song was
composed upon the tradition of the feast, the fame of which having
reached Swift, he was supplied with a literal version, from which he
executed the following very spirited translation.--_W. E. B._

TRANSLATED ALMOST LITERALLY OUT OF THE ORIGINAL IRISH. 1720

O'ROURKE'S noble fare
  Will ne'er be forgot,
By those who were there,
  Or those who were not.

His revels to keep,
  We sup and we dine
On seven score sheep,
  Fat bullocks, and swine.

Usquebaugh to our feast
  In pails was brought up,
A hundred at least,
  And a madder[1] our cup.

O there is the sport!
  We rise with the light
In disorderly sort,
  From snoring all night.

O how was I trick'd!
  My pipe it was broke,
My pocket was pick'd,
  I lost my new cloak.

I'm rifled, quoth Nell,
  Of mantle and kercher,[2]
Why then fare them well,
  The de'el take the searcher.

Come, harper, strike up;
  But, first, by your favour,
Boy, give us a cup:
  Ah! this hath some savour.

O'Rourke's jolly boys
  Ne'er dreamt of the matter,
Till, roused by the noise,
  And musical clatter,

They bounce from their nest,
  No longer will tarry,
They rise ready drest,
  Without one Ave-Mary.

They dance in a round,
  Cutting capers and ramping;
A mercy the ground
  Did not burst with their stamping.

The floor is all wet
  With leaps and with jumps,
While the water and sweat
  Splish-splash in their pumps.

Bless you late and early,
  Laughlin O'Enagin![3]
But, my hand,[4] you dance rarely.
  Margery Grinagin.[5]

Bring straw for our bed,
  Shake it down to the feet,
Then over us spread
  The winnowing sheet.

To show I don't flinch,
  Fill the bowl up again:
Then give us a pinch
  Of your sneezing, a Yean.[6]

Good lord! what a sight,
  After all their good cheer,
For people to fight
  In the midst of their beer!

They rise from their feast,
  And hot are their brains,
A cubit at least
  The length of their skeans.[7]

What stabs and what cuts,
  What clattering of sticks;
What strokes on the guts,
  What bastings and kicks!

With cudgels of oak,
  Well harden'd in flame,
A hundred heads broke,
  A hundred struck lame.

You churl, I'll maintain
  My father built Lusk,
The castle of Slane,
  And Carrick Drumrusk:

The Earl of Kildare,
  And Moynalta his brother,
As great as they are,
  I was nurst by their mother.[8]

Ask that of old madam:
  She'll tell you who's who,
As far up as Adam,
  She knows it is true.

Come down with that beam,
  If cudgels are scarce,
A blow on the weam,
  Or a kick on the a----se.


[Footnote 1: A wooden vessel.--_F_.]

[Footnote 2: A covering of linen, worn on the heads of the
women.--_F_.]

[Footnote 3: The name of an Irishman.--_F_.]

[Footnote 4: An Irish oath.--_F_.]

[Footnote 5: The name of an Irishwoman.--_F_.]

[Footnote 6: Surname of an Irishwoman.--_F_.]

[Footnote 7: Daggers, or short swords,--_F_.]

[Footnote 8: It is the custom in Ireland to call nurses, foster-mothers;
their husbands, foster-fathers; and their children, foster-brothers or
foster-sisters; and thus the poorest claim kindred to the rich.--_F_.]




THE PROGRESS OF BEAUTY. 1719[1]

When first Diana leaves her bed,
  Vapours and steams her looks disgrace,
A frowzy dirty-colour'd red
  Sits on her cloudy wrinkled face:

But by degrees, when mounted high,
  Her artificial face appears
Down from her window in the sky,
  Her spots are gone, her visage clears.

'Twixt earthly females and the moon,
  All parallels exactly run;
If Celia should appear too soon,
  Alas, the nymph would be undone!

To see her from her pillow rise,
  All reeking in a cloudy steam,
Crack'd lips, foul teeth, and gummy eyes,
  Poor Strephon! how would he blaspheme!

The soot or powder which was wont
  To make her hair look black as jet,
Falls from her tresses on her front,
  A mingled mass of dirt and sweat.

Three colours, black, and red, and white
  So graceful in their proper place,
Remove them to a different light,
  They form a frightful hideous face:

For instance, when the lily slips
  Into the precincts of the rose,
And takes possession of the lips,
  Leaving the purple to the nose:

So Celia went entire to bed,
  All her complexion safe and sound;
But, when she rose, the black and red,
  Though still in sight, had changed their ground.

The black, which would not be confined,
  A more inferior station seeks,
Leaving the fiery red behind,
  And mingles in her muddy cheeks.

The paint by perspiration cracks,
  And falls in rivulets of sweat,
On either side you see the tracks
  While at her chin the conflu'nts meet.

A skilful housewife thus her thumb,
  With spittle while she spins anoints;
And thus the brown meanders come
  In trickling streams betwixt her joints.

But Celia can with ease reduce,
  By help of pencil, paint, and brush,
Each colour to its place and use,
  And teach her cheeks again to blush.

She knows her early self no more,
  But fill'd with admiration stands;
As other painters oft adore
  The workmanship of their own hands.

Thus, after four important hours,
  Celia's the wonder of her sex;
Say, which among the heavenly powers
  Could cause such wonderful effects?

Venus, indulgent to her kind,
  Gave women all their hearts could wish,
When first she taught them where to find
  White lead, and Lusitanian dish.

Love with white lead cements his wings;
  White lead was sent us to repair
Two brightest, brittlest, earthly things,
  A lady's face, and China-ware.

She ventures now to lift the sash;
  The window is her proper sphere;
Ah, lovely nymph! be not too rash,
  Nor let the beaux approach too near.

Take pattern by your sister star;
  Delude at once and bless our sight;
When you are seen, be seen from far,
  And chiefly choose to shine by night.

In the Pall Mall when passing by,
  Keep up the glasses of your chair,
Then each transported fop will cry,
  "G----d d----n me, Jack, she's wondrous fair!"

But art no longer can prevail,
  When the materials all are gone;
The best mechanic hand must fail,
  Where nothing's left to work upon.

Matter, as wise logicians say,
  Cannot without a form subsist;
And form, say I, as well as they,
  Must fail if matter brings no grist.

And this is fair Diana's case;
  For, all astrologers maintain,
Each night a bit drops off her face,
  When mortals say she's in her wane:

While Partridge wisely shows the cause
  Efficient of the moon's decay,
That Cancer with his pois'nous claws
  Attacks her in the milky way:

But Gadbury,[2] in art profound,
  From her pale cheeks pretends to show
That swain Endymion is not sound,
  Or else that Mercury's her foe.

But let the cause be what it will,
  In half a month she looks so thin,
That Flamsteed[3] can, with all his skill,
  See but her forehead and her chin.

Yet, as she wastes, she grows discreet,
  Till midnight never shows her head;
So rotting Celia strolls the street,
  When sober folks are all a-bed:

For sure, if this be Luna's fate,
  Poor Celia, but of mortal race,
In vain expects a longer date
  To the materials of her face.

When Mercury her tresses mows,
  To think of oil and soot is vain:
No painting can restore a nose,
  Nor will her teeth return again.

Two balls of glass may serve for eyes,
  White lead can plaister up a cleft;
But these, alas, are poor supplies
  If neither cheeks nor lips be left.

Ye powers who over love preside!
  Since mortal beauties drop so soon,
If ye would have us well supplied,
  Send us new nymphs with each new moon!


[Footnote 1: Collated with the copy transcribed by
Stella.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 2: Gadbury, an astrologer, wrote a series of
ephemerides.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: John Flamsteed, the celebrated astronomer-royal, born in
August, 1646, died in December, 1719. For a full account of him, see
"Dictionary of National Biography."--_W. E. B._]




THE PROGRESS OF MARRIAGE[1]

AETATIS SUAE fifty-two,
A reverend Dean began to woo[2]
A handsome, young, imperious girl,
Nearly related to an earl.[3]
Her parents and her friends consent;
The couple to the temple went:
They first invite the Cyprian queen;
'Twas answer'd, "She would not be seen;"
But Cupid in disdain could scarce
Forbear to bid them kiss his ----
The Graces next, and all the Muses,
Were bid in form, but sent excuses.
Juno attended at the porch,
With farthing candle for a torch;
While mistress Iris held her train,
The faded bow bedropt with rain.
Then Hebe came, and took her place,
But show'd no more than half her face.
  Whate'er these dire forebodings meant,
In joy the marriage-day was spent;
The marriage-_day_, you take me right,
I promise nothing for the night.
The bridegroom, drest to make a figure,
Assumes an artificial vigour;
A flourish'd nightcap on, to grace
His ruddy, wrinkled, smirking face;
Like the faint red upon a pippin,
Half wither'd by a winter's keeping.
  And thus set out this happy pair,
The swain is rich, the nymph is fair;
But, what I gladly would forget,
The swain is old, the nymph coquette.
Both from the goal together start;
Scarce run a step before they part;
No common ligament that binds
The various textures of their minds;
Their thoughts and actions, hopes and fears,
Less corresponding than their years.
The Dean desires his coffee soon,
She rises to her tea at noon.
While the Dean goes out to cheapen books,
She at the glass consults her looks;
While Betty's buzzing at her ear,
Lord, what a dress these parsons wear!
So odd a choice how could she make!
Wish'd him a colonel for her sake.
Then, on her finger ends she counts,
Exact, to what his[4] age amounts.
The Dean, she heard her uncle say,
Is sixty, if he be a day;
His ruddy cheeks are no disguise;
You see the crow's feet round his eyes.
  At one she rambles to the shops,
To cheapen tea, and talk with fops;
Or calls a council of her maids,
And tradesmen, to compare brocades.
Her weighty morning business o'er,
Sits down to dinner just at four;
Minds nothing that is done or said,
Her evening work so fills her head.
The Dean, who used to dine at one,
Is mawkish, and his stomach's gone;
In threadbare gown, would scarce a louse hold,
Looks like the chaplain of the household;
Beholds her, from the chaplain's place,
In French brocades, and Flanders lace;
He wonders what employs her brain,
But never asks, or asks in vain;
His mind is full of other cares,
And, in the sneaking parson's airs,
Computes, that half a parish dues
Will hardly find his wife in shoes.
  Canst thou imagine, dull divine,
'Twill gain her love, to make her fine?
Hath she no other wants beside?
You feed her lust as well as pride,
Enticing coxcombs to adore,
And teach her to despise thee more.
  If in her coach she'll condescend
To place him at the hinder end,
Her hoop is hoist above his nose,
His odious gown would soil her clothes.[5]
She drops him at the church, to pray,
While she drives on to see the play.
He like an orderly divine,
Comes home a quarter after nine,
And meets her hasting to the ball:
Her chairmen push him from the wall.
The Dean gets in and walks up stairs,
And calls the family to prayers;
Then goes alone to take his rest
In bed, where he can spare her best.
At five the footmen make a din,
Her ladyship is just come in;
The masquerade began at two,
She stole away with much ado;
And shall be chid this afternoon,
For leaving company so soon:
She'll say, and she may truly say't,
She can't abide to stay out late.
  But now, though scarce a twelvemonth married,
Poor Lady Jane has thrice miscarried:
The cause, alas! is quickly guest;
The town has whisper'd round the jest.
Think on some remedy in time,
The Dean you see, is past his prime,
Already dwindled to a lath:
No other way but try the Bath.
  For Venus, rising from the ocean,
Infused a strong prolific potion,
That mix'd with Achelos spring,
The horned flood, as poets sing,
Who, with an English beauty smitten,
Ran under ground from Greece to Britain;
The genial virtue with him brought,
And gave the nymph a plenteous draught;
Then fled, and left his horn behind,
For husbands past their youth to find;
The nymph, who still with passion burn'd,
Was to a boiling fountain turn'd,
Where childless wives crowd every morn,
To drink in Achelos horn;[6]
Or bathe beneath the Cross their limbs
Where fruitful matter chiefly swims.
And here the father often gains
That title by another's pains.
  Hither, though much against his grain
The Dean has carried Lady Jane.
He, for a while, would not consent,
But vow'd his money all was spent:
Was ever such a clownish reason!
And must my lady slip her season?
The doctor, with a double fee,
Was bribed to make the Dean agree.
  Here, all diversions of the place
Are proper in my lady's case:
With which she patiently complies,
Merely because her friends advise;
His money and her time employs
In music, raffling-rooms, and toys;
Or in the Cross-bath[7] seeks an heir,
Since others oft have found one there;
Where if the Dean by chance appears,
It shames his cassock and his years.
He keeps his distance in the gallery,
Till banish'd by some coxcomb's raillery;
For 'twould his character expose,
To bathe among the belles and beaux.
  So have I seen, within a pen,
Young ducklings foster'd by a hen;
But, when let out, they run and muddle,
As instinct leads them, in a puddle;
The sober hen, not born to swim,
With mournful note clucks round the brim.[8]
  The Dean, with all his best endeavour,
Gets not an heir, but gets a fever.
A victim to the last essays
Of vigour in declining days,
He dies, and leaves his mourning mate
(What could he less?)[9] his whole estate.
  The widow goes through all her forms:
New lovers now will come in swarms.
O, may I see her soon dispensing
Her favours to some broken ensign!
Him let her marry for his face,
And only coat of tarnish'd lace;
To turn her naked out of doors,
And spend her jointure on his whores;
But, for a parting present, leave her
A rooted pox to last for ever!



[Footnote 1: Collated with Swift's original MS. in my possession, dated
January, 1721-2.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 2:
  "A rich divine began to woo,"
  "A grave divine resolved to woo,"
are Swift's successive changes of this line.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 3: "Philippa, daughter to an Earl," is the original text, but
he changed it on changing the lady's name to Jane.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 4: Scott prints "her."--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 5: Swift has writ in the margin:
  "If by a more than usual grace
  She lends him in her chariot place,
  Her hoop is hoist above his nose
  For fear his gown should soil her clothes."--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 6: For this fable, see Ovid, "Metam.," lib.
ix.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: So named from a very curious cross or pillar which was
erected in it in 1687 by John, Earl of Melfort, Secretary of State to
James the Second, in honour of the King's second wife, Mary Beatrice of
Modena, having conceived after bathing there.--Collinson's "History of
Somersetshire."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 8: "Meanwhile stands cluckling at the brim," the first
draft.--_Forster_.]

[Footnote 9: "The best of heirs" in first draft.--_Forster_.]




THE PROGRESS OF POETRY

The farmer's goose, who in the stubble
Has fed without restraint or trouble,
Grown fat with corn and sitting still,
Can scarce get o'er the barn-door sill;
And hardly waddles forth to cool
Her belly in the neighbouring pool!
Nor loudly cackles at the door;
For cackling shows the goose is poor.
  But, when she must be turn'd to graze,
And round the barren common strays,
Hard exercise, and harder fare,
Soon make my dame grow lank and spare;
Her body light, she tries her wings,
And scorns the ground, and upward springs;
While all the parish, as she flies,
Hear sounds harmonious from the skies.
  Such is the poet fresh in pay,
The third night's profits of his play;
His morning draughts till noon can swill,
Among his brethren of the quill:
With good roast beef his belly full,
Grown lazy, foggy, fat, and dull,
Deep sunk in plenty and delight,
What poet e'er could take his flight?
Or, stuff'd with phlegm up to the throat,
What poet e'er could sing a note?
Nor Pegasus could bear the load
Along the high celestial road;
The steed, oppress'd, would break his girth,
To raise the lumber from the earth.
  But view him in another scene,
When all his drink is Hippocrene,
His money spent, his patrons fail,
His credit out for cheese and ale;
His two-years coat so smooth and bare,
Through every thread it lets in air;
With hungry meals his body pined,
His guts and belly full of wind;
And, like a jockey for a race,
His flesh brought down to flying case:
Now his exalted spirit loathes
Encumbrances of food and clothes;
And up he rises like a vapour,
Supported high on wings of paper.
He singing flies, and flying sings,
While from below all Grub-Street rings.




THE SOUTH-SEA PROJECT. 1721

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto,
Arma virm, tabulaeque, et Troa gaza per undas.
VIRG.

For particulars of this famous scheme for reducing the National Debt,
projected by Sir John Blunt, who became one of the Directors of it, and
ultimately one of the greatest sufferers by it, when the Bubble burst,
see Smollett's "History of England," vol. ii; Pope's "Moral Essays,"
Epist. iii, and notes; and Gibbon's "Memoirs," for the violent and
arbitrary proceedings against the Directors, one of whom was his
grandfather.--_W. E. B._


Ye wise philosophers, explain
  What magic makes our money rise,
When dropt into the Southern main;
  Or do these jugglers cheat our eyes?

Put in your money fairly told;
  _Presto_! be gone--'Tis here again:
Ladies and gentlemen, behold,
  Here's every piece as big as ten.

Thus in a basin drop a shilling,
  Then fill the vessel to the brim,
You shall observe, as you are filling,
  The pond'rous metal seems to swim:

It rises both in bulk and height,
  Behold it swelling like a sop;
The liquid medium cheats your sight:
  Behold it mounted to the top!

In stock three hundred thousand pounds,
  I have in view a lord's estate;
My manors all contiguous round!
  A coach-and-six, and served in plate!

Thus the deluded bankrupt raves,
  Puts all upon a desperate bet;
Then plunges in the Southern waves,
  Dipt over head and ears--in debt.

So, by a calenture misled,
  The mariner with rapture sees,
On the smooth ocean's azure bed,
  Enamell'd fields and verdant trees:

With eager haste he longs to rove
  In that fantastic scene, and thinks
It must be some enchanted grove;
  And in he leaps, and down he sinks.

Five hundred chariots just bespoke,
  Are sunk in these devouring waves,
The horses drown'd, the harness broke,
  And here the owners find their graves.

Like Pharaoh, by directors led,
  They with their spoils went safe before;
His chariots, tumbling out the dead,
  Lay shatter'd on the Red Sea shore.

Raised up on Hope's aspiring plumes,
  The young adventurer o'er the deep
An eagle's flight and state assumes,
  And scorns the middle way to keep.

On paper wings he takes his flight,
  With wax the father bound them fast;
The wax is melted by the height,
  And down the towering boy is cast.

A moralist might here explain
  The rashness of the Cretan youth;[1]
Describe his fall into the main,
  And from a fable form a truth.

His wings are his paternal rent,
  He melts the wax at every flame;
His credit sunk, his money spent,
  In Southern Seas he leaves his name.

Inform us, you that best can tell,
  Why in that dangerous gulf profound,
Where hundreds and where thousands fell,
  Fools chiefly float, the wise are drown'd?

So have I seen from Severn's brink
  A flock of geese jump down together;
Swim where the bird of Jove would sink,
  And, swimming, never wet a feather.

But, I affirm, 'tis false in fact,
  Directors better knew their tools;
We see the nation's credit crack'd,
  Each knave has made a thousand fools.

One fool may from another win,
  And then get off with money stored;
But, if a sharper once comes in,
  He throws it all, and sweeps the board.

As fishes on each other prey,
  The great ones swallowing up the small,
So fares it in the Southern Sea;
  The whale directors eat up all.

When stock is high, they come between,
  Making by second-hand their offers;
Then cunningly retire unseen,
  With each a million in his coffers.

So, when upon a moonshine night,
  An ass was drinking at a stream,
A cloud arose, and stopt the light,
  By intercepting every beam:

The day of judgment will be soon,
  Cries out a sage among the crowd;
An ass has swallow'd up the moon!
  The moon lay safe behind the cloud.

Each poor subscriber to the sea
  Sinks down at once, and there he lies;
Directors fall as well as they,
  Their fall is but a trick to rise.

So fishes, rising from the main,
  Can soar with moisten'd wings on high;
The moisture dried, they sink again,
  And dip their fins again to fly.

Undone at play, the female troops
  Come here their losses to retrieve;
Ride o'er the waves in spacious hoops,
  Like Lapland witches in a sieve.

Thus Venus to the sea descends,
  As poets feign; but where's the moral?
It shows the Queen of Love intends
  To search the deep for pearl and coral.

The sea is richer than the land,
  I heard it from my grannam's mouth,
Which now I clearly understand;
  For by the sea she meant the South.

Thus, by directors we are told,
  "Pray, gentlemen, believe your eyes;
Our ocean's cover'd o'er with gold,
  Look round, and see how thick it lies:

"We, gentlemen, are your assisters,
  We'll come, and hold you by the chin."--
Alas! all is not gold that glisters,
  Ten thousand sink by leaping in.

O! would those patriots be so kind,
  Here in the deep to wash their hands,
Then, like Pactolus,[2] we should find
  The sea indeed had golden sands.

A shilling in the bath you fling,
  The silver takes a nobler hue,
By magic virtue in the spring,
  And seems a guinea to your view.

But, as a guinea will not pass
  At market for a farthing more,
Shown through a multiplying glass,
  Than what it always did before:

So cast it in the Southern seas,
  Or view it through a jobber's bill;
Put on what spectacles you please,
  Your guinea's but a guinea still.

One night a fool into a brook
  Thus from a hillock looking down,
The golden stars for guineas took,
  And silver Cynthia for a crown.

The point he could no longer doubt;
  He ran, he leapt into the flood;
There sprawl'd a while, and scarce got out,
  All cover'd o'er with slime and mud.

"Upon the water cast thy bread,
  And after many days thou'lt find it;"[3]
But gold, upon this ocean spread,
  Shall sink, and leave no mark behind it:

There is a gulf, where thousands fell,
  Here all the bold adventurers came,
A narrow sound, though deep as Hell--
  'Change Alley is the dreadful name.

Nine times a-day it ebbs and flows,
  Yet he that on the surface lies,
Without a pilot seldom knows
  The time it falls, or when 'twill rise.

Subscribers here by thousands float,
  And jostle one another down;
Each paddling in his leaky boat,
  And here they fish for gold, and drown.

"Now buried in the depth below,
  Now mounted up to Heaven again,
They reel and stagger to and fro,
  At their wits' end, like drunken men."[4]

Meantime, secure on Garway[5] cliffs,
  A savage race, by shipwrecks fed,
Lie waiting for the founder'd skiffs,
  And strip the bodies of the dead.

But these, you say, are factious lies,
  From some malicious Tory's brain;
For, where directors get a prize,
  The Swiss and Dutch whole millions drain.

Thus, when by rooks a lord is plied,
  Some cully often wins a bet,
By venturing on the cheating side,
  Though not into the secret let.

While some build castles in the air,
  Directors build them in the seas;
Subscribers plainly see them there,
  For fools will see as wise men please.

Thus oft by mariners are shown
  (Unless the men of Kent are liars)
Earl Godwin's castles overflown,
  And palace roofs, and steeple spires.

Mark where the sly directors creep,
  Nor to the shore approach too nigh!
The monsters nestle in the deep,
  To seize you in your passing by.

Then, like the dogs of Nile, be wise,
  Who, taught by instinct how to shun
The crocodile, that lurking lies,
  Run as they drink, and drink and run.

Antus could, by magic charms,
  Recover strength whene'er he fell;
Alcides held him in his arms,
  And sent him up in air to Hell.

Directors, thrown into the sea,
  Recover strength and vigour there;
But may be tamed another way,
  Suspended for a while in air.

Directors! for 'tis you I warn,
  By long experience we have found
What planet ruled when you were born;
  We see you never can be drown'd.

Beware, nor overbulky grow,
  Nor come within your cully's reach;
For, if the sea should sink so low
  To leave you dry upon the beach,

You'll owe your ruin to your bulk:
  Your foes already waiting stand,
To tear you like a founder'd hulk,
  While you lie helpless on the sand.

Thus, when a whale has lost the tide,
  The coasters crowd to seize the spoil:
The monster into parts divide,
  And strip the bones, and melt the oil.

Oh! may some western tempest sweep
  These locusts whom our fruits have fed,
That plague, directors, to the deep,
  Driven from the South Sea to the Red!

May he, whom Nature's laws obey,
  Who lifts the poor, and sinks the proud,
"Quiet the raging of the sea,
  And still the madness of the crowd!"

But never shall our isle have rest,
  Till those devouring swine run down,
(The devils leaving the possest)
  And headlong in the waters drown.

The nation then too late will find,
  Computing all their cost and trouble,
Directors' promises but wind,
  South Sea, at best, a mighty bubble.



[Footnote 1: Phathon. Ovid, "Metam.," lib. ii.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: See the fable of Midas. Ovid, "Metam.," lib.
xi.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Ecclesiastes, xi, I.]

[Footnote 4: Psalm cvii, 26, 27.]

[Footnote 5: Garraway's auction room and coffee-house, closed in
1866.--_W. E. B._]




FABULA CANIS ET UMBRAE

ORE cibum portans catulus dum spectat in undis,
Apparet liquido praedae melioris imago:
Dum speciosa diu damna admiratur, et alt
Ad latices inhiat, cadit imo vortice praeceps
Ore cibus, nee non simulacrum corripit una.
Occupat ille avidus deceptis faucibus umbram;
Illudit species, ac dentibus ara mordet.




A PROLOGUE

BILLET TO A COMPANY OF PLAYERS SENT WITH THE PROLOGUE

The enclosed prologue is formed upon the story of the secretary's not
allowing you to act, unless you would pay him 300 per annum; upon
which you got a license from the Lord Mayor to act as strollers.
  The prologue supposes, that upon your being forbidden to act, a company
of country strollers came and hired the playhouse, and your clothes,
etc. to act in.


Our set of strollers, wandering up and down,
Hearing the house was empty, came to town;
And, with a license from our good lord mayor,
Went to one Griffith, formerly a player:
Him we persuaded, with a moderate bribe,
To speak to Elrington[1] and all the tribe,
To let our company supply their places,
And hire us out their scenes, and clothes, and faces.
Is not the truth the truth? Look full on me;
I am not Elrington, nor Griffith he.
When we perform, look sharp among our crew,
There's not a creature here you ever knew.
The former folks were servants to the king;
We, humble strollers, always on the wing.
Now, for my part, I think, upon the whole,
Rather than starve, a better man would stroll.
  Stay! let me see--Three hundred pounds a-year,
For leave to act in town!--'Tis plaguy dear.
Now, here's a warrant; gallants, please to mark,
For three thirteens, and sixpence to the clerk.
Three hundred pounds! Were I the price to fix,
The public should bestow the actors six;
A score of guineas given underhand,
For a good word or so, we understand.
To help an honest lad that's out of place,
May cost a crown or so; a common case:
And, in a crew, 'tis no injustice thought
To ship a rogue, and pay him not a groat.
But, in the chronicles of former ages,
Who ever heard of servants paying wages?
  I pity Elrington with all my heart;
Would he were here this night to act my part!
I told him what it was to be a stroller;
How free we acted, and had no comptroller:
In every town we wait on Mr. Mayor,
First get a license, then produce our ware;
We sound a trumpet, or we beat a drum:
Huzza! (the schoolboys roar) the players are come;
And then we cry, to spur the bumpkins on,
Gallants, by Tuesday next we must be gone.
I told him in the smoothest way I could,
All this, and more, yet it would do no good.
But Elrington, tears falling from his cheeks,
He that has shone with Betterton and Wilks,[2]
To whom our country has been always dear,
Who chose to leave his dearest pledges here,
Owns all your favours, here intends to stay,
And, as a stroller, act in every play:
And the whole crew this resolution takes,
To live and die all strollers, for your sakes;
Not frighted with an ignominious name,
For your displeasure is their only shame.
  A pox on Elrington's majestic tone!
Now to a word of business in our own.
  Gallants, next Thursday night will be our last:
Then without fail we pack up for Belfast.
Lose not your time, nor our diversion miss,
The next we act shall be as good as this.


[Footnote 1: Thomas Elrington, born in 1688, an English actor of great
reputation at Drury Lane from 1709 till 1712, when he was engaged by
Joseph Ashbury, manager of the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin. After the
death of Ashbury, whose daughter he had married, he succeeded to the
management of the theatre, and enjoyed high social and artistic
consideration. He died in July, 1732.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Two celebrated actors: Betterton in tragedy, and Wilks in
comedy. See "The Tatler," Nos. 71, 157, 167, 182, and notes, edit. 1786;
Colley Cibber's "Apology "; and "Dictionary of National
Biography."--_W. E. B._]




EPILOGUE[1]

TO MR. HOPPY'S BENEFIT-NIGHT, AT SMOCK-ALLEY


HOLD! hold, my good friends; for one moment, pray stop ye,
I return ye my thanks, in the name of poor Hoppy.
He's not the first person who never did write,
And yet has been fed by a benefit-night.
The custom is frequent, on my word I assure ye,
In our famed elder house, of the Hundreds of Drury.
But then you must know, those players still act on
Some very good reasons, for such benefaction.
  A deceased poet's widow, if pretty, can't fail;
From Cibber she holds, as a tenant in tail.
Your emerited actors, and actresses too,
For what they have done (though no more they can do)
And sitters, and songsters, and Chetwood and G----,
And sometimes a poor sufferer in the South Sea;
A machine-man, a tire-woman, a mute, and a spright,
Have been all kept from starving by a benefit-night.
  Thus, for Hoppy's bright merits, at length we have found
That he must have of us ninety-nine and one pound,
Paid to him clear money once every year:
And however some think it a little too dear,
Yet, for reasons of state, this sum we'll allow,
Though we pay the good man with the sweat of our brow.
  First, because by the King to us he was sent,
To guide the whole session of this parliament.
To preside in our councils, both public and private,
And so learn, by the by, what both houses do drive at.
When bold B---- roars, and meek M---- raves,
When Ash prates by wholesale, or Be----h by halves,
When Whigs become Whims, or join with the Tories;
And to himself constant when a member no more is,
But changes his sides, and votes and unvotes;
As S----t is dull, and with S----d, who dotes;
Then up must get Hoppy, and with voice very low,
And with eloquent bow, the house he must show,
That that worthy member who spoke last must give
The freedom to him, humbly most, to conceive,
That his sentiment on this affair isn't right;
That he mightily wonders which way he came by't:
That, for his part, God knows, he does such things disown;
And so, having convinced him, he most humbly sits down.
  For these, and more reasons, which perhaps you may hear,
Pounds hundred this night, and one hundred this year,
And so on we are forced, though we sweat out our blood,
To make these walls pay for poor Hoppy's good;
To supply with rare diet his pot and his spit;
And with richest Margoux to wash down a tit-bit.
To wash oft his fine linen, so clean and so neat,
And to buy him much linen, to fence against sweat:
All which he deserves; for although all the day
He ofttimes is heavy, yet all night he's gay;
And if he rise early to watch for the state,
To keep up his spirits he'll sit up as late.
Thus, for these and more reasons, as before I did say
Hop has got all the money for our acting this play,
Which makes us poor actors look _je ne sai quoy_.


[Footnote 1: This piece, which relates, like the former, to the
avaricious demands which the Irish Secretary of State made upon the
company of players, is said, in the collection called "Gulliveriana," to
have been composed by Swift, and delivered by him at Gaulstown House. But
it is more likely to have been written by some other among the joyous
guests of the Lord Chief Baron, since it does not exhibit Swift's
accuracy of numbers.--_Scott_. Perhaps so, but the note to this
piece in "Gulliveriana" is "Spoken by the _Captain_, one evening, at the
end of a private farce, acted by gentlemen, for their own diversion at
_Gallstown_"; the "Captain" being Swift, as the leader of the "joyous
guests." This is very different from "composed."--_W. E. B._]




PROLOGUE[1]

TO A PLAY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE DISTRESSED WEAVERS.
BY DR. SHERIDAN. SPOKEN BY MR. ELRINGTON. 1721


Great cry, and little wool--is now become
The plague and proverb of the weaver's loom;
No wool to work on, neither weft nor warp;
Their pockets empty, and their stomachs sharp.
Provoked, in loud complaints to you they cry;
Ladies, relieve the weavers; or they die!
Forsake your silks for stuff's; nor think it strange
To shift your clothes, since you delight in change.
One thing with freedom I'll presume to tell--
The men will like you every bit as well.
  See I am dress'd from top to toe in stuff,
And, by my troth, I think I'm fine enough;
My wife admires me more, and swears she never,
In any dress, beheld me look so clever.
And if a man be better in such ware,
What great advantage must it give the fair!
Our wool from lambs of innocence proceeds;
Silks come from maggots, calicoes from weeds;
Hence 'tis by sad experience that we find
Ladies in silks to vapours much inclined--
And what are they but maggots in the mind?
For which I think it reason to conclude,
That clothes may change our temper like our food.
Chintzes are gawdy, and engage our eyes
Too much about the party-colour'd dyes;
Although the lustre is from you begun,
We see the rainbow, and neglect the sun.
  How sweet and innocent's the country maid,
With small expense in native wool array'd;
Who copies from the fields her homely green,
While by her shepherd with delight she's seen!
Should our fair ladies dress like her, in wool
How much more lovely, and how beautiful,
Without their Indian drapery, they'd prove!
While wool would help to warm us into love!
Then, like the famous Argonauts of Greece,
We'll all contend to gain the Golden Fleece!


[Footnote 1: In connection with this Prologue and the Epilogue by the
Dean which follows, see Swift's Papers relating to the use of Irish
Manufactures in "Prose Works," vol. vii.--_W. E. B._]



EPILOGUE
TO A BENEFIT PLAY, GIVEN IN BEHALF OF THE DISTRESSED WEAVERS.
BY THE DEAN. SPOKEN BY MR. GRIFFITH

Who dares affirm this is no pious age,
When charity begins to tread the stage?
When actors, who at best are hardly savers,
Will give a night of benefit to weavers?
Stay--let me see, how finely will it sound!
_Imprimis_, From his grace[1] a hundred pound.
Peers, clergy, gentry, all are benefactors;
And then comes in the _item_ of the actors.
_Item_, The actors freely give a day--
The poet had no more who made the play.
  But whence this wondrous charity in players?
They learn it not at sermons, or at prayers:
Under the rose, since here are none but friends,
(To own the truth) we have some private ends.
Since waiting-women, like exacting jades,
Hold up the prices of their old brocades;
We'll dress in manufactures made at home;
Equip our kings and generals at the Comb.[2]
We'll rig from Meath Street Egypt's haughty queen
And Antony shall court her in ratteen.
In blue shalloon shall Hannibal be clad,
And Scipio trail an Irish purple plaid,
In drugget drest, of thirteen pence a-yard,
See Philip's son amidst his Persian guard;
And proud Roxana, fired with jealous rage,
With fifty yards of crape shall sweep the stage.
In short, our kings and princesses within
Are all resolved this project to begin;
And you, our subjects, when you here resort,
Must imitate the fashion of the court.
  O! could I see this audience clad in stuff,
Though money's scarce, we should have trade enough:
But chintz, brocades, and lace, take all away,
And scarce a crown is left to see the play.
Perhaps you wonder whence this friendship springs
Between the weavers and us playhouse kings;
But wit and weaving had the same beginning;
Pallas[3] first taught us poetry and spinning:
And, next, observe how this alliance fits,
For weavers now are just as poor as wits:
Their brother quillmen, workers for the stage,
For sorry stuff can get a crown a page;
But weavers will be kinder to the players,
And sell for twenty pence a yard of theirs.
And to your knowledge, there is often less in
The poet's wit, than in the player's dressing.


[Footnote 1: Archbishop King.]

[Footnote 2: A street famous for woollen manufactures.--_F_.]

[Footnote 3: See the fable of Pallas and Arachne in Ovid, "Metamorph.,"
lib. vi, applied in "A proposal for the Universal use of Irish
Manufacture," "Prose Works," vii, at p. 21.--_W. E. B._]




ANSWER
TO DR. SHERIDAN'S PROLOGUE, AND TO DR. SWIFT'S EPILOGUE.
IN BEHALF OF THE DISTRESSED WEAVERS. BY DR. DELANY.

Femineo generi tribuantur.

The Muses, whom the richest silks array,
Refuse to fling their shining gowns away;
The pencil clothes the nine in bright brocades,
And gives each colour to the pictured maids;
Far above mortal dress the sisters shine,
Pride in their Indian Robes, and must be fine.
And shall two bards in concert rhyme, and huff
And fret these Muses with their playhouse stuff?
  The player in mimic piety may storm,
Deplore the Comb, and bid her heroes arm:
The arbitrary mob, in paltry rage,
May curse the belles and chintzes of the age:
Yet still the artist worm her silk shall share,
And spin her thread of life in service of the fair.
  The cotton plant, whom satire cannot blast,
Shall bloom the favourite of these realms, and last;
Like yours, ye fair, her fame from censure grows,
Prevails in charms, and glares above her foes:
Your injured plant shall meet a loud defence,
And be the emblem of your innocence.
  Some bard, perhaps, whose landlord was a weaver,
Penn'd the low prologue to return a favour:
Some neighbour wit, that would be in the vogue,
Work'd with his friend, and wove the epilogue.
Who weaves the chaplet, or provides the bays,
For such wool-gathering sonnetteers as these?
Hence, then, ye homespun witlings, that persuade
Miss Chloe to the fashion of her maid.
Shall the wide hoop, that standard of the town,
Thus act subservient to a poplin gown?
Who'd smell of wool all over? 'Tis enough
The under petticoat be made of stuff.
Lord! to be wrapt in flannel just in May,
When the fields dress'd in flowers appear so gay!
And shall not miss be flower'd as well as they?
  In what weak colours would the plaid appear,
Work'd to a quilt, or studded in a chair!
The skin, that vies with silk, would fret with stuff;
Or who could bear in bed a thing so rough?
Ye knowing fair, how eminent that bed,
Where the chintz diamonds with the silken thread,
Where rustling curtains call the curious eye,
And boast the streaks and paintings of the sky!
Of flocks they'd have your milky ticking full:
And all this for the benefit of wool!
  "But where," say they, "shall we bestow these weavers,
That spread our streets, and are such piteous cravers?"
The silk-worms (brittle beings!) prone to fate,
Demand their care, to make their webs complete:
These may they tend, their promises receive;
We cannot pay too much for what they give!




ON GAULSTOWN HOUSE

THE SEAT OF GEORGE ROCHFORT, ESQ.
BY DR. DELANY

'Tis so old and so ugly, and yet so convenient,
You're sometimes in pleasure, though often in pain in't;
'Tis so large, you may lodge a few friends with ease in't,
You may turn and stretch at your length if you please in't;
'Tis so little, the family live in a press in't,
And poor Lady Betty[1] has scarce room to dress in't;
'Tis so cold in the winter, you can't bear to lie in't,
And so hot in the summer, you're ready to fry in't;
'Tis so brittle, 'twould scarce bear the weight of a tun,
Yet so staunch, that it keeps out a great deal of sun;
'Tis so crazy, the weather with ease beats quite through it,
And you're forced every year in some part to renew it;
'Tis so ugly, so useful, so big, and so little,
'Tis so staunch and so crazy, so strong and so brittle,
'Tis at one time so hot, and another so cold,
It is part of the new, and part of the old;
It is just half a blessing, and just half a curse--
wish then, dear George, it were better or worse.

[Footnote 1: Daughter of the Earl of Drogheda, and married to George
Rochfort, Esq.--_F._]




THE COUNTRY LIFE

PART OF A SUMMER SPENT AT GAULSTOWN HOUSE,
THE SEAT OF GEORGE ROCHFORT, ESQ.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

The Baron, Lord Chief Baron Rochfort.
_George_, his eldest son.
_Nim_, his second son, John, so called from his love of hunting.
_Dan_, Mr. Jackson, a parson.
Gaulstown, the Baron's seat.
_Sheridan_, a pedant and pedagogue.
_Delany_, chaplain to Sir Constantine Phipps, when Lord Chancellor
of Ireland.
Dragon, the name of the boat on the canal.
Dean Percival and his wife, friends of the Baron and his lady.


Thalia, tell, in sober lays,
How George, Nim, Dan, Dean,[1] pass their days;
And, should our Gaulstown's wit grow fallow,
Yet _Neget quis carmina Gallo?_
Here (by the way) by Gallus mean I
Not Sheridan, but friend Delany.
Begin, my Muse! First from our bowers
We sally forth at different hours;
At seven the Dean, in night-gown drest,
Goes round the house to wake the rest;
At nine, grave Nim and George facetious,
Go to the Dean, to read Lucretius;[2]
At ten my lady comes and hectors
And kisses George, and ends our lectures;
And when she has him by the neck fast,
Hauls him, and scolds us, down to breakfast.
We squander there an hour or more,
And then all hands, boys, to the oar;
All, heteroclite Dan except,
Who never time nor order kept,
But by peculiar whimseys drawn,
Peeps in the ponds to look for spawn:
O'ersees the work, or Dragon rows,
Or mars a text, or mends his hose;
Or--but proceed we in our journal--
At two, or after, we return all:
From the four elements assembling,
Warn'd by the bell, all folks come trembling,
From airy garrets some descend,
Some from the lake's remotest end;
My lord and Dean the fire forsake,
Dan leaves the earthy spade and rake;
The loiterers quake, no corner hides them
And Lady Betty soundly chides them.
Now water brought, and dinner done;
With "Church and King" the ladies gone.
Not reckoning half an hour we pass
In talking o'er a moderate glass.
Dan, growing drowsy, like a thief
Steals off to doze away his beef;
And this must pass for reading Hammond--
While George and Dean go to backgammon.
George, Nim, and Dean, set out at four,
And then, again, boys, to the oar.
But when the sun goes to the deep,
(Not to disturb him in his sleep,
Or make a rumbling o'er his head,
His candle out, and he a-bed,)
We watch his motions to a minute,
And leave the flood when he goes in it.
Now stinted in the shortening day,
We go to prayers and then to play,
Till supper comes; and after that
We sit an hour to drink and chat.
'Tis late--the old and younger pairs,
By Adam[3] lighted, walk up stairs.
The weary Dean goes to his chamber;
And Nim and Dan to garret clamber,
So when the circle we have run,
The curtain falls and all is done.
  I might have mention'd several facts,
Like episodes between the acts;
And tell who loses and who wins,
Who gets a cold, who breaks his shins;
How Dan caught nothing in his net,
And how the boat was overset.
For brevity I have retrench'd
How in the lake the Dean was drench'd:
It would be an exploit to brag on,
How valiant George rode o'er the Dragon;
How steady in the storm he sat,
And saved his oar, but lost his hat:
How Nim (no hunter e'er could match him)
Still brings us hares, when he can catch 'em;
How skilfully Dan mends his nets;
How fortune fails him when he sets;
Or how the Dean delights to vex
The ladies, and lampoon their sex:
I might have told how oft Dean Perceval
Displays his pedantry unmerciful,
How haughtily he cocks his nose,
To tell what every schoolboy knows:
And with his finger and his thumb,
Explaining, strikes opposers dumb:
But now there needs no more be said on't,
Nor how his wife, that female pedant,
Shews all her secrets of housekeeping:
For candles how she trucks her dripping;
Was forced to send three miles for yeast,
To brew her ale, and raise her paste;
Tells everything that you can think of,
How she cured Charley of the chincough;
What gave her brats and pigs the measles,
And how her doves were killed by weasels;
How Jowler howl'd, and what a fright
She had with dreams the other night.
  But now, since I have gone so far on,
A word or two of Lord Chief Baron;
And tell how little weight he sets
On all Whig papers and gazettes;
But for the politics of Pue,[4]
Thinks every syllable is true:
And since he owns the King of Sweden [5]
Is dead at last, without evading,
Now all his hopes are in the czar;
"Why, Muscovy is not so far;
Down the Black Sea, and up the Straits,
And in a month he's at your gates;
Perhaps from what the packet brings,
By Christmas we shall see strange things."
Why should I tell of ponds and drains,
What carps we met with for our pains;
Of sparrows tamed, and nuts innumerable
To choke the girls, and to consume a rabble?
But you, who are a scholar, know
How transient all things are below,
How prone to change is human life!
Last night arrived Clem[6] and his wife--
This grand event has broke our measures;
Their reign began with cruel seizures;
The Dean must with his quilt supply
The bed in which those tyrants lie;
Nim lost his wig-block, Dan his Jordan,
(My lady says, she can't afford one,)
George is half scared out of his wits,
For Clem gets all the dainty bits.
Henceforth expect a different survey,
This house will soon turn topsyturvy;
They talk of farther alterations,
Which causes many speculations.


[Footnote 1: Dr. Swift.--_F_.]

[Footnote 2: For his philosophy and his exquisite verse, rather than for
his irreligion, which never seems to have affected Swift.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: The butler.--_F_.]

[Footnote 4: A Tory news-writer. See "Prose Works," vii, p.
347.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: Charles XII, killed by a musket ball, when besieging a
"petty fortress" in Norway in the winter of 1718.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6: Mr. Clement Barry, called, in the notes appended to
"Gulliveriana," p. 12, chief favourite and governor of
Gaulstown.--_W. E. B._]




DR. DELANY'S VILLA[1]

WOULD you that Delville I describe?
Believe me, Sir, I will not gibe:
For who would be satirical
Upon a thing so very small?
  You scarce upon the borders enter,
Before you're at the very centre.
A single crow can make it night,
When o'er your farm she takes her flight:
Yet, in this narrow compass, we
Observe a vast variety;
Both walks, walls, meadows, and parterres,
Windows and doors, and rooms and stairs,
And hills and dales, and woods and fields,
And hay, and grass, and corn, it yields:
All to your haggard brought so cheap in,
Without the mowing or the reaping:
A razor, though to say't I'm loth,
Would shave you and your meadows both.
  Though small's the farm, yet here's a house
Full large to entertain a mouse;
But where a rat is dreaded more
Than savage Caledonian boar;
For, if it's enter'd by a rat,
There is no room to bring a cat.
  A little rivulet seems to steal
Down through a thing you call a vale,
Like tears adown a wrinkled cheek,
Like rain along a blade of leek:
And this you call your sweet meander,
Which might be suck'd up by a gander,
Could he but force his nether bill
To scoop the channel of the rill.
For sure you'd make a mighty clutter,
Were it as big as city gutter.
Next come I to your kitchen garden,
Where one poor mouse would fare but hard in;
And round this garden is a walk
No longer than a tailor's chalk;
Thus I compare what space is in it,
A snail creeps round it in a minute.
One lettuce makes a shift to squeeze
Up through a tuft you call your trees:
And, once a year, a single rose
Peeps from the bud, but never blows;
In vain then you expect its bloom!
It cannot blow for want of room.
  In short, in all your boasted seat,
There's nothing but yourself that's GREAT.


[Footnote 1: This poem has been stated to have been written by Swift's
friend, Dr. Sheridan, on the authority of his son, but it is
unquestionably by Swift. See "Prose Works," xii, p. 79.--_W. E. B._]



ON ONE OF THE WINDOWS AT DELVILLE

A bard, grown desirous of saving his pelf,
Built a house he was sure would hold none but himself.
This enraged god Apollo, who Mercury sent,
And bid him go ask what his votary meant?
"Some foe to my empire has been his adviser:
'Tis of dreadful portent when a poet turns miser!
Tell him, Hermes, from me, tell that subject of mine,
I have sworn by the Styx, to defeat his design;
For wherever he lives, the Muses shall reign;
And the Muses, he knows, have a numerous train."




CARBERIAE RUPES

IN COMITATU CORGAGENSI.  SCRIPSIT JUN. ANN. DOM. 1723


Ecce ingens fragmen scopuli, quod vertice summo
Desuper impendet, nullo fundamine nixum,
Decidit in fluctus: maria undique et undique saxa
Horrisono stridore tenant, et ad aethera murmur
Erigitur; trepidatque suis Neptunus in undis.
Nam, long venti rabie, atque aspergine crebr
Aequorei laticis, specus im rupe cavatur:
Jam fultura ruit, jam summa cacumina nutant;
Jam cadit in praeceps moles, et verberat undas.
Attonitus credas, hinc dejecisse Tonantem
Montibus impositos montes, et Pelion altum
In capita anguipedum coelo jaculsse gigantum.
  Saepe etiam spelunca immani aperitur hiatu
Exesa  scopulis, et utrinque foramina pandit,
Hinc atque hinc a ponto ad pontum pervia Phoebo
Cautibus enorm junctis laquearia tecti
Formantur; moles olim ruitura supern.
Fornice sublimi nidos posuere palumbes,
Inque imo stagni posuere cubilia phocae.
  Sed, cum saevit hyems, et venti, carcere rupto,
Immensos volvunt fluctus ad culmina montis;
Non obsessae arces, non fulmina vindice dextr
Missa Jovis, quoties inimicus saevit in urbes,
Exaequant sonitum undarum, veniente procell:
Littora littoribus reboant; vicinia lat,
Gens assueta mari, et pedibus percurrere rupes,
Terretur tamen, et long fugit, arva relinquens.
  Gramina dum carpunt pendentes rupe capellae,
Vi salientis aquae de summo praecipitantur,
Et dulces animas imo sub gurgite linquunt.
  Piscator terr non audet vellere funem;
Sed latet in portu tremebundus, et ara sudum
Haud sperans, Nereum precibus votisque fatigat.




CARBERY ROCKS

TRANSLATED BY DR. DUNKIN

Lo! from the top of yonder cliff, that shrouds
Its airy head amid the azure clouds,
Hangs a huge fragment; destitute of props,
Prone on the wave the rocky ruin drops;
With hoarse rebuff the swelling seas rebound,
From shore to shore the rocks return the sound:
The dreadful murmur Heaven's high convex cleaves,
And Neptune shrinks beneath his subject waves:
For, long the whirling winds and beating tides
Had scoop'd a vault into its nether sides.
Now yields the base, the summits nod, now urge
Their headlong course, and lash the sounding surge.
Not louder noise could shake the guilty world,
When Jove heap'd mountains upon mountains hurl'd;
Retorting Pelion from his dread abode,
To crush Earth's rebel sons beneath the load.
  Oft too with hideous yawn the cavern wide
Presents an orifice on either side.
A dismal orifice, from sea to sea
Extended, pervious to the God of Day:
Uncouthly join'd, the rocks stupendous form
An arch, the ruin of a future storm:
High on the cliff their nests the woodquests make,
And sea-calves stable in the oozy lake.
  But when bleak Winter with his sullen train
Awakes the winds to vex the watery plain;
When o'er the craggy steep without control,
Big with the blast, the raging billows roll;
Not towns beleaguer'd, not the flaming brand,
Darted from Heaven by Jove's avenging hand,
Oft as on impious men his wrath he pours,
Humbles their pride and blasts their gilded towers,
Equal the tumult of this wild uproar:
Waves rush o'er waves, rebellows shore to shore.
The neighbouring race, though wont to brave the shocks
Of angry seas, and run along the rocks,
Now, pale with terror, while the ocean foams,
Fly far and wide, nor trust their native homes.
  The goats, while, pendent from the mountain top,
The wither'd herb improvident they crop,
Wash'd down the precipice with sudden sweep,
Leave their sweet lives beneath th'unfathom'd deep.
  The frighted fisher, with desponding eyes,
Though safe, yet trembling in the harbour lies,
Nor hoping to behold the skies serene,
Wearies with vows the monarch of the main.




COPY OF THE BIRTH-DAY VERSES

ON MR. FORD[1]


COME, be content, since out it must,
For Stella has betray'd her trust;
And, whispering, charged me not to say
That Mr. Ford was born to-day;
Or, if at last I needs must blab it,
According to my usual habit,
She bid me, with a serious face,
Be sure conceal the time and place;
And not my compliment to spoil,
By calling this your native soil;
Or vex the ladies, when they knew
That you are turning forty-two:
But, if these topics shall appear
Strong arguments to keep you here,
I think, though you judge hardly of it,
Good manners must give place to profit.
  The nymphs, with whom you first began,
Are each become a harridan;
And Montague so far decay'd,
Her lovers now must all be paid;
And every belle that since arose,
Has her contemporary beaux.
Your former comrades, once so bright,
With whom you toasted half the night,
Of rheumatism and pox complain,
And bid adieu to dear champaign.
Your great protectors, once in power,
Are now in exile or the Tower.
Your foes triumphant o'er the laws,
Who hate your person and your cause,
If once they get you on the spot,
You must be guilty of the plot;
For, true or false, they'll ne'er inquire,
But use you ten times worse than Prior.
  In London! what would you do there?
Can you, my friend, with patience bear
(Nay, would it not your passion raise
Worse than a pun, or Irish phrase)
To see a scoundrel strut and hector,
A foot-boy to some rogue director,
To look on vice triumphant round,
And virtue trampled on the ground?
Observe where bloody **** stands
With torturing engines in his hands,
Hear him blaspheme, and swear, and rail,
Threatening the pillory and jail:
If this you think a pleasing scene,
To London straight return again;
Where, you have told us from experience,
Are swarms of bugs and presbyterians.
  I thought my very spleen would burst,
When fortune hither drove me first;
Was full as hard to please as you,
Nor persons' names nor places knew:
But now I act as other folk,
Like prisoners when their gaol is broke.
  If you have London still at heart,
We'll make a small one here by art;
The difference is not much between
St. James's Park and Stephen's Green;
And Dawson Street will serve as well
To lead you thither as Pall Mall.
Nor want a passage through the palace,
To choke your sight, and raise your malice.
The Deanery-house may well be match'd,
Under correction, with the Thatch'd.[2]
Nor shall I, when you hither come,
Demand a crown a-quart for stum.
Then for a middle-aged charmer,
Stella may vie with your Mounthermer;[3]
She's now as handsome every bit,
And has a thousand times her wit
The Dean and Sheridan, I hope,
Will half supply a Gay and Pope.
Corbet,[4] though yet I know his worth not,
No doubt, will prove a good Arbuthnot.
I throw into the bargain Tim;
In London can you equal him?
What think you of my favourite clan,
Robin[5] and Jack, and Jack and Dan;
Fellows of modest worth and parts,
With cheerful looks and honest hearts?
  Can you on Dublin look with scorn?
Yet here were you and Ormond born.
  O! were but you and I so wise,
To see with Robert Grattan's eyes!
Robin adores that spot of earth,
That literal spot which gave him birth;
And swears, "Belcamp[6] is, to his taste,
As fine as Hampton-court at least."
When to your friends you would enhance
The praise of Italy or France,
For grandeur, elegance, and wit,
We gladly hear you, and submit;
But then, to come and keep a clutter,
For this or that side of a gutter,
To live in this or t'other isle,
We cannot think it worth your while;
For, take it kindly or amiss,
The difference but amounts to this,
We bury on our side the channel
In linen; and on yours in flannel.[7]
You for the news are ne'er to seek;
While we, perhaps, may wait a week;
You happy folks are sure to meet
A hundred whores in every street;
While we may trace all Dublin o'er
Before we find out half a score.
  You see my arguments are strong,
I wonder you held out so long;
But, since you are convinced at last,
We'll pardon you for what has past.
So--let us now for whist prepare;
Twelve pence a corner, if you dare.


[Footnote 1: Dr. Swift had been used to celebrate the birth-day of his
friend Charles Ford, which was on the first day of January. See also the
poem, "Stella at Wood Park."--Dr. Delany mentions also, among the Dean's
intimate friends, "Matthew Ford, Esq., a man of family and fortune, a
fine gentleman, and the best lay scholar of his time and
nation."--_Nichols_.]

[Footnote 1: A celebrated tavern in St. James' Street, from 1711 till
about 1865. Since then and now, The Thatched House Club.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 3: Mary, youngest daughter of the Duke of Marlborough,
"exquisitely beautiful, lively in temper, and no less amiable in mind
than elegant in person," married in 1703, to Lord Mounthermer, son of the
Earl, afterwards Duke, of Montagu. See Coxe's "Life of Marlborough," i,
172.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Dr. Corbet, afterwards Dean of St. Patrick's, on the death
of Dr. Maturine, who succeeded Dr. Swift.]

[Footnote 5: Robert and John Grattan, and John and Daniel Jackson.--_H._]

[Footnote 6: In Fingal, about five miles from Dublin.--_H._]

[Footnote 7: The law for burying in woollen was extended to Ireland in
1733.]




ON DREAMS

AN IMITATION OF PETRONIUS

Petronii Fragmenta, xxx.


THOSE dreams, that on the silent night intrude,
And with false flitting shades our minds delude
Jove never sends us downward from the skies;
Nor can they from infernal mansions rise;
But are all mere productions of the brain,
And fools consult interpreters in vain.[1]

For when in bed we rest our weary limbs,
The mind unburden'd sports in various whims;
The busy head with mimic art runs o'er
The scenes and actions of the day before.[2]

The drowsy tyrant, by his minions led,
To regal rage devotes some patriot's head.
With equal terrors, not with equal guilt,
The murderer dreams of all the blood he spilt.

The soldier smiling hears the widow's cries,
And stabs the son before the mother's eyes.
With like remorse his brother of the trade,
The butcher, fells the lamb beneath his blade.

The statesman rakes the town to find a plot,
And dreams of forfeitures by treason got.
Nor less Tom-t--d-man, of true statesman mould,
Collects the city filth in search of gold.

Orphans around his bed the lawyer sees,
And takes the plaintiff's and defendant's fees.
His fellow pick-purse, watching for a job,
Fancies his fingers in the cully's fob.

The kind physician grants the husband's prayers,
Or gives relief to long-expecting heirs.
The sleeping hangman ties the fatal noose,
Nor unsuccessful waits for dead men's shoes.

The grave divine, with knotty points perplext,
As if he were awake, nods o'er his text:
While the sly mountebank attends his trade,
Harangues the rabble, and is better paid.

The hireling senator of modern days
Bedaubs the guilty great with nauseous praise:
And Dick, the scavenger, with equal grace
Flirts from his cart the mud in Walpole's face.


[Footnote 1:
"Somnia quae mentes ludunt volitantibus umbris,
Non delubra deum nec ab aethere numina mittunt,
Sed sibi quisque facit."]

[Footnote 2:
          "Nam cum prostrata sopore
Urguet membra quies et mens sine pondere ludit,
Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit."--_W. E. B._]




SENT BY DR. DELANY TO DR. SWIFT,
IN ORDER TO BE ADMITTED TO SPEAK TO HIM WHEN HE WAS DEAF. 1724


Dear Sir, I think, 'tis doubly hard,
Your ears and doors should both be barr'd.
Can anything be more unkind?
Must I not see, 'cause you are blind?
Methinks a friend at night should cheer you,--
A friend that loves to see and hear you.
Why am I robb'd of that delight,
When you can be no loser by't
Nay, when 'tis plain (for what is plainer?)
That if you heard you'd be no gainer?
For sure you are not yet to learn,
That hearing is not your concern.
Then be your doors no longer barr'd:
Your business, sir, is to be heard.




THE ANSWER

The wise pretend to make it clear,
'Tis no great loss to lose an ear.
Why are we then so fond of two,
When by experience one would do?
  'Tis true, say they, cut off the head,
And there's an end; the man is dead;
Because, among all human race,
None e'er was known to have a brace:
But confidently they maintain,
That where we find the members twain,
The loss of one is no such trouble,
Since t'other will in strength be double.
The limb surviving, you may swear,
Becomes his brother's lawful heir:
Thus, for a trial, let me beg of
Your reverence but to cut one leg off,
And you shall find, by this device,
The other will be stronger twice;
For every day you shall be gaining
New vigour to the leg remaining.
So, when an eye has lost its brother,
You see the better with the other,
Cut off your hand, and you may do
With t'other hand the work of two:
Because the soul her power contracts,
And on the brother limb reacts.
  But yet the point is not so clear in
Another case, the sense of hearing:
For, though the place of either ear
Be distant, as one head can bear,
Yet Galen most acutely shows you,
(Consult his book _de partium usu_)
That from each ear, as he observes,
There creep two auditory nerves,
Not to be seen without a glass,
Which near the _os petrosum_ pass;
Thence to the neck; and moving thorough there,
One goes to this, and one to t'other ear;
Which made my grandam always stuff her ears
Both right and left, as fellow-sufferers.
You see my learning; but, to shorten it,
When my left ear was deaf a fortnight,
To t'other ear I felt it coming on:
And thus I solve this hard phenomenon.

'Tis true, a glass will bring supplies
To weak, or old, or clouded eyes:
Your arms, though both your eyes were lost,
Would guard your nose against a post:
Without your legs, two legs of wood
Are stronger, and almost as good:
And as for hands, there have been those
Who, wanting both, have used their toes.[1]
But no contrivance yet appears
To furnish artificial ears.


[Footnote 1: There have been instances of a man's writing with his foot.
And I have seen a man, in India, who painted pictures, holding the brush
betwixt his toes. The work was not well done: the wonder was to see it
done at all.--_W. E. B._]




A QUIET LIFE AND A GOOD NAME
TO A FRIEND WHO MARRIED A SHREW. 1724

NELL scolded in so loud a din,
That Will durst hardly venture in:
He mark'd the conjugal dispute;
Nell roar'd incessant, Dick sat mute;
But, when he saw his friend appear,
Cried bravely, "Patience, good my dear!"
At sight of Will she bawl'd no more,
But hurried out and clapt the door.
  Why, Dick! the devil's in thy Nell,
(Quoth Will,) thy house is worse than Hell.
Why what a peal the jade has rung!
D--n her, why don't you slit her tongue?
For nothing else will make it cease.
Dear Will, I suffer this for peace:
I never quarrel with my wife;
I bear it for a quiet life.
Scripture, you know, exhorts us to it;
Bids us to seek peace, and ensue it.
  Will went again to visit Dick;
And entering in the very nick,
He saw virago Nell belabour,
With Dick's own staff, his peaceful neighbour.
Poor Will, who needs must interpose,
Received a brace or two of blows.
But now, to make my story short,
Will drew out Dick to take a quart.
Why, Dick, thy wife has devilish whims;
Ods-buds! why don't you break her limbs?
If she were mine, and had such tricks,
I'd teach her how to handle sticks:
Z--ds! I would ship her to Jamaica,[1]
Or truck the carrion for tobacco:
I'd send her far enough away----
Dear Will; but what would people say?
Lord! I should get so ill a name,
The neighbours round would cry out shame.
  Dick suffer'd for his peace and credit;
But who believed him when he said it?
Can he, who makes himself a slave,
Consult his peace, or credit save?
Dick found it by his ill success,
His quiet small, his credit less.
She served him at the usual rate;
She stunn'd, and then she broke his pate:
And what he thought the hardest case,
The parish jeer'd him to his face;
Those men who wore the breeches least,
Call'd him a cuckold, fool, and beast.
At home he was pursued with noise;
Abroad was pester'd by the boys:
Within, his wife would break his bones:
Without, they pelted him with stones;
The 'prentices procured a riding,[2]
To act his patience and her chiding.
False patience and mistaken pride!
There are ten thousand Dicks beside;
Slaves to their quiet and good name,
Are used like Dick, and bear the blame.


[Footnote 1: See _post_, p. 200, "A beautiful young nymph."]

[Footnote 2: A performance got up by the rustics in some counties to
ridicule and shame a man who has been guilty of beating his wife (or in
this case, who has been beaten by her), by having a cart drawn through
the village, having in it two persons dressed to resemble the woman and
her master, and a supposed representation of the beating is inflicted,
enacted before the offender's door. "Notes and Queries," 1st S., ix,
370, 578.--_W. E. B._]




ADVICE TO THE GRUB-STREET VERSE-WRITERS
1726

Ye poets ragged and forlorn,
  Down from your garrets haste;
Ye rhymers, dead as soon as born,
  Not yet consign'd to paste;

I know a trick to make you thrive;
  O, 'tis a quaint device:
Your still-born poems shall revive,
  And scorn to wrap up spice.

Get all your verses printed fair,
  Then let them well be dried;
And Curll[1] must have a special care
  To leave the margin wide.

Lend these to paper-sparing[2] Pope;
  And when he sets to write,
No letter with an envelope
  Could give him more delight.

When Pope has fill'd the margins round,
  Why then recall your loan;
Sell them to Curll for fifty pound,
  And swear they are your own.

[Footnote 1: The infamous piratical bookseller. See Pope's Works,
_passim.--W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: The original copy of Pope's celebrated translation of Homer
(preserved in the British Museum) is almost entirely written on the
covers of letters, and sometimes between the lines of the letters
themselves.]




A PASTORAL DIALOGUE

WRITTEN JUNE, 1727, JUST AFTER THE NEWS OF THE DEATH OF GEORGE I,
WHO DIED THE 12TH OF THAT MONTH IN GERMANY [1]


This poem was written when George II succeeded his father, and bore the
following explanatory introduction:

Richmond Lodge is a house with a small park belonging to the crown. It
was usually granted by the crown for a lease of years. The Duke of Ormond
was the last who had it. After his exile, it was given to the Prince of
Wales by the king. The prince and princess usually passed their summer
there. It is within a mile of Richmond.

"Marble Hill is a house built by Mrs. Howard, then of the bedchamber, now
Countess of Suffolk, and groom of the stole to the queen. It is on the
Middlesex side, near Twickenham, where Pope lives, and about two miles
from Richmond Lodge. Pope was the contriver of the gardens, Lord Herbert
the architect, the Dean of St. Patrick's chief butler, and keeper of the
ice-house. Upon King George's death, these two houses met, and had the
above dialogue."--_Dublin Edition_, 1734.


In spight of Pope, in spight of Gay,
And all that he or they can say;
Sing on I must, and sing I will,
Of Richmond Lodge and Marble Hill.
  Last Friday night, as neighbours use,
This couple met to talk of news:
For, by old proverbs, it appears,
That walls have tongues, and hedges ears.

MARBLE HILL

Quoth Marble Hill, right well I ween,
Your mistress now is grown a queen;
You'll find it soon by woful proof,
She'll come no more beneath your roof.

RICHMOND LODGE

The kingly prophet well evinces,
That we should put no trust in princes:
My royal master promised me
To raise me to a high degree:
But now he's grown a king, God wot,
I fear I shall be soon forgot.
You see, when folks have got their ends,
How quickly they neglect their friends;
Yet I may say, 'twixt me and you,
Pray God, they now may find as true!

MARBLE HILL

My house was built but for a show,
My lady's empty pockets know;
And now she will not have a shilling,
To raise the stairs, or build the ceiling;
For all the courtly madams round
Now pay four shillings in the pound;
'Tis come to what I always thought:
My dame is hardly worth a groat.[2]
Had you and I been courtiers born,
We should not thus have lain forlorn;
For those we dext'rous courtiers call,
Can rise upon their masters' fall:
But we, unlucky and unwise,
Must fall because our masters rise.

RICHMOND LODGE

My master, scarce a fortnight since,
Was grown as wealthy as a prince;
But now it will be no such thing,
For he'll be poor as any king;
And by his crown will nothing get,
But like a king to run in debt.

MARBLE HILL

No more the Dean, that grave divine,
Shall keep the key of my (no) wine;
My ice-house rob, as heretofore,
And steal my artichokes no more;
Poor Patty Blount[3] no more be seen
Bedraggled in my walks so green:
Plump Johnny Gay will now elope;
And here no more will dangle Pope.

RICHMOND LODGE

Here wont the Dean, when he's to seek,
To spunge a breakfast once a-week;
To cry the bread was stale, and mutter
Complaints against the royal butter.
But now I fear it will be said,
No butter sticks upon his bread.[4]
We soon shall find him full of spleen,
For want of tattling to the queen;
Stunning her royal ears with talking;
His reverence and her highness walking:
While Lady Charlotte,[5] like a stroller,
Sits mounted on the garden-roller.
A goodly sight to see her ride,
With ancient Mirmont[6] at her side.
In velvet cap his head lies warm,
His hat, for show, beneath his arm.

MARBLE HILL

Some South-Sea broker from the city
Will purchase me, the more's the pity;
Lay all my fine plantations waste,
To fit them to his vulgar taste:
Chang'd for the worse in ev'ry part,
My master Pope will break his heart.

RICHMOND LODGE

In my own Thames may I be drownded,
If e'er I stoop beneath a crown'd head:
Except her majesty prevails
To place me with the Prince of Wales;
And then I shall be free from fears,
For he'll be prince these fifty years.
I then will turn a courtier too,
And serve the times as others do.
Plain loyalty, not built on hope,
I leave to your contriver, Pope;
None loves his king and country better,
Yet none was ever less their debtor.

MARBLE HILL

Then let him come and take a nap
In summer on my verdant lap;
Prefer our villas, where the Thames is,
To Kensington, or hot St. James's;
Nor shall I dull in silence sit;
For 'tis to me he owes his wit;
My groves, my echoes, and my birds,
Have taught him his poetic words.
We gardens, and you wildernesses,
Assist all poets in distresses.
Him twice a-week I here expect,
To rattle Moody[7] for neglect;
An idle rogue, who spends his quartridge
In tippling at the Dog and Partridge;
And I can hardly get him down
Three times a-week to brush my gown.

RICHMOND LODGE

I pity you, dear Marble Hill;
But hope to see you flourish still.
All happiness--and so adieu.

MARBLE HILL

Kind Richmond Lodge, the same to you.


[Footnote 1: The King left England on the 3rd June, 1727, and after
supping heartily and sleeping at the Count de Twellet's house near Delden
on the 9th, he continued his journey to Osnabruck, where he arrived at
the house of his brother, the Duke of York, on the night of the 11th,
wholly paralyzed, and died calmly the next morning, in the very same room
where he was born.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Swift was probably not aware how nearly he described the
narrowed situation of Mrs. Howard's finances. Lord Orford, in a letter to
Lord Strafford, 29th July, 1767, written shortly after her death,
described her affairs as so far from being easy, that the utmost economy
could by no means prevent her exceeding her income considerably; and
states in his Reminiscences, that, besides Marble Hill, which cost the
King ten or twelve thousand pounds, she did not leave above twenty
thousand pounds to her family.--See "Lord Orford's Works," vol. iv, p.
304; v, p. 456.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Who was "often in Swift's thoughts," and "high in his
esteem"; and to whom Pope dedicated his second "Moral
Epistle."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: This also proved a prophecy more true than the Dean
suspected.]

[Footnote 5: Lady Charlotte de Roussy, a French lady.--_Dublin
Edition_.]

[Footnote 6: Marquis de Mirmont, a Frenchman, who had come to England
after the Edict of Nantes (by which Henri IV had secured freedom of
religion to Protestants) had been revoked by Louis XIV in 1685. See
Voltaire, "Sicle de Louis XIV."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: The gardener.]




DESIRE AND POSSESSION 1727


  'Tis strange what different thoughts inspire
In men, Possession and Desire!
Think what they wish so great a blessing;
So disappointed when possessing!
  A moralist profoundly sage
(I know not in what book or page,
Or whether o'er a pot of ale)
Related thus the following tale.
  Possession, and Desire, his brother,
But still at variance with each other,
Were seen contending in a race;
And kept at first an equal pace;
'Tis said, their course continued long,
For this was active, that was strong:
Till Envy, Slander, Sloth, and Doubt,
Misled them many a league about;
Seduced by some deceiving light,
They take the wrong way for the right;
Through slippery by-roads, dark and deep,
They often climb, and often creep.
  Desire, the swifter of the two,
Along the plain like lightning flew:
Till, entering on a broad highway,
Where power and titles scatter'd lay,
He strove to pick up all he found,
And by excursions lost his ground:
No sooner got, than with disdain
He threw them on the ground again;
And hasted forward to pursue
Fresh objects, fairer to his view,
In hope to spring some nobler game;
But all he took was just the same:
Too scornful now to stop his pace,
He spurn'd them in his rival's face.
  Possession kept the beaten road,
And gather'd all his brother strew'd;
But overcharged, and out of wind,
Though strong in limbs, he lagg'd behind.
  Desire had now the goal in sight;
It was a tower of monstrous height;
Where on the summit Fortune stands,
A crown and sceptre in her hands;
Beneath, a chasm as deep as Hell,
Where many a bold adventurer fell.
Desire, in rapture, gazed awhile,
And saw the treacherous goddess smile;
But as he climb'd to grasp the crown,
She knock'd him with the sceptre down!
He tumbled in the gulf profound;
There doom'd to whirl an endless round.
  Possession's load was grown so great,
He sunk beneath the cumbrous weight;
And, as he now expiring lay,
Flocks every ominous bird of prey;
The raven, vulture, owl, and kite,
At once upon his carcass light,
And strip his hide, and pick his bones,
Regardless of his dying groans.




ON CENSURE
1727

Ye wise, instruct me to endure
An evil, which admits no cure;
Or, how this evil can be borne,
Which breeds at once both hate and scorn.
Bare innocence is no support,
When you are tried in Scandal's court.
Stand high in honour, wealth, or wit;
All others, who inferior sit,
Conceive themselves in conscience bound
To join, and drag you to the ground.
Your altitude offends the eyes
Of those who want the power to rise.
The world, a willing stander-by,
Inclines to aid a specious lie:
Alas! they would not do you wrong;
But all appearances are strong.
  Yet whence proceeds this weight we lay
On what detracting people say!
For let mankind discharge their tongues
In venom, till they burst their lungs,
Their utmost malice cannot make
Your head, or tooth, or finger ache;
Nor spoil your shape, distort your face,
Or put one feature out of place;
Nor will you find your fortune sink
By what they speak or what they think;
Nor can ten hundred thousand lies
Make you less virtuous, learn'd, or wise.
  The most effectual way to balk
Their malice, is--to let them talk.




THE FURNITURE OF A WOMAN'S MIND
1727


A set of phrases learn'd by rote;
A passion for a scarlet coat;
When at a play, to laugh or cry,
Yet cannot tell the reason why;
Never to hold her tongue a minute,
While all she prates has nothing in it;
Whole hours can with a coxcomb sit,
And take his nonsense all for wit;
Her learning mounts to read a song,
But half the words pronouncing wrong;
Has every repartee in store
She spoke ten thousand times before;
Can ready compliments supply
On all occasions cut and dry;
Such hatred to a parson's gown,
The sight would put her in a swoon;
For conversation well endued,
She calls it witty to be rude;
And, placing raillery in railing,
Will tell aloud your greatest failing;
Nor make a scruple to expose
Your bandy leg, or crooked nose;
Can at her morning tea run o'er
The scandal of the day before;
Improving hourly in her skill,
To cheat and wrangle at quadrille.
  In choosing lace, a critic nice,
Knows to a groat the lowest price;
Can in her female clubs dispute,
What linen best the silk will suit,
What colours each complexion match,
And where with art to place a patch.
  If chance a mouse creeps in her sight,
Can finely counterfeit a fright;
So sweetly screams, if it comes near her,
She ravishes all hearts to hear her.
Can dext'rously her husband teaze,
By taking fits whene'er she please;
By frequent practice learns the trick
At proper seasons to be sick;
Thinks nothing gives one airs so pretty,
At once creating love and pity;
If Molly happens to be careless,
And but neglects to warm her hair-lace,
She gets a cold as sure as death,
And vows she scarce can fetch her breath;
Admires how modest women can
Be so robustious like a man.
  In party, furious to her power;
A bitter Whig, or Tory sour;
Her arguments directly tend
Against the side she would defend;
Will prove herself a Tory plain,
From principles the Whigs maintain;
And, to defend the Whiggish cause,
Her topics from the Tories draws.
  O yes! if any man can find
More virtues in a woman's mind,
Let them be sent to Mrs. Harding;[1]
She'll pay the charges to a farthing;
Take notice, she has my commission
To add them in the next edition;
They may outsell a better thing:
So, holla, boys; God save the King!


[Footnote 1: Widow of John Harding, the Drapier's printer.--_F._]




CLEVER TOM CLINCH GOING TO BE HANGED. 1727


As clever Tom Clinch, while the rabble was bawling,
Rode stately through Holborn to die in his calling,
He stopt at the George for a bottle of sack,
And promised to pay for it when he came back.
His waistcoat, and stockings, and breeches, were white;
His cap had a new cherry ribbon to tie't.
The maids to the doors and the balconies ran,
And said, "Lack-a-day, he's a proper young man!"
But, as from the windows the ladies he spied,
Like a beau in the box, he bow'd low on each side!
And when his last speech the loud hawkers did cry,
He swore from his cart, "It was all a damn'd lie!"
The hangman for pardon fell down on his knee;
Tom gave him a kick in the guts for his fee:
Then said, I must speak to the people a little;
But I'll see you all damn'd before I will whittle.[1]
My honest friend Wild[2] (may he long hold his place)
He lengthen'd my life with a whole year of grace.
Take courage, dear comrades, and be not afraid,
Nor slip this occasion to follow your trade;
My conscience is clear, and my spirits are calm,
And thus I go off, without prayer-book or psalm;
Then follow the practice of clever Tom Clinch,
Who hung like a hero, and never would flinch.


[Footnote 1: A cant word for confessing at the gallows.--_F._]


[Footnote 2: The noted thief-catcher, under-keeper of Newgate, who was
the head of a gang of thieves, and was at last hanged as a receiver of
stolen goods. See Fielding's "Life of Jonathan Wild."--_W. E. B._]




DR. SWIFT TO MR. POPE, WHILE HE WAS WRITING THE "DUNCIAD"

1727


POPE has the talent well to speak,
  But not to reach the ear;
His loudest voice is low and weak,
  The Dean too deaf to hear.

Awhile they on each other look,
  Then different studies choose;
The Dean sits plodding on a book;
  Pope walks, and courts the Muse.

Now backs of letters, though design'd
  For those who more will need 'em,
Are fill'd with hints, and interlined,
  Himself can hardly read 'em.

Each atom by some other struck,
  All turns and motions tries;
Till in a lump together stuck,
  Behold a poem rise:

Yet to the Dean his share allot;
  He claims it by a canon;
That without which a thing is not,
  Is _causa sine qu non_.

Thus, Pope, in vain you boast your wit;
  For, had our deaf divine
Been for your conversation fit,
  You had not writ a line.

Of Sherlock,[1] thus, for preaching framed
  The sexton reason'd well;
And justly half the merit claim'd,
  Because he rang the bell.




A LOVE POEM FROM A PHYSICIAN TO HIS MISTRESS

WRITTEN AT LONDON


By poets we are well assured
That love, alas! can ne'er be cured;
A complicated heap of ills,
Despising boluses and pills.
Ah! Chloe, this I find is true,
Since first I gave my heart to you.
Now, by your cruelty hard bound,
I strain my guts, my colon wound.
Now jealousy my grumbling tripes
Assaults with grating, grinding gripes.
When pity in those eyes I view,
My bowels wambling make me spew.
When I an amorous kiss design'd,
I belch'd a hurricane of wind.
Once you a gentle sigh let fall;
Remember how I suck'd it all;
What colic pangs from thence I felt,
Had you but known, your heart would melt,
Like ruffling winds in cavern pent,
Till Nature pointed out a vent.
How have you torn my heart to pieces
With maggots, humours, and caprices!
By which I got the hemorrhoids;
And loathsome worms my _anus_ voids.
Whene'er I hear a rival named,
I feel my body all inflamed;
Which, breaking out in boils and blains,
With yellow filth my linen stains;
Or, parch'd with unextinguish'd thirst,
Small-beer I guzzle till I burst;
And then I drag a bloated _corpus_,
Swell'd with a dropsy, like a porpus;
When, if I cannot purge or stale,
I must be tapp'd to fill a pail.


[Footnote 1: The Dean of St. Paul's, father to the Bishop.--_H._]


BOUTS RIMEZ[1]

ON SIGNORA DOMITILLA


Our schoolmaster may roar i' th' fit,
  Of classic beauty, _haec et illa_;
Not all his birch inspires such wit
  As th'ogling beams of Domitilla.

Let nobles toast, in bright champaign,
  Nymphs higher born than Domitilla;
I'll drink her health, again, again,
  In Berkeley's tar,[2] or sars'parilla.

At Goodman's Fields I've much admired
  The postures strange of Monsieur Brilla;
But what are they to the soft step,
  The gliding air of Domitilla?

Virgil has eternized in song
  The flying footsteps of Camilla;[3]
Sure, as a prophet, he was wrong;
  He might have dream'd of Domitilla.

Great Theodose condemn'd a town
  For thinking ill of his Placilla:[4]
And deuce take London! if some knight
  O' th' city wed not Domitilla.

Wheeler,[5] Sir George, in travels wise,
  Gives us a medal of Plantilla;
But O! the empress has not eyes,
  Nor lips, nor breast, like Domitilla.

Not all the wealth of plunder'd Italy,
  Piled on the mules of king At-tila,
Is worth one glove (I'll not tell a bit a lie)
  Or garter, snatch'd from Domitilla.

Five years a nymph at certain hamlet,
  Y-cleped Harrow of the Hill, a-
--bused much my heart, and was a damn'd let
  To verse--but now for Domitilla.

Dan Pope consigns Belinda's watch
  To the fair sylphid Momentilla,[6]
And thus I offer up my catch
  To the snow-white hands of Domitilla.


[Footnote 1: Verses to be made upon a given name or word, at the end of a
line, and to which rhymes must be found.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne, famous, _inter alia_, for his
enthusiasm in urging the use of tar-water for all kinds of complaints.
See his Works, _edit._ Fraser. Fielding mentions it favourably as a
remedy for dropsy, in the Introduction to his "Journal of a voyage to
Lisbon"; and see Austin Dobson's note to his edition of the
"Journal."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: "Aeneid," xi.]

[Footnote 4: Qu. Flaccilla? see Gibbon, iii, chap, xxvii.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: Who lived from 1650 to 1723, and wrote and published several
books of travels in Greece and Italy, etc.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6: See "The Rape of the Lock."]




HELTER SKELTER; OR, THE HUE AND CRY AFTER THE ATTORNEYS
UPON THEIR RIDING THE CIRCUIT


Now the active young attorneys
Briskly travel on their journeys,
Looking big as any giants,
On the horses of their clients;
Like so many little Marses
With their tilters at their a--s,
Brazen-hilted, lately burnish'd,
And with harness-buckles furnish'd,
And with whips and spurs so neat,
And with jockey-coats complete,
And with boots so very greasy,
And with saddles eke so easy,
And with bridles fine and gay,
Bridles borrow'd for a day,
Bridles destined far to roam,
Ah! never, never to come home.
And with hats so very big, sir,
And with powder'd caps and wigs, sir,
And with ruffles to be shown,
Cambric ruffles not their own;
And with Holland shirts so white,
Shirts becoming to the sight,
Shirts bewrought with different letters,
As belonging to their betters.
With their pretty tinsel'd boxes,
Gotten from their dainty doxies,
And with rings so very trim,
Lately taken out of lim--[1]
And with very little pence,
And as very little sense;
With some law, but little justice,
Having stolen from my hostess,
From the barber and the cutler,
Like the soldier from the sutler;
From the vintner and the tailor,
Like the felon from the jailor;
Into this and t'other county,
Living on the public bounty;
Thorough town and thorough village,
All to plunder, all to pillage:
Thorough mountains, thorough valleys,
Thorough stinking lanes and alleys,
Some to--kiss with farmers' spouses,
And make merry in their houses;
Some to tumble country wenches
On their rushy beds and benches;
And if they begin a fray,
Draw their swords, and----run away;
All to murder equity,
And to take a double fee;
Till the people are all quiet,
And forget to broil and riot,
Low in pocket, cow'd in courage,
Safely glad to sup their porridge,
And vacation's over--then,
Hey, for London town again.


[Footnote 1: _Limbo_, any place of misery and restraint.
  "For he no sooner was at large,
  But Trulla straight brought on the charge,
  And in the selfsame _Limbo_ put
  The knight and squire where he was shut."
        _Hudibras_, Part i, canto iii, 1,000.
Here abbreviated by Swift as a cant term for a pawn shop.--_W. E. B._]




THE PUPPET-SHOW


The life of man to represent,
  And turn it all to ridicule,
Wit did a puppet-show invent,
  Where the chief actor is a fool.

The gods of old were logs of wood,
  And worship was to puppets paid;
In antic dress the idol stood,
  And priest and people bow'd the head.

No wonder then, if art began
  The simple votaries to frame,
To shape in timber foolish man,
  And consecrate the block to fame.

From hence poetic fancy learn'd
  That trees might rise from human forms;
The body to a trunk be turn'd,
  And branches issue from the arms.

Thus Ddalus and Ovid too,
  That man's a blockhead, have confest:
Powel and Stretch[1] the hint pursue;
  Life is a farce, the world a jest.

The same great truth South Sea has proved
  On that famed theatre, the alley;
Where thousands, by directors moved
  Are now sad monuments of folly.

What Momus was of old to Jove,
  The same a Harlequin is now;
The former was buffoon above,
  The latter is a Punch below.

This fleeting scene is but a stage,
  Where various images appear;
In different parts of youth and age,
  Alike the prince and peasant share.

Some draw our eyes by being great,
  False pomp conceals mere wood within;
And legislators ranged in state
  Are oft but wisdom in machine.

A stock may chance to wear a crown,
  And timber as a lord take place;
A statue may put on a frown,
  And cheat us with a thinking face.

Others are blindly led away,
  And made to act for ends unknown;
By the mere spring of wires they play,
  And speak in language not their own.

Too oft, alas! a scolding wife
  Usurps a jolly fellow's throne;
And many drink the cup of life,
  Mix'd and embitter'd by a Joan.

In short, whatever men pursue,
  Of pleasure, folly, war, or love:
This mimic race brings all to view:
  Alike they dress, they talk, they move.

Go on, great Stretch, with artful hand,
  Mortals to please and to deride;
And, when death breaks thy vital band,
  Thou shalt put on a puppet's pride.

Thou shalt in puny wood be shown,
  Thy image shall preserve thy fame;
Ages to come thy worth shall own,
  Point at thy limbs, and tell thy name.

Tell Tom,[2] he draws a farce in vain,
  Before he looks in nature's glass;
Puns cannot form a witty scene,
  Nor pedantry for humour pass.

To make men act as senseless wood,
  And chatter in a mystic strain,
Is a mere force on flesh and blood,
  And shows some error in the brain.

He that would thus refine on thee,
  And turn thy stage into a school,
The jest of Punch will ever be,
  And stand confest the greater fool.


[Footnote 1: Two famous puppet-show men.]

[Footnote 2: Sheridan.]




THE JOURNAL OF A MODERN LADY

IN A LETTER TO A PERSON OF QUALITY. 1728


SIR, 'twas a most unfriendly part
In you, who ought to know my heart,
Are well acquainted with my zeal
For all the female commonweal--
How could it come into your mind
To pitch on me, of all mankind,
Against the sex to write a satire,
And brand me for a woman-hater?
On me, who think them all so fair,
They rival Venus to a hair;
Their virtues never ceased to sing,
Since first I learn'd to tune a string?
Methinks I hear the ladies cry,
Will he his character belie?
Must never our misfortunes end?
And have we lost our only friend?
Ah, lovely nymphs! remove your fears,
No more let fall those precious tears.
Sooner shall, etc.

[Here several verses are omitted.]

The hound be hunted by the hare,
Than I turn rebel to the fair.
  'Twas you engaged me first to write,
Then gave the subject out of spite:
The journal of a modern dame,
Is, by my promise, what you claim.
My word is past, I must submit;
And yet perhaps you may be bit.
I but transcribe; for not a line
Of all the satire shall be mine.
Compell'd by you to tag in rhymes
The common slanders of the times,
Of modern times, the guilt is yours,
And me my innocence secures.
Unwilling Muse, begin thy lay,
The annals of a female day.
  By nature turn'd to play the rake well,
(As we shall show you in the sequel,)
The modern dame is waked by noon,
(Some authors say not quite so soon,)
Because, though sore against her will,
She sat all night up at quadrille.
She stretches, gapes, unglues her eyes,
And asks if it be time to rise;
Of headache and the spleen complains;
And then, to cool her heated brains,
Her night-gown and her slippers brought her,
Takes a large dram of citron water.
Then to her glass; and, "Betty, pray,
Don't I look frightfully to-day?
But was it not confounded hard?
Well, if I ever touch a card!
Four matadores, and lose codille!
Depend upon't, I never will.
But run to Tom, and bid him fix
The ladies here to-night by six."
"Madam, the goldsmith waits below;
He says, his business is to know
If you'll redeem the silver cup
He keeps in pawn?"--"Why, show him up."
"Your dressing-plate he'll be content
To take, for interest _cent. per cent._
And, madam, there's my Lady Spade
Has sent this letter by her maid."
"Well, I remember what she won;
And has she sent so soon to dun?
Here, carry down these ten pistoles
My husband left to pay for coals:
I thank my stars they all are light,
And I may have revenge to-night."
Now, loitering o'er her tea and cream,
She enters on her usual theme;
Her last night's ill success repeats,
Calls Lady Spade a hundred cheats:
"She slipt spadillo in her breast,
Then thought to turn it to a jest:
There's Mrs. Cut and she combine,
And to each other give the sign."
Through every game pursues her tale,
Like hunters o'er their evening ale.
  Now to another scene give place:
Enter the folks with silks and lace:
Fresh matter for a world of chat,
Right Indian this, right Mechlin that:
"Observe this pattern--there's a stuff;
I can have customers enough.
Dear madam, you are grown so hard--
This lace is worth twelve pounds a-yard:
Madam, if there be truth in man,
I never sold so cheap a fan."
  This business of importance o'er,
And madam almost dress'd by four;
The footman, in his usual phrase,
Comes up with, "Madam, dinner stays."
She answers, in her usual style,
"The cook must keep it back a while;
I never can have time to dress,
No woman breathing takes up less;
I'm hurried so, it makes me sick;
I wish the dinner at Old Nick."
At table now she acts her part,
Has all the dinner cant by heart:
"I thought we were to dine alone,
My dear; for sure, if I had known
This company would come to-day--
But really 'tis my spouse's way!
He's so unkind, he never sends
To tell when he invites his friends:
I wish ye may but have enough!"
And while with all this paltry stuff
She sits tormenting every guest,
Nor gives her tongue one moment's rest,
In phrases batter'd, stale, and trite,
Which modern ladies call polite;
You see the booby husband sit
In admiration at her wit!
  But let me now a while survey
Our madam o'er her evening tea;
Surrounded with her noisy clans
Of prudes, coquettes, and harridans,
When, frighted at the clamorous crew,
Away the God of Silence flew,
And fair Discretion left the place,
And modesty with blushing face;
Now enters overweening Pride,
And Scandal, ever gaping wide,
Hypocrisy with frown severe,
Scurrility with gibing air;
Rude laughter seeming like to burst,
And Malice always judging worst;
And Vanity with pocket glass,
And Impudence with front of brass;
And studied Affectation came,
Each limb and feature out of frame;
While Ignorance, with brain of lead,
Flew hovering o'er each female head.
  Why should I ask of thee, my Muse,
A hundred tongues, as poets use,
When, to give every dame her due,
A hundred thousand were too few?
Or how should I, alas! relate
The sum of all their senseless prate,
Their innuendoes, hints, and slanders,
Their meanings lewd, and double entendres?
Now comes the general scandal charge;
What some invent, the rest enlarge;
And, "Madam, if it be a lie,
You have the tale as cheap as I;
I must conceal my author's name:
But now 'tis known to common fame."
  Say, foolish females, bold and blind,
Say, by what fatal turn of mind,
Are you on vices most severe,
Wherein yourselves have greatest share?
Thus every fool herself deludes;
The prude condemns the absent prudes:
Mopsa, who stinks her spouse to death,
Accuses Chloe's tainted breath;
Hircina, rank with sweat, presumes
To censure Phyllis for perfumes;
While crooked Cynthia, sneering, says,
That Florimel wears iron stays;
Chloe, of every coxcomb jealous,
Admires how girls can talk with fellows;
And, full of indignation, frets,
That women should be such coquettes:
Iris, for scandal most notorious,
Cries, "Lord, the world is so censorious!"
And Rufa, with her combs of lead,
Whispers that Sappho's hair is red:
Aura, whose tongue you hear a mile hence,
Talks half a day in praise of silence;
And Sylvia, full of inward guilt,
Calls Amoret an arrant jilt.
  Now voices over voices rise,
While each to be the loudest vies:
They contradict, affirm, dispute,
No single tongue one moment mute;
All mad to speak, and none to hearken,
They set the very lap-dog barking;
Their chattering makes a louder din
Than fishwives o'er a cup of gin;
Not schoolboys at a barring out
Raised ever such incessant rout;
The jumbling particles of matter
In chaos made not such a clatter;
Far less the rabble roar and rail,
When drunk with sour election ale.
  Nor do they trust their tongues alone,
But speak a language of their own;
Can read a nod, a shrug, a look,
Far better than a printed book;
Convey a libel in a frown,
And wink a reputation down;
Or by the tossing of the fan,
Describe the lady and the man.
  But see, the female club disbands,
Each twenty visits on her hands.
Now all alone poor madam sits
In vapours and hysteric fits;
"And was not Tom this morning sent?
I'd lay my life he never went;
Past six, and not a living soul!
I might by this have won a vole."
A dreadful interval of spleen!
How shall we pass the time between?
"Here, Betty, let me take my drops;
And feel my pulse, I know it stops;
This head of mine, lord, how it swims!
And such a pain in all my limbs!"
"Dear madam, try to take a nap"--
But now they hear a footman's rap:
"Go, run, and light the ladies up:
It must be one before we sup."
  The table, cards, and counters, set,
And all the gamester ladies met,
Her spleen and fits recover'd quite,
Our madam can sit up all night;
"Whoever comes, I'm not within."
Quadrille's the word, and so begin.
  How can the Muse her aid impart,
Unskill'd in all the terms of art?
Or in harmonious numbers put
The deal, the shuffle, and the cut?
The superstitious whims relate,
That fill a female gamester's pate?
What agony of soul she feels
To see a knave's inverted heels!
She draws up card by card, to find
Good fortune peeping from behind;
With panting heart, and earnest eyes,
In hope to see spadillo rise;
In vain, alas! her hope is fed;
She draws an ace, and sees it red;
In ready counters never pays,
But pawns her snuff-box, rings, and keys;
Ever with some new fancy struck,
Tries twenty charms to mend her luck.
"This morning, when the parson came,
I said I should not win a game.
This odious chair, how came I stuck in't?
I think I never had good luck in't.
I'm so uneasy in my stays:
Your fan, a moment, if you please.
Stand farther, girl, or get you gone;
I always lose when you look on."
"Lord! madam, you have lost codille:
I never saw you play so ill."
"Nay, madam, give me leave to say,
'Twas you that threw the game away:
When Lady Tricksey play'd a four,
You took it with a matadore;
I saw you touch your wedding ring
Before my lady call'd a king;
You spoke a word began with H,
And I know whom you meant to teach,
Because you held the king of hearts;
Fie, madam, leave these little arts."
"That's not so bad as one that rubs
Her chair to call the king of clubs;
And makes her partner understand
A matadore is in her hand."
"Madam, you have no cause to flounce,
I swear I saw you thrice renounce."
"And truly, madam, I know when
Instead of five you scored me ten.
Spadillo here has got a mark;
A child may know it in the dark:
I guess'd the hand: it seldom fails:
I wish some folks would pare their nails."
  While thus they rail, and scold, and storm,
It passes but for common form:
But, conscious that they all speak true,
And give each other but their due,
It never interrupts the game,
Or makes them sensible of shame.
  The time too precious now to waste,
The supper gobbled up in haste;
Again afresh to cards they run,
As if they had but just begun.
But I shall not again repeat,
How oft they squabble, snarl, and cheat.
At last they hear the watchman knock,
"A frosty morn--past four o'clock."
The chairmen are not to be found,
"Come, let us play the other round."
  Now all in haste they huddle on
Their hoods, their cloaks, and get them gone;
But, first, the winner must invite
The company to-morrow night.
  Unlucky madam, left in tears,
(Who now again quadrille forswears,)
With empty purse, and aching head,
Steals to her sleeping spouse to bed.




THE LOGICIANS REFUTED


Logicians have but ill defined
As rational, the human kind;
Reason, they say, belongs to man,
But let them prove it if they can.
Wise Aristotle and Smiglesius,
By ratiocinations specious,
Have strove to prove, with great precision,
With definition and division,
_Homo est ratione praeditum;_
But for my soul I cannot credit 'em,
And must, in spite of them, maintain,
That man and all his ways are vain;
And that this boasted lord of nature
Is both a weak and erring creature;
That instinct is a surer guide
Than reason, boasting mortals' pride;
And that brute beasts are far before 'em.
_Deus est anima brutorum._
Whoever knew an honest brute
At law his neighbour prosecute,
Bring action for assault or battery,
Or friend beguile with lies and flattery?
O'er plains they ramble unconfined,
No politics disturb their mind;
They eat their meals, and take their sport
Nor know who's in or out at court.
They never to the levee go
To treat, as dearest friend, a foe:
They never importune his grace,
Nor ever cringe to men in place:
Nor undertake a dirty job,
Nor draw the quill to write for Bob.[1]
Fraught with invective, they ne'er go
To folks at Paternoster Row.
No judges, fiddlers, dancing-masters,
No pickpockets, or poetasters,
Are known to honest quadrupeds;
No single brute his fellow leads.
Brutes never meet in bloody fray,
Nor cut each other's throats for pay.
Of beasts, it is confess'd, the ape
Comes nearest us in human shape;
Like man, he imitates each fashion,
And malice is his lurking passion:
But, both in malice and grimaces,
A courtier any ape surpasses.
Behold him, humbly cringing, wait
Upon the minister of state;
View him soon after to inferiors
Aping the conduct of superiors;
He promises with equal air,
And to perform takes equal care.
He in his turn finds imitators,
At court, the porters, lacqueys, waiters,
Their masters' manner still contract,
And footmen, lords and dukes can act.
Thus, at the court, both great and small
Behave alike, for all ape all.


[Footnote 1: Sir Robert Walpole, and his employment of
party-writers.--_W. E. B._]




THE ELEPHANT; OR, THE PARLIAMENT MAN

WRITTEN MANY YEARS SINCE;
AND TAKEN FROM COKE'S FOURTH INSTITUTE
THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, CAP. I

Sir E. Coke says: "Every member of the house being a counsellor
should have three properties of the elephant; first that he hath no gall;
secondly, that he is inflexible and cannot bow; thirdly, that he is of a
most ripe and perfect memory ... first, to be without gall, that is,
without malice, rancor, heat, and envy: ... secondly, that he be
constant, inflexible, and not be bowed, or turned from the right either
for fear, reward, or favour, nor in judgement respect any person: ...
thirdly, of a ripe memory, that they remembering perils past, might
prevent dangers to come."--_W. E. B._


Ere bribes convince you whom to choose,
The precepts of Lord Coke peruse.
Observe an elephant, says he,
And let him like your member be:
First take a man that's free from _Gaul_,
For elephants have none at all;
In flocks or parties he must keep;
For elephants live just like sheep.
Stubborn in honour he must be;
For elephants ne'er bend the knee.
Last, let his memory be sound,
In which your elephant's profound;
That old examples from the wise
May prompt him in his noes and ayes.
  Thus the Lord Coke hath gravely writ,
In all the form of lawyer's wit:
And then, with Latin and all that,
Shows the comparison is pat.
Yet in some points my lord is wrong,
One's teeth are sold, and t'other's tongue:
Now, men of parliament, God knows,
Are more like elephants of shows;
Whose docile memory and sense
Are turn'd to trick, to gather pence;
To get their master half-a-crown,
They spread the flag, or lay it down:
Those who bore bulwarks on their backs,
And guarded nations from attacks,
Now practise every pliant gesture,
Opening their trunk for every tester.
Siam, for elephants so famed,
Is not with England to be named:
Their elephants by men are sold;
Ours sell themselves, and take the gold.




PAULUS: AN EPIGRAM

BY MR. LINDSAY[1]

_Dublin, Sept._ 7, 1728.


"A SLAVE to crowds, scorch'd with the summer's heats,
In courts the wretched lawyer toils and sweats;
While smiling Nature, in her best attire,
Regales each sense, and vernal joys inspire.
Can he, who knows that real good should please,
Barter for gold his liberty and ease?"--
This Paulus preach'd:--When, entering at the door,
Upon his board the client pours the ore:
He grasps the shining gift, pores o'er the cause,
Forgets the sun, and dozes on the laws.


[Footnote 1: A polite and elegant scholar; at that time an eminent
pleader at the bar in Dublin, and afterwards advanced to be one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas.--_H._]




THE ANSWER. BY DR. SWIFT


Lindsay mistakes the matter quite,
And honest Paulus judges right.
Then, why these quarrels to the sun,
Without whose aid you're all undone?
Did Paulus e'er complain of sweat?
Did Paulus e'er the sun forget;
The influence of whose golden beams
Soon licks up all unsavoury steams?
The sun, you say, his face has kiss'd:
It has; but then it greased his fist.
True lawyers, for the wisest ends,
Have always been Apollo's friends.
Not for his superficial powers
Of ripening fruits, and gilding flowers;
Not for inspiring poets' brains
With penniless and starveling strains;
Not for his boasted healing art;
Not for his skill to shoot the dart;
Nor yet because he sweetly fiddles;
Nor for his prophecies in riddles:
But for a more substantial cause--
Apollo's patron of the laws;
Whom Paulus ever must adore,
As parent of the golden ore,
By Phoebus, an incestuous birth,
Begot upon his grandam Earth;
By Phoebus first produced to light;
By Vulcan form'd so round and bright:
Then offer'd at the shrine of Justice,
By clients to her priests and trustees.
Nor, when we see Astraea[1] stand
With even balance in her hand,
Must we suppose she has in view,
How to give every man his due;
Her scales you see her only hold,
To weigh her priests' the lawyers' gold.
  Now, should I own your case was grievous,
Poor sweaty Paulus, who'd believe us?
'Tis very true, and none denies,
At least, that such complaints are wise:
'Tis wise, no doubt, as clients fat you more,
To cry, like statesmen, _Quanta patimur!_
But, since the truth must needs be stretched
To prove that lawyers are so wretched,
This paradox I'll undertake,
For Paulus' and for Lindsay's sake;
By topics, which, though I abomine 'em,
May serve as arguments _ad hominem_:
Yet I disdain to offer those
Made use of by detracting foes.
  I own the curses of mankind
Sit light upon a lawyer's mind:
The clamours of ten thousand tongues
Break not his rest, nor hurt his lungs;
I own, his conscience always free,
(Provided he has got his fee,)
Secure of constant peace within,
He knows no guilt, who knows no sin.
  Yet well they merit to be pitied,
By clients always overwitted.
And though the gospel seems to say,
What heavy burdens lawyers lay
Upon the shoulders of their neighbour,
Nor lend a finger to their labour,
Always for saving their own bacon;
No doubt, the text is here mistaken:
The copy's false, the sense is rack'd:
To prove it, I appeal to fact;
And thus by demonstration show
What burdens lawyers undergo.
  With early clients at his door,
Though he was drunk the night before,
And crop-sick, with unclubb'd-for wine,
The wretch must be at court by nine;
Half sunk beneath his briefs and bag,
As ridden by a midnight hag;
Then, from the bar, harangues the bench,
In English vile, and viler French,
And Latin, vilest of the three;
And all for poor ten moidores fee!
Of paper how is he profuse,
With periods long, in terms abstruse!
What pains he takes to be prolix!
A thousand lines to stand for six!
Of common sense without a word in!
And is not this a grievous burden?
  The lawyer is a common drudge,
To fight our cause before the judge:
And, what is yet a greater curse,
Condemn'd to bear his client's purse:
While he at ease, secure and light,
Walks boldly home at dead of night;
When term is ended, leaves the town,
Trots to his country mansion down;
And, disencumber'd of his load,
No danger dreads upon the road;
Despises rapparees,[2] and rides
Safe through the Newry mountains' sides.
  Lindsay, 'tis you have set me on,
To state this question _pro_ and _con_.
My satire may offend, 'tis true;
However, it concerns not you.
I own, there may, in every clan,
Perhaps, be found one honest man;
Yet link them close, in this they jump,
To be but rascals in the lump.
Imagine Lindsay at the bar,
He's much the same his brethren are;
Well taught by practice to imbibe
The fundamentals of his tribe:
And in his client's just defence,
Must deviate oft from common sense;
And make his ignorance discern'd,
To get the name of counsel-learn'd,
(As _lucus_ comes _a non lucendo_,)
And wisely do as other men do:
But shift him to a better scene,
Among his crew of rogues in grain;
Surrounded with companions fit,
To taste his humour, sense, and wit;
You'd swear he never took a fee,
Nor knew in law his A, B, C.
  'Tis hard, where dulness overrules,
To keep good sense in crowds of fools.
And we admire the man, who saves
His honesty in crowds of knaves;
Nor yields up virtue at discretion,
To villains of his own profession.
Lindsay, you know what pains you take
In both, yet hardly save your stake;
And will you venture both anew,
To sit among that venal crew,
That pack of mimic legislators,
Abandon'd, stupid, slavish praters?
For as the rabble daub and rifle
The fool who scrambles for a trifle;
Who for his pains is cuff'd and kick'd,
Drawn through the dirt, his pockets pick'd;
You must expect the like disgrace,
Scrambling with rogues to get a place;
Must lose the honour you have gain'd,
Your numerous virtues foully stain'd:
Disclaim for ever all pretence
To common honesty and sense;
And join in friendship with a strict tie,
To M--l, C--y, and Dick Tighe.[3]


[Footnote 1: The Goddess of Justice, the last of the celestials to leave
the earth. "Ultima caelestum terras Astraea reliquit," Ovid, "Met.," i,
150.--_W. E .B._]

[Footnote 2: Highwaymen of that time were so called.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Richard Tighe, Esq. He was a member of the Irish Parliament,
and held by Dean Swift in utter abomination. He is several times
mentioned in the Journal to Stella: how he used to beat his wife, and
how she deserved it. "Prose Works," vol. ii, pp. 229, 242,
etc.--_W. E. B._]




A DIALOGUE

BETWEEN AN EMINENT LAWYER[1] AND DR. JONATHAN
SWIFT, D.S.P.D. IN ALLUSION TO HORACE,
BOOK II, SATIRE I

"Sunt quibus in Satir," etc.

WRITTEN BY MR. LINDSAY, IN 1729


DR. SWIFT

Since there are persons who complain
There's too much satire in my vein;
That I am often found exceeding
The rules of raillery and breeding;
With too much freedom treat my betters,
Not sparing even men of letters:
You, who are skill'd in lawyers' lore,
What's your advice? Shall I give o'er?
Nor ever fools or knaves expose,
Either in verse or humorous prose:
And to avoid all future ill,
In my scrutoire lock up my quill?

LAWYER

  Since you are pleased to condescend
To ask the judgment of a friend,
Your case consider'd, I must think
You should withdraw from pen and ink,
Forbear your poetry and jokes,
And live like other Christian folks;
Or if the Muses must inspire
Your fancy with their pleasing fire,
Take subjects safer for your wit
Than those on which you lately writ.
Commend the times, your thoughts correct,
And follow the prevailing sect;
Assert that Hyde,[2] in writing story,
Shows all the malice of a Tory;
While Burnet,[3] in his deathless page,
Discovers freedom without rage.
To Woolston[4] recommend our youth,
For learning, probity, and truth;
That noble genius, who unbinds
The chains which fetter freeborn minds;
Redeems us from the slavish fears
Which lasted near two thousand years;
He can alone the priesthood humble,
Make gilded spires and altars tumble.

DR. SWIFT

  Must I commend against my conscience,
Such stupid blasphemy and nonsense;
To such a subject tune my lyre,
And sing like one of Milton's choir,
Where devils to a vale retreat,
And call the laws of Wisdom, Fate;
Lament upon their hapless fall,
That Force free Virtue should enthrall?
Or shall the charms of Wealth and Power
Make me pollute the Muses' bower?

LAWYER

  As from the tripod of Apollo,
Hear from my desk the words that follow:
"Some, by philosophers misled,
Must honour you alive and dead;
And such as know what Greece has writ,
Must taste your irony and wit;
While most that are, or would be great,
Must dread your pen, your person hate;
And you on Drapier's hill[5] must lie,
And there without a mitre die."


[Footnote 1: Mr. Lindsay.--_F_.]

[Footnote 2: See Clarendon's "History of the Rebellion."]

[Footnote 3: In his "History of his own Time," and "History of the
Reformation."]

[Footnote 4: An enthusiast and a freethinker. For a full account of him,
see "Dictionary of National Biography." His later works on the Miracles
caused him to be prosecuted, fined, and imprisoned. He died in
1733.--_W.E.B._]

[Footnote 5: In the county of Armagh.--_F_.]




ON BURNING A DULL POEM

1729


An ass's hoof alone can hold
That poisonous juice, which kills by cold.
Methought, when I this poem read,
No vessel but an ass's head
Such frigid fustian could contain;
I mean, the head without the brain.
The cold conceits, the chilling thoughts,
Went down like stupifying draughts;
I found my head begin to swim,
A numbness crept through every limb.
In haste, with imprecations dire,
I threw the volume in the fire;
When, (who could think?) though cold as ice,
It burnt to ashes in a trice.
  How could I more enhance its fame?
Though born in snow, it died in flame.




AN EXCELLENT NEW BALLAD
OR, THE TRUE ENGLISH DEAN[1] TO BE HANGED FOR A RAPE. 1730


Our brethren of England, who love us so dear,
  And in all they do for us so kindly do mean,
(A blessing upon them!) have sent us this year,
  For the good of our church, a true English dean.
A holier priest ne'er was wrapt up in crape,
The worst you can say, he committed a rape.

In his journey to Dublin, he lighted at Chester,
  And there he grew fond of another man's wife;
Burst into her chamber and would have caress'd her;
  But she valued her honour much more than her life.
She bustled, and struggled, and made her escape
To a room full of guests, for fear of a rape.

The dean he pursued, to recover his game;
  And now to attack her again he prepares:
But the company stood in defence of the dame,
  They cudgell'd, and cuff'd him, and kick'd him down stairs.
His deanship was now in a damnable scrape,
And this was no time for committing a rape.

To Dublin he comes, to the bagnio he goes,
  And orders the landlord to bring him a whore;
No scruple came on him his gown to expose,
  'Twas what all his life he had practised before.
He made himself drunk with the juice of the grape,
And got a good clap, but committed no rape.

The dean, and his landlord, a jolly comrade,
  Resolved for a fortnight to swim in delight;
For why, they had both been brought up to the trade
  Of drinking all day, and of whoring all night.
His landlord was ready his deanship to ape
In every debauch but committing a rape.

This Protestant zealot, this English divine,
  In church and in state was of principles sound;
Was truer than Steele to the Hanover line,
  And grieved that a Tory should live above ground.
Shall a subject so loyal be hang'd by the nape,
For no other crime but committing a rape?

By old Popish canons, as wise men have penn'd 'em,
  Each priest had a concubine _jure ecclesiae_;
Who'd be Dean of Fernes without a _commendam_?
  And precedents we can produce, if it please ye:
Then why should the dean, when whores are so cheap,
Be put to the peril and toil of a rape?

If fortune should please but to take such a crotchet,
  (To thee I apply, great Smedley's successor,)
To give thee lawn sleeves, a mitre, and rochet,
  Whom wouldst thou resemble? I leave thee a guesser.
But I only behold thee in Atherton's[2] shape,
For sodomy hang'd; as thou for a rape.

Ah! dost thou not envy the brave Colonel Chartres,
  Condemn'd for thy crime at threescore and ten?
To hang him, all England would lend him their garters,
  Yet he lives, and is ready to ravish again.[3]
Then throttle thyself with an ell of strong tape,
For thou hast not a groat to atone for a rape.

The dean he was vex'd that his whores were so willing;
  He long'd for a girl that would struggle and squall;
He ravish'd her fairly, and saved a good shilling;
  But here was to pay the devil and all.
His troubles and sorrows now come in a heap,
And hang'd he must be for committing a rape.

If maidens are ravish'd, it is their own choice:
  Why are they so wilful to struggle with men?
If they would but lie quiet, and stifle their voice,
  No devil nor dean could ravish them then.
Nor would there be need of a strong hempen cape
Tied round the dean's neck for committing a rape.

Our church and our state dear England maintains,
  For which all true Protestant hearts should be glad:
She sends us our bishops, our judges, and deans,
  And better would give us, if better she had.
But, lord! how the rabble will stare and will gape,
When the good English dean is hang'd up for a rape!


[Footnote 1: "DUBLIN, June 6. The Rev. Dean Sawbridge, having surrendered
himself on his indictment for a rape, was arraigned at the bar of the
Court of King's Bench, and is to be tried next Monday."--_London Evening
Post_, June 16, 1730. "DUBLIN, June 13. The Rev. Thomas Sawbridge, Dean
of Fernes, who was indicted for ravishing Susanna Runkard, and whose
trial was put off for some time past, on motion of the king's counsel on
behalf of the said Susanna, was yesterday tried in the Court of King's
Bench, and acquitted. It is reported, that the Dean intends to indict her
for perjury, he being in the county of Wexford when she swore the rape
was committed against her in the city of Dublin."--_Daily Post-Boy_, June
23, 1730.--_Nichols_.]

[Footnote 2: A Bishop of Waterford, sent from England a hundred years
ago, was hanged at Arbor-hill, near Dublin.--See "The penitent death of
a woful sinner, or the penitent death of John Atherton, executed at
Dublin the 5th of December, 1640. With some annotations upon several
passages in it". As also the sermon, with some further enlargements,
preached at his burial. By Nicholas Barnard, Dean of Ardagh, in Ireland.

"_Quis in seculo peccavit enormius Paulo? Quis in religione gravius
Petro? illi tamen poenitentiam assequuti sunt non solum ministerium sed
magisterium sanctitatis. Nolite ergo ante tempus judicare, quia fortasse
quos vos laudatis, Deus reprehendit, et quos vos reprehenditis, ille
laudabit, priminovissimi, et novissimi primi_. Petr. Chrysolog. Dublin,
Printed by the Society of Stationers, 1641."]

[Footnote 3: This trial took place in 1723; but being only found guilty
of an assault, with intent to commit the crime, the worthy colonel was
fined 300 to the private party prosecuting. See a full account of
Chartres in the notes to Pope's "Moral Essays," Epistle III, and the
Satirical Epitaph by Arbuthnot. Carruthers' Edition.--_W. E. B._]




ON STEPHEN DUCK
THE THRESHER, AND FAVOURITE POET

A QUIBBLING EPIGRAM. 1730

The thresher Duck[1] could o'er the queen prevail,
The proverb says, "no fence against a flail."
From threshing corn he turns to thresh his brains;
For which her majesty allows him grains:
Though 'tis confest, that those, who ever saw
His poems, think them all not worth a straw!
  Thrice happy Duck, employ'd in threshing stubble,
Thy toil is lessen'd, and thy profits double.

[Footnote 1: Who was appointed by Queen Caroline librarian to a small
collection of books in a building called Merlin's Cave, in the Royal
Gardens of Richmond.
  "How shall we fill a library with wit,
  When Merlin's cave is half unfurnish'd yet?"
POPE, _Imitations of Horace_, ii, Ep. 1.--_W. E. B._]




THE LADY'S DRESSING-ROOM. 1730

Five hours (and who can do it less in?)
By haughty Celia spent in dressing;
The goddess from her chamber issues,
Array'd in lace, brocades, and tissues.
  Strephon, who found the room was void,
And Betty otherwise employ'd,
Stole in, and took a strict survey
Of all the litter as it lay:
Whereof, to make the matter clear,
An inventory follows here.
  And, first, a dirty smock appear'd,
Beneath the arm-pits well besmear'd;
Strephon, the rogue, display'd it wide,
And turn'd it round on ev'ry side:
On such a point, few words are best,
And Strephon bids us guess the rest;
But swears, how damnably the men lie
In calling Celia sweet and cleanly.
  Now listen, while he next produces
The various combs for various uses;
Fill'd up with dirt so closely fixt,
No brush could force a way betwixt;
A paste of composition rare,
Sweat, dandriff, powder, lead, and hair:
A fore-head cloth with oil upon't,
To smooth the wrinkles on her front:
Here alum-flour, to stop the steams
Exhaled from sour unsavoury streams:
There night-gloves made of Tripsey's hide,
[1]Bequeath'd by Tripsey when she died;
With puppy-water, beauty's help,
Distil'd from Tripsey's darling whelp.
Here gallipots and vials placed,
Some fill'd with washes, some with paste;
Some with pomatums, paints, and slops,
And ointments good for scabby chops.
Hard by a filthy bason stands,
Foul'd with the scouring of her hands:
The bason takes whatever comes,
The scrapings from her teeth and gums,
A nasty compound of all hues,
For here she spits, and here she spues.
  But, oh! it turn'd poor Strephon's bowels
When he beheld and smelt the towels,
Begumm'd, bematter'd, and beslim'd,
With dirt, and sweat, and ear-wax grim'd;
No object Strephon's eye escapes;
Here petticoats in frouzy heaps;
Nor be the handkerchiefs forgot,
All varnish'd o'er with snuff and snot.
The stockings why should I expose,
Stain'd with the moisture of her toes,[2]
Or greasy coifs, and pinners reeking,
Which Celia slept at least a week in?
A pair of tweezers next he found,
To pluck her brows in arches round;
Or hairs that sink the forehead low,
Or on her chin like bristles grow.
  The virtues we must not let pass
Of Celia's magnifying glass;
When frighted Strephon cast his eye on't,
It shew'd the visage of a giant:
A glass that can to sight disclose
The smallest worm in Celia's nose,
And faithfully direct her nail
To squeeze it out from head to tail;
For, catch it nicely by the head,
It must come out, alive or dead.
  Why, Strephon, will you tell the rest?
And must you needs describe the chest?
That careless wench! no creature warn her
To move it out from yonder corner!
But leave it standing full in sight,
For you to exercise your spight?
In vain the workman shew'd his wit,
With rings and hinges counterfeit,
To make it seem in this disguise
A cabinet to vulgar eyes:
Which Strephon ventur'd to look in,
Resolved to go thro' thick and thin.
He lifts the lid: there needs no more,
He smelt it all the time before.
  As, from within Pandora's box,
When Epimetheus op'd the locks,
A sudden universal crew
Of human evils upward flew;
He still was comforted to find
That hope at last remain'd behind:
So Strephon, lifting up the lid,
To view what in the chest was hid,
The vapours flew from up the vent;
But Strephon, cautious, never meant
The bottom of the pan to grope,
And foul his hands in search of hope.
O! ne'er may such a vile machine
Be once in Celia's chamber seen!
O! may she better learn to keep
Those "secrets of the hoary deep." [3]
  As mutton-cutlets, prime of meat,
Which, tho' with art you salt and beat,
As laws of cookery require,
And toast them at the clearest fire;
If from upon the hopeful chops
The fat upon a cinder drops,
To stinking smoke it turns the flame,
Pois'ning the flesh from whence it came,
And up exhales a greasy stench,
For which you curse the careless wench:
So things which must not be exprest,
When drop'd into the reeking chest,
Send up an excremental smell
To taint the part from whence they fell:
The petticoats and gown perfume,
And waft a stink round ev'ry room.
  Thus finishing his grand survey,
Disgusted Strephon slunk away;
Repeating in his amorous fits,
"Oh! Celia, Celia, Celia sh--!"
But Vengeance, goddess never sleeping,
Soon punish'd Strephon for his peeping:
His foul imagination links
Each dame he sees with all her stinks;
And, if unsavoury odours fly,
Conceives a lady standing by.
All women his description fits,
And both ideas jump like wits;
By vicious fancy coupled fast,
And still appearing in contrast.
  I pity wretched Strephon, blind
To all the charms of woman kind.
Should I the Queen of Love refuse,
Because she rose from stinking ooze?
To him that looks behind the scene,
Statira's but some pocky quean.
  When Celia in her glory shews,
If Strephon would but stop his nose,
(Who now so impiously blasphemes
Her ointments, daubs, and paints, and creams,
Her washes, slops, and every clout,
With which he makes so foul a rout;)
He soon would learn to think like me,
And bless his ravish'd sight to see
Such order from confusion sprung,
Such gaudy tulips raised from dung.


[Footnote 1: Var. "The bitch bequeath'd her when she died."--1732.]

[Footnote 2: Var. "marks of stinking toes."--1732.]

[Footnote 3: Milton, "Paradise Lost," ii, 890-1:
  "Before their eyes in sudden view appear
  The secrets of the hoary deep."--_W. E. B._]




THE POWER OF TIME. 1730

If neither brass nor marble can withstand
The mortal force of Time's destructive hand;
If mountains sink to vales, if cities die,
And lessening rivers mourn their fountains dry;
When my old cassock (said a Welsh divine)
Is out at elbows, why should I repine?




CASSINUS AND PETER

A TRAGICAL ELEGY

1731


Two college sophs of Cambridge growth,
Both special wits and lovers both,
Conferring, as they used to meet,
On love, and books, in rapture sweet;
(Muse, find me names to fit my metre,
Cassinus this, and t'other Peter.)
Friend Peter to Cassinus goes,
To chat a while, and warm his nose:
But such a sight was never seen,
The lad lay swallow'd up in spleen.
He seem'd as just crept out of bed;
One greasy stocking round his head,
The other he sat down to darn,
With threads of different colour'd yarn;
His breeches torn, exposing wide
A ragged shirt and tawny hide.
Scorch'd were his shins, his legs were bare,
But well embrown'd with dirt and hair
A rug was o'er his shoulders thrown,
(A rug, for nightgown he had none,)
His jordan stood in manner fitting
Between his legs, to spew or spit in;
His ancient pipe, in sable dyed,
And half unsmoked, lay by his side.
  Him thus accoutred Peter found,
With eyes in smoke and weeping drown'd;
The leavings of his last night's pot
On embers placed, to drink it hot.
  Why, Cassy, thou wilt dose thy pate:
What makes thee lie a-bed so late?
The finch, the linnet, and the thrush,
Their matins chant in every bush;
And I have heard thee oft salute
Aurora with thy early flute.
Heaven send thou hast not got the hyps!
How! not a word come from thy lips?
  Then gave him some familiar thumps,
A college joke to cure the dumps.
  The swain at last, with grief opprest,
Cried, Celia! thrice, and sigh'd the rest.
  Dear Cassy, though to ask I dread,
Yet ask I must--is Celia dead?
  How happy I, were that the worst!
But I was fated to be curst!
  Come, tell us, has she play'd the whore?
  O Peter, would it were no more!
  Why, plague confound her sandy locks!
Say, has the small or greater pox
Sunk down her nose, or seam'd her face?
Be easy, 'tis a common case.
  O Peter! beauty's but a varnish,
Which time and accidents will tarnish:
But Celia has contrived to blast
Those beauties that might ever last.
Nor can imagination guess,
Nor eloquence divine express,
How that ungrateful charming maid
My purest passion has betray'd:
Conceive the most envenom'd dart
To pierce an injured lover's heart.
  Why, hang her; though she seem'd so coy,
I know she loves the barber's boy.
  Friend Peter, this I could excuse,
For every nymph has leave to choose;
Nor have I reason to complain,
She loves a more deserving swain.
But, oh! how ill hast thou divined
A crime, that shocks all human kind;
A deed unknown to female race,
At which the sun should hide his face:
Advice in vain you would apply--
Then leave me to despair and die.
Ye kind Arcadians, on my urn
These elegies and sonnets burn;
And on the marble grave these rhymes,
A monument to after-times--
"Here Cassy lies, by Celia slain,
And dying, never told his pain."
  Vain empty world, farewell. But hark,
The loud Cerberian triple bark;
And there--behold Alecto stand,
A whip of scorpions in her hand:
Lo, Charon from his leaky wherry
Beckoning to waft me o'er the ferry:
I come! I come! Medusa see,
Her serpents hiss direct at me.
Begone; unhand me, hellish fry:
"Avaunt--ye cannot say 'twas I."[1]
  Dear Cassy, thou must purge and bleed;
I fear thou wilt be mad indeed.
But now, by friendship's sacred laws,
I here conjure thee, tell the cause;
And Celia's horrid fact relate:
Thy friend would gladly share thy fate.
  To force it out, my heart must rend;
Yet when conjured by such a friend--
Think, Peter, how my soul is rack'd!
These eyes, these eyes, beheld the fact.
Now bend thine ear, since out it must;
But, when thou seest me laid in dust,
The secret thou shalt ne'er impart,
Not to the nymph that keeps thy heart;
 (How would her virgin soul bemoan
A crime to all her sex unknown!)
Nor whisper to the tattling reeds
The blackest of all female deeds;
Nor blab it on the lonely rocks,
Where Echo sits, and listening mocks;
Nor let the Zephyr's treacherous gale
Through Cambridge waft the direful tale;
Nor to the chattering feather'd race
Discover Celia's foul disgrace.
But, if you fail, my spectre dread,
Attending nightly round your bed--
And yet I dare confide in you;
So take my secret, and adieu:
Nor wonder how I lost my wits:
Oh! Celia, Celia, Celia sh--!


[Footnote 1:  From "Macbeth," in Act III, Sc. iv:
  "Thou canst not say, I did it:" etc.
  "Avaunt, and quit my sight."]




A BEAUTIFUL YOUNG NYMPH GOING TO BED.

WRITTEN FOR THE HONOUR OF THE FAIR SEX. 1731


Corinna, pride of Drury-Lane,
For whom no shepherd sighs in vain;
Never did Covent-Garden boast
So bright a batter'd strolling toast!
No drunken rake to pick her up,
No cellar where on tick to sup;
Returning at the midnight hour,
Four stories climbing to her bower;
Then, seated on a three-legg'd chair,
Takes off her artificial hair;
Now picking out a crystal eye,
She wipes it clean, and lays it by.
Her eyebrows from a mouse's hide
Stuck on with art on either side,
Pulls off with care, and first displays 'em,
Then in a play-book smoothly lays 'em.
Now dext'rously her plumpers draws,
That serve to fill her hollow jaws,
Untwists a wire, and from her gums
A set of teeth completely comes;
Pulls out the rags contrived to prop
Her flabby dugs, and down they drop.
Proceeding on, the lovely goddess
Unlaces next her steel-ribb'd bodice,
Which, by the operator's skill,
Press down the lumps, the hollows fill.
Up goes her hand, and off she slips
The bolsters that supply her hips;
With gentlest touch she next explores
Her chancres, issues, running sores;
Effects of many a sad disaster,
And then to each applies a plaster:
But must, before she goes to bed,
Rub off the daubs of white and red,
And smooth the furrows in her front
With greasy paper stuck upon't.
She takes a bolus ere she sleeps;
And then between two blankets creeps.
With pains of love tormented lies;
Or, if she chance to close her eyes,
Of Bridewell[1] and the Compter[1] dreams,
And feels the lash, and faintly screams;
Or, by a faithless bully drawn,
At some hedge-tavern lies in pawn;
Or to Jamaica[2] seems transported
Alone, and by no planter courted;
Or, near Fleet-ditch's[3] oozy brinks,
Surrounded with a hundred stinks,
Belated, seems on watch to lie,
And snap some cully passing by;
Or, struck with fear, her fancy runs
On watchmen, constables, and duns,
From whom she meets with frequent rubs;
But never from religious clubs;
Whose favour she is sure to find,
Because she pays them all in kind.
  Corinna wakes. A dreadful sight!
Behold the ruins of the night!
A wicked rat her plaster stole,
Half eat, and dragg'd it to his hole.
The crystal eye, alas! was miss'd;
And puss had on her plumpers p--st,
A pigeon pick'd her issue-pease:
And Shock her tresses fill'd with fleas.
  The nymph, though in this mangled plight
Must ev'ry morn her limbs unite.
But how shall I describe her arts
To re-collect the scatter'd parts?
Or show the anguish, toil, and pain,
Of gath'ring up herself again?
The bashful Muse will never bear
In such a scene to interfere.
Corinna, in the morning dizen'd,
Who sees, will spew; who smells, be poison'd.


[Footnote 1: See Cunningham's "Handbook of London." Bridewell was the
Prison to which harlots were sent, and were made to beat hemp and
pick oakum and were whipped if they did not perform their tasks. See
the Plate in Hogarth's "Harlot's Progress." The Prison has, happily,
been cleared away. The hall, court room, etc., remain at 14, New
Bridge Street. The Compter, a similar Prison, was also abolished.
For details of these abominations, see "London Past and Present,"
by Wheatley.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Jamaica seems to have been regarded as a place of exile. See
"A quiet life and a good name," _ante_, p. 152.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 3:  See _ante_, p. 78, "Descripton of a City
Shower."--_W. E. B_.]




STREPHON AND CHLOE
1731


Of Chloe all the town has rung,
By ev'ry size of poets sung:
So beautiful a nymph appears
But once in twenty thousand years;
By Nature form'd with nicest care,
And faultless to a single hair.
Her graceful mien, her shape, and face,
Confess'd her of no mortal race:
And then so nice, and so genteel;
Such cleanliness from head to heel;
No humours gross, or frouzy steams,
No noisome whiffs, or sweaty streams,
Before, behind, above, below,
Could from her taintless body flow:
Would so discreetly things dispose,
None ever saw her pluck a rose.[1]
Her dearest comrades never caught her
Squat on her hams to make maid's water:
You'd swear that so divine a creature
Felt no necessities of nature.
In summer had she walk'd the town,
Her armpits would not stain her gown:
At country dances, not a nose
Could in the dog-days smell her toes.
Her milk-white hands, both palms and backs,
Like ivory dry, and soft as wax.
Her hands, the softest ever felt,
[2] Though cold would burn, though dry would melt.
  Dear Venus, hide this wond'rous maid,
Nor let her loose to spoil your trade.
While she engrosses ev'ry swain,
You but o'er half the world can reign.
Think what a case all men are now in,
What ogling, sighing, toasting, vowing!
What powder'd wigs! what flames and darts!
What hampers full of bleeding hearts!
What sword-knots! what poetic strains!
What billets-doux, and clouded canes!
  But Strephon sigh'd so loud and strong,
He blew a settlement along;
And bravely drove his rivals down,
With coach and six, and house in town.
The bashful nymph no more withstands,
Because her dear papa commands.
The charming couple now unites:
Proceed we to the marriage rites.
  _Imprimis_, at the Temple porch
Stood Hymen with a flaming torch:
The smiling Cyprian Goddess brings
Her infant loves with purple wings:
And pigeons billing, sparrows treading,
Fair emblems of a fruitful wedding.
The Muses next in order follow,
Conducted by their squire, Apollo:
Then Mercury with silver tongue;
And Hebe, goddess ever young.
Behold, the bridegroom and his bride
Walk hand in hand, and side by side;
She, by the tender Graces drest,
But he, by Mars, in scarlet vest.
The nymph was cover'd with her _flammeum_[3],
And Phoebus sung th'epithalamium[4].
And last, to make the matter sure,
Dame Juno brought a priest demure.
[5]Luna was absent, on pretence
Her time was not till nine months hence.
The rites perform'd, the parson paid,
In state return'd the grand parade;
With loud huzzas from all the boys,
That now the pair must crown their joys.
  But still the hardest part remains:
Strephon had long perplex'd his brains,
How with so high a nymph he might
Demean himself the wedding-night:
For, as he view'd his person round,
Mere mortal flesh was all he found:
His hand, his neck, his mouth, and feet,
Were duly wash'd, to keep them sweet;
With other parts, that shall be nameless,
The ladies else might think me shameless.
The weather and his love were hot;
And, should he struggle, I know what--
Why, let it go, if I must tell it--
He'll sweat, and then the nymph may smell it;
While she, a goddess dyed in grain,
Was unsusceptible of stain,
And, Venus-like, her fragrant skin
Exhaled ambrosia from within.
Can such a deity endure
A mortal human touch impure?
How did the humbled swain detest
His prickly beard, and hairy breast!
His night-cap, border'd round with lace,
Could give no softness to his face.
  Yet, if the goddess could be kind,
What endless raptures must he find!
And goddesses have now and then
Come down to visit mortal men;
To visit and to court them too:
A certain goddess, God knows who,
(As in a book he heard it read,)
Took Col'nel Peleus[6] to her bed.
But what if he should lose his life
By vent'ring on his heavenly wife!
(For Strephon could remember well,
That once he heard a school-boy tell,
How Semele,[7] of mortal race,
By thunder died in Jove's embrace.)
And what if daring Strephon dies
By lightning shot from Chloe's eyes!
  While these reflections fill'd his head,
The bride was put in form to bed:
He follow'd, stript, and in he crept,
But awfully his distance kept.
  Now, "ponder well, ye parents dear;"
Forbid your daughters guzzling beer;
And make them ev'ry afternoon
Forbear their tea, or drink it soon;
That, ere to bed they venture up,
They may discharge it ev'ry sup;
If not, they must in evil plight
Be often forc'd to rise at night.
Keep them to wholesome food confin'd,
Nor let them taste what causes wind:
'Tis this the sage of Samos means,
Forbidding his disciples beans.[8]
O! think what evils must ensue;
Miss Moll, the jade, will burn it blue;
And, when she once has got the art,
She cannot help it for her heart;
But out it flies, even when she meets
Her bridegroom in the wedding-sheets.
_Carminative_ and _diuretic_[9]
Will damp all passion sympathetic;
And Love such nicety requires,
One blast will put out all his fires.
Since husbands get behind the scene,
The wife should study to be clean;
Nor give the smallest room to guess
The time when wants of nature press;
But after marriage practise more
Decorum than she did before;
To keep her spouse deluded still,
And make him fancy what she will.
  In bed we left the married pair;
'Tis time to show how things went there.
Strephon, who had been often told
That fortune still assists the bold,
Resolved to make the first attack;
But Chloe drove him fiercely back.
How could a nymph so chaste as Chloe,
With constitution cold and snowy,
Permit a brutish man to touch her?
Ev'n lambs by instinct fly the butcher.
Resistance on the wedding-night
Is what our maidens claim by right;
And Chloe, 'tis by all agreed,
Was maid in thought, in word, and deed.
Yet some assign a different reason;
That Strephon chose no proper season.
  Say, fair ones, must I make a pause,
Or freely tell the secret cause?
  Twelve cups of tea (with grief I speak)
Had now constrain'd the nymph to leak.
This point must needs be settled first:
The bride must either void or burst.
Then see the dire effects of pease;
Think what can give the colic ease.
The nymph oppress'd before, behind,
As ships are toss'd by waves and wind,
Steals out her hand, by nature led,
And brings a vessel into bed;
Fair utensil, as smooth and white
As Chloe's skin, almost as bright.
  Strephon, who heard the fuming rill
As from a mossy cliff distil,
Cried out, Ye Gods! what sound is this?
Can Chloe, heavenly Chloe,----?
But when he smelt a noisome steam
Which oft attends that lukewarm stream;
(Salerno both together joins,[10]
As sov'reign med'cines for the loins:)
And though contriv'd, we may suppose,
To slip his ears, yet struck his nose;
He found her while the scent increast,
As mortal as himself at least.
But soon, with like occasions prest
He boldly sent his hand in quest
(Inspired with courage from his bride)
To reach the pot on t'other side;
And, as he fill'd the reeking vase;
Let fly a rouser in her face.
  The little Cupids hov'ring round,
(As pictures prove) with garlands crown'd,
Abash'd at what they saw and heard,
Flew off, nor ever more appear'd.
  Adieu to ravishing delights,
High raptures, and romantic flights;
To goddesses so heav'nly sweet,
Expiring shepherds at their feet;
To silver meads and shady bowers,
Dress'd up with amaranthine flowers.
  How great a change! how quickly made!
They learn to call a spade a spade.
They soon from all constraint are freed;
Can see each other do their need.
On box of cedar sits the wife,
And makes it warm for dearest life;
And, by the beastly way of thinking,
Find great society in stinking.
Now Strephon daily entertains
His Chloe in the homeliest strains;
And Chloe, more experienc'd grown,
With int'rest pays him back his own.
No maid at court is less asham'd,
Howe'er for selling bargains fam'd,
Than she to name her parts behind,
Or when a-bed to let out wind.
  Fair Decency, celestial maid!
Descend from Heaven to Beauty's aid!
Though Beauty may beget desire,
'Tis thou must fan the Lover's fire;
For Beauty, like supreme dominion,
Is best supported by Opinion:
If Decency bring no supplies,
Opinion falls, and Beauty dies.
  To see some radiant nymph appear
In all her glitt'ring birth-day gear,
You think some goddess from the sky
Descended, ready cut and dry:
But ere you sell yourself to laughter,
Consider well what may come after;
For fine ideas vanish fast,
While all the gross and filthy last.
  O Strephon, ere that fatal day
When Chloe stole your heart away,
Had you but through a cranny spy'd
On house of ease your future bride,
In all the postures of her face,
Which nature gives in such a case;
Distortions, groanings, strainings, heavings,
'Twere better you had lick'd her leavings,
Than from experience find too late
Your goddess grown a filthy mate.
Your fancy then had always dwelt
On what you saw and what you smelt;
Would still the same ideas give ye,
As when you spy'd her on the privy;
And, spite of Chloe's charms divine,
Your heart had been as whole as mine.
  Authorities, both old and recent,
Direct that women must be decent;
And from the spouse each blemish hide,
More than from all the world beside.
  Unjustly all our nymphs complain
Their empire holds so short a reign;
Is, after marriage, lost so soon,
It hardly lasts the honey-moon:
For, if they keep not what they caught,
It is entirely their own fault.
They take possession of the crown,
And then throw all their weapons down:
Though, by the politician's scheme,
Whoe'er arrives at power supreme,
Those arts, by which at first they gain it,
They still must practise to maintain it.
  What various ways our females take
To pass for wits before a rake!
And in the fruitless search pursue
All other methods but the true!
  Some try to learn polite behaviour
By reading books against their Saviour;
Some call it witty to reflect
On ev'ry natural defect;
Some shew they never want explaining
To comprehend a double meaning.
But sure a tell-tale out of school
Is of all wits the greatest fool;
Whose rank imagination fills
Her heart, and from her lips distils;
You'd think she utter'd from behind,
Or at her mouth was breaking wind.
  Why is a handsome wife ador'd
By every coxcomb but her lord?
From yonder puppet-man inquire,
Who wisely hides his wood and wire;
Shows Sheba's queen completely drest,
And Solomon in royal vest:
But view them litter'd on the floor,
Or strung on pegs behind the door;
Punch is exactly of a piece
With Lorrain's duke, and prince of Greece.
  A prudent builder should forecast
How long the stuff is like to last;
And carefully observe the ground,
To build on some foundation sound.
What house, when its materials crumble,
Must not inevitably tumble?
What edifice can long endure
Raised on a basis unsecure?
Rash mortals, ere you take a wife,
Contrive your pile to last for life:
Since beauty scarce endures a day,
And youth so swiftly glides away;
Why will you make yourself a bubble,
To build on sand with hay and stubble?
  On sense and wit your passion found,
By decency cemented round;
Let prudence with good-nature strive,
To keep esteem and love alive.
Then come old age whene'er it will,
Your friendship shall continue still:
And thus a mutual gentle fire
Shall never but with life expire.


[Footnote 1: A delicate way of speaking of a lady retiring behind a bush
in a garden.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2:
  "Though deep, yet clear, though gentle, yet not dull
  Strong without rage, without o'erflowing, full."
DENHAM, _Cooper's Hill._]


[Footnote 3: A veil with which the Roman brides covered themselves when
going to be married.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Marriage song, sung at weddings.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: Diana.]

[Footnote 6: Who married Thetis, the Nereid, by whom he became the father
of Achilles.--Ovid, "Metamorph.," lib. xi, 221, _seq.--W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: See Ovid, "Metamorph.," lib. iii.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 8: A precept of Pythagoras. Hence, in French _argot_, beans, as
causing wind, are called _musiciens.--W. E. B._]

[Footnote 9: Provocative of perspiration and urine.]

[Footnote 1: "Mingere cum bombis res est saluberrima lumbis." A precept
to be found in the "Regimen Sanitatis," or "Schola Salernitana," a work
in rhyming Latin verse composed at Salerno, the earliest school in
Christian Europe where medicine was professed, taught, and practised. The
original text, if anywhere, is in the edition published and commented
upon by Arnaldus de Villa Nova, about 1480. Subsequently above one
hundred and sixty editions of the "Schola Salernitana" were published,
with many additions. A reprint of the first edition, edited by Sir
Alexander Croke, with woodcuts from the editions of 1559, 1568, and
1573, was published at Oxford in 1830.--_W. E. B._]




APOLLO; OR, A PROBLEM SOLVED
1731


Apollo, god of light and wit,
Could verse inspire, but seldom writ,
Refined all metals with his looks,
As well as chemists by their books;
As handsome as my lady's page;
Sweet five-and-twenty was his age.
His wig was made of sunny rays,
He crown'd his youthful head with bays;
Not all the court of Heaven could show
So nice and so complete a beau.
No heir upon his first appearance,
With twenty thousand pounds a-year rents,
E'er drove, before he sold his land,
So fine a coach along the Strand;
The spokes, we are by Ovid told,
Were silver, and the axle gold:
I own, 'twas but a coach-and-four,
For Jupiter allows no more.
  Yet, with his beauty, wealth, and parts,
Enough to win ten thousand hearts,
No vulgar deity above
Was so unfortunate in love.
  Three weighty causes were assign'd,
That moved the nymphs to be unkind.
Nine Muses always waiting round him,
He left them virgins as he found them.
His singing was another fault;
For he could reach to B in _alt_:
And, by the sentiments of Pliny,[1]
Such singers are like Nicolini.
At last, the point was fully clear'd;
In short, Apollo had no beard.


[Footnote 1: "Bubus tantum feminis vox gravior, in alio omni genere
exilior quam maribus, in homine etiam castratis."--"Hist. Nat.," xi, 51.
"A condicione castrati seminis quae spadonia appellant Belgae,"
_ib_. xv.--_W. E. B._]




THE PLACE OF THE DAMNED
1731


All folks who pretend to religion and grace,
Allow there's a HELL, but dispute of the place:
But, if HELL may by logical rules be defined
The place of the damn'd--I'll tell you my mind.
Wherever the damn'd do chiefly abound,
Most certainly there is HELL to be found:
Damn'd poets, damn'd critics, damn'd blockheads, damn'd knaves,
Damn'd senators bribed, damn'd prostitute slaves;
Damn'd lawyers and judges, damn'd lords and damn'd squires;
Damn'd spies and informers, damn'd friends and damn'd liars;
Damn'd villains, corrupted in every station;
Damn'd time-serving priests all over the nation;
And into the bargain I'll readily give you
Damn'd ignorant prelates, and counsellors privy.
Then let us no longer by parsons be flamm'd,
For we know by these marks the place of the damn'd:
And HELL to be sure is at Paris or Rome.
How happy for us that it is not at home!




THE DAY OF JUDGMENT[1]

With a whirl of thought oppress'd,
I sunk from reverie to rest.
An horrid vision seized my head;
I saw the graves give up their dead!
Jove, arm'd with terrors, bursts the skies,
And thunder roars and lightning flies!
Amaz'd, confus'd, its fate unknown,
The world stands trembling at his throne!
While each pale sinner hung his head,
Jove, nodding, shook the heavens, and said:
"Offending race of human kind,
By nature, reason, _learning_, blind;
You who, through frailty, stepp'd aside;
And you, who never fell--_through pride_:
You who in different sects were shamm'd,
And come to see each other damn'd;
(So some folk told you, but they knew
No more of Jove's designs than you;)
--The world's mad business now is o'er,
And I resent these pranks no more.
--I to such blockheads set my wit!
I damn such fools!--Go, go, you're _bit_."


[Footnote 1: This Poem was sent in a letter from Lord Chesterfield to
Voltaire, dated 27th August, 1752, in which he says: "Je vous envoie
ci-jointe une pice par le feu Docteur Swift, laquelle je crois ne vous
dplaira pas. Elle n'a jamais t imprime, vous en dvinerez bien la
raison, roais elle est authentique. J'en ai l'original, crit de sa
propre main."--_W. E. B._]





JUDAS. 1731


By the just vengeance of incensed skies,
Poor Bishop Judas late repenting dies.
The Jews engaged him with a paltry bribe,
Amounting hardly to a crown a-tribe;
Which though his conscience forced him to restore,
(And parsons tell us, no man can do more,)
Yet, through despair, of God and man accurst,
He lost his bishopric, and hang'd or burst.
Those former ages differ'd much from this;
Judas betray'd his master with a kiss:
But some have kiss'd the gospel fifty times,
Whose perjury's the least of all their crimes;
Some who can perjure through a two inch-board,
Yet keep their bishoprics, and 'scape the cord:
Like hemp, which, by a skilful spinster drawn
To slender threads, may sometimes pass for lawn.
  As ancient Judas by transgression fell,
And burst asunder ere he went to hell;
So could we see a set of new Iscariots
Come headlong tumbling from their mitred chariots;
Each modern Judas perish like the first,
Drop from the tree with all his bowels burst;
Who could forbear, that view'd each guilty face,
To cry, "Lo! Judas gone to his own place,
His habitation let all men forsake,
And let his bishopric another take!"




AN EPISTLE TO MR. GAY[1]
1731


How could you, Gay, disgrace the Muse's train,
To serve a tasteless court twelve years in vain![2]
Fain would I think our female friend [3] sincere,
Till Bob,[4] the poet's foe, possess'd her ear.
Did female virtue e'er so high ascend,
To lose an inch of favour for a friend?
  Say, had the court no better place to choose
For triee, than make a dry-nurse of thy Muse?
How cheaply had thy liberty been sold,
To squire a royal girl of two years old:
In leading strings her infant steps to guide,
Or with her go-cart amble side by side![5]
  But princely Douglas,[6] and his glorious dame,
Advanced thy fortune, and preserved thy fame.
Nor will your nobler gifts be misapplied,
When o'er your patron's treasure you preside:
The world shall own, his choice was wise and just,
For sons of Phoebus never break their trust.
  Not love of beauty less the heart inflames
Of guardian eunuchs to the sultan's dames,
Their passions not more impotent and cold,
Than those of poets to the lust of gold.
With Pan's purest fire his favourites glow,
The dregs will serve to ripen ore below:
His meanest work: for, had he thought it fit
That wealth should be the appanage of wit,
The god of light could ne'er have been so blind
To deal it to the worst of human kind.
  But let me now, for I can do it well,
Your conduct in this new employ foretell.
  And first: to make my observation right,
I place a statesman full before my sight,
A bloated minister in all his gear,
With shameless visage and perfidious leer:
Two rows of teeth arm each devouring jaw,
And ostrich-like his all-digesting maw.
My fancy drags this monster to my view,
To shew the world his chief reverse in you.
Of loud unmeaning sounds, a rapid flood
Rolls from his mouth in plenteous streams of mud;
With these the court and senate-house he plies,
Made up of noise, and impudence, and lies.
  Now let me show how Bob and you agree:
You serve a potent prince,[7] as well as he.
The ducal coffers trusted to your charge,
Your honest care may fill, perhaps enlarge:
His vassals easy, and the owner blest;
They pay a trifle, and enjoy the rest.
Not so a nation's revenues are paid;
The servant's faults are on the master laid.
The people with a sigh their taxes bring,
And, cursing Bob, forget to bless the king.
  Next hearken, Gay, to what thy charge requires,
With servants, tenants, and the neighbouring squires,
Let all domestics feel your gentle sway;
Nor bribe, insult, nor flatter, nor betray.
Let due reward to merit be allow'd;
Nor with your kindred half the palace crowd;
Nor think yourself secure in doing wrong,
By telling noses [8] with a party strong.
  Be rich; but of your wealth make no parade;
At least, before your master's debts are paid;
Nor in a palace, built with charge immense,
Presume to treat him at his own expense.[9]
Each farmer in the neighbourhood can count
To what your lawful perquisites amount.
The tenants poor, the hardness of the times,
Are ill excuses for a servant's crimes.
With interest, and a premium paid beside,
The master's pressing wants must be supplied;
With hasty zeal behold the steward come
By his own credit to advance the sum;
Who, while th'unrighteous Mammon is his friend,
May well conclude his power will never end.
A faithful treasurer! what could he do more?
He lends my lord what was my lord's before.
  The law so strictly guards the monarch's health,
That no physician dares prescribe by stealth:
The council sit; approve the doctor's skill;
And give advice before he gives the pill.
But the state empiric acts a safer part;
And, while he poisons, wins the royal heart.
  But how can I describe the ravenous breed?
Then let me now by negatives proceed.
  Suppose your lord a trusty servant send
On weighty business to some neighbouring friend:
Presume not, Gay, unless you serve a drone,
To countermand his orders by your own.
Should some imperious neighbour sink the boats,
And drain the fish-ponds, while your master dotes;
Shall he upon the ducal rights intrench,
Because he bribed you with a brace of tench?
  Nor from your lord his bad condition hide,
To feed his luxury, or soothe his pride.
Nor at an under rate his timber sell,
And with an oath assure him, all is well;
Or swear it rotten, and with humble airs [10]
Request it of him, to complete your stairs;
Nor, when a mortgage lies on half his lands,
Come with a purse of guineas in your hands.
  Have Peter Waters [11] always in your mind;
That rogue, of genuine ministerial kind,
Can half the peerage by his arts bewitch,
Starve twenty lords to make one scoundrel rich:
And, when he gravely has undone a score,
Is humbly pray'd to ruin twenty more.
  A dext'rous steward, when his tricks are found,
Hush-money sends to all the neighbours round;
His master, unsuspicious of his pranks,
Pays all the cost, and gives the villain thanks.
And, should a friend attempt to set him right,
His lordship would impute it all to spite;
Would love his favourite better than before,
And trust his honesty just so much more.
Thus families, like realms, with equal fate,
Are sunk by premier ministers of state.
  Some, when an heir succeeds, go bodily on,
And, as they robb'd the father, rob the son.
A knave, who deep embroils his lord's affairs,
Will soon grow necessary to his heirs.
His policy consists in setting traps,
In finding ways and means, and stopping gaps;
He knows a thousand tricks whene'er he please,
Though not to cure, yet palliate each disease.
In either case, an equal chance is run;
For, keep or turn him out, my lord's undone.
You want a hand to clear a filthy sink;
No cleanly workman can endure the stink.
A strong dilemma in a desperate case!
To act with infamy, or quit the place.
  A bungler thus, who scarce the nail can hit,
With driving wrong will make the panel split:
Nor dares an abler workman undertake
To drive a second, lest the whole should break.
  In every court the parallel will hold;
And kings, like private folks, are bought and sold.
The ruling rogue, who dreads to be cashler'd,
Contrives, as he is hated, to be fear'd;
Confounds accounts, perplexes all affairs:
For vengeance more embroils, than skill repairs.
So robbers, (and their ends are just the same,)
To 'scape inquiries, leave the house in flame.
  I knew a brazen minister of state,[12]
Who bore for twice ten years the public hate.
In every mouth the question most in vogue
Was, when will they turn out this odious rogue?
A juncture happen'd in his highest pride:
While he went robbing on, his master died.[13]
We thought there now remain'd no room to doubt;
The work is done, the minister must out.
The court invited more than one or two:
Will you, Sir Spencer?[14] or will you, or you?
But not a soul his office durst accept;
The subtle knave had all the plunder swept:
And, such was then the temper of the times,
He owed his preservation to his crimes.
The candidates observed his dirty paws;
Nor found it difficult to guess the cause:
But, when they smelt such foul corruptions round him,
Away they fled, and left him as they found him.
  Thus, when a greedy sloven once has thrown
His snot into the mess, 'tis all his own.


[Footnote 1: The Dean having been told by an intimate friend that the
Duke of Queensberry had employed Mr. Gay to inspect the accounts and
management of his grace's receivers and stewards (which, however, proved
to be a mistake), wrote this Epistle to his friend.--_H_. Through the
whole piece, under the pretext of instructing Gay in his duty as the
duke's auditor of accounts, he satirizes the conduct of Sir Robert
Walpole, then Prime Minister.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 2: See the "Libel on Dr. Delany and Lord Carteret," _post_.]

[Footnote 3: The Countess of Suffolk.--_H._]

[Footnote 4: Sir Robert Walpole.--_Faulkner_.]

[Footnote 5: The post of gentleman-usher to the Princess Louisa was
offered to Gay, which he and his friends considered as a great indignity,
her royal highness being a mere infant.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 6: The Duke and Duchess of Queensberry.]

[Footnote 7: A title given to every duke by the
heralds.--_Faulkner_.]

[Footnote 8: Counting the numbers of a division. A horse dealer's
term.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 9: Alluding to the magnificence of Houghton, the seat of Sir
Robert Walpole, by which he greatly impaired his fortune.
  "What brought Sir Visto's ill-got wealth to waste?
  Some Demon whispered, 'Visto! have a Taste.'"
POPE, _Moral Essays_, Epist. iv.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 10: These lines are thought to allude to some story concerning
a vast quantity of mahogany declared rotten, and then applied by somebody
to wainscots, stairs, door-cases, etc.--_Dublin edition_.]

[Footnote 11: He hath practised this trade for many years, and still
continues it with success; and after he hath ruined one lord, is
earnestly solicited to take another.--_Dublin edition_.
Properly Walter, a dexterous and unscrupulous attorney.
  "Wise Peter sees the world's respect for gold,
  And therefore hopes this nation may be sold."
POPE, _Moral Essays_, Epist. iii.
And see his character fully displayed in Sir Chas. Hanbury Williams'
poem, "Peter and my Lord Quidam," Works, with notes, edit. 1822. Peter
was the original of Peter Pounce in Fielding's "Joseph
Andrews."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 12: Sir Robert Walpole, who was called Sir Robert Brass.]

[Footnote 13: King George I, who died on the 12th June,
1727.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 14: Sir Spencer Compton, Speaker of the House of Commons,
afterwards created Earl of Wilmington. George II, on his accession to the
throne, intended that Compton should be Prime Minister, but Walpole,
through the influence of the queen, retained his place, Compton having
confessed "his incapacity to undertake so arduous a task." As Lord
Wilmington, he is constantly ridiculed by Sir Chas. Hanbury Williams.
See his Works, with notes by Horace Walpole, edit. 1822.--_W. E. B._]




TO A LADY
WHO DESIRED THE AUTHOR TO WRITE SOME VERSES UPON HER
IN THE HEROIC STYLE


After venting all my spite,
Tell me, what have I to write?
Every error I could find
Through the mazes of your mind,
Have my busy Muse employ'd,
Till the company was cloy'd.
Are you positive and fretful,
Heedless, ignorant, forgetful?
Those, and twenty follies more,
I have often told before.
  Hearken what my lady says:
Have I nothing then to praise?
Ill it fits you to be witty,
Where a fault should move your pity.
If you think me too conceited,
Or to passion quickly heated;
If my wandering head be less
Set on reading than on dress;
If I always seem too dull t'ye;
I can solve the diffi--culty.
  You would teach me to be wise:
Truth and honour how to prize;
How to shine in conversation,
And with credit fill my station;
How to relish notions high;
How to live, and how to die.
  But it was decreed by Fate--
Mr. Dean, you come too late.
Well I know, you can discern,
I am now too old to learn:
Follies, from my youth instill'd,
Have my soul entirely fill'd;
In my head and heart they centre,
Nor will let your lessons enter.
  Bred a fondling and an heiress;
Drest like any lady mayoress:
Cocker'd by the servants round,
Was too good to touch the ground;
Thought the life of every lady
Should be one continued play-day--
Balls, and masquerades, and shows,
Visits, plays, and powder'd beaux.
  Thus you have my case at large,
And may now perform your charge.
Those materials I have furnish'd,
When by you refined and burnish'd,
Must, that all the world may know 'em,
Be reduced into a poem.
  But, I beg, suspend a while
That same paltry, burlesque style;
Drop for once your constant rule,
Turning all to ridicule;
Teaching others how to ape you;
Court nor parliament can 'scape you;
Treat the public and your friends
Both alike, while neither mends.
  Sing my praise in strain sublime:
Treat me not with dogg'rel rhyme.
'Tis but just, you should produce,
With each fault, each fault's excuse;
Not to publish every trifle,
And my few perfections stifle.
With some gifts at least endow me,
Which my very foes allow me.
Am I spiteful, proud, unjust?
Did I ever break my trust?
Which of all our modern dames
Censures less, or less defames?
In good manners am I faulty?
Can you call me rude or haughty?
Did I e'er my mite withhold
From the impotent and old?
When did ever I omit
Due regard for men of wit?
When have I esteem express'd
For a coxcomb gaily dress'd?
Do I, like the female tribe,
Think it wit to fleer and gibe?
Who with less designing ends
Kindlier entertains her friends;
With good words and countenance sprightly,
Strives to treat them more politely?
  Think not cards my chief diversion:
'Tis a wrong, unjust aspersion:
Never knew I any good in 'em,
But to dose my head like laudanum.
We, by play, as men, by drinking,
Pass our nights to drive out thinking.
From my ailments give me leisure,
I shall read and think with pleasure;
Conversation learn to relish,
And with books my mind embellish.
  Now, methinks, I hear you cry,
Mr. Dean, you must reply.
  Madam, I allow 'tis true:
All these praises are your due.
You, like some acute philosopher,
Every fault have drawn a gloss over;[1]
Placing in the strongest light
All your virtues to my sight.
  Though you lead a blameless life,
Are an humble prudent wife,
Answer all domestic ends:
What is this to us your friends?
Though your children by a nod
Stand in awe without a rod;
Though, by your obliging sway,
Servants love you, and obey;
Though you treat us with a smile;
Clear your looks, and smooth your style;
Load our plates from every dish;
This is not the thing we wish.
Colonel ***** may be your debtor;
We expect employment better.
You must learn, if you would gain us,
With good sense to entertain us.
  Scholars, when good sense describing,
Call it tasting and imbibing;
Metaphoric meat and drink
Is to understand and think;
We may carve for others thus;
And let others carve for us;
To discourse, and to attend,
Is, to help yourself and friend.
Conversation is but carving;
Carve for all, yourself is starving:
Give no more to every guest,
Than he's able to digest;
Give him always of the prime;
And but little at a time.
Carve to all but just enough:
Let them neither starve nor stuff:
And, that you may have your due,
Let your neighbours carve for you.
This comparison will hold,
Could it well in rhyme be told,
How conversing, listening, thinking,
Justly may resemble drinking;
For a friend a glass you fill,
What is this but to instil?
  To conclude this long essay;
Pardon if I disobey,
Nor against my natural vein,
Treat you in heroic strain.
I, as all the parish knows,
Hardly can be grave in prose:
Still to lash, and lashing smile,
Ill befits a lofty style.
From the planet of my birth
I encounter vice with mirth.
Wicked ministers of state
I can easier scorn than hate;
And I find it answers right:
Scorn torments them more than spight.
All the vices of a court
Do but serve to make me sport.
Were I in some foreign realm,
Which all vices overwhelm;
Should a monkey wear a crown,
Must I tremble at his frown?
Could I not, through all his ermine,
'Spy the strutting chattering vermin;
Safely write a smart lampoon,
To expose the brisk baboon?
  When my Muse officious ventures
On the nation's representers:
Teaching by what golden rules
Into knaves they turn their fools;
How the helm is ruled by Walpole,
At whose oars, like slaves, they all pull;
Let the vessel split on shelves;
With the freight enrich themselves:
Safe within my little wherry,
All their madness makes me merry:
Like the waterman of Thames,
I row by, and call them names;
Like the ever-laughing sage,[2]
In a jest I spend my rage:
(Though it must be understood,
I would hang them if I could;)
If I can but fill my niche,
I attempt no higher pitch;
Leave to d'Anvers and his mate
Maxims wise to rule the state.
Pulteney deep, accomplish'd St. Johns,
Scourge the villains with a vengeance;
Let me, though the smell be noisome,
Strip their bums; let Caleb[3] hoise 'em;
Then apply Alecto's[4] whip
Till they wriggle, howl, and skip.
  Deuce is in you, Mr. Dean:
What can all this passion mean?
Mention courts! you'll ne'er be quiet
On corruptions running riot.
End as it befits your station;
Come to use and application;
Nor with senates keep a fuss.
I submit; and answer thus:
  If the machinations brewing,
To complete the public ruin,
Never once could have the power
To affect me half an hour;
Sooner would I write in buskins,
Mournful elegies on Blueskins.[5]
If I laugh at Whig and Tory;
I conclude _ fortiori_,
All your eloquence will scarce
Drive me from my favourite farce.
This I must insist on; for, as
It is well observed by Horace,[6]
Ridicule has greater power
To reform the world than sour.
Horses thus, let jockeys judge else,
Switches better guide than cudgels.
Bastings heavy, dry, obtuse,
Only dulness can produce;
While a little gentle jerking
Sets the spirits all a-working.
  Thus, I find it by experiment,
Scolding moves you less than merriment.
I may storm and rage in vain;
It but stupifies your brain.
But with raillery to nettle,
Sets your thoughts upon their mettle;
Gives imagination scope;
Never lets your mind elope;
Drives out brangling and contention.
Brings in reason and invention.
For your sake as well as mine,
I the lofty style decline.
I should make a figure scurvy,
And your head turn topsy-turvy.
  I who love to have a fling
Both at senate-house and king:
That they might some better way tread,
To avoid the public hatred;
Thought no method more commodious,
Than to show their vices odious;
Which I chose to make appear,
Not by anger, but by sneer.
As my method of reforming,
Is by laughing, not by storming,
(For my friends have always thought
Tenderness my greatest fault,)
Would you have me change my style?
On your faults no longer smile;
But, to patch up all our quarrels,
Quote you texts from Plutarch's Morals,
Or from Solomon produce
Maxims teaching Wisdom's use?
  If I treat you like a crown'd head,
You have cheap enough compounded;
Can you put in higher claims,
Than the owners of St. James?
You are not so great a grievance,
As the hirelings of St. Stephen's.
You are of a lower class
Than my friend Sir Robert Brass.
None of these have mercy found:
I have laugh'd, and lash'd them round.
  Have you seen a rocket fly?
You would swear it pierced the sky:
It but reach'd the middle air,
Bursting into pieces there;
Thousand sparkles falling down
Light on many a coxcomb's crown.
See what mirth the sport creates!
Singes hair, but breaks no pates.
Thus, should I attempt to climb,
Treat you in a style sublime,
Such a rocket is my Muse:
Should I lofty numbers choose,
Ere I reach'd Parnassus' top,
I should burst, and bursting drop;
All my fire would fall in scraps,
Give your head some gentle raps;
Only make it smart a while;
Then could I forbear to smile,
When I found the tingling pain
Entering warm your frigid brain;
Make you able upon sight
To decide of wrong and right;
Talk with sense whate'er you please on;
Learn to relish truth and reason!
  Thus we both shall gain our prize;
I to laugh, and you grow wise.


[Footnote 1:
  "Beside, he was a shrewd Philosopher,
  And had read ev'ry Text and Gloss over."
                  _Hudibras_.]

[Footnote 2: Democritus, the Greek philosopher, one of the founders of
the atomic theory.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: Caleb d'Anvers was the name assumed by Nicholas Amhurst, the
ostensible editor of the celebrated journal, entitled "The Craftsman,"
written by Bolingbroke and Pulteney. See "Prose Works," vii, p.
219.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: One of the three Furies--Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera, the
avenging deities.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: The famous thief, who, while on his trial at the Old Bailey,
stabbed Jonathan Wild. See Fielding's "Life of Jonathan Wild," Book iv,
ch. i.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6:
  "Ridiculum acri
  Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat res."--_Sat_. I, x, 14.]



EPIGRAM ON THE BUSTS[1] IN RICHMOND HERMITAGE. 1732

  "Sic siti laetantur docti."


With honour thus by Carolina placed,
How are these venerable bustoes graced!
O queen, with more than regal title crown'd,
For love of arts and piety renown'd!
How do the friends of virtue joy to see
Her darling sons exalted thus by thee!
Nought to their fame can now be added more,
Revered by her whom all mankind adore.[2]

[Footnote 1: Newton, Locke, Clarke, and Woolaston.]

[Footnote 2: Queen Caroline's regard for learned men was chiefly directed
to those who had signalized themselves by philosophical research. Horace
Walpole alludes to this her peculiar taste, in his fable called the
"Funeral of the Lioness," where the royal shade is made to say:
  "... where Elysian waters glide,
  With Clarke and Newton by my side,
  Purrs o'er the metaphysic page,
  Or ponders the prophetic rage
  Of Merlin, who mysterious sings
  Of men and lions, beasts and kings."
_Lord Orford's Works_, iv, 379.--_W. E. B._]




ANOTHER

Louis the living learned fed,
And raised the scientific head;
Our frugal queen, to save her meat,
Exalts the heads that cannot eat.




A CONCLUSION

DRAWN FROM THE ABOVE EPIGRAMS, AND SENT TO THE DRAPIER

Since Anna, whose bounty thy merits had fed,
Ere her own was laid low, had exalted thy head:
And since our good queen to the wise is so just,
To raise heads for such as are humbled in dust,
I wonder, good man, that you are not envaulted;
Prithee go, and be dead, and be doubly exalted.




DR. SWIFT'S ANSWER

Her majesty never shall be my exalter;
And yet she would raise me, I know, by a halter!


TO THE REVEREND DR. SWIFT

WITH A PRESENT OF A PAPER-BOOK, FINELY BOUND,
ON HIS BIRTH-DAY, NOV. 30, 1732.[1]
BY JOHN, EARL OF ORRERY

To thee, dear Swift, these spotless leaves I send;
Small is the present, but sincere the friend.
Think not so poor a book below thy care;
Who knows the price that thou canst make it bear?
Tho' tawdry now, and, like Tyrilla's face,
The specious front shines out with borrow'd grace;
Tho' pasteboards, glitt'ring like a tinsell'd coat,
A _rasa tabula_ within denote:
Yet, if a venal and corrupted age,
And modern vices should provoke thy rage;
If, warn'd once more by their impending fate,
A sinking country and an injur'd state,
Thy great assistance should again demand,
And call forth reason to defend the land;
Then shall we view these sheets with glad surprise,
Inspir'd with thought, and speaking to our eyes;
Each vacant space shall then, enrich'd, dispense
True force of eloquence, and nervous sense;
Inform the judgment, animate the heart,
And sacred rules of policy impart.
The spangled cov'ring, bright with splendid ore,
Shall cheat the sight with empty show no more;
But lead us inward to those golden mines,
Where all thy soul in native lustre shines.
So when the eye surveys some lovely fair,
With bloom of beauty graced, with shape and air;
How is the rapture heighten'd, when we find
Her form excell'd by her celestial mind!


[Footnote 1: It was occasioned by an annual custom, which I found pursued
among his friends, of making him a present on his birth-day. Orrery's
"Remarks," p. 202.--_W. E. B._]




VERSES LEFT WITH A SILVER STANDISH ON THE DEAN OF ST. PATRICK'S DESK,
ON HIS BIRTH-DAY.
BY DR. DELANY

Hither from Mexico I came,
To serve a proud Iernian dame:
Was long submitted to her will;
At length she lost me at quadrille.
Through various shapes I often pass'd,
Still hoping to have rest at last;
And still ambitious to obtain
Admittance to the patriot Dean;
And sometimes got within his door,
But soon turn'd out to serve the poor:[1]
Not strolling Idleness to aid,
But honest Industry decay'd.
At length an artist purchased me,
And wrought me to the shape you see.
  This done, to Hermes I applied:
"O Hermes! gratify my pride;
Be it my fate to serve a sage,
The greatest genius of his age;
That matchless pen let me supply,
Whose living lines will never die!"
  "I grant your suit," the God replied,
And here he left me to reside.


[Footnote 1: Alluding to sums lent by the Dean, without interest, to
assist poor tradesmen.--_W. E. B._]




VERSES OCCASIONED BY THE FOREGOING PRESENTS

A paper book is sent by Boyle,
Too neatly gilt for me to soil.
Delany sends a silver standish,
When I no more a pen can brandish.
Let both around my tomb be placed:
As trophies of a Muse deceased;
And let the friendly lines they writ,
In praise of long-departed wit,
Be graved on either side in columns,
More to my praise than all my volumes,
To burst with envy, spite, and rage,
The Vandals of the present age.




VERSES
SENT TO THE DEAN WITH AN EAGLE QUILL,
ON HEARING OF THE PRESENTS BY THE EARL OF ORRERY AND DR. DELANY.
BY MRS. PILKINGTON
Shall then my kindred all my glory claim,
And boldly rob me of eternal fame?
To every art my gen'rous aid I lend,
To music, painting, poetry, a friend.
'Tis I celestial harmony inspire,
When fix'd to strike the sweetly warbling wire.[1]
I to the faithful canvas have consign'd
Each bright idea of the painter's mind;
Behold from Raphael's sky-dipt pencils rise
Such heavenly scenes as charm the gazer's eyes.
O let me now aspire to higher praise!
Ambitious to transcribe your deathless lays:
Nor thou, immortal bard, my aid refuse,
Accept me as the servant of your Muse;
Then shall the world my wondrous worth declare,
And all mankind your matchless pen revere.


[Footnote 1: Quills of the harpsichord.]



AN INVITATION, BY DR. DELANY, IN THE NAME OF DR. SWIFT

Mighty Thomas, a solemn senatus[1] I call,
To consult for Sapphira;[2] so come one and all;
Quit books, and quit business, your cure and your care,
For a long winding walk, and a short bill of fare.
I've mutton for you, sir; and as for the ladies,
As friend Virgil has it, I've _aliud mercedis_;
For Letty,[3] one filbert, whereon to regale;
And a peach for pale Constance,[4] to make a full meal;
And for your cruel part, who take pleasure in blood,
I have that of the grape, which is ten times as good:
Flow wit to her honour, flow wine to her health:
High raised be her worth above titles or wealth.[5]


[Footnote 1: To correct Mrs. Barber's poems; which were published at
London, in 4to, by subscription.]

[Footnote 2: The name by which Mrs, Barber was distinguished by her
friends.--_N_.]

[Footnote 2: Mrs. Pilkington.--_N_.]

[Footnote 3: Mrs. Constantia Grierson, a very learned young lady, who
died in 1733, at the age of 27.--_N_.]

[Footnote 4: Mrs. Van Lewen, Mrs. Pilkington's mother. Swift had
ultimately good reason to regret his intimacy with the Pilkingtons, and
the favours he showed them. See accounts of them in the "Dictionary of
National Biography."--. _W. E. B_.]




THE BEASTS' CONFESSION TO THE PRIEST,
ON OBSERVING HOW MOST MEN MISTAKE THEIR OWN TALENTS. 1732

PREFACE

I have been long of opinion, that there is not a more general and
greater mistake, or of worse consequences through the commerce of
mankind, than the wrong judgments they are apt to entertain of their
own talents. I knew a stuttering alderman in London, a great frequenter
of coffeehouses, who, when a fresh newspaper was brought in, constantly
seized it first, and read it aloud to his brother citizens; but in a
manner as little intelligible to the standers-by as to himself. How many
pretenders to learning expose themselves, by choosing to discourse on
those very parts of science wherewith they are least acquainted! It is
the same case in every other qualification. By the multitude of those
who deal in rhymes, from half a sheet to twenty, which come out every
minute, there must be at least five hundred poets in the city and suburbs
of London: half as many coffeehouse orators, exclusive of the clergy,
forty thousand politicians, and four thousand five hundred profound
scholars; not to mention the wits, the railers, the smart fellows, and
critics; all as illiterate and impudent as a suburb whore. What are we
to think of the fine-dressed sparks, proud of their own personal
deformities, which appear the more hideous by the contrast of wearing
scarlet and gold, with what they call toupees[1] on their heads, and all
the frippery of a modern beau, to make a figure before women; some of
them with hump-backs, others hardly five feet high, and every feature
of their faces distorted: I have seen many of these insipid pretenders
entering into conversation with persons of learning, constantly making
the grossest blunders in every sentence, without conveying one single
idea fit for a rational creature to spend a thought on; perpetually
confounding all chronology, and geography, even of present times. I
compute, that London hath eleven native fools of the beau and puppy kind,
for one among us in Dublin; besides two-thirds of ours transplanted
thither, who are now naturalized: whereby that overgrown capital exceeds
ours in the articles of dunces by forty to one; and what is more to our
farther mortification, there is no one distinguished fool of Irish birth
or education, who makes any noise in that famous metropolis, unless the
London prints be very partial or defective; whereas London is seldom
without a dozen of their own educating, who engross the vogue for half a
winter together, and are never heard of more, but give place to a new
set. This has been the constant progress for at least thirty years past,
only allowing for the change of breed and fashion.

The poem is grounded upon the universal folly in mankind of mistaking
their talents; by which the author does a great honour to his
own species, almost equalling them with certain brutes; wherein, indeed,
he is too partial, as he freely confesses: and yet he has gone as
low as he well could, by specifying four animals; the wolf, the ass, the
swine, and the ape; all equally mischievous, except the last, who outdoes
them in the article of cunning: so great is the pride of man!

When beasts could speak, (the learned say
They still can do so every day,)
It seems, they had religion then,
As much as now we find in men.
It happen'd, when a plague broke out,
(Which therefore made them more devout,)
The king of brutes (to make it plain,
Of quadrupeds I only mean)
By proclamation gave command,
That every subject in the land
Should to the priest confess their sins;
And thus the pious Wolf begins:
Good father, I must own with shame,
That often I have been to blame:
I must confess, on Friday last,
Wretch that I was! I broke my fast:
But I defy the basest tongue
To prove I did my neighbour wrong;
Or ever went to seek my food,
By rapine, theft, or thirst of blood.
  The Ass approaching next, confess'd,
That in his heart he loved a jest:
A wag he was, he needs must own,
And could not let a dunce alone:
Sometimes his friend he would not spare,
And might perhaps be too severe:
But yet the worst that could be said,
He was a wit both born and bred;
And, if it be a sin and shame,
Nature alone must bear the blame:
One fault he has, is sorry for't,
His ears are half a foot too short;
Which could he to the standard bring,
He'd show his face before the king:
Then for his voice, there's none disputes
That he's the nightingale of brutes.
  The Swine with contrite heart allow'd,
His shape and beauty made him proud:
In diet was perhaps too nice,
But gluttony was ne'er his vice:
In every turn of life content,
And meekly took what fortune sent:
Inquire through all the parish round,
A better neighbour ne'er was found;
His vigilance might some displease;
'Tis true, he hated sloth like pease.
  The mimic Ape began his chatter,
How evil tongues his life bespatter;
Much of the censuring world complain'd,
Who said, his gravity was feign'd:
Indeed, the strictness of his morals
Engaged him in a hundred quarrels:
He saw, and he was grieved to see't,
His zeal was sometimes indiscreet:
He found his virtues too severe
For our corrupted times to bear;
Yet such a lewd licentious age
Might well excuse a stoic's rage.
  The Goat advanced with decent pace,
And first excused his youthful face;
Forgiveness begg'd that he appear'd
('Twas Nature's fault) without a beard.
'Tis true, he was not much inclined
To fondness for the female kind:
Not, as his enemies object,
From chance, or natural defect;
Not by his frigid constitution;
But through a pious resolution:
For he had made a holy vow
Of Chastity, as monks do now:
Which he resolved to keep for ever hence
And strictly too, as doth his reverence.[2]
  Apply the tale, and you shall find,
How just it suits with human kind.
Some faults we own; but can you guess?
--Why, virtue's carried to excess,
Wherewith our vanity endows us,
Though neither foe nor friend allows us.
  The Lawyer swears (you may rely on't)
He never squeezed a needy client;
And this he makes his constant rule,
For which his brethren call him fool;
His conscience always was so nice,
He freely gave the poor advice;
By which he lost, he may affirm,
A hundred fees last Easter term;
While others of the learned robe,
Would break the patience of a Job.
No pleader at the bar could match
His diligence and quick dispatch;
Ne'er kept a cause, he well may boast,
Above a term or two at most.
  The cringing knave, who seeks a place
Without success, thus tells his case:
Why should he longer mince the matter?
He fail'd, because he could not flatter;
He had not learn'd to turn his coat,
Nor for a party give his vote:
His crime he quickly understood;
Too zealous for the nation's good:
He found the ministers resent it,
Yet could not for his heart repent it.
  The Chaplain vows, he cannot fawn,
Though it would raise him to the lawn:
He pass'd his hours among his books;
You find it in his meagre looks:
He might, if he were worldly wise,
Preferment get, and spare his eyes;
But owns he had a stubborn spirit.
That made him trust alone to merit;
Would rise by merit to promotion;
Alas! a mere chimeric notion.
  The Doctor, if you will believe him,
Confess'd a sin; (and God forgive him!)
Call'd up at midnight, ran to save
A blind old beggar from the grave:
But see how Satan spreads his snares;
He quite forgot to say his prayers.
He cannot help it, for his heart,
Sometimes to act the parson's part:
Quotes from the Bible many a sentence,
That moves his patients to repentance;
And, when his medicines do no good,
Supports their minds with heavenly food:
At which, however well intended,
He hears the clergy are offended;
And grown so bold behind his back,
To call him hypocrite and quack.
In his own church he keeps a seat;
Says grace before and after meat;
And calls, without affecting airs,
His household twice a-day to prayers.
He shuns apothecaries' shops,
And hates to cram the sick with slops:
He scorns to make his art a trade;
Nor bribes my lady's favourite maid.
Old nurse-keepers would never hire,
To recommend him to the squire;
Which others, whom he will not name,
Have often practised to their shame.
  The Statesman tells you, with a sneer,
His fault is to be too sincere;
And having no sinister ends,
Is apt to disoblige his friends.
The nation's good, his master's glory,
Without regard to Whig or Tory,
Were all the schemes he had in view,
Yet he was seconded by few:
Though some had spread a thousand lies,
'Twas he defeated the excise.[3]
'Twas known, though he had borne aspersion,
That standing troops were his aversion:
His practice was, in every station:
To serve the king, and please the nation.
Though hard to find in every case
The fittest man to fill a place:
His promises he ne'er forgot,
But took memorials on the spot;
His enemies, for want of charity,
Said, he affected popularity:
'Tis true, the people understood,
That all he did was for their good;
Their kind affections he has tried;
No love is lost on either side.
He came to court with fortune clear,
Which now he runs out every year;
Must, at the rate that he goes on,
Inevitably be undone:
O! if his majesty would please
To give him but a writ of ease,
Would grant him license to retire,
As it has long been his desire,
By fair accounts it would be found,
He's poorer by ten thousand pound.
He owns, and hopes it is no sin,
He ne'er was partial to his kin;
He thought it base for men in stations,
To crowd the court with their relations:
His country was his dearest mother,
And every virtuous man his brother;
Through modesty or awkward shame,
(For which he owns himself to blame,)
He found the wisest man he could,
Without respect to friends or blood;
Nor ever acts on private views,
When he has liberty to choose.
  The Sharper swore he hated play,
Except to pass an hour away:
And well he might; for, to his cost,
By want of skill, he always lost;
He heard there was a club of cheats,
Who had contrived a thousand feats;
Could change the stock, or cog a die,
And thus deceive the sharpest eye:
Nor wonder how his fortune sunk,
His brothers fleece him when he's drunk.
  I own the moral not exact,
Besides, the tale is false, in fact;
And so absurd, that could I raise up,
From fields Elysian, fabling sop,
I would accuse him to his face,
For libelling the four-foot race.
Creatures of every kind but ours
Well comprehend their natural powers,
While we, whom reason ought to sway,
Mistake our talents every day.
The Ass was never known so stupid,
To act the part of Tray or Cupid;
Nor leaps upon his master's lap,
There to be stroked, and fed with pap,
As sop would the world persuade;
He better understands his trade:
Nor comes whene'er his lady whistles,
But carries loads, and feeds on thistles.
Our author's meaning, I presume, is
A creature _bipes et implumis;_
Wherein the moralist design'd
A compliment on human kind;
For here he owns, that now and then
Beasts may degenerate into men.[4]


[Footnote 1: Wigs with long black tails, at that time very much in
fashion. It was very common also to call the wearers of them by the same
name.--_F_.]

[Footnote 2: The priest, his confessor.--_F_.]

[Footnote 3: A bill was brought into the House of Commons of England, in
March, 1733, for laying an excise on wines and tobacco, but so violent
was the outcry against the measure, that when it came on for the second
reading, 11th April, Walpole moved that it be postponed for two months,
and thus it was dropped.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: See Gulliver's Travels; voyage to the country of the
Houyhnhnms, "Prose Works," vol. viii.--_W. E. B._]




THE PARSON'S CASE

That you, friend Marcus, like a stoic,
Can wish to die in strains heroic,
No real fortitude implies:
Yet, all must own, thy wish is wise.
Thy curate's place, thy fruitful wife,
Thy busy, drudging scene of life,
Thy insolent, illiterate vicar,
Thy want of all-consoling liquor,
Thy threadbare gown, thy cassock rent,
Thy credit sunk, thy money spent,
Thy week made up of fasting-days,
Thy grate unconscious of a blaze,
And to complete thy other curses,
The quarterly demands of nurses,
Are ills you wisely wish to leave,
And fly for refuge to the grave;
And, O, what virtue you express,
In wishing such afflictions less!
  But, now, should Fortune shift the scene,
And make thy curateship a dean:
Or some rich benefice provide,
To pamper luxury and pride;
With labour small, and income great;
With chariot less for use than state;
With swelling scarf, and glossy gown,
And license to reside in town:
To shine where all the gay resort,
At concerts, coffee-house, or court:
And weekly persecute his grace
With visits, or to beg a place:
With underlings thy flock to teach,
With no desire to pray or preach;
With haughty spouse in vesture fine,
With plenteous meals and generous wine;
Wouldst thou not wish, in so much ease,
Thy years as numerous as thy days?




THE HARDSHIP UPON THE LADIES
1733

Poor ladies! though their business be to play,
'Tis hard they must be busy night and day:
Why should they want the privilege of men,
Nor take some small diversions now and then?
Had women been the makers of our laws,
(And why they were not, I can see no cause,)
The men should slave at cards from morn to night
And female pleasures be to read and write.




A LOVE SONG IN THE MODERN TASTE. 1733

Fluttering spread thy purple pinions,
  Gentle Cupid, o'er my heart:
I a slave in thy dominions;
  Nature must give way to art.

Mild Arcadians, ever blooming
  Nightly nodding o'er your flocks,
See my weary days consuming
  All beneath yon flowery rocks.

Thus the Cyprian goddess weeping
  Mourn'd Adonis, darling youth;
Him the boar, in silence creeping,
  Gored with unrelenting tooth.

Cynthia, tune harmonious numbers;
  Fair Discretion, string the lyre;
Sooth my ever-waking slumbers:
  Bright Apollo, lend thy choir.

Gloomy Pluto, king of terrors,
  Arm'd in adamantine chains,
Lead me to the crystal mirrors,
  Watering soft Elysian plains.

Mournful cypress, verdant willow,
  Gilding my Aurelia's brows,
Morpheus, hovering o'er my pillow,
  Hear me pay my dying vows.

Melancholy smooth Meander,
  Swiftly purling in a round,
On thy margin lovers wander,
  With thy flowery chaplets crown'd.

Thus when Philomela drooping
  Softly seeks her silent mate,
See the bird of Juno stooping;
  Melody resigns to fate.




THE STORM

MINERVA'S PETITION

Pallas, a goddess chaste and wise
Descending lately from the skies,
To Neptune went, and begg'd in form
He'd give his orders for a storm;
A storm, to drown that rascal Hort,[1]
And she would kindly thank him for't:
A wretch! whom English rogues, to spite her,
Had lately honour'd with a mitre.
  The god, who favour'd her request,
Assured her he would do his best:
But Venus had been there before,
Pleaded the bishop loved a whore,
And had enlarged her empire wide;
He own'd no deity beside.
At sea or land, if e'er you found him
Without a mistress, hang or drown him.
Since Burnet's death, the bishops' bench,
Till Hort arrived, ne'er kept a wench;
If Hort must sink, she grieves to tell it,
She'll not have left one single prelate:
For, to say truth, she did intend him,
Elect of Cyprus _in commendam._
And, since her birth the ocean gave her,
She could not doubt her uncle's favour.
  Then Proteus urged the same request,
But half in earnest, half in jest;
Said he--"Great sovereign of the main,
To drown him all attempts are vain.
Hort can assume more forms than I,
A rake, a bully, pimp, or spy;
Can creep, or run, or fly, or swim;
All motions are alike to him:
Turn him adrift, and you shall find
He knows to sail with every wind;
Or, throw him overboard, he'll ride
As well against as with the tide.
But, Pallas, you've applied too late;
For, 'tis decreed by Jove and Fate,
That Ireland must be soon destroy'd,
And who but Hort can be employ'd?
You need not then have been so pert,
In sending Bolton[2] to Clonfert.
I found you did it, by your grinning;
Your business is to mind your spinning.
But how you came to interpose
In making bishops, no one knows;
Or who regarded your report;
For never were you seen at court.
And if you must have your petition,
There's Berkeley[3] in the same condition;
Look, there he stands, and 'tis but just,
If one must drown, the other must;
But, if you'll leave us Bishop Judas,
We'll give you Berkeley for Bermudas.[4]
Now, if 'twill gratify your spight,
To put him in a plaguy fright,
Although 'tis hardly worth the cost,
You soon shall see him soundly tost.
You'll find him swear, blaspheme, and damn
(And every moment take a dram)
His ghastly visage with an air
Of reprobation and despair;
Or else some hiding-hole he seeks,
For fear the rest should say he squeaks;
Or, as Fitzpatrick[5] did before,
Resolve to perish with his whore;
Or else he raves, and roars, and swears,
And, but for shame, would say his prayers.
Or, would you see his spirits sink?
Relaxing downwards in a stink?
If such a sight as this can please ye,
Good madam Pallas, pray be easy.
To Neptune speak, and he'll consent;
But he'll come back the knave he went."
The goddess, who conceived a hope
That Hort was destined to a rope,
Believed it best to condescend
To spare a foe, to save a friend;
But, fearing Berkeley might be scared,
She left him virtue for a guard.


[Footnote 1: Josiah Hort was born about 1674, and educated in London as a
Nonconformist Minister; but he soon conformed to the Church of England,
and held in succession several benefices. In 1709 he went to Ireland as
chaplain to Lord Wharton, when Lord Lieutenant; and afterwards became, in
1721, Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin, and ultimately Archbishop of Tuam. He
died in 1751.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Dr. Theophilus Bolton, afterwards Archbishop of
Cashell.--_F_.]

[Footnote 3: Dr. George Berkeley, a senior fellow of Trinity College,
Dublin, who became Dean of Derry, and afterwards Bishop of Cloyne.]

[Footnote 4: The Bishop had a project of a college at Bermuda for the
propagation of the Gospel in 1722. See his Works, _ut supra.--W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: Brigadier Fitzpatrick was drowned in one of the packet-boats
in the Bay of Dublin, in a great storm.--_F_.]




ODE ON SCIENCE

O, heavenly born! in deepest dells
If fairest science ever dwells
  Beneath the mossy cave;
Indulge the verdure of the woods,
With azure beauty gild the floods,
  And flowery carpets lave.

For, Melancholy ever reigns
Delighted in the sylvan scenes
  With scientific light;
While Dian, huntress of the vales,
Seeks lulling sounds and fanning gales,
  Though wrapt from mortal sight.

Yet, goddess, yet the way explore
With magic rites and heathen lore
  Obstructed and depress'd;
Till Wisdom give the sacred Nine,
Untaught, not uninspired, to shine,
  By Reason's power redress'd.

When Solon and Lycurgus taught
To moralize the human thought
  Of mad opinion's maze,
To erring zeal they gave new laws,
Thy charms, O Liberty, the cause
  That blends congenial rays.

Bid bright Astra gild the morn,
Or bid a hundred suns be born,
  To hecatomb the year;
Without thy aid, in vain the poles,
In vain the zodiac system rolls,
  In vain the lunar sphere.

Come, fairest princess of the throng,
Bring sweet philosophy along,
  In metaphysic dreams;
While raptured bards no more behold
A vernal age of purer gold,
  In Heliconian streams.

Drive Thraldom with malignant hand,
To curse some other destined land,
  By Folly led astray:
Irne bear on azure wing;
Energic let her soar, and sing
  Thy universal sway.

So when Amphion[1] bade the lyre
To more majestic sound aspire,
  Behold the madding throng,
In wonder and oblivion drown'd,
To sculpture turn'd by magic sound
  And petrifying song.


[Footnote 1: King of Thebes, and husband of Niobe; famous for his magical
power with the lyre by which the stones were collected for the building
of the city.--Hor., "De Arte Poetica," 394.--_W. E. B._]




A YOUNG LADY'S COMPLAINT[1]
FOR THE STAY OF THE DEAN IN ENGLAND

Blow, ye zephyrs, gentle gales;
Gently fill the swelling sails.
Neptune, with thy trident long,
Trident three-fork'd, trident strong:
And ye Nereids fair and gay,
Fairer than the rose in May,
Nereids living in deep caves,
Gently wash'd with gentle waves;
Nereids, Neptune, lull asleep
Ruffling storms, and ruffled deep;
All around, in pompous state,
On this richer Argo wait:
Argo, bring my golden fleece,
Argo, bring him to his Greece.
Will Cadenus longer stay?
Come, Cadenus, come away;
Come with all the haste of love,
Come unto thy turtle-dove.
The ripen'd cherry on the tree
Hangs, and only hangs for thee,
Luscious peaches, mellow pears,
Ceres, with her yellow ears,
And the grape, both red and white,
Grape inspiring just delight;
All are ripe, and courting sue,
To be pluck'd and press'd by you.
Pinks have lost their blooming red,
Mourning hang their drooping head,
Every flower languid seems,
Wants the colour of thy beams,
Beams of wondrous force and power,
Beams reviving every flower.
Come, Cadenus, bless once more,
Bless again thy native shore,
Bless again this drooping isle,
Make its weeping beauties smile,
Beauties that thine absence mourn,
Beauties wishing thy return:
Come, Cadenus, come with haste,
Come before the winter's blast;
Swifter than the lightning fly,
Or I, like Vanessa, die.


[Footnote 1: These verses, like the "Love Song in the Modern Taste" and
the preceding one, seem designed to ridicule the commonplaces of
poetry.--_W. E. B._]





ON THE DEATH OF DR. SWIFT

WRITTEN IN NOVEMBER, 1731 [1]

Occasioned by reading the following maxim in Rochefoucauld, "Dans
l'adversit de nos meilleurs amis, nous trouvons toujours quelque chose,
qui ne nous dplait pas."

This maxim was No. 99 in the edition of 1665, and was one of those
suppressed by the author in his later editions. In the edition published
by Didot Freres, 1864, it is No. 15 in the first supplement. See it
commented upon by Lord Chesterfield in a letter to his son, Sept. 5,
1748, where he takes a similar view to that expressed by
Swift.--_W. E. B._


AS Rochefoucauld his maxims drew
From nature, I believe 'em true:
They argue no corrupted mind
In him; the fault is in mankind.
  This maxim more than all the rest
Is thought too base for human breast:
"In all distresses of our friends,
We first consult our private ends;
While nature, kindly bent to ease us,
Points out some circumstance to please us."
  If this perhaps your patience move,
Let reason and experience prove.
We all behold with envious eyes
Our _equal_ raised above our _size._
Who would not at a crowded show
Stand high himself, keep others low?
I love my friend as well as you:
[2]But why should he obstruct my view?
Then let me have the higher post:
[3]Suppose it but an inch at most.
If in battle you should find
One whom you love of all mankind,
Had some heroic action done,
A champion kill'd, or trophy won;
Rather than thus be overtopt,
Would you not wish his laurels cropt?
Dear honest Ned is in the gout,
Lies rackt with pain, and you without:
How patiently you hear him groan!
How glad the case is not your own!
  What poet would not grieve to see
His breth'ren write as well as he?
But rather than they should excel,
He'd wish his rivals all in hell.
  Her end when Emulation misses,
She turns to Envy, stings and hisses:
The strongest friendship yields to pride,
Unless the odds be on our side.
Vain human kind! fantastic race!
Thy various follies who can trace?
Self-love, ambition, envy, pride,
Their empire in our hearts divide.
Give others riches, power, and station,
'Tis all on me an usurpation.
I have no title to aspire;
Yet, when you sink, I seem the higher.
In Pope I cannot read a line,
But with a sigh I wish it mine;
When he can in one couplet fix
More sense than I can do in six;
It gives me such a jealous fit,
I cry, "Pox take him and his wit!"
[4]I grieve to be outdone by Gay
In my own hum'rous biting way.
Arbuthnot is no more my friend,
Who dares to irony pretend,
Which I was born to introduce,
Refin'd it first, and shew'd its use.
St. John, as well as Pultney, knows
That I had some repute for prose;
And, till they drove me out of date
Could maul a minister of state.
If they have mortify'd my pride,
And made me throw my pen aside;
If with such talents Heav'n has blest 'em,
Have I not reason to detest 'em?
  To all my foes, dear Fortune, send
Thy gifts; but never to my friend:
I tamely can endure the first;
But this with envy makes me burst.
  Thus much may serve by way of proem:
Proceed we therefore to our poem.
  The time is not remote, when I
Must by the course of nature die;
When, I foresee, my special friends
Will try to find their private ends:
Tho' it is hardly understood
Which way my death can do them good,
Yet thus, methinks, I hear 'em speak:
"See, how the Dean begins to break!
Poor gentleman, he droops apace!
You plainly find it in his face.
That old vertigo in his head
Will never leave him till he's dead.
Besides, his memory decays:
He recollects not what he says;
He cannot call his friends to mind:
Forgets the place where last he din'd;
Plyes you with stories o'er and o'er;
He told them fifty times before.
How does he fancy we can sit
To hear his out-of-fashion'd wit?
But he takes up with younger folks,
Who for his wine will bear his jokes.
Faith! he must make his stories shorter,
Or change his comrades once a quarter:
In half the time he talks them round,
There must another set be found.
  "For poetry he's past his prime:
He takes an hour to find a rhyme;
His fire is out, his wit decay'd,
His fancy sunk, his Muse a jade.
I'd have him throw away his pen;--
But there's no talking to some men!"
  And then their tenderness appears,
By adding largely to my years;
"He's older than he would be reckon'd,
And well remembers Charles the Second.
He hardly drinks a pint of wine;
And that, I doubt, is no good sign.
His stomach too begins to fail:
Last year we thought him strong and hale;
But now he's quite another thing:
I wish he may hold out till spring!"
Then hug themselves, and reason thus:
"It is not yet so bad with us!"
  In such a case, they talk in tropes,
And by their fears express their hopes:
Some great misfortune to portend,
No enemy can match a friend.
With all the kindness they profess,
The merit of a lucky guess
(When daily how d'ye's come of course,
And servants answer, "_Worse and worse!_")
Wou'd please 'em better, than to tell,
That, "God be prais'd, the Dean is well."
Then he, who prophecy'd the best,
Approves his foresight to the rest:
"You know I always fear'd the worst,
And often told you so at first."
He'd rather chuse that I should die,
Than his prediction prove a lie.
Not one foretells I shall recover;
But all agree to give me over.
  Yet, shou'd some neighbour feel a pain
Just in the parts where I complain;
How many a message would he send!
What hearty prayers that I should mend!
Inquire what regimen I kept;
What gave me ease, and how I slept?
And more lament when I was dead,
Than all the sniv'llers round my bed.
  My good companions, never fear;
For though you may mistake a year,
Though your prognostics run too fast,
They must be verify'd at last.
  Behold the fatal day arrive!
"How is the Dean?"--"He's just alive."
Now the departing prayer is read;
"He hardly breathes."--"The Dean is dead."
  Before the Passing-bell begun,
The news thro' half the town has run.
"O! may we all for death prepare!
What has he left? and who's his heir?"--
"I know no more than what the news is;
'Tis all bequeath'd to public uses."--
"To public use! a perfect whim!
What had the public done for him?
Mere envy, avarice, and pride:
He gave it all--but first he died.
And had the Dean, in all the nation,
No worthy friend, no poor relation?
So ready to do strangers good,
Forgetting his own flesh and blood!"
  Now, Grub-Street wits are all employ'd;
With elegies the town is cloy'd:
Some paragraph in ev'ry paper
To curse the Dean, or bless the Drapier.[5]
  The doctors, tender of their fame,
Wisely on me lay all the blame:
"We must confess, his case was nice;
But he would never take advice.
Had he been ruled, for aught appears,
He might have lived these twenty years;
For, when we open'd him, we found,
That all his vital parts were sound."
  From Dublin soon to London spread,
'Tis told at court,[6] "the Dean is dead."
Kind Lady Suffolk,[7] in the spleen,
Runs laughing up to tell the queen.
The queen, so gracious, mild, and good,
Cries, "Is he gone! 'tis time he shou'd.
He's dead, you say; why, let him rot:
I'm glad the medals[8] were forgot.
I promised him, I own; but when?
I only was a princess then;
But now, as consort of a king,
You know, 'tis quite a different thing."
Now Chartres,[9] at Sir Robert's levee,
Tells with a sneer the tidings heavy:
"Why, is he dead without his shoes,"
Cries Bob,[10] "I'm sorry for the news:
O, were the wretch but living still,
And in his place my good friend Will![11]
Or had a mitre on his head,
Provided Bolingbroke[12] were dead!"
Now Curll[13] his shop from rubbish drains:
Three genuine tomes of Swift's remains!
And then, to make them pass the glibber,
Revised by Tibbalds, Moore, and Cibber.[14]
He'll treat me as he does my betters,
Publish my will, my life, my letters:[15]
Revive the libels born to die;
Which Pope must bear, as well as I.
  Here shift the scene, to represent
How those I love my death lament.
Poor Pope will grieve a month, and Gay
A week, and Arbuthnot a day.
  St. John himself will scarce forbear
To bite his pen, and drop a tear.
The rest will give a shrug, and cry,
"I'm sorry--but we all must die!"
  Indifference, clad in Wisdom's guise,
All fortitude of mind supplies:
For how can stony bowels melt
In those who never pity felt!
When _we_ are lash'd, _they_ kiss the rod,
Resigning to the will of God.
  The fools, my juniors by a year,
Are tortur'd with suspense and fear;
Who wisely thought my age a screen,
When death approach'd, to stand between:
The screen removed, their hearts are trembling;
They mourn for me without dissembling.
  My female friends, whose tender hearts
Have better learn'd to act their parts,
Receive the news in doleful dumps:
"The Dean is dead: (and what is trumps?)
Then, Lord have mercy on his soul!
(Ladies, I'll venture for the vole.)[16]
Six deans, they say, must bear the pall:
(I wish I knew what king to call.)
Madam, your husband will attend
The funeral of so good a friend.
No, madam, 'tis a shocking sight:
And he's engaged to-morrow night:
My Lady Club wou'd take it ill,
If he shou'd fail her at quadrille.
He loved the Dean--(I lead a heart,)
But dearest friends, they say, must part.
His time was come: he ran his race;
We hope he's in a better place."
  Why do we grieve that friends should die?
No loss more easy to supply.
One year is past; a different scene!
No further mention of the Dean;
Who now, alas! no more is miss'd,
Than if he never did exist.
Where's now this fav'rite of Apollo!
Departed:--and his works must follow;
Must undergo the common fate;
His kind of wit is out of date.
  Some country squire to Lintot[17] goes,
Inquires for "Swift in Verse and Prose."
Says Lintot, "I have heard the name;
He died a year ago."--"The same."
He searches all the shop in vain.
"Sir, you may find them in Duck-lane;[18]
I sent them with a load of books,
Last Monday to the pastry-cook's.
To fancy they could live a year!
I find you're but a stranger here.
The Dean was famous in his time,
And had a kind of knack at rhyme.
His way of writing now is past;
The town has got a better taste;
I keep no antiquated stuff,
But spick and span I have enough.
Pray do but give me leave to show 'em;
Here's Colley Cibber's birth-day poem.
This ode you never yet have seen,
By Stephen Duck,[19] upon the queen.
Then here's a letter finely penned
Against the Craftsman and his friend:
It clearly shows that all reflection
On ministers is disaffection.
Next, here's Sir Robert's vindication,[20]
And Mr. Henley's last oration.[21]
The hawkers have not got them yet:
Your honour please to buy a set?
  "Here's Woolston's[22] tracts, the twelfth edition;
'Tis read by every politician:
The country members, when in town,
To all their boroughs send them down;
You never met a thing so smart;
The courtiers have them all by heart:
Those maids of honour (who can read),
Are taught to use them for their creed.[23]
The rev'rend author's good intention
Has been rewarded with a pension.
He does an honour to his gown,
By bravely running priestcraft down:
He shows, as sure as God's in Gloucester,
That Moses was a grand impostor;
That all his miracles were cheats,
Perform'd as jugglers do their feats:
The church had never such a writer;
A shame he has not got a mitre!"
  Suppose me dead; and then suppose
A club assembled at the Rose;
Where, from discourse of this and that,
I grow the subject of their chat.
And while they toss my name about,
With favour some, and some without,
One, quite indiff'rent in the cause,
My character impartial draws:
  The Dean, if we believe report,
Was never ill receiv'd at court.
As for his works in verse and prose
I own myself no judge of those;
Nor can I tell what critics thought 'em:
But this I know, all people bought 'em.
As with a moral view design'd
To cure the vices of mankind:
And, if he often miss'd his aim,
The world must own it, to their shame,
The praise is his, and theirs the blame.
"Sir, I have heard another story:
He was a most confounded Tory,
And grew, or he is much belied,
Extremely dull, before he died."
  Can we the Drapier then forget?
Is not our nation in his debt?
'Twas he that writ the Drapier's letters!--
  "He should have left them for his betters,
We had a hundred abler men,
Nor need depend upon his pen.--
Say what you will about his reading,
You never can defend his breeding;
Who in his satires running riot,
Could never leave the world in quiet;
Attacking, when he took the whim,
Court, city, camp--all one to him.--
  "But why should he, except he slobber't,
Offend our patriot, great Sir Robert,
Whose counsels aid the sov'reign power
To save the nation every hour?
What scenes of evil he unravels
In satires, libels, lying travels!
Not sparing his own clergy-cloth,
But eats into it, like a moth!"
His vein, ironically grave,
Exposed the fool, and lash'd the knave.
To steal a hint was never known,
But what he writ was all his own.[24]
  "He never thought an honour done him,
Because a duke was proud to own him,
Would rather slip aside and chuse
To talk with wits in dirty shoes;
Despised the fools with stars and garters,
So often seen caressing Chartres.[25]
He never courted men in station,
_Nor persons held in admiration;_
Of no man's greatness was afraid,
Because he sought for no man's aid.
Though trusted long in great affairs
He gave himself no haughty airs:
Without regarding private ends,
Spent all his credit for his friends;
And only chose the wise and good;
No flatterers; no allies in blood:
But succour'd virtue in distress,
And seldom fail'd of good success;
As numbers in their hearts must own,
Who, but for him, had been unknown.
  "With princes kept a due decorum,
But never stood in awe before 'em.
He follow'd David's lesson just;
_In princes never put thy trust:_
And would you make him truly sour,
Provoke him with a slave in power.
The Irish senate if you named,
With what impatience he declaim'd!
Fair LIBERTY was all his cry,
For her he stood prepared to die;
For her he boldly stood alone;
For her he oft exposed his own.
Two kingdoms,[26] just as faction led,
Had set a price upon his head;
But not a traitor could be found,
To sell him for six hundred pound.
  "Had he but spared his tongue and pen
He might have rose like other men:
But power was never in his thought,
And wealth he valued not a groat:
Ingratitude he often found,
And pitied those who meant the wound:
But kept the tenor of his mind,
To merit well of human kind:
Nor made a sacrifice of those
Who still were true, to please his foes.
He labour'd many a fruitless hour,
To reconcile his friends in power;
Saw mischief by a faction brewing,
While they pursued each other's ruin.
But finding vain was all his care,
He left the court in mere despair.[27]
  "And, oh! how short are human schemes!
Here ended all our golden dreams.
What St. John's skill in state affairs,
What Ormond's valour, Oxford's cares,
To save their sinking country lent,
Was all destroy'd by one event.
Too soon that precious life was ended,
On which alone our weal depended.[28]
When up a dangerous faction starts,[29]
With wrath and vengeance in their hearts;
_By solemn League and Cov'nant bound,_
To ruin, slaughter, and confound;
To turn religion to a fable,
And make the government a Babel;
Pervert the laws, disgrace the gown,
Corrupt the senate, rob the crown;
To sacrifice old England's glory,
And make her infamous in story:
When such a tempest shook the land,
How could unguarded Virtue stand!
With horror, grief, despair, the Dean
Beheld the dire destructive scene:
His friends in exile, or the tower,
Himself[30] within the frown of power,
Pursued by base envenom'd pens,
Far to the land of slaves and fens;[31]
A servile race in folly nursed,
Who truckle most, when treated worst.
"By innocence and resolution,
He bore continual persecution;
While numbers to preferment rose,
Whose merits were, to be his foes;
When _ev'n his own familiar friends_,
Intent upon their private ends,
Like renegadoes now he feels,
_Against him lifting up their heels._
  "The Dean did, by his pen, defeat
An infamous destructive cheat;[32]
Taught fools their int'rest how to know,
And gave them arms to ward the blow.
Envy has own'd it was his doing,
To save that hapless land from ruin;
While they who at the steerage stood,
And reap'd the profit, sought his blood.
  "To save them from their evil fate,
In him was held a crime of state,
A wicked monster on the bench,[33]
Whose fury blood could never quench;
As vile and profligate a villain,
As modern Scroggs, or old Tresilian:[34]
Who long all justice had discarded,
_Nor fear'd he God, nor man regarded;_
Vow'd on the Dean his rage to vent,
And make him of his zeal repent:
But Heaven his innocence defends,
The grateful people stand his friends;
Not strains of law, nor judge's frown,
Nor topics brought to please the crown,
Nor witness hired, nor jury pick'd,
Prevail to bring him in convict.
  "In exile,[35] with a steady heart,
He spent his life's declining part;
Where folly, pride, and faction sway,
Remote from St. John, Pope, and Gay.
Alas, poor Dean! his only scope
Was to be held a misanthrope.
This into gen'ral odium drew him,
Which if he liked, much good may't do him.
His zeal was not to lash our crimes,
But discontent against the times:
For had we made him timely offers
To raise his post, or fill his coffers,
Perhaps he might have truckled down,
Like other brethren of his gown.
For party he would scarce have bled:
I say no more--because he's dead.
What writings has he left behind?
I hear, they're of a different kind;
A few in verse; but most in prose--
Some high-flown pamphlets, I suppose;--
All scribbled in the worst of times,
To palliate his friend Oxford's crimes,
To praise Queen Anne, nay more, defend her,
As never fav'ring the Pretender;
Or libels yet conceal'd from sight,
Against the court to show his spite;
Perhaps his travels, part the third;
A lie at every second word--
Offensive to a loyal ear:
But not one sermon, you may swear."
His friendships there, to few confined
Were always of the middling kind;[36]
No fools of rank, a mongrel breed,
Who fain would pass for lords indeed:
Where titles give no right or power,[37]
And peerage is a wither'd flower;
He would have held it a disgrace,
If such a wretch had known his face.
On rural squires, that kingdom's bane,
He vented oft his wrath in vain;
[Biennial[38]] squires to market brought;
Who sell their souls and [votes] for nought;
The [nation stripped,] go joyful back,
To *** the church, their tenants rack,
Go snacks with [rogues and rapparees,][39]
And keep the peace to pick up fees;
In every job to have a share,
A gaol or barrack to repair;
And turn the tax for public roads,
Commodious to their own abodes.[40]
  "Perhaps I may allow the Dean,
Had too much satire in his vein;
And seem'd determined not to starve it,
Because no age could more deserve it.
Yet malice never was his aim;
He lash'd the vice, but spared the name;
No individual could resent,
Where thousands equally were meant;
His satire points at no defect,
But what all mortals may correct;
For he abhorr'd that senseless tribe
Who call it humour when they gibe:
He spared a hump, or crooked nose,
Whose owners set not up for beaux.
True genuine dulness moved his pity,
Unless it offer'd to be witty.
Those who their ignorance confest,
He ne'er offended with a jest;
But laugh'd to hear an idiot quote
A verse from Horace learn'd by rote.
  "Vice, if it e'er can be abash'd,
Must be or ridiculed or lash'd.
If you resent it, who's to blame?
He neither knew you nor your name.
Should vice expect to 'scape rebuke,
Because its owner is a duke?
  "He knew an hundred pleasant stories,
With all the turns of Whigs and Tories:
Was cheerful to his dying day;
And friends would let him have his way.
  "He gave the little wealth he had
To build a house for fools and mad;
And show'd by one satiric touch,
No nation wanted it so much.
That kingdom he hath left his debtor,
I wish it soon may have a better."
And, since you dread no farther lashes
Methinks you may forgive his ashes.



[Footnote 1: This poem was first written about 1731 but was not then
intended to be published; and having been shown by Swift to all his
"common acquaintance indifferently," some "friend," probably
Pilkington, remembered enough of it to concoct the poem called "The Life
and Character of Dr. Swift, written by himself," which was published in
London in 1733, and reprinted in Dublin. In a letter to Pope, dated 1
May, that year, the Dean complained seriously about the imposture,
saying, "it shall not provoke me to print the true one, which indeed is
not proper to be seen till I can be seen no more." See Swift to Pope,
in Pope's Works, edit. Elwin and Courthope, vii, 307. The poem was
subsequently published by Faulkner with the Dean's permission. It is now
printed from a copy of the original edition, with corrections in Swift's
hand, which I found in the Forster collection.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: _Var_. "But would not have him stop my view."]

[Footnote 3: _Var_. "I ask but for an inch at most."]

[Footnote 4: _Var_. "Why must I be outdone by Gay."]

[Footnote 5: The author supposes that the scribblers of the prevailing
party, which he always opposed, will libel him after his death; but that
others will remember the service he had done to Ireland, under the name
of M. B. Drapier, by utterly defeating the destructive project of Wood's
halfpence, in five letters to the people of Ireland, at that time read
universally, and convincing every reader.]

[Footnote 6: The Dean supposeth himself to die in Ireland.]

[Footnote 7: Mrs. Howard, afterwards Countess of Suffolk, then of the
bedchamber to the queen, professed much favour for the Dean. The queen,
then princess, sent a dozen times to the Dean (then in London), with her
commands to attend her; which at last he did, by advice of all his
friends. She often sent for him afterwards, and always treated him very
graciously. He taxed her with a present worth 10, which she promised
before he should return to Ireland; but on his taking leave the medals
were not ready.

A letter from Swift to Lady Suffolk, 21st November, 1730, bears out
this note.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 8: The medals were to be sent to the Dean in four months; but
she forgot or thought them too dear. The Dean, being in Ireland, sent
Mrs. Howard a piece of plaid made in that kingdom, which the queen seeing
took it from her and wore it herself and sent to the Dean for as much as
would clothe herself and children, desiring he would send the charge of
it; he did the former, it cost 35, but he said he would have nothing
except the medals; he went next summer to England, and was treated as
usual, and she being then queen, the Dean was promised a settlement in
England, but returned as he went, and instead of receiving of her
intended favours or the medals, hath been ever since under Her
Majesty's displeasure.]

[Footnote 9: Chartres is a most infamous vile scoundrel, grown from a
footboy, or worse, to a prodigious fortune, both in England and Scotland.
He had a way of insinuating himself into all ministers, under every
change, either as pimp, flatterer, or informer. He was tried at seventy
for a rape, and came off by sacrificing a great part of his fortune. He
is since dead; but this poem still preserves the scene and time it was
writ in.--_Dublin Edition,_ and see _ante_, p. 191.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 10: Sir Robert Walpole, chief minister of state, treated the
Dean in 1726 with great distinction; invited him to dinner at Chelsea,
with the Dean's friends chosen on purpose: appointed an hour to talk with
him of Ireland, to which kingdom and people the Dean found him no great
friend; for he defended Wood's project of halfpence, etc. The Dean would
see him no more; and upon his next year's return to England, Sir Robert,
on an accidental meeting, only made a civil compliment, and never invited
him again.]

[Footnote 11: Mr. William Pultney, from being Sir Robert's intimate
friend, detesting his administration, became his mortal enemy and joined
with my Lord Bolingbroke, to expose him in an excellent paper called the
Craftsman, which is still continued.]

[Footnote 12: Henry St. John, Viscount Bolingbroke, Secretary of State to
Queen Anne, of blessed memory. He is reckoned the most universal genius
in Europe. Walpole, dreading his abilities, treated him most injuriously
working with King George I, who forgot his promise of restoring the said
lord, upon the restless importunity of Sir Robert Walpole.]

[Footnote 13: Curll hath been the most infamous bookseller of any age or
country. His character, in part, may be found in Mr. Pope's "Dunciad." He
published three volumes, all charged on the Dean, who never writ three
pages of them. He hath used many of the Dean's friends in almost as vile
a manner.]

[Footnote 14: Three stupid verse-writers in London; the last, to the
shame of the court, and the highest disgrace to wit and learning, was
made laureate. Moore, commonly called Jemmy Moore, son of Arthur Moore,
whose father was jailor of Monaghan, in Ireland. See the character of
Jemmy Moore, and Tibbalds [Theobald], in the "Dunciad."]

[Footnote 15: Curll is notoriously infamous for publishing the lives,
letters, and last wills and testaments of the nobility and ministers of
state, as well as of all the rogues who are hanged at Tyburn. He hath
been in custody of the House of Lords, for publishing or forging the
letters of many peers, which made the Lords enter a resolution in their
journal-book, that no life or writings of any lord should be published,
without the consent of the next heir-at-law or license from their House.]

[Footnote 16: The play by which the dealer may win or lose all the
tricks. See Hoyle on "Quadrille."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 17: See _post_, p. 267.]

[Footnote 18: A place in London, where old books are sold.]

[Footnote 19: See _ante_ "On Stephen Duck, the Thresher Poet,"
p. 192.]

[Footnote 20: Walpole hath a set of party scribblers, who do nothing but
write in his defence.]

[Footnote 21: Henley is a clergyman, who, wanting both merit and luck to
get preferment, or even to keep his curacy in the established church,
formed a new conventicle, which he called an Oratory. There, at set
times, he delivereth strange speeches, compiled by himself and his
associates, who share the profit with him. Every hearer payeth a shilling
each day for admittance. He is an absolute dunce, but generally reported
crazy.]

[Footnote 22: See _ante_, p. 188.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 23: See _ante_, p. 188. There is some confusion here betwixt
Woolston and Wollaston, whose book, the "Religion of Nature delineated,"
was much talked of and fashionable. See a letter from Pope to Bethell in
Pope's correspondence, Pope's Works, edit. Elwin and Courthope, ix,
p. 149.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 24: Denham's elegy on Cowley:
  "To him no author was unknown,
  Yet what he wrote was all his own."]

[Footnote 25: See _ante_, pp. 192 and 252.]

[Footnote 26: In the year 1713, the late queen was prevailed with, by an
address of the House of Lords in England, to publish a proclamation,
promising 300 to whatever person would discover the author of a pamphlet
called "The Public Spirit of the Whigs"; and in Ireland, in the year
1724, Lord Carteret, at his first coming into the government, was
prevailed on to issue a proclamation for promising the like reward
of 300 to any person who would discover the author of a pamphlet,
called "The Drapier's Fourth Letter," etc., writ against that destructive
project of coining halfpence for Ireland; but in neither kingdom was the
Dean discovered.]

[Footnote 27: Queen Anne's ministry fell to variance from the first year
after their ministry began; Harcourt, the chancellor, and Lord
Bolingbroke, the secretary, were discontented with the treasurer Oxford,
for his too much mildness to the Whig party; this quarrel grew higher
every day till the queen's death. The Dean, who was the only person that
endeavoured to reconcile them, found it impossible, and thereupon retired
to the country about ten weeks before that event: upon which he returned
to his deanery in Dublin, where for many years he was worryed by the new
people in power, and had hundreds of libels writ against him in England.]

[Footnote 28: In the height of the quarrel between the ministers, the
queen died.]

[Footnote 29: Upon Queen Anne's death, the Whig faction was restored to
power, which they exercised with the utmost rage and revenge; impeached
and banished the chief leaders of the Church party, and stripped all
their adherents of what employments they had; after which England was
never known to make so mean a figure in Europe. The greatest preferments
in the Church, in both kingdoms, were given to the most ignorant men.
Fanaticks were publickly caressed, Ireland utterly ruined and enslaved,
only great ministers heaping up millions; and so affairs continue, and
are likely to remain so.]

[Footnote 30: Upon the queen's death, the Dean returned to live in Dublin
at his Deanery House. Numberless libels were written against him in
England as a Jacobite; he was insulted in the street, and at night he was
forced to be attended by his servants armed.]

[Footnote 31: Ireland.]

[Footnote 32: One Wood, a hardware-man from England, had a patent for
coining copper halfpence in Ireland, to the sum of 108,000, which, in
the consequence, must leave that kingdom without gold or silver. See The
Drapier's Letters, "Prose Works," vol. vi.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 33: Whitshed was then chief justice. He had some years before
prosecuted a printer for a pamphlet writ by the Dean, to persuade the
people of Ireland to wear their own manufactures. Whitshed sent the jury
down eleven times, and kept them nine hours, until they were forced to
bring in a special verdict. He sat afterwards on the trial of the printer
of the Drapier's Fourth Letter; but the jury, against all he could say or
swear, threw out the bill. All the kingdom took the Drapier's part,
except the courtiers, or those who expected places. The Drapier was
celebrated in many poems and pamphlets. His sign was set up in most
streets of Dublin (where many of them still continue) and in several
country towns. This note was written in 1734.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 34: Scroggs was chief justice under King Charles II. His
judgement always varied in state trials according to directions from
Court. Tresilian was a wicked judge hanged above three hundred years
ago.]

[Footnote 35: In Ireland, which he had reason to call a place of exile;
to which country nothing could have driven him but the queen's death,
who had determined to fix him in England, in spite of the Duchess of
Somerset.]

[Footnote 36: In Ireland the Dean was not acquainted with one single
lord, spiritual or temporal. He only conversed with private gentlemen of
the clergy or laity, and but a small number of either.]

[Footnote 37: The peers of Ireland lost their jurisdiction by one single
act, and tamely submitted to this infamous mark of slavery without the
least resentment or remonstrance.]

[Footnote 38: The Parliament, as they call it in Ireland, meet but once
in two years, and after having given five times more than they can
afford, return home to reimburse themselves by country jobs and
oppressions of which some few are mentioned.]

[Footnote 39: The highwaymen in Ireland are, since the late wars there,
usually called Rapparees, which was a name given to those Irish soldiers
who, in small parties, used at that time to plunder Protestants.]

[Footnote 40: The army in Ireland are lodged in barracks, the building
and repairing whereof and other charges, have cost a prodigious sum to
that unhappy kingdom.]




ON POETRY
A RHAPSODY. 1733


All human race would fain be wits,
And millions miss for one that hits.
Young's universal passion, pride,[1]
Was never known to spread so wide.
Say, Britain, could you ever boast
Three poets in an age at most?
Our chilling climate hardly bears
A sprig of bays in fifty years;
While every fool his claim alleges,
As if it grew in common hedges.
What reason can there be assign'd
For this perverseness in the mind?
Brutes find out where their talents lie:
A bear will not attempt to fly;
A founder'd horse will oft debate,
Before he tries a five-barr'd gate;
A dog by instinct turns aside,
Who sees the ditch too deep and wide.
But man we find the only creature
Who, led by Folly, combats Nature;
Who, when she loudly cries, Forbear,
With obstinacy fixes there;
And, where his genius least inclines,
Absurdly bends his whole designs.
  Not empire to the rising sun
By valour, conduct, fortune won;
Not highest wisdom in debates,
For framing laws to govern states;
Not skill in sciences profound
So large to grasp the circle round,
Such heavenly influence require,
As how to strike the Muse's lyre.
  Not beggar's brat on bulk begot;
Not bastard of a pedler Scot;
Not boy brought up to cleaning shoes,
The spawn of Bridewell[2] or the stews;
Not infants dropp'd, the spurious pledges
Of gipsies litter'd under hedges;
Are so disqualified by fate
To rise in church, or law, or state,
As he whom Phoebus in his ire
Has blasted with poetic fire.
What hope of custom in the fair,
While not a soul demands your ware?
Where you have nothing to produce
For private life, or public use?
Court, city, country, want you not;
You cannot bribe, betray, or plot.
For poets, law makes no provision;
The wealthy have you in derision:
Of state affairs you cannot smatter;
Are awkward when you try to flatter;
Your portion, taking Britain round,
Was just one annual hundred pound;
Now not so much as in remainder,
Since Cibber[3] brought in an attainder;
For ever fix'd by right divine
(A monarch's right) on Grub Street line.
  Poor starv'ling bard, how small thy gains!
How unproportion'd to thy pains!
And here a simile comes pat in:
Though chickens take a month to fatten,
The guests in less than half an hour
Will more than half a score devour.
So, after toiling twenty days
To earn a stock of pence and praise,
Thy labours, grown the critic's prey,
Are swallow'd o'er a dish of tea;
Gone to be never heard of more,
Gone where the chickens went before.
How shall a new attempter learn
Of different spirits to discern,
And how distinguish which is which,
The poet's vein, or scribbling itch?
Then hear an old experienced sinner,
Instructing thus a young beginner.
  Consult yourself; and if you find
A powerful impulse urge your mind,
Impartial judge within your breast
What subject you can manage best;
Whether your genius most inclines
To satire, praise, or humorous lines,
To elegies in mournful tone,
Or prologue sent from hand unknown.
Then, rising with Aurora's light,
The Muse invoked, sit down to write;
Blot out, correct, insert, refine,
Enlarge, diminish, interline;
Be mindful, when invention fails,
To scratch your head, and bite your nails.
  Your poem finish'd, next your care
Is needful to transcribe it fair.
In modern wit all printed trash is
Set off with numerous breaks and dashes.
  To statesmen would you give a wipe,
You print it in _Italic_ type.
When letters are in vulgar shapes,
'Tis ten to one the wit escapes:
But, when in capitals express'd,
The dullest reader smokes the jest:
Or else perhaps he may invent
A better than the poet meant;
As learned commentators view
In Homer more than Homer knew.
  Your poem in its modish dress,
Correctly fitted for the press,
Convey by penny-post to Lintot,[4]
But let no friend alive look into't.
If Lintot thinks 'twill quit the cost,
You need not fear your labour lost:
And how agreeably surprised
Are you to see it advertised!
The hawker shows you one in print,
As fresh as farthings from the mint:
The product of your toil and sweating;
A bastard of your own begetting.
  Be sure at Will's,[5] the following day,
Lie snug, and hear what critics say;
And, if you find the general vogue
Pronounces you a stupid rogue,
Damns all your thoughts as low and little,
Sit still, and swallow down your spittle;
Be silent as a politician,
For talking may beget suspicion;
Or praise the judgment of the town,
And help yourself to run it down.
Give up your fond paternal pride,
Nor argue on the weaker side:
For, poems read without a name
We justly praise, or justly blame;
And critics have no partial views,
Except they know whom they abuse:
And since you ne'er provoke their spite,
Depend upon't their judgment's right.
But if you blab, you are undone:
Consider what a risk you run:
You lose your credit all at once;
The town will mark you for a dunce;
The vilest dogg'rel Grub Street sends,
Will pass for yours with foes and friends;
And you must bear the whole disgrace,
Till some fresh blockhead takes your place.
  Your secret kept, your poem sunk,
And sent in quires to line a trunk,
If still you be disposed to rhyme,
Go try your hand a second time.
Again you fail: yet Safe's the word;
Take courage and attempt a third.
But first with care employ your thoughts
Where critics mark'd your former faults;
The trivial turns, the borrow'd wit,
The similes that nothing fit;
The cant which every fool repeats,
Town jests and coffeehouse conceits,
Descriptions tedious, flat, and dry,
And introduced the Lord knows why:
Or where we find your fury set
Against the harmless alphabet;
On A's and B's your malice vent,
While readers wonder whom you meant:
A public or a private robber,
A statesman, or a South Sea jobber;
A prelate, who no God believes;
A parliament, or den of thieves;
A pickpurse at the bar or bench,
A duchess, or a suburb wench:
Or oft, when epithets you link,
In gaping lines to fill a chink;
Like stepping-stones, to save a stride,
In streets where kennels are too wide;
Or like a heel-piece, to support
A cripple with one foot too short;
Or like a bridge, that joins a marish
To moorlands of a different parish.
So have I seen ill-coupled hounds
Drag different ways in miry grounds.
So geographers, in Afric maps,
With savage pictures fill their gaps,
And o'er unhabitable downs
Place elephants for want of towns.
  But, though you miss your third essay,
You need not throw your pen away.
Lay now aside all thoughts of fame,
To spring more profitable game.
From party merit seek support;
The vilest verse thrives best at court.
And may you ever have the luck
To rhyme almost as ill as Duck;[6]
And, though you never learn'd to scan verse
Come out with some lampoon on D'Anvers.
A pamphlet in Sir Bob's defence
Will never fail to bring in pence:
Nor be concern'd about the sale,
He pays his workmen on the nail.[7]
Display the blessings of the nation,
And praise the whole administration.
Extol the bench of bishops round,
Who at them rail, bid ---- confound;
To bishop-haters answer thus:
(The only logic used by us)
What though they don't believe in ----
Deny them Protestants--thou lyest.
  A prince, the moment he is crown'd,
Inherits every virtue round,
As emblems of the sovereign power,
Like other baubles in the Tower;
Is generous, valiant, just, and wise,
And so continues till he dies:
His humble senate this professes,
In all their speeches, votes, addresses.
But once you fix him in a tomb,
His virtues fade, his vices bloom;
And each perfection, wrong imputed,
Is fully at his death confuted.
The loads of poems in his praise,
Ascending, make one funeral blaze:
His panegyrics then are ceased,
He grows a tyrant, dunce, or beast.
As soon as you can hear his knell,
This god on earth turns devil in hell:
And lo! his ministers of state,
Transform'd to imps, his levee wait;
Where in the scenes of endless woe,
They ply their former arts below;
And as they sail in Charon's boat,
Contrive to bribe the judge's vote;
To Cerberus they give a sop,
His triple barking mouth to stop;
Or, in the ivory gate of dreams,[8]
Project excise and South-Sea[9] schemes;
Or hire their party pamphleteers
To set Elysium by the ears.
  Then, poet, if you mean to thrive,
Employ your muse on kings alive;
With prudence gathering up a cluster
Of all the virtues you can muster,
Which, form'd into a garland sweet,
Lay humbly at your monarch's feet:
Who, as the odours reach his throne,
Will smile, and think them all his own;
For law and gospel both determine
All virtues lodge in royal ermine:
I mean the oracles of both,
Who shall depose it upon oath.
Your garland, in the following reign,
Change but the names, will do again.
  But, if you think this trade too base,
(Which seldom is the dunce's case)
Put on the critic's brow, and sit
At Will's, the puny judge of wit.
A nod, a shrug, a scornful smile,
With caution used, may serve a while.
Proceed no further in your part,
Before you learn the terms of art;
For you can never be too far gone
In all our modern critics' jargon:
Then talk with more authentic face
Of unities, in time and place:
Get scraps of Horace from your friends,
And have them at your fingers' ends;
Learn Aristotle's rules by rote,
And at all hazards boldly quote;
Judicious Rymer[10] oft review,
Wise Dennis,[11] and profound Bossu.[12]
Read all the prefaces of Dryden,
For these our critics much confide in;
Though merely writ at first for filling,
To raise the volume's price a shilling.
  A forward critic often dupes us
With sham quotations _peri hupsous_:
And if we have not read Longinus,
Will magisterially outshine us.
Then, lest with Greek he overrun ye,
Procure the book for love or money,
Translated from Boileau's translation,[13]
And quote quotation on quotation.
  At Will's you hear a poem read,
Where Battus[14] from the table head,
Reclining on his elbow-chair,
Gives judgment with decisive air;
To whom the tribe of circling wits
As to an oracle submits.
He gives directions to the town,
To cry it up, or run it down;
Like courtiers, when they send a note,
Instructing members how to vote.
He sets the stamp of bad and good,
Though not a word be understood.
Your lesson learn'd, you'll be secure
To get the name of connoisseur:
And, when your merits once are known,
Procure disciples of your own.
For poets (you can never want 'em)
Spread through Augusta Trinobantum,[15]
Computing by their pecks of coals,
Amount to just nine thousand souls:
These o'er their proper districts govern,
Of wit and humour judges sovereign.
In every street a city bard
Rules, like an alderman, his ward;
His undisputed rights extend
Through all the lane, from end to end;
The neighbours round admire his shrewdness
For songs of loyalty and lewdness;
Outdone by none in rhyming well,
Although he never learn'd to spell.
  Two bordering wits contend for glory;
And one is Whig, and one is Tory:
And this, for epics claims the bays,
And that, for elegiac lays:
Some famed for numbers soft and smooth,
By lovers spoke in Punch's booth;
And some as justly fame extols
For lofty lines in Smithfield drolls.
Bavius[16] in Wapping gains renown,
And Mvius[16] reigns o'er Kentish town:
Tigellius[17] placed in Phooebus' car
From Ludgate shines to Temple-bar:
Harmonious Cibber entertains
The court with annual birth-day strains;
Whence Gay was banish'd in disgrace;[18]
Where Pope will never show his face;
Where Young must torture his invention
To flatter knaves or lose his pension.[19]
  But these are not a thousandth part
Of jobbers in the poet's art,
Attending each his proper station,
And all in due subordination,
Through every alley to be found,
In garrets high, or under ground;
And when they join their pericranies,
Out skips a book of miscellanies.
Hobbes clearly proves, that every creature
Lives in a state of war by nature.[20]
The greater for the smaller watch,
But meddle seldom with their match.
A whale of moderate size will draw
A shoal of herrings down his maw;
A fox with geese his belly crams;
A wolf destroys a thousand lambs;
But search among the rhyming race,
The brave are worried by the base.
If on Parnassus' top you sit,
You rarely bite, are always bit:
Each poet of inferior size
On you shall rail and criticise,
And strive to tear you limb from limb;
While others do as much for him.
  The vermin only teaze and pinch
Their foes superior by an inch.
So, naturalists observe, a flea
Has smaller fleas that on him prey;
And these have smaller still to bite 'em,
And so proceed _ad infinitum_.
Thus every poet, in his kind,
Is bit by him that comes behind:
Who, though too little to be seen,
Can teaze, and gall, and give the spleen;
Call dunces, fools, and sons of whores,
Lay Grub Street at each other's doors;
Extol the Greek and Roman masters,
And curse our modern poetasters;
Complain, as many an ancient bard did,
How genius is no more rewarded;
How wrong a taste prevails among us;
How much our ancestors outsung us:
Can personate an awkward scorn
For those who are not poets born;
And all their brother dunces lash,
Who crowd the press with hourly trash.
  O Grub Street! how do I bemoan thee,
Whose graceless children scorn to own thee!
Their filial piety forgot,
Deny their country, like a Scot;
Though by their idiom and grimace,
They soon betray their native place:
Yet thou hast greater cause to be
Ashamed of them, than they of thee,
Degenerate from their ancient brood
Since first the court allow'd them food.
  Remains a difficulty still,
To purchase fame by writing ill.
From Flecknoe[21] down to Howard's[22] time,
How few have reach'd the low sublime!
For when our high-born Howard died,
Blackmore[23] alone his place supplied:
And lest a chasm should intervene,
When death had finish'd Blackmore's reign,
The leaden crown devolved to thee,
Great poet[24] of the "Hollow Tree."
But ah! how unsecure thy throne!
A thousand bards thy right disown:
They plot to turn, in factious zeal,
Duncenia to a common weal;
And with rebellious arms pretend
An equal privilege to descend.
  In bulk there are not more degrees
From elephants to mites in cheese,
Than what a curious eye may trace
In creatures of the rhyming race.
From bad to worse, and worse they fall;
But who can reach the worst of all?
For though, in nature, depth and height
Are equally held infinite:
In poetry, the height we know;
'Tis only infinite below.
For instance: when you rashly think,
No rhymer can like Welsted sink,
His merits balanced, you shall find
The Laureate leaves him far behind.
Concanen,[25] more aspiring bard,
Soars downward deeper by a yard.
Smart Jemmy Moore[26] with vigour drops;
The rest pursue as thick as hops:
With heads to point the gulf they enter,
Link'd perpendicular to the centre;
And as their heels elated rise,
Their heads attempt the nether skies.
  O, what indignity and shame,
To prostitute the Muses' name!
By flattering kings, whom Heaven design'd
The plagues and scourges of mankind;
Bred up in ignorance and sloth,
And every vice that nurses both.
  Perhaps you say, Augustus shines,
Immortal made in Virgil's lines,
And Horace brought the tuneful quire,
To sing his virtues on the lyre;
Without reproach for flattery, true,
Because their praises were his due.
For in those ages kings, we find,
Were animals of human kind.
But now, go search all _Europe_ round
Among the _savage monsters_ ----
With vice polluting every _throne_,
(I mean all thrones except our own;)
In vain you make the strictest view
To find a ---- in all the crew,
With whom a footman out of place
Would not conceive a high disgrace,
A burning shame, a crying sin,
To take his morning's cup of gin.
  Thus all are destined to obey
Some beast of burthen or of prey.
  'Tis sung, Prometheus,[27] forming man,
Through all the brutal species ran,
Each proper quality to find
Adapted to a human mind;
A mingled mass of good and bad,
The best and worst that could be had;
Then from a clay of mixture base
He shaped a ---- to rule the race,
Endow'd with gifts from every brute
That best the * * nature suit.
Thus think on ----s: the name denotes
Hogs, asses, wolves, baboons, and goats.
To represent in figure just,
Sloth, folly, rapine, mischief, lust;
Oh! were they all but Neb-cadnezers,
What herds of ----s would turn to grazers!
  Fair Britain, in thy monarch blest,
Whose virtues bear the strictest test;
Whom never faction could bespatter,
Nor minister nor poet flatter;
What justice in rewarding merit!
What magnanimity of spirit!
What lineaments divine we trace
Through all his figure, mien, and face!
Though peace with olive binds his hands,
Confess'd the conquering hero stands.
Hydaspes,[28] Indus, and the Ganges,
Dread from his hand impending changes.
From him the Tartar and Chinese,
Short by the knees,[29] entreat for peace.
The consort of his throne and bed,
A perfect goddess born and bred,
Appointed sovereign judge to sit
On learning, eloquence, and wit.
Our eldest hope, divine Ilus,[30]
(Late, very late, O may he rule us!)
What early manhood has he shown,
Before his downy beard was grown,
Then think, what wonders will be done
By going on as he begun,
An heir for Britain to secure
As long as sun and moon endure.
  The remnant of the royal blood
Comes pouring on me like a flood.
Bright goddesses, in number five;
Duke William, sweetest prince alive.
Now sing the minister of state,
Who shines alone without a mate.
Observe with what majestic port
This Atlas stands to prop the court:
Intent the public debts to pay,
Like prudent Fabius,[31] by delay.
Thou great vicegerent of the king,
Thy praises every Muse shall sing!
In all affairs thou sole director;
Of wit and learning chief protector,
Though small the time thou hast to spare,
The church is thy peculiar care.
Of pious prelates what a stock
You choose to rule the sable flock!
You raise the honour of the peerage,
Proud to attend you at the steerage.
You dignify the noble race,
Content yourself with humbler place.
Now learning, valour, virtue, sense,
To titles give the sole pretence.
St. George beheld thee with delight,
Vouchsafe to be an azure knight,
When on thy breast and sides Herculean,
He fix'd the star and string cerulean.
  Say, poet, in what other nation
Shone ever such a constellation!
Attend, ye Popes, and Youngs, and Gays,
And tune your harps, and strew your bays:
Your panegyrics here provide;
You cannot err on flattery's side.
Above the stars exalt your style,
You still are low ten thousand mile.
On Lewis all his bards bestow'd
Of incense many a thousand load;
But Europe mortified his pride,
And swore the fawning rascals lied.
Yet what the world refused to Lewis,
Applied to George, exactly true is.
Exactly true! invidious poet!
'Tis fifty thousand times below it.
  Translate me now some lines, if you can,
From Virgil, Martial, Ovid, Lucan.
They could all power in Heaven divide,
And do no wrong on either side;
They teach you how to split a hair,
Give George and Jove an equal share.[32]
Yet why should we be laced so strait?
I'll give my monarch butter-weight.
And reason good; for many a year
Jove never intermeddled here:
Nor, though his priests be duly paid,
Did ever we desire his aid:
We now can better do without him,
Since Woolston gave us arms to rout him.
_Caetera desiderantur_.


[Footnote 1: See Young's "Satires," and "Life" by
Johnson.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: The prison or house of correction to which harlots were
often consigned. See Hogarth's "Harlot's Progress," and "A beautiful
young Nymph," _ante_, p. 201.--_W. R. B._]

[Footnote 3: Colley Cibber, born in 1671, died in 1757; famous as a
comedian and dramatist, and immortalized by Pope as the hero of the
"Dunciad"; appointed Laureate in December, 1730, in succession to Eusden,
who died in September that year. See Cibber's "Apology for his Life";
Disraeli's "Quarrels of Authors," edit. 1859.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Barnaby Bernard Lintot, publisher and bookseller, noted for
adorning his shop with titles in red letters. In the Prologue to the
"Satires" Pope says: "What though my name stood rubric on the walls"; and
in the "Dunciad," book i, "Lintot's rubric post." He made a handsome
fortune, and died High Sheriff of Sussex in 1736, aged
sixty-one.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: The coffee-house most frequented by the wits and poets of
that time.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6: See _ante_, p. 192, "On Stephen Duck, the Thresher
Poet."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: Allusion to the large sums paid by Walpole to scribblers in
support of his party.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 8:
  "Sunt geminae Somni portae: quarum altera fertur
  Cornea; qua veris facilis datur exitus Vmbris:
  Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto;
  Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes."
        VIRG., _Aen._, vi.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 9: See the "South Sea Project," _ante_, p. 120.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 10: Thomas Rymer, archaeologist and critic. The allusion is to
his "Remarks on the Tragedies of the last Age," on which see Johnson's
"Life of Dryden" and Spence's "Anecdotes," p. 173. Rymer is best known by
his work entitled "Foedera," consisting of leagues, treaties, etc., made
between England and other kingdoms.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 11: John Dennis, born 1657, died 1734. He is best remembered as
"The Critic." See Swift's "Thoughts on various subjects," "Prose Works,"
i, 284; Disraeli, "Calamities of Authors: Influence of a bad Temper in
Criticism"; Pope's Works, edit. Elwin and Courthope,
_passim._--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 12: Highly esteemed as a French critic by Dryden and
Pope.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 13: By Leonard Welsted, who, in 1712, published the work of
"Longinus on the Sublime," stated to be "translated from the Greek." He
is better known through his quarrel with Pope. See the "Prologue to the
Satires."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 14: Dryden, whose armed chair at Will's was in the winter
placed by the fire, and in the summer in the balcony. Malone's "Life of
Dryden," p. 485. Why Battus? Battus was a herdsman who, because he
Betrayed Mercury's theft of some cattle, was changed by the god into a
Stone Index. Ovid, "Metam.," ii, 685.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 15: The ancient name of London, also called Troynovant. See
Journal to Stella, "Prose Works," ii, 249; and Cunningham's "Handbook of
London," introduction.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 16: The two bad Roman poets, hateful and inimical to Virgil and
Horace: Virg., "Ecl." iii, 90; Horat., "Epod." x. The names have been
well applied in our time by Gifford in his satire entitled "The Baviad
and Maeviad."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 17: A musician, also a censurer of Horace. See "Satirae," lib.
1. iii, 4.--_--W. E. B._]

[Footnote 18: In consequence of "Polly," the supplement to the "Beggar's
Opera," but which obtained him the friendship of the Duke and Duchess of
Queensberry.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 19: The grant of two hundred a year, which he obtained from the
Crown, and retained till his death in 1765.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 20: See "Leviathan," Part I, chap, xiii.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 21: Richard Flecknoe, poet and dramatist, died 1678, of whom it
has been written that "whatever may become of his own pieces, his name
will continue, whilst Dryden's satire, called 'Mac Flecknoe,' shall
remain in vogue." Dryden's Poetical Works, edit. Warton, ii,
169.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 22: Hon. Edward Howard, author of some indifferent plays and
poems. See "Dict. Nat. Biog."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 23: Richard Blackmore, physician and very voluminous writer in
prose and verse. In 1697 he was appointed physician to William III, when
he was knighted. See Pope, "Imitations of Horace," book ii, epist. 1,
387.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 24: Lord Grimston, born 1683, died 1756. He is best known by
his play, written in 1705, "The Lawyer's Fortune, or Love in a Hollow
Tree," which the author withdrew from circulation; but, by some person's
malice, it was reprinted in 1736. See "Dict. Nat. Biog.," Pope's Works,
edit. Elwin and Courthope, iii, p. 314.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 25: Matthew Concanen, born in Ireland, 1701, a writer of
miscellaneous works, dramatic and poetical. See the "Dunciad," ii, 299,
304, _ut supra.--W. E. B._]

[Footnote 26: James Moore Smythe, chiefly remarkable for his consummate
assurance as a plagiarist. See the "Dunciad," ii, 50, and notes thereto,
Pope's Works, edit. Elwin and Courthope, iv, 132.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 27:
  "Fertur Prometheus, addere principi
  Limo coactus particulam undique
      Desectam, et insani leonis
        Vim stomacho apposuisse nostro."
            HORAT., _Carm._ I, xvi.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 28:
  "---- super et Garamantas et Indos,
  Proferet imperium; ----
  ---- jam nunc et Caspia regna
  Responsis horrent divom."
        Virg., _Aen._, vi.]

[Footnote 29:
  "---- genibus minor."]

[Footnote 30: Son of Aeneas, here representing Frederick, Prince of
Wales, father of George III.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 31:
  "Unus qui nobis cunctando restituis rem."
        Virg., _Aen._, vi, 847.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 32: "Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet."]




VERSES SENT TO THE DEAN
ON HIS BIRTH-DAY, WITH PINE'S HORACE, FINELY BOUND.
BY DR. J. SICAN[1]


(Horace speaking.)

You've read, sir, in poetic strain,
How Varus and the Mantuan swain
Have on my birth-day been invited,
(But I was forced in verse to write it,)
Upon a plain repast to dine,
And taste my old Campanian wine;
But I, who all punctilios hate,
Though long familiar with the great,
Nor glory in my reputation,
Am come without an invitation;
And, though I'm used to right Falernian,
I'll deign for once to taste Irnian;
But fearing that you might dispute
(Had I put on my common suit)
My breeding and my politesse,
I visit in my birth-day dress:
My coat of purest Turkey red,
With gold embroidery richly spread;
To which I've sure as good pretensions,
As Irish lords who starve on pensions.
What though proud ministers of state
Did at your antichamber wait;
What though your Oxfords and your St. Johns,
Have at your levee paid attendance,
And Peterborough and great Ormond,
With many chiefs who now are dormant,
Have laid aside the general's staff,
And public cares, with you to laugh;
Yet I some friends as good can name,
Nor less the darling sons of fame;
For sure my Pollio and Mcenas
Were as good statesmen, Mr. Dean, as
Either your Bolingbroke or Harley,
Though they made Lewis beg a parley;
And as for Mordaunt,[2] your loved hero,
I'll match him with my Drusus Nero.
You'll boast, perhaps, your favourite Pope;
But Virgil is as good, I hope.
I own indeed I can't get any
To equal Helsham and Delany;
Since Athens brought forth Socrates,
A Grecian isle, Hippocrates;
Since Tully lived before my time,
And Galen bless'd another clime.
  You'll plead, perhaps, at my request,
To be admitted as a guest,
"Your hearing's bad!"--But why such fears?
I speak to eyes, and not to ears;
And for that reason wisely took
The form you see me in, a book.
Attack'd by slow devouring moths,
By rage of barbarous Huns and Goths;
By Bentley's notes, my deadliest foes,
By Creech's[3] rhymes, and Dunster's[4] prose;
I found my boasted wit and fire
In their rude hands almost expire:
Yet still they but in vain assail'd;
For, had their violence prevail'd,
And in a blast destroy'd my frame,
They would have partly miss'd their aim;
Since all my spirit in thy page
Defies the Vandals of this age.
'Tis yours to save these small remains
From future pedant's muddy brains,
And fix my long uncertain fate,
You best know how--"which way?"--TRANSLATE.


[Footnote 1: This ingenious young gentleman was unfortunately murdered in
Italy.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 2: See verses to the Earl of Peterborough, _ante_,
p. 48.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: The translator and editor of Lucretius and
Horace.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Who put forth, in 1710, the "Satyrs and Epistles of Horace,
done into English," of which a second edition was published in 1717, with
the addition of the "Art of Poetry." His versions were well satirized by
the wits of the time, one of whom, Dr. T. Francklin, wrote:
  "O'er Tibur's swan the Muses wept in vain,
  And mourned their bard by cruel Dunster slain."
_Dict. Nat. Biog.--W. E. B._]




EPIGRAM BY MR. BOWYER
INTENDED TO BE PLACED UNDER THE HEAD OF GULLIVER. 1733

"Here learn from moral truth and wit refined,
How vice and folly have debased mankind;
Strong sense and humour arm in virtue's cause;
Thus her great votary vindicates her laws:
While bold and free the glowing colours strike;
Blame not the picture, if the picture's like."




ON PSYCHE[1]

At two afternoon for our Psyche inquire,
Her tea-kettle's on, and her smock at the fire:
So loitering, so active; so busy, so idle;
Which has she most need of, a spur or a bridle?
Thus a greyhound outruns the whole pack in a race,
Yet would rather be hang'd than he'd leave a warm place.
She gives you such plenty, it puts you in pain;
But ever with prudence takes care of the main.
To please you, she knows how to choose a nice bit;
For her taste is almost as refined as her wit.
To oblige a good friend, she will trace every market,
It would do your heart good, to see how she will cark it.
Yet beware of her arts; for, it plainly appears,
She saves half her victuals, by feeding your ears.


[Footnote 1: Mrs. Sican, a very ingenious lady, mother to the author of
the "Verses" with Pine's Horace; and a favourite with Swift and
Stella.--_W. E. B._]




THE DEAN AND DUKE
1734


James Brydges[1]and the Dean had long been friends;
James is beduked; of course their friendship ends:
But sure the Dean deserves a sharp rebuke,
For knowing James, to boast he knows the duke.
Yet, since just Heaven the duke's ambition mocks,
Since all he got by fraud is lost by stocks,[2]
His wings are clipp'd: he tries no more in vain
With bands of fiddlers to extend his train.
Since he no more can build, and plant, and revel,
The duke and dean seem near upon a level.
O! wert thou not a duke, my good Duke Humphry,
From bailiffs claws thou scarce couldst keep thy bum free.
A duke to know a dean! go, smooth thy crown:
Thy brother[3](far thy better) wore a gown.
Well, but a duke thou art; so please the king:
O! would his majesty but add a string!


[Footnote 1: James Brydges, who was created Duke of Chandos in 1719, and
built the magnificent house at Canons near Edgware, celebrated by Pope in
his "Moral Essays," Epistles iii and iv. For a description of the
building, see De Foe's "Tour through Great Britain," cited in Carruthers'
edition of Pope, vol. i, p. 482. At the sale of the house by the second
Duke in 1747, Lord Chesterfield purchased the hall pillars for the house
he was then building in May Fair, where they still adorn the entrance
hall of Chesterfield House. He used to call them his _Canonical_
pillars.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 2: In allusion to the Duke's difficulties caused by the failure
of his speculative investments.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 3: The Hon. Henry Brydges, Archdeacon of Rochester.--_N_.]




WRITTEN BY DR. SWIFT ON HIS OWN DEAFNESS, IN SEPTEMBER, 1734


Vertiginosus, inops, surdus, male gratus amicis;
Non campana sonans, tonitru non ab Jove missum,
Quod mage mirandum, saltem si credere fas est,
Non clamosa meas mulier jam percutit aures.


THE DEAN'S COMPLAINT, TRANSLATED AND ANSWERED

DOCTOR. Deaf, giddy, helpless, left alone.
ANSWER. Except the first, the fault's your own.
DOCTOR. To all my friends a burden grown.
ANSWER. Because to few you will be shewn.
        Give them good wine, and meat to stuff,
        You may have company enough.
DOCTOR. No more I hear my church's bell,
        Than if it rang out for my knell.
ANSWER. Then write and read, 'twill do as well.
DOCTOR. At thunder now no more I start,
        Than at the rumbling of a cart.
ANSWER. Think then of thunder when you f--t.
DOCTOR. Nay, what's incredible, alack!
        No more I hear a woman's clack.
ANSWER. A woman's clack, if I have skill,
        Sounds somewhat like a throwster's mill;
        But louder than a bell, or thunder:
        That does, I own, increase my wonder.




THE DEAN'S MANNER OF LIVING

On rainy days alone I dine
Upon a chick and pint of wine.
On rainy days I dine alone,
And pick my chicken to the bone;
But this my servants much enrages,
No scraps remain to save board-wages.
In weather fine I nothing spend,
But often spunge upon a friend;
Yet, where he's not so rich as I,
I pay my club, and so good b'ye.




EPIGRAM BY MR. BOWYER

"IN SYLLABAM LONGAM IN VOCE VERTIGINOSUS A. D. SWIFT CORREPTAM"


Musarum antistes, Phoebi numerosus alumnus,
  Vix omnes numeros Vertiginosus habet.
Intentat charo capiti vertigo ruinam:
  Oh! servet cerebro nata Minerva caput.
Vertigo nimium longa est, divina poeta;
  Dent tibi Pierides, donet Apollo, brevem.




VERSES MADE FOR FRUIT-WOMEN

APPLES

Come buy my fine wares,
Plums, apples, and pears.
A hundred a penny,
In conscience too many:
Come, will you have any?
My children are seven,
I wish them in Heaven;
My husband a sot,
With his pipe and his pot,
Not a farthing will gain them,
And I must maintain them.



ASPARAGUS

  Ripe 'sparagrass
  Fit for lad or lass,
To make their water pass:
  O, 'tis pretty picking
  With a tender chicken!



ONIONS


    Come, follow me by the smell,
    Here are delicate onions to sell;
    I promise to use you well.
    They make the blood warmer,
    You'll feed like a farmer;
For this is every cook's opinion,
No savoury dish without an onion;
But, lest your kissing should be spoil'd,
Your onions must be thoroughly boil'd:
    Or else you may spare
    Your mistress a share,
The secret will never be known:
    She cannot discover
    The breath of her lover,
But think it as sweet as her own.



OYSTERS

    Charming oysters I cry:
    My masters, come buy,
    So plump and so fresh,
    So sweet is their flesh,
    No Colchester oyster
    Is sweeter and moister:
    Your stomach they settle,
    And rouse up your mettle:
    They'll make you a dad
    Of a lass or a lad;
    And madam your wife
    They'll please to the life;
  Be she barren, be she old,
  Be she slut, or be she scold,
Eat my oysters, and lie near her,
She'll be fruitful, never fear her.



HERRINGS

      Be not sparing,
      Leave off swearing.
      Buy my herring
Fresh from Malahide,[1]
Better never was tried.
Come, eat them with pure fresh butter and mustard,
Their bellies are soft, and as white as a custard.
Come, sixpence a-dozen, to get me some bread,
Or, like my own herrings, I soon shall be dead.

[Footnote 1: Malahide, a village five miles from Dublin, famous for
oysters.--_F_.]



ORANGES

Come buy my fine oranges, sauce for your veal,
And charming, when squeezed in a pot of brown ale;
Well roasted, with sugar and wine in a cup,
They'll make a sweet bishop when gentlefolks sup.




ON ROVER, A LADY'S SPANIEL

INSTRUCTIONS TO A PAINTER[1]

Happiest of the spaniel race,
Painter, with thy colours grace:
Draw his forehead large and high,
Draw his blue and humid eye;
Draw his neck so smooth and round,
Little neck with ribbons bound!
And the muscly swelling breast,
Where the Loves and Graces rest;
And the spreading even back,
Soft, and sleek, and glossy black;
And the tail that gently twines,
Like the tendrils of the vines;
And the silky twisted hair,
Shadowing thick the velvet ear;
Velvet ears, which, hanging low,
O'er the veiny temples flow.
  With a proper light and shade,
Let the winding hoop be laid;
And within that arching bower,
(Secret circle, mystic power,)
In a downy slumber place
Happiest of the spaniel race;
While the soft respiring dame,
Glowing with the softest flame,
On the ravish'd favourite pours
Balmy dews, ambrosial showers.
  With thy utmost skill express
Nature in her richest dress,
Limpid rivers smoothly flowing,
Orchards by those rivers blowing;
Curling woodbine, myrtle shade,
And the gay enamell'd mead;
Where the linnets sit and sing,
Little sportlings of the spring;
Where the breathing field and grove
Soothe the heart and kindle love.
Here for me, and for the Muse,
Colours of resemblance choose,
Make of lineaments divine,
Daply female spaniels shine,
Pretty fondlings of the fair,
Gentle damsels' gentle care;
But to one alone impart
All the flattery of thy art.
Crowd each feature, crowd each grace,
Which complete the desperate face;
Let the spotted wanton dame
Feel a new resistless flame!
Let the happiest of his race
Win the fair to his embrace.
But in shade the rest conceal,
Nor to sight their joys reveal,
Lest the pencil and the Muse
Loose desires and thoughts infuse.


[Footnote 1: A parody of Ambrose Phillips's poem on Miss Carteret,
daughter of the Lord Lieutenant. Phillips stood high in Archbishop
Boulter's regard. Hence the parody. "Does not," says Pope, "still to one
Bishop Phillips seem a wit?" It is to the infantine style of some of
Phillips' verse that we owe the term, Namby Pamby.--_W. E. B_.]




EPIGRAMS ON WINDOWS

SEVERAL OF THEM WRITTEN IN 1726


I. ON A WINDOW AT AN INN

We fly from luxury and wealth,
To hardships, in pursuit of health;
From generous wines, and costly fare,
And dozing in an easy-chair;
Pursue the goddess Health in vain,
To find her in a country scene,
And every where her footsteps trace,
And see her marks in every face;
And still her favourites we meet,
Crowding the roads with naked feet.
But, oh! so faintly we pursue,
We ne'er can have her full in view.


II. AT AN INN IN ENGLAND

The glass, by lovers' nonsense blurr'd,
  Dims and obscures our sight;
So, when our passions Love has stirr'd,
  It darkens Reason's light.


III. ON A WINDOW AT THE FOUR CROSSES
IN THE WATLING-STREET ROAD, WARWICKSHIRE

Fool, to put up four crosses at your door,
Put up your wife, she's CROSSER than all four.


IV. ANOTHER, AT CHESTER

The church and clergy here, no doubt,
  Are very near a-kin;
Both weather-beaten are without,
  And empty both within.


V. ANOTHER, AT CHESTER

My landlord is civil,
But dear as the d--l:
Your pockets grow empty
With nothing to tempt ye;
The wine is so sour,
'Twill give you a scour,
The beer and the ale
Are mingled with stale.
The veal is such carrion,
A dog would be weary on.
All this I have felt,
For I live on a smelt.


VI. ANOTHER, AT CHESTER

  The walls of this town
  Are full of renown,
And strangers delight to walk round 'em:
  But as for the dwellers,
  Both buyers and sellers,
For me, you may hang 'em, or drown 'em.


VII. ANOTHER
WRITTEN UPON A WINDOW WHERE THERE WAS NO WRITING BEFORE

Thanks to my stars, I once can see
A window here from scribbling free!
Here no conceited coxcombs pass,
To scratch their paltry drabs on glass;
Nor party fool is calling names,
Or dealing crowns to George and James.


VIII. ON SEEING VERSES WRITTEN UPON WINDOWS AT INNS

The sage, who said he should be proud
  Of windows in his breast,[1]
Because he ne'er a thought allow'd
  That might not be confest;
His window scrawl'd by every rake,
  His breast again would cover,
And fairly bid the devil take
  The diamond and the lover.

[Footnote 1: See on this "Notes and Queries," 10th S., xii,
497.--_W. E. B._]


IX. ANOTHER

By Satan taught, all conjurors know
Your mistress in a glass to show,
And you can do as much:
In this the devil and you agree;
None e'er made verses worse than he,
  And thine, I swear, are such.


X. ANOTHER

That love is the devil, I'll prove when required;
  Those rhymers abundantly show it:
They swear that they all by love are inspired,
  And the devil's a damnable poet.


XI. ANOTHER, AT HOLYHEAD [1]

O Neptune! Neptune! must I still
Be here detain'd against my will?
Is this your justice, when I'm come
Above two hundred miles from home;
O'er mountains steep, o'er dusty plains,
Half choked with dust, half drown'd with rains,
Only your godship to implore,
To let me kiss your other shore?
A boon so small! but I may weep,
While you're like Baal, fast asleep.

[Footnote 1: These verses were no doubt written during the Dean's
enforced stay at Holyhead while waiting for fair weather. See Swift's
Journal of 1727, in Craik's "Life of Swift," vol. ii, and "Prose Works,"
vol. xi.--_W. E. B_.]




TO JANUS, ON NEW YEAR'S DAY, 1726

Two-faced Janus,[1] god of Time!
Be my Phoebus while I rhyme;
To oblige your crony Swift,
Bring our dame a new year's gift;
She has got but half a face;
Janus, since thou hast a brace,
To my lady once be kind;
Give her half thy face behind.
  God of Time, if you be wise,
Look not with your future eyes;
What imports thy forward sight?
Well, if you could lose it quite.
Can you take delight in viewing
This poor Isle's[2] approaching ruin,
When thy retrospection vast
Sees the glorious ages past?
Happy nation, were we blind,
Or had only eyes behind!
  Drown your morals, madam cries,
I'll have none but forward eyes;
Prudes decay'd about may tack,
Strain their necks with looking back.
Give me time when coming on;
Who regards him when he's gone?
By the Dean though gravely told,
New-years help to make me old;
Yet I find a new-year's lace
Burnishes an old-year's face.
Give me velvet and quadrille,
I'll have youth and beauty still.

[Footnote 1: "Matutine pater, seu Jane libentius audis
Unde homines operum primos vitaeque labores
Instituunt."--HOR., _Sat_., ii, vi, 20.]

[Footnote 2: Ireland.--_H_.]




A MOTTO FOR MR. JASON HASARD

WOOLLEN-DRAPER IN DUBLIN, WHOSE SIGN WAS THE GOLDEN FLEECE

Jason, the valiant prince of Greece,
From Colchis brought the Golden Fleece;
We comb the wool, refine the stuff,
For modern Jasons, that's enough.
Oh! could we tame yon watchful dragon,[1]
Old Jason would have less to brag on.

[Footnote 1: England.--_H_.]


TO A FRIEND
WHO HAD BEEN MUCH ABUSED IN MANY INVETERATE LIBELS

The greatest monarch may be stabb'd by night
And fortune help the murderer in his flight;
The vilest ruffian may commit a rape,
Yet safe from injured innocence escape;
And calumny, by working under ground,
Can, unrevenged, the greatest merit wound.
  What's to be done? Shall wit and learning choose
To live obscure, and have no fame to lose?
By Censure[1] frighted out of Honour's road,
Nor dare to use the gifts by Heaven bestow'd?
Or fearless enter in through Virtue's gate,
And buy distinction at the dearest rate.

[Footnote 1: See _ante_, p. 160, the poem entitled "On
Censure."--_W. E. B._.]




CATULLUS DE LESBIA[1]

Lesbia for ever on me rails,
To talk of me she never fails.
Now, hang me, but for all her art,
I find that I have gain'd her heart.
My proof is this: I plainly see,
The case is just the same with me;
I curse her every hour sincerely,
Yet, hang me but I love her dearly.


[Footnote 1: "Lesbia mi dicit semper mala nec tacet unquam
De me: Lesbia me dispeream nisi amat.
Quo signo? quia sunt totidem mea: deprecor illam
Assidue; verum dispeream nisi amo."
  _Catulli Carmina, xcii.--W. E. B._]




ON A CURATE'S COMPLAINT OF HARD DUTY

I marched three miles through scorching sand,
With zeal in heart, and notes in hand;
I rode four more to Great St. Mary,
Using four legs, when two were weary:
To three fair virgins I did tie men,
In the close bands of pleasing Hymen;
I dipp'd two babes in holy water,
And purified their mother after.
Within an hour and eke a half,
I preach'd three congregations deaf;
Where, thundering out, with lungs long-winded,
I chopp'd so fast, that few there minded.
My emblem, the laborious sun,
Saw all these mighty labours done
Before one race of his was run.
All this perform'd by Robert Hewit:
What mortal else could e'er go through it!




TO BETTY, THE GRISETTE

Queen of wit and beauty, Betty,
Never may the Muse forget ye,
How thy face charms every shepherd,
Spotted over like a leopard!
And thy freckled neck, display'd,
Envy breeds in every maid;
Like a fly-blown cake of tallow,
Or on parchment ink turn'd yellow;
Or a tawny speckled pippin,
Shrivell'd with a winter's keeping.
  And, thy beauty thus dispatch'd,
Let me praise thy wit unmatch'd.
  Sets of phrases, cut and dry,
Evermore thy tongue supply;
And thy memory is loaded
With old scraps from plays exploded;
Stock'd with repartees and jokes,
Suited to all Christian folks:
Shreds of wit, and senseless rhymes,
Blunder'd out a thousand times;
Nor wilt thou of gifts be sparing,
Which can ne'er be worse for wearing.
Picking wit among collegians,
In the playhouse upper regions;
Where, in the eighteen-penny gallery,
Irish nymphs learn Irish raillery.
But thy merit is thy failing,
And thy raillery is railing.
  Thus with talents well endued
To be scurrilous and rude;
When you pertly raise your snout,
Fleer and gibe, and laugh and flout;
This among Hibernian asses
For sheer wit and humour passes.
Thus indulgent Chloe, bit,
Swears you have a world of wit.



EPIGRAM FROM THE FRENCH[1]

Who can believe with common sense,
A bacon slice gives God offence;
Or, how a herring has a charm
Almighty vengeance to disarm?
Wrapp'd up in majesty divine,
Does he regard on what we dine?


[Footnote 1: A French gentleman dining with some company on a fast-day,
called for some bacon and eggs. The rest were very angry, and reproved
him for so heinous a sin; whereupon he wrote the following lines, which
are translated above:
  "Peut-on croire avec bon sens
    Qu'un lardon le mil en colre,
  Ou, que manger un hareng,
    C'est un secret pour lui plaire?
  En sa gloire envelop,
  Songe-t-il bien de nos soups?"--_H_.]



EPIGRAM[1]

As Thomas was cudgell'd one day by his wife,
He took to the street, and fled for his life:
Tom's three dearest friends came by in the squabble,
And saved him at once from the shrew and the rabble;
Then ventured to give him some sober advice--
But Tom is a person of honour so nice,
Too wise to take counsel, too proud to take warning,
That he sent to all three a challenge next morning.
Three duels he fought, thrice ventur'd his life;
Went home, and was cudgell'd again by his wife.

[Footnote 1: Collated with copy transcribed by
Stella.--_Forster_.]



EPIGRAM ADDED BY STELLA[1]

When Margery chastises Ned,
She calls it combing of his head;
A kinder wife was never born:
She combs his head, and finds him horn.

[Footnote 1: From Stella's copy in the Duke of Bedford's
volume.--_Forster._]



JOAN CUDGELS NED

Joan cudgels Ned, yet Ned's a bully;
Will cudgels Bess, yet Will's a cully.
Die Ned and Bess; give Will to Joan,
She dares not say her life's her own.
Die Joan and Will; give Bess to Ned,
And every day she combs his head.



VERSES ON TWO CELEBRATED MODERN POETS

Behold, those monarch oaks, that rise
With lofty branches to the skies,
Have large proportion'd roots that grow
With equal longitude below:
Two bards that now in fashion reign,
Most aptly this device explain:
If this to clouds and stars will venture,
That creeps as far to reach the centre;
Or, more to show the thing I mean,
Have you not o'er a saw-pit seen
A skill'd mechanic, that has stood
High on a length of prostrate wood,
Who hired a subterraneous friend
To take his iron by the end;
But which excell'd was never found,
The man above or under ground.
  The moral is so plain to hit,
That, had I been the god of wit,
Then, in a saw-pit and wet weather,
Should Young and Philips drudge together.



EPITAPH ON GENERAL GORGES,[1] AND LADY MEATH[2]

Under this stone lies Dick and Dolly.
Doll dying first, Dick grew melancholy;
For Dick without Doll thought living a folly.

Dick lost in Doll a wife tender and dear:
But Dick lost by Doll twelve hundred a-year;
A loss that Dick thought no mortal could bear.

Dick sigh'd for his Doll, and his mournful arms cross'd;
Thought much of his Doll, and the jointure he lost;
The first vex'd him much, the other vex'd most.

Thus loaded with grief, Dick sigh'd and he cried:
To live without both full three days he tried;
But liked neither loss, and so quietly died.

Dick left a pattern few will copy after:
Then, reader, pray shed some tears of salt water;
For so sad a tale is no subject of laughter.
Meath smiles for the jointure, though gotten so late;
The son laughs, that got the hard-gotten estate;
And Cuffe[3] grins, for getting the Alicant plate.

Here quiet they lie, in hopes to rise one day,
Both solemnly put in this hole on a Sunday,
And here rest----_sic transit gloria mundi_!


[Footnote 1: Of Kilbrue, in the county of Meath.--_F._]

[Footnote 2: Dorothy, dowager of Edward, Earl of Meath. She was married
to the general in 1716, and died 10th April, 1728. Her husband survived
her but two days.--_F_.
  The Dolly of this epitaph is the same lady whom Swift satirized in
his "Conference between Sir Harry Pierce's Chariot and Mrs. Dorothy
Stopford's Chair." See _ante_, p.85.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: John Cuffe, of Desart, Esq., married the general's eldest
daughter.--_F._]




VERSES ON I KNOW NOT WHAT

My latest tribute here I send,
With this let your collection end.
Thus I consign you down to fame
A character to praise or blame:
And if the whole may pass for true,
Contented rest, you have your due.
Give future time the satisfaction,
To leave one handle for detraction.




DR. SWIFT TO HIMSELF ON ST. CECILIA'S DAY

Grave Dean of St. Patrick's, how comes it to pass,
That you, who know music no more than an ass,
That you who so lately were writing of drapiers,
Should lend your cathedral to players and scrapers?
To act such an opera once in a year,
So offensive to every true Protestant ear,
With trumpets, and fiddles, and organs, and singing,
Will sure the Pretender and Popery bring in,
No Protestant Prelate, his lordship or grace,
Durst there show his right, or most reverend face:
How would it pollute their crosiers and rochets,
To listen to minims, and quavers, and crochets!

[The rest is wanting.]




AN ANSWER TO A FRIEND'S QUESTION

The furniture that best doth please
St. Patrick's Dean, good Sir, are these:
The knife and fork with which I eat;
And next the pot that boils the meat;
The next to be preferr'd, I think,
Is the glass in which I drink;
The shelves on which my books I keep
And the bed on which I sleep;
An antique elbow-chair between,
Big enough to hold the Dean;
And the stove that gives delight
In the cold bleak wintry night:
To these we add a thing below,
More for use reserved than show:
These are what the Dean do please;
All superfluous are but these.




EPITAPH
INSCRIBED ON A MARBLE TABLET, IN BERKELEY CHURCH, GLOUCESTERSHIRE

H. S. E.

[*text centered]
CAROLUS Comes de BERKELEY, Vicecomes DURSLEY,
Baro BERKELEY, de Berkeley Cast., MOWBRAY, SEGRAVE,
Et BRUCE,  nobilissimo Ordine Balnei Eques,
Vir ad genus quod spectat et proavos usquequaque nobilis
Et longo si quis alius procerum stemmate editus;
Muniis etiam tarn illustri stirpi dignis insignitus.
Siquidem a GULIELMO III ad ordines foederati Belgii
Ablegatus et Plenipotentiarius Extraordinarius
Rebus, non Britanniae tantm, sed totius fere Europae
(Tunc temporis praesertim arduis) per annos V. incubuit,
Quam felici diligentia, fide quam intemerata,
Ex illo discas, Lector, quod, superstite patre,
In magnatum ordinem adscisci meruerit.
Fuit  sanctioribus consiliis et Regi GULIEL. et ANNAE Reginae
E proregibus Hiberniae secundus,
Comitatum civitatumque Glocest. et Brist. Dominus Locumtenens,
Surriae et Glocest. Gustos Rot., Urbis Glocest. magnus
Senescallus, Arcis sancti de Briavell Castellanus, Guardianus
Forestae de Dean.
Denique ad Turcarum primum, deinde ad Romam Imperatorem
Cum Legatus Extraordinarius designatus esset,
Quo minus has etiam ornaret provincias
Obstitit adversa corporis valetudo.
Sed restat adhuc, prae quo sordescunt caetera,
Honos verus, stabilis, et vel morti cedere nescius
Qud veritatem evangelicam seri amplexus;
Erga Deum pius, erga pauperes munificus,
Adverss omnes aequus et benevolus,
In Christo jam placid obdormit
Cum eodem olim regnaturus un.
Natus VIII April. MDCXLIX. denatus
XXIV Septem. MDCCX. aetat. suae LXII.




EPITAPH

ON FREDERICK, DUKE OF SCHOMBERG[1]

[*text centered]
Hic infra situm est corpus
FREDERICI DUCIS DE SCHOMBERG.
ad BUDINDAM occisi, A.D. 1690.
DECANUS et CAPITULUM maximopere etiam
atque etiam petierunt,
UT HAEREDES DUCIS monumentum
In memoriam PARENTIS erigendum curarent:
Sed postquam per epistolas, per amicos,
diu ac saep orando nil profecre;
Hunc demum lapidem ipsi statuerunt,
Saltem[2] ut scias, hospes,
Ubinam terrarum SCONBERGENSIS cineres
delitescunt
"Plus potuit fama virtutis apud alienos,
Quam sanguinis proximitas apud suos."
A.D. 1731.

[Footnote 1: The Duke was unhappily killed in crossing the River Boyne,
July, 1690, and was buried in St. Patrick's Cathedral, where the dean and
chapter erected a small monument to his honour, at their own
expense.--_N_.]

[Footnote 2: The words with which Dr. Swift first concluded the epitaph
were, "Saltem ut sciat viator indignabundus, quali in cellul tanti
ductoris cineres delitescunt."--_N._]




VERSES WRITTEN DURING LORD CARTERET'S ADMINISTRATION OF IRELAND


As Lord Carteret's residence in Ireland as Viceroy was a series of cabals
against the authority of the Prime Minister, he failed not, as well from
his love of literature as from his hatred to Walpole, to attach to
himself as much as possible the distinguished author of the Drapier
Letters. By the interest which Swift soon gained with the
Lord-Lieutenant, he was enabled to recommend several friends, whose High
Church or Tory principles had hitherto obstructed their preferment. The
task of forwarding the views of Delany, in particular, led to several of
Swift's liveliest poetical effusions, while, on the other hand, he was
equally active in galling, by his satire, Smedley, and other Whig beaux
esprits, who, during this amphibious administration, sought the favour of
a literary Lord-Lieutenant, by literary offerings and poetical adulation.
These pieces, with one or two connected with the same subject, are here
thrown together, as they seem to reflect light upon each other.--_Scott._



AN APOLOGY TO LADY CARTERET


A lady, wise as well as fair,
Whose conscience always was her care,
Thoughtful upon a point of moment,
Would have the text as well as comment:
So hearing of a grave divine,
She sent to bid him come to dine.
But, you must know he was not quite
So grave as to be unpolite:
Thought human learning would not lessen
The dignity of his profession:
And if you'd heard the man discourse,
Or preach, you'd like him scarce the worse.
He long had bid the court farewell,
Retreating silent to his cell;
Suspected for the love he bore
To one who sway'd some time before;
Which made it more surprising how
He should be sent for thither now.
  The message told, he gapes, and stares,
And scarce believes his eyes or ears:
Could not conceive what it should mean,
And fain would hear it told again.
But then the squire so trim and nice,
'Twere rude to make him tell it twice;
So bow'd, was thankful for the honour;
And would not fail to wait upon her.
His beaver brush'd, his shoes, and gown,
Away he trudges into town;
Passes the lower castle yard,
And now advancing to the guard,
He trembles at the thoughts of state;
For, conscious of his sheepish gait,
His spirits of a sudden fail'd him;
He stopp'd, and could not tell what ail'd him.
  What was the message I received?
Why certainly the captain raved?
To dine with her! and come at three!
Impossible! it can't be me.
Or maybe I mistook the word;
My lady--it must be my lord.
  My lord 's abroad; my lady too:
What must the unhappy doctor do?
"Is Captain Cracherode[1] here, pray?"--"No."
"Nay, then 'tis time for me to go."
Am I awake, or do I dream?
I'm sure he call'd me by my name;
Named me as plain as he could speak;
And yet there must be some mistake.
Why, what a jest should I have been,
Had now my lady been within!
What could I've said? I'm mighty glad
She went abroad--she'd thought me mad.
The hour of dining now is past:
Well then, I'll e'en go home and fast:
And, since I 'scaped being made a scoff,
I think I'm very fairly off.
My lady now returning home,
Calls "Cracherode, is the Doctor come?"
He had not heard of him--"Pray see,
'Tis now a quarter after three."
The captain walks about, and searches
Through all the rooms, and courts, and arches;
Examines all the servants round,
In vain--no doctor's to be found.
My lady could not choose but wonder;
"Captain, I fear you've made some blunder;
But, pray, to-morrow go at ten;
I'll try his manners once again;
If rudeness be th' effect of knowledge,
My son shall never see a college."
  The captain was a man of reading,
And much good sense, as well as breeding;
Who, loath to blame, or to incense,
Said little in his own defence.
Next day another message brought;
The Doctor, frighten'd at his fault,
Is dress'd, and stealing through the crowd,
Now pale as death, then blush'd and bow'd,
Panting--and faltering--humm'd and ha'd,
"Her ladyship was gone abroad:
The captain too--he did not know
Whether he ought to stay or go;"
Begg'd she'd forgive him. In conclusion,
My lady, pitying his confusion,
Call'd her good nature to relieve him;
Told him, she thought she might believe him;
And would not only grant his suit,
But visit him, and eat some fruit,
Provided, at a proper time,
He told the real truth in rhyme;
'Twas to no purpose to oppose,
She'd hear of no excuse in prose.
The Doctor stood not to debate,
Glad to compound at any rate;
So, bowing, seemingly complied;
Though, if he durst, he had denied.
But first, resolved to show his taste,
Was too refined to give a feast;
He'd treat with nothing that was rare,
But winding walks and purer air;
Would entertain without expense,
Or pride or vain magnificence:
For well he knew, to such a guest
The plainest meals must be the best.
To stomachs clogg'd with costly fare
Simplicity alone is rare;
While high, and nice, and curious meats
Are really but vulgar treats.
Instead of spoils of Persian looms,
The costly boast of regal rooms,
Thought it more courtly and discreet
To scatter roses at her feet;
Roses of richest dye, that shone
With native lustre, like her own;
Beauty that needs no aid of art
Through every sense to reach the heart.
The gracious dame, though well she knew
All this was much beneath her due,
Liked everything--at least thought fit
To praise it _par manire d'acquit_.
Yet she, though seeming pleased, can't bear
The scorching sun, or chilling air;
Disturb'd alike at both extremes,
Whether he shows or hides his beams:
Though seeming pleased at all she sees,
Starts at the ruffling of the trees,
And scarce can speak for want of breath,
In half a walk fatigued to death.
The Doctor takes his hint from hence,
T' apologize his late offence:
"Madam, the mighty power of use
Now strangely pleads in my excuse;
If you unused have scarcely strength
To gain this walk's untoward length;
If, frighten'd at a scene so rude,
Through long disuse of solitude;
If, long confined to fires and screens,
You dread the waving of these greens;
If you, who long have breathed the fumes
Of city fogs and crowded rooms,
Do now solicitously shun
The cooler air and dazzling sun;
If his majestic eye you flee,
Learn hence t' excuse and pity me.
Consider what it is to bear
The powder'd courtier's witty sneer;
To see th' important man of dress
Scoffing my college awkwardness;
To be the strutting cornet's sport,
To run the gauntlet of the court,
Winning my way by slow approaches,
Through crowds of coxcombs and of coaches,
From the first fierce cockaded sentry,
Quite through the tribe of waiting gentry;
To pass so many crowded stages,
And stand the staring of your pages:
And after all, to crown my spleen,
Be told--'You are not to be seen:'
Or, if you are, be forced to bear
The awe of your majestic air.
And can I then be faulty found,
In dreading this vexatious round?
Can it be strange, if I eschew
A scene so glorious and so new?
Or is he criminal that flies
The living lustre of your eyes?"


[Footnote 1: The gentleman who brought the message.--_Scott._]




THE BIRTH OF MANLY VIRTUE

INSCRIBED TO LORD CARTERET[1]
1724

Gratior et pulcro veniens in corpore virtus.--VIRG., _Aen._, v, 344.

Once on a time, a righteous sage,
Grieved with the vices of the age,
Applied to Jove with fervent prayer--
"O Jove, if Virtue be so fair
As it was deem'd in former days,
By Plato and by Socrates,
Whose beauties mortal eyes escape,
Only for want of outward shape;
Make then its real excellence,
For once the theme of human sense;
So shall the eye, by form confined,
Direct and fix the wandering mind,
And long-deluded mortals see,
With rapture, what they used to flee!"
  Jove grants the prayer, gives Virtue birth,
And bids him bless and mend the earth.
Behold him blooming fresh and fair,
Now made--ye gods--a son and heir;
An heir: and, stranger yet to hear,
An heir, an orphan of a peer;[2]
But prodigies are wrought to prove
Nothing impossible to Jove.
  Virtue was for this sex design'd,
In mild reproof to womankind;
In manly form to let them see
The loveliness of modesty,
The thousand decencies that shone
With lessen'd lustre in their own;
Which few had learn'd enough to prize,
And some thought modish to despise.
  To make his merit more discern'd,
He goes to school--he reads--is learn'd;
Raised high above his birth, by knowledge,
He shines distinguish'd in a college;
Resolved nor honour, nor estate,
Himself alone should make him great.
Here soon for every art renown'd,
His influence is diffused around;
The inferior youth to learning led,
Less to be famed than to be fed,
Behold the glory he has won,
And blush to see themselves outdone;
And now, inflamed with rival rage,
In scientific strife engage,
Engage; and, in the glorious strife
The arts new kindle into life.
  Here would our hero ever dwell,
Fix'd in a lonely learned cell:
Contented to be truly great,
In Virtue's best beloved retreat;
Contented he--but Fate ordains,
He now shall shine in nobler scenes,
Raised high, like some celestial fire,
To shine the more, still rising higher;
Completely form'd in every part,
To win the soul, and glad the heart.
The powerful voice, the graceful mien,
Lovely alike, or heard, or seen;
The outward form and inward vie,
His soul bright beaming from his eye,
Ennobling every act and air,
With just, and generous, and sincere.
  Accomplish'd thus, his next resort
Is to the council and the court,
Where Virtue is in least repute,
And interest the one pursuit;
Where right and wrong are bought and sold,
Barter'd for beauty, and for gold;
Here Manly Virtue, even here,
Pleased in the person of a peer,
A peer; a scarcely bearded youth,
Who talk'd of justice and of truth,
Of innocence the surest guard,
Tales here forgot, or yet unheard;
That he alone deserved esteem,
Who was the man he wish'd to seem;
Call'd it unmanly and unwise,
To lurk behind a mean disguise;
(Give fraudful Vice the mask and screen,
'Tis Virtue's interest to be seen;)
Call'd want of shame a want of sense,
And found, in blushes, eloquence.
  Thus acting what he taught so well,
He drew dumb merit from her cell,
Led with amazing art along
The bashful dame, and loosed her tongue;
And, while he made her value known,
Yet more display'd and raised his own.
  Thus young, thus proof to all temptations,
He rises to the highest stations;
For where high honour is the prize,
True Virtue has a right to rise:
Let courtly slaves low bend the knee
To Wealth and Vice in high degree:
Exalted Worth disdains to owe
Its grandeur to its greatest foe.
  Now raised on high, see Virtue shows
The godlike ends for which he rose;
For him, let proud Ambition know
The height of glory here below,
Grandeur, by goodness made complete!
To bless, is truly to be great!
He taught how men to honour rise,
Like gilded vapours to the skies,
Which, howsoever they display
Their glory from the god of day,
Their noblest use is to abate
His dangerous excess of heat,
To shield the infant fruits and flowers,
And bless the earth with genial showers.
  Now change the scene; a nobler care
Demands him in a higher sphere:[3]
Distress of nations calls him hence,
Permitted so by Providence;
For models, made to mend our kind,
To no one clime should be confined;
And Manly Virtue, like the sun,
His course of glorious toils should run:
Alike diffusing in his flight
Congenial joy, and life, and light.
Pale Envy sickens, Error flies,
And Discord in his presence dies;
Oppression hides with guilty dread,
And Merit rears her drooping head;
The arts revive, the valleys sing,
And winter softens into spring:
The wondering world, where'er he moves,
With new delight looks up, and loves;
One sex consenting to admire,
Nor less the other to desire;
While he, though seated on a throne,
Confines his love to one alone;
The rest condemn'd with rival voice
Repining, do applaud his choice.
  Fame now reports, the Western isle
Is made his mansion for a while,
Whose anxious natives, night and day,
(Happy beneath his righteous sway,)
Weary the gods with ceaseless prayer,
To bless him, and to keep him there;
And claim it as a debt from Fate,
Too lately found, to lose him late.


[Footnote 1: See Swift's "Vindication of Lord Carteret," "Prose Works,"
vii, 227; and his character as Lord Granville in my "Wit and Wisdom of
Lord Chesterfield."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: George, the first Lord Carteret, father of the Lord
Lieutenant, died when his son was between four and five years of
age.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 3: Lord Carteret had the honour of mediating peace for Sweden,
with Denmark, and with the Czar.--_H._]




ON PADDY'S CHARACTER OF THE "INTELLIGENCER."[1] 1729

As a thorn bush, or oaken bough,
Stuck in an Irish cabin's brow,
Above the door, at country fair,
Betokens entertainment there;
So bays on poets' brows have been
Set, for a sign of wit within.
And as ill neighbours in the night
Pull down an alehouse bush for spite;
The laurel so, by poets worn,
Is by the teeth of Envy torn;
Envy, a canker-worm, which tears
Those sacred leaves that lightning spares.
  And now, t'exemplify this moral:
Tom having earn'd a twig of laurel,
(Which, measured on his head, was found
Not long enough to reach half round,
But, like a girl's cockade, was tied,
A trophy, on his temple-side,)
Paddy repined to see him wear
This badge of honour in his hair;
And, thinking this cockade of wit
Would his own temples better fit,
Forming his Muse by Smedley's model,
Lets drive at Tom's devoted noddle,
Pelts him by turns with verse and prose
Hums like a hornet at his nose.
At length presumes to vent his satire on
The Dean, Tom's honour'd friend and patron.
The eagle in the tale, ye know,
Teazed by a buzzing wasp below,
Took wing to Jove, and hoped to rest
Securely in the thunderer's breast:
In vain; even there, to spoil his nod,
The spiteful insect stung the god.


[Footnote 1: For particulars of this publication, the work of two only,
Swift and Sheridan, see "Prose Works," vol. ix, p. 311. The satire seems
To have provoked retaliation from Tighe, Prendergast, Smedley, and even
from Delany. Hence this poem.--_W. E. B._]




AN EPISTLE TO HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN, LORD CARTERET
BY DR. DELANY. 1729[1]

  Credis ob haec me, Pastor, opes fortasse rogare,
  Propter quae vulgus crassaque turba rogat.
MART., _Epig._, lib. ix, 22.

Thou wise and learned ruler of our isle,
Whose guardian care can all her griefs beguile;
When next your generous soul shall condescend
T' instruct or entertain your humble friend;
Whether, retiring from your weighty charge,
On some high theme you learnedly enlarge;
Of all the ways of wisdom reason well,
How Richelieu rose, and how Sejanus fell:
Or, when your brow less thoughtfully unbends,
Circled with Swift and some delighted friends;
When, mixing mirth and wisdom with your wine,
Like that your wit shall flow, your genius shine:
Nor with less praise the conversation guide,
Than in the public councils you decide:
Or when the Dean, long privileged to rail,
Asserts his friend with more impetuous zeal;
You hear (whilst I sit by abash'd and mute)
With soft concessions shortening the dispute;
Then close with kind inquiries of my state,
"How are your tithes, and have they rose of late?
Why, Christ-Church is a pretty situation,
There are not many better in the nation!
This, with your other things, must yield you clear
Some six--at least five hundred pounds a-year."
  Suppose, at such a time, I took the freedom
To speak these truths as plainly as you read 'em;
You shall rejoin, my lord, when I've replied,
And, if you please, my lady shall decide.
  "My lord, I'm satisfied you meant me well,
And that I'm thankful, all the world can tell;
But you'll forgive me, if I own the event
Is short, is very short, of your intent:
At least, I feel some ills unfelt before,
My income less, and my expenses more."
  "How, doctor! double vicar! double rector!
A dignitary! with a city lecture!
What glebes--what dues--what tithes--what fines--what rent!
Why, doctor!--will you never be content?"
"Would my good Lord but cast up the account,
And see to what my revenues amount;[2]
My titles ample; but my gain so small,
That one good vicarage is worth them all:
And very wretched, sure, is he that's double
In nothing but his titles and his trouble.
And to this crying grievance, if you please,
My horses founder'd on Fermanagh ways;
Ways of well-polish'd and well-pointed stone,
Where every step endangers every bone;
And, more to raise your pity and your wonder,
Two churches--twelve Hibernian miles asunder:
With complicated cures, I labour hard in,
Beside whole summers absent from--my garden!
But that the world would think I play'd the fool,
I'd change with Charley Grattan for his school.[3]
What fine cascades, what vistoes, might I make,
Fixt in the centre of th' Irnian lake!
There might I sail delighted, smooth and safe,
Beneath the conduct of my good Sir Ralph:[4]
There's not a better steerer in the realm;
I hope, my lord, you'll call him to the helm."--
  "Doctor--a glorious scheme to ease your grief!
When cures are cross, a school's a sure relief.
You cannot fail of being happy there,
The lake will be the Lethe of your care:
The scheme is for your honour and your ease:
And, doctor, I'll promote it when you please.
Meanwhile, allowing things below your merit,
Yet, doctor, you've a philosophic spirit;
Your wants are few, and, like your income, small,
And you've enough to gratify them all:
You've trees, and fruits, and roots, enough in store:
And what would a philosopher have more?
You cannot wish for coaches, kitchens, cooks--"
  "My lord, I've not enough to buy me books--
Or pray, suppose my wants were all supplied,
Are there no wants I should regard beside?
Whose breast is so unmann'd, as not to grieve,
Compass'd with miseries he can't relieve?
Who can be happy--who should wish to live,
And want the godlike happiness to give?
That I'm a judge of this, you must allow:
I had it once--and I'm debarr'd it now.
Ask your own heart, my lord; if this be true,
Then how unblest am I! how blest are you!"
  "'Tis true--but, doctor, let us wave all that--
Say, if you had your wish, what you'd be at?"
  "Excuse me, good my lord--I won't be sounded,
Nor shall your favour by my wants be bounded.
My lord, I challenge nothing as my due,
Nor is it fit I should prescribe to you.
Yet this might Symmachus himself avow,
(Whose rigid rules[5] are antiquated now)--
My lord; I'd wish to pay the debts I owe--
I'd wish besides--to build and to bestow."


[Footnote 1: Delany, by the patronage of Carteret, and probably through
the intercession of Swift, had obtained a small living in the north of
Ireland, worth about one hundred pounds a-year, with the chancellorship
of Christ-Church, and a prebend's stall in St. Patrick's, neither of
which exceeded the same annual amount. Yet a clamour was raised among the
Whigs, on account of the multiplication of his preferments; and a charge
was founded against the Lord-Lieutenant of extravagant favour to a Tory
divine, which Swift judged worthy of an admirable ironical confutation
in his "Vindication of Lord Carteret." It appears, from the following
verses, that Delany was far from being of the same opinion with those who
thought he was too amply provided for.--_Scott._ See the "Vindication,"
"Prose Works," vii, p. 244.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Which, according to Swift's calculation, in his "Vindication
of Lord Carteret," amounted only to 300 a year. "Prose Works," vol. vii,
p. 245.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: A free school at Inniskillen, founded by Erasmus Smith,
Esq.--_Scott._]

[Footnote 4: Sir Ralph Gore, who had a villa in the lake of
Erin.--_F._]

[Footnote 5: Symmachus, Bishop of Rome, 499, made a decree, that no man
should solicit for ecclesiastical preferment before the death of the
incumbent.--_H._]




AN EPISTLE UPON AN EPISTLE

FROM A CERTAIN DOCTOR TO A CERTAIN GREAT LORD.
BEING A CHRISTMAS-BOX FOR DR. DELANY


As Jove will not attend on less,
When things of more importance press:
You can't, grave sir, believe it hard,
That you, a low Hibernian bard,
Should cool your heels a while, and wait
Unanswer'd at your patron's gate;
And would my lord vouchsafe to grant
This one poor humble boon I want,
Free leave to play his secretary,
As Falstaff acted old king Harry;[1]
I'd tell of yours in rhyme and print,
Folks shrug, and cry, "There's nothing in't."
And, after several readings over,
It shines most in the marble cover.
  How could so fine a taste dispense
With mean degrees of wit and sense?
Nor will my lord so far beguile
The wise and learned of our isle;
To make it pass upon the nation,
By dint of his sole approbation.
The task is arduous, patrons find,
To warp the sense of all mankind:
Who think your Muse must first aspire,
Ere he advance the doctor higher.
  You've cause to say he meant you well:
That you are thankful, who can tell?
For still you're short (which grieves your spirit)
Of his intent: you mean your merit.
  Ah! _quanto rectius, tu adepte,
Qui nil moliris tarn inepte_?[2]
Smedley,[3] thou Jonathan of Clogher,
"When thou thy humble lay dost offer
To Grafton's grace, with grateful heart,
Thy thanks and verse devoid of art:
Content with what his bounty gave,
No larger income dost thou crave."
  But you must have cascades, and all
Irne's lake, for your canal,
Your vistoes, barges, and (a pox on
All pride!) our speaker for your coxon:[4]
It's pity that he can't bestow you
Twelve commoners in caps to row you.
Thus Edgar proud, in days of yore,[5]
Held monarchs labouring at the oar;
And, as he pass'd, so swell'd the Dee,
Enraged, as Ern would do at thee.
  How different is this from Smedley!
(His name is up, he may in bed lie)
"Who only asks some pretty cure,
In wholesome soil and ether pure:
The garden stored with artless flowers,
In either angle shady bowers:
No gay parterre with costly green
Must in the ambient hedge be seen;
But Nature freely takes her course,
Nor fears from him ungrateful force:
No shears to check her sprouting vigour,
Or shape the yews to antic figure."
  But you, forsooth, your all must squander
On that poor spot, call'd Dell-ville, yonder;
And when you've been at vast expenses
In whims, parterres, canals, and fences,
Your assets fail, and cash is wanting;
Nor farther buildings, farther planting:
No wonder, when you raise and level,
Think this wall low, and that wall bevel.
Here a convenient box you found,
Which you demolish'd to the ground:
Then built, then took up with your arbour,
And set the house to Rupert Barber.
You sprang an arch which, in a scurvy
Humour, you tumbled topsy-turvy.
You change a circle to a square,
Then to a circle as you were:
Who can imagine whence the fund is,
That you _quadrata_ change _rotundis_?
  To Fame a temple you erect,
A Flora does the dome protect;
Mounts, walks, on high; and in a hollow
You place the Muses and Apollo;
There shining 'midst his train, to grace
Your whimsical poetic place.
  These stories were of old design'd
As fables: but you have refined
The poets mythologic dreams,
To real Muses, gods, and streams.
Who would not swear, when you contrive thus,
That you're Don Quixote redivivus?
Beneath, a dry canal there lies,
Which only Winter's rain supplies.
O! couldst thou, by some magic spell,
Hither convey St. Patrick's well![6]
Here may it reassume its stream,
And take a greater Patrick's name!
  If your expenses rise so high;
What income can your wants supply?
Yet still you fancy you inherit
A fund of such superior merit,
That you can't fail of more provision,
All by my lady's kind decision.
For, the more livings you can fish up,
You think you'll sooner be a bishop:
That could not be my lord's intent,
Nor can it answer the event.
Most think what has been heap'd on you
To other sort of folk was due:
Rewards too great for your flim-flams,
Epistles, riddles, epigrams.
  Though now your depth must not be sounded,
The time was, when you'd have compounded
For less than Charley Grattan's school!
Five hundred pound a-year's no fool!
Take this advice then from your friend,
To your ambition put an end,
Be frugal, Pat: pay what you owe,
Before you build and you bestow.
Be modest, nor address your betters
With begging, vain, familiar letters.
  A passage may be found,[7] I've heard,
In some old Greek or Latian bard,
Which says, "Would crows in silence eat
Their offals, or their better meat,
Their generous feeders not provoking
By loud and inharmonious croaking,
They might, unhurt by Envy's claws,
Live on, and stuff to boot their maws."


[Footnote 1: "King Henry the Fourth," Part I, Act ii,
Scene 4.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: Adapted from Hor., "Epist. ad Pisones," 140.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: See the "Petition to the Duke of Grafton," _post_,
p. 345.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: Alluding to Dr. Delany's ambitious choice of fixing in the
island of the Lake of Erin, where Sir Ralph Gore had a villa.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 5: When residing at Chester, he obliged eight of his tributary
princes to row him in a barge upon the Dee. Hume's "History of England,"
vol. i, p. 106.--_W. E. B_.]

[Footnote 6: Which had suddenly dried up. See _post_, vol. ii, "Verses on
the sudden drying up of St. Patrick's Well, near Trinity College,
Dublin."--_W.E.B._]

[Footnote 7: Hor., "Epist.," lib. I, xvii, 50.
  "Sed tacitus pasci si corvus posset, haberet
  Plus dapis, et rixae multo minus invidiaeque."
I append the original, for the sake of Swift's very free
rendering.--_W. E. B._]




A LIBEL
ON THE REVEREND DR. DELANY, AND HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN, LORD CARTERET
1729


Deluded mortals, whom the great
Choose for companions _tte--tte_;
Who at their dinners, _en famille_,
Get leave to sit whene'er you will;
Then boasting tell us where you dined,
And how his lordship was so kind;
How many pleasant things he spoke;
And how you laugh'd at every joke:
Swear he's a most facetious man;
That you and he are cup and can;
You travel with a heavy load,
And quite mistake preferment's road.
  Suppose my lord and you alone;
Hint the least interest of your own,
His visage drops, he knits his brow,
He cannot talk of business now:
Or, mention but a vacant post,
He'll turn it off with "Name your toast:"
Nor could the nicest artist paint
A countenance with more constraint.
  For, as their appetites to quench,
Lords keep a pimp to bring a wench;
So men of wit are but a kind
Of panders to a vicious mind
Who proper objects must provide
To gratify their lust of pride,
When, wearied with intrigues of state,
They find an idle hour to prate.
Then, shall you dare to ask a place,
You forfeit all your patron's grace,
And disappoint the sole design,
For which he summon'd you to dine.
  Thus Congreve spent in writing plays,
And one poor office, half his days:
While Montague,[1] who claim'd the station
To be Mcenas of the nation,
For poets open table kept,
But ne'er consider'd where they slept:
Himself as rich as fifty Jews,
Was easy, though they wanted shoes;
And crazy Congreve scarce could spare
A shilling to discharge his chair:
Till prudence taught him to appeal
From Pan's fire to party zeal;
Not owing to his happy vein
The fortunes of his later scene,
Took proper principles to thrive:
And so might every dunce alive.[2]
  Thus Steele, who own'd what others writ,
And flourish'd by imputed wit,
From perils of a hundred jails,
Withdrew to starve, and die in Wales.
  Thus Gay, the hare with many friends,
Twice seven long years the court attends:
Who, under tales conveying truth,
To virtue form'd a princely youth:[3]
Who paid his courtship with the crowd,
As far as modest pride allow'd;
Rejects a servile usher's place,
And leaves St. James's in disgrace.[4]
  Thus Addison, by lords carest,
Was left in foreign lands distrest;
Forgot at home, became for hire
A travelling tutor to a squire:
But wisely left the Muses' hill,
To business shaped the poet's quill,
Let all his barren laurels fade,
Took up himself the courtier's trade,
And, grown a minister of state,
Saw poets at his levee wait.[5]
  Hail, happy Pope! whose generous mind
Detesting all the statesman kind,
Contemning courts, at courts unseen,
Refused the visits of a queen.
A soul with every virtue fraught,
By sages, priests, or poets taught;
Whose filial piety excels
Whatever Grecian story tells;[6]
A genius for all stations fit,
Whose meanest talent is his wit:
His heart too great, though fortune little,
To lick a rascal statesman's spittle:
Appealing to the nation's taste,
Above the reach of want is placed:
By Homer dead was taught to thrive,
Which Homer never could alive;
And sits aloft on Pindus' head,
Despising slaves that cringe for bread.
  True politicians only pay
For solid work, but not for play:
Nor ever choose to work with tools
Forged up in colleges and schools,
Consider how much more is due
To all their journeymen than you:
At table you can Horace quote;
They at a pinch can bribe a vote:
You show your skill in Grecian story;
But they can manage Whig and Tory;
You, as a critic, are so curious
To find a verse in Virgil spurious;
But they can smoke the deep designs,
When Bolingbroke with Pulteney dines.
  Besides, your patron may upbraid ye,
That you have got a place already;
An office for your talents fit,
To flatter, carve, and show your wit;
To snuff the lights and stir the fire,
And get a dinner for your hire.
What claim have you to place or pension?
He overpays in condescension.
  But, reverend doctor, you we know
Could never condescend so low;
The viceroy, whom you now attend,
Would, if he durst, be more your friend;
Nor will in you those gifts despise,
By which himself was taught to rise:
When he has virtue to retire,
He'll grieve he did not raise you higher,
And place you in a better station,
Although it might have pleased the nation.
  This may be true--submitting still
To Walpole's more than royal will;
And what condition can be worse?
He comes to drain a beggar's purse;
He comes to tie our chains on faster,
And show us England is our master:
Caressing knaves, and dunces wooing,
To make them work their own undoing.
What has he else to bait his traps,
Or bring his vermin in, but scraps?
The offals of a church distrest;
A hungry vicarage at best;
Or some remote inferior post,
With forty pounds a-year at most?
  But here again you interpose--
Your favourite lord is none of those
Who owe their virtues to their stations,
And characters to dedications:
For, keep him in, or turn him out,
His learning none will call in doubt;
His learning, though a poet said it
Before a play, would lose no credit;
Nor Pope would dare deny him wit,
Although to praise it Philips writ.
I own he hates an action base,
His virtues battling with his place:
Nor wants a nice discerning spirit
Betwixt a true and spurious merit;
Can sometimes drop a voter's claim,
And give up party to his fame.
I do the most that friendship can;
I hate the viceroy, love the man.
  But you, who, till your fortune's made,
Must be a sweetener by your trade,
Should swear he never meant us ill;
We suffer sore against his will;
That, if we could but see his heart,
He would have chose a milder part:
We rather should lament his case,
Who must obey, or lose his place.
  Since this reflection slipt your pen,
Insert it when you write again;
And, to illustrate it, produce
This simile for his excuse:
  "So, to destroy a guilty land
An [7]angel sent by Heaven's command,
While he obeys Almighty will,
Perhaps may feel compassion still;
And wish the task had been assign'd
To spirits of less gentle kind."
  But I, in politics grown old,
Whose thoughts are of a different mould,
Who from my soul sincerely hate
Both kings and ministers of state;
Who look on courts with stricter eyes
To see the seeds of vice arise;
Can lend you an allusion fitter,
Though flattering knaves may call it bitter;
Which, if you durst but give it place,
Would show you many a statesman's face:
Fresh from the tripod of Apollo,
I had it in the words that follow:
Take notice to avoid offence,
I here except his excellence:
  "So, to effect his monarch's ends,
From hell a viceroy devil ascends;
His budget with corruptions cramm'd,
The contributions of the damn'd;
Which with unsparing hand he strews
Through courts and senates as he goes;
And then at Beelzebub's black hall,
Complains his budget was too small."
  Your simile may better shine
In verse, but there is truth in mine.
For no imaginable things
Can differ more than gods and kings:
And statesmen, by ten thousand odds,
Are angels just as kings are gods.


[Footnote 1: Earl of Halifax; see Johnson's "Life of
Montague."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 2: The whole of this paragraph is unjust both to Halifax and
Congreve; for immediately after the production of Congreve's first play,
"The Old Bachelor," Halifax gave him a place in the Pipe Office, and
another in the Customs, of 600 a year. Ultimately he had at least four
sinecure appointments which together afforded him some 1,200 a year. See
Johnson's "Lives of the Poets," edit. Cunningham.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 3: William, Duke of Cumberland, son to George II, "The
Butcher."]

[Footnote 4: See _ante_, p. 215, note.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: See Johnson's "Life of Addison."--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 6: See "Prologue to the Satires," 390 to the end.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 7: "So when an angel by divine command," etc.
ADDISON'S _Campaign_.]




TO DR. DELANY
ON THE LIBELS WRITTEN AGAINST HIM. 1729

                  --Tanti tibi non sit opaci
Omnis arena Tagi quodque in mare volvitur aurum.--_Juv._ iii, 54.

As some raw youth in country bred,
To arms by thirst of honour led,
When at a skirmish first he hears
The bullets whistling round his ears,
Will duck his head aside, will start,
And feel a trembling at his heart,
Till 'scaping oft without a wound
Lessens the terror of the sound;
Fly bullets now as thick as hops,
He runs into a cannon's chops.
An author thus, who pants for fame,
Begins the world with fear and shame;
When first in print you see him dread
Each pop-gun levell'd at his head:
The lead yon critic's quill contains,
Is destined to beat out his brains:
As if he heard loud thunders roll,
Cries, Lord have mercy on his soul!
Concluding that another shot
Will strike him dead upon the spot.
But, when with squibbing, flashing, popping,
He cannot see one creature dropping;
That, missing fire, or missing aim,
His life is safe, I mean his fame;
The danger past, takes heart of grace,
And looks a critic in the face.
  Though splendour gives the fairest mark
To poison'd arrows in the dark,
Yet, in yourself when smooth and round,
They glance aside without a wound.
  'Tis said, the gods tried all their art,
How pain they might from pleasure part:
But little could their strength avail;
Both still are fasten'd by the tail;
Thus fame and censure with a tether
By fate are always link'd together.
  Why will you aim to be preferr'd
In wit before the common herd;
And yet grow mortified and vex'd,
To pay the penalty annex'd?
  'Tis eminence makes envy rise;
As fairest fruits attract the flies.
Should stupid libels grieve your mind,
You soon a remedy may find;
Lie down obscure like other folks
Below the lash of snarlers' jokes.
Their faction is five hundred odds,
For every coxcomb lends them rods,
And sneers as learnedly as they,
Like females o'er their morning tea.
  You say the Muse will not contain
And write you must, or break a vein.
Then, if you find the terms too hard,
No longer my advice regard:
But raise your fancy on the wing;
The Irish senate's praises sing;
How jealous of the nation's freedom,
And for corruptions how they weed 'em;
How each the public good pursues,
How far their hearts from private views;
Make all true patriots, up to shoe-boys,
Huzza their brethren at the Blue-boys;[1]
Thus grown a member of the club,
No longer dread the rage of Grub.
  How oft am I for rhyme to seek!
To dress a thought I toil a week:
And then how thankful to the town,
If all my pains will earn a crown!
While every critic can devour
My work and me in half an hour.
Would men of genius cease to write,
The rogues must die for want and spite;
Must die for want of food and raiment,
If scandal did not find them payment.
How cheerfully the hawkers cry
A satire, and the gentry buy!
While my hard-labour'd poem pines
Unsold upon the printer's lines.
  A genius in the reverend gown
Must ever keep its owner down;
'Tis an unnatural conjunction,
And spoils the credit of the function.
Round all your brethren cast your eyes,
Point out the surest men to rise;
That club of candidates in black,
The least deserving of the pack,
Aspiring, factious, fierce, and loud,
With grace and learning unendow'd,
Can turn their hands to every job,
The fittest tools to work for Bob;[2]
Will sooner coin a thousand lies,
Than suffer men of parts to rise;
They crowd about preferment's gate,
And press you down with all their weight;
For as of old mathematicians
Were by the vulgar thought magicians;
So academic dull ale-drinkers
Pronounce all men of wit free-thinkers.
  Wit, as the chief of virtue's friends,
Disdains to serve ignoble ends.
Observe what loads of stupid rhymes
Oppress us in corrupted times;
What pamphlets in a court's defence
Show reason, grammar, truth, or sense?
For though the Muse delights in fiction,
She ne'er inspires against conviction.
Then keep your virtue still unmixt,
And let not faction come betwixt:
By party-steps no grandeur climb at,
Though it would make you England's primate;
First learn the science to be dull,
You then may soon your conscience lull;
If not, however seated high,
Your genius in your face will fly.
  When Jove was from his teeming head
Of Wit's fair goddess[3] brought to bed,
There follow'd at his lying-in
For after-birth a sooterkin;
Which, as the nurse pursued to kill,
Attain'd by flight the Muses' hill,
There in the soil began to root,
And litter'd at Parnassus' foot.
From hence the critic vermin sprung,
With harpy claws and poisonous tongue:
Who fatten on poetic scraps,
Too cunning to be caught in traps.
Dame Nature, as the learned show,
Provides each animal its foe:
Hounds hunt the hare, the wily fox
Devours your geese, the wolf your flocks
Thus Envy pleads a natural claim
To persecute the Muse's fame;
On poets in all times abusive,
From Homer down to Pope inclusive.
  Yet what avails it to complain?
You try to take revenge in vain.
A rat your utmost rage defies,
That safe behind the wainscot lies.
Say, did you ever know by sight
In cheese an individual mite!
Show me the same numeric flea,
That bit your neck but yesterday:
You then may boldly go in quest
To find the Grub Street poet's nest;
What spunging-house, in dread of jail,
Receives them, while they wait for bail;
What alley are they nestled in,
To flourish o'er a cup of gin;
Find the last garret where they lay,
Or cellar where they starve to-day.
Suppose you have them all trepann'd,
With each a libel in his hand,
What punishment would you inflict?
Or call them rogues, or get them kickt?
These they have often tried before;
You but oblige them so much more:
Themselves would be the first to tell,
To make their trash the better sell.
  You have been libell'd--Let us know,
What fool officious told you so?
Will you regard the hawker's cries,
Who in his titles always lies?
Whate'er the noisy scoundrel says,
It might be something in your praise;
And praise bestow'd in Grub Street rhymes,
Would vex one more a thousand times.
Till critics blame, and judges praise,
The poet cannot claim his bays.
On me when dunces are satiric,
I take it for a panegyric.
Hated by fools, and fools to hate,
Be that my motto, and my fate.


[Footnote 1: The Irish Parliament met at the Blue-Boys Hospital, while
the new Parliament-house was building.--_Swift_.]

[Footnote 2: Sir Robert Walpole.]

[Footnote 3: Pallas.]




DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING A BIRTH-DAY SONG. 1729

To form a just and finish'd piece,
Take twenty gods of Rome or Greece,
Whose godships are in chief request,
And fit your present subject best;
And, should it be your hero's case,
To have both male and female race,
Your business must be to provide
A score of goddesses beside.
  Some call their monarchs sons of Saturn,
For which they bring a modern pattern;
Because they might have heard of one,[1]
Who often long'd to eat his son;
But this I think will not go down,
For here the father kept his crown.
  Why, then, appoint him son of Jove,
Who met his mother in a grove;
To this we freely shall consent,
Well knowing what the poets meant;
And in their sense, 'twixt me and you,
It may be literally true.[2]
  Next, as the laws of verse require,
He must be greater than his sire;
For Jove, as every schoolboy knows,
Was able Saturn to depose;
And sure no Christian poet breathing
Would be more scrupulous than a Heathen;
Or, if to blasphemy it tends.
That's but a trifle among friends.
  Your hero now another Mars is,
Makes mighty armies turn their a--s:
Behold his glittering falchion mow
Whole squadrons at a single blow;
While Victory, with wings outspread,
Flies, like an eagle, o'er his head;
His milk-white steed upon its haunches,
Or pawing into dead men's paunches;
As Overton has drawn his sire,
Still seen o'er many an alehouse fire.
Then from his arm hoarse thunder rolls,
As loud as fifty mustard bowls;
For thunder still his arm supplies,
And lightning always in his eyes.
They both are cheap enough in conscience,
And serve to echo rattling nonsense.
The rumbling words march fierce along,
Made trebly dreadful in your song.
  Sweet poet, hired for birth-day rhymes,
To sing of wars, choose peaceful times.
What though, for fifteen years and more,
Janus has lock'd his temple-door;
Though not a coffeehouse we read in
Has mention'd arms on this side Sweden;
Nor London Journals, nor the Postmen,
Though fond of warlike lies as most men;
Thou still with battles stuff thy head full:
For, must thy hero not be dreadful?
Dismissing Mars, it next must follow
Your conqueror is become Apollo:
That he's Apollo is as plain as
That Robin Walpole is Mcenas;
But that he struts, and that he squints,
You'd know him by Apollo's prints.
Old Phoebus is but half as bright,
For yours can shine both day and night.
The first, perhaps, may once an age
Inspire you with poetic rage;
Your Phoebus Royal, every day,
Not only can inspire, but pay.
  Then make this new Apollo sit
Sole patron, judge, and god of wit.
"How from his altitude he stoops
To raise up Virtue when she droops;
On Learning how his bounty flows,
And with what justice he bestows;
Fair Isis, and ye banks of Cam!
Be witness if I tell a flam,
What prodigies in arts we drain,
From both your streams, in George's reign.
As from the flowery bed of Nile"--
But here's enough to show your style.
Broad innuendoes, such as this,
If well applied, can hardly miss:
For, when you bring your song in print,
He'll get it read, and take the hint;
(It must be read before 'tis warbled,
The paper gilt and cover marbled.)
And will be so much more your debtor,
Because he never knew a letter.
And, as he hears his wit and sense
(To which he never made pretence)
Set out in hyperbolic strains,
A guinea shall reward your pains;
For patrons never pay so well,
As when they scarce have learn'd to spell.
Next call him Neptune: with his trident
He rules the sea: you see him ride in't;
And, if provoked, he soundly firks his
Rebellious waves with rods, like Xerxes.
He would have seized the Spanish plate,
Had not the fleet gone out too late;
And in their very ports besiege them,
But that he would not disoblige them;
And make the rascals pay him dearly
For those affronts they give him yearly.
  'Tis not denied, that, when we write,
Our ink is black, our paper white:
And, when we scrawl our paper o'er,
We blacken what was white before:
I think this practice only fit
For dealers in satiric wit.
But you some white-lead ink must get
And write on paper black as jet;
Your interest lies to learn the knack
Of whitening what before was black.
  Thus your encomium, to be strong,
Must be applied directly wrong.
A tyrant for his mercy praise,
And crown a royal dunce with bays:
A squinting monkey load with charms,
And paint a coward fierce in arms.
Is he to avarice inclined?
Extol him for his generous mind:
And, when we starve for want of corn,
Come out with Amalthea's horn:[3]
For all experience this evinces
The only art of pleasing princes:
For princes' love you should descant
On virtues which they know they want.
One compliment I had forgot,
But songsters must omit it not;
I freely grant the thought is old:
Why, then, your hero must be told,
In him such virtues lie inherent,
To qualify him God's vicegerent;
That with no title to inherit,
He must have been a king by merit.
Yet, be the fancy old or new,
Tis partly false, and partly true:
And, take it right, it means no more
Than George and William claim'd before.
  Should some obscure inferior fellow,
Like Julius, or the youth of Pella,[4]
When all your list of Gods is out,
Presume to show his mortal snout,
And as a Deity intrude,
Because he had the world subdued;
O, let him not debase your thoughts,
Or name him but to tell his faults.--
  Of Gods I only quote the best,
But you may hook in all the rest.
  Now, birth-day bard, with joy proceed
To praise your empress and her breed;
First of the first, to vouch your lies,
Bring all the females of the skies;
The Graces, and their mistress, Venus,
Must venture down to entertain us:
With bended knees when they adore her,
What dowdies they appear before her!
Nor shall we think you talk at random,
For Venus might be her great-grandam:
Six thousand years has lived the Goddess,
Your heroine hardly fifty odd is;
Besides, your songsters oft have shown
That she has Graces of her own:
Three Graces by Lucina brought her,
Just three, and every Grace a daughter;
Here many a king his heart and crown
Shall at their snowy feet lay down:
In royal robes, they come by dozens
To court their English German cousins:
Beside a pair of princely babies,
That, five years hence, will both be Hebes.
  Now see her seated in her throne
With genuine lustre, all her own:
Poor Cynthia never shone so bright,
Her splendour is but borrow'd light;
And only with her brother linkt
Can shine, without him is extinct.
But Carolina shines the clearer
With neither spouse nor brother near her:
And darts her beams o'er both our isles,
Though George is gone a thousand miles.
Thus Berecynthia takes her place,
Attended by her heavenly race;
And sees a son in every God,
Unawed by Jove's all-shaking nod.
  Now sing his little highness Freddy
Who struts like any king already:
With so much beauty, show me any maid
That could resist this charming Ganymede!
Where majesty with sweetness vies,
And, like his father, early wise.
Then cut him out a world of work,
To conquer Spain, and quell the Turk:
Foretel his empire crown'd with bays,
And golden times, and halcyon days;
And swear his line shall rule the nation
For ever--till the conflagration.
  But, now it comes into my mind,
We left a little duke behind;
A Cupid in his face and size,
And only wants, to want his eyes.
Make some provision for the younker,
Find him a kingdom out to conquer;
Prepare a fleet to waft him o'er,
Make Gulliver his commodore;
Into whose pocket valiant Willy put,
Will soon subdue the realm of Lilliput.
  A skilful critic justly blames
Hard, tough, crank, guttural, harsh, stiff names
The sense can ne'er be too jejune,
But smooth your words to fit the tune.
Hanover may do well enough,
But George and Brunswick are too rough;
Hesse-Darmstadt makes a rugged sound,
And Guelp the strongest ear will wound.
In vain are all attempts from Germany
To find out proper words for harmony:
And yet I must except the Rhine,
Because it clinks to Caroline.
Hail, queen of Britain, queen of rhymes!
Be sung ten hundred thousand times;
Too happy were the poets' crew,
If their own happiness they knew:
Three syllables did never meet
So soft, so sliding, and so sweet:
Nine other tuneful words like that
Would prove even Homer's numbers flat.
Behold three beauteous vowels stand,
With bridegroom liquids hand in hand;
In concord here for ever fix'd,
No jarring consonant betwixt.
  May Caroline continue long,
For ever fair and young!--in song.
What though the royal carcass must,
Squeezed in a coffin, turn to dust?
Those elements her name compose,
Like atoms, are exempt from blows.
  Though Caroline may fill your gaps,
Yet still you must consult your maps;
Find rivers with harmonious names,
Sabrina, Medway, and the Thames,
Britannia long will wear like steel,
But Albion's cliffs are out at heel;
And Patience can endure no more
To hear the Belgic lion roar.
Give up the phrase of haughty Gaul,
But proud Iberia soundly maul:
Restore the ships by Philip taken,
And make him crouch to save his bacon.
Nassau, who got the name of Glorious,
Because he never was victorious,
A hanger-on has always been;
For old acquaintance bring him in.
  To Walpole you might lend a line,
But much I fear he's in decline;
And if you chance to come too late,
When he goes out, you share his fate,
And bear the new successor's frown;
Or, whom you once sang up, sing down.
Reject with scorn that stupid notion,
To praise your hero for devotion;
Nor entertain a thought so odd,
That princes should believe in God;
But follow the securest rule,
And turn it all to ridicule:
'Tis grown the choicest wit at court,
And gives the maids of honour sport;
For, since they talk'd with Dr. Clarke,[5]
They now can venture in the dark:
That sound divine the truth has spoke all,
And pawn'd his word, Hell is not local.
This will not give them half the trouble
Of bargains sold, or meanings double.
  Supposing now your song is done,
To Mynheer Handel next you run,
Who artfully will pare and prune
Your words to some Italian tune:
Then print it in the largest letter,
With capitals, the more the better.
Present it boldly on your knee,
And take a guinea for your fee.


[Footnote 1: Alluding to the disputes between George I, and his son,
while the latter was Prince of Wales.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 2: The Electress Sophia, mother of George II, was supposed to
have had an intrigue with Count Konigsmark.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 3: The name of the goat with whose milk Jupiter was fed, and
one of whose horns was placed among the stars as the Cornu Amaltheae, or
Cornu Copiae. Ovid, "Fasti," lib. v.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 4: The ancient city in Macedonia, the birthplace of Alexander
the Great.--_W. E. B._]

[Footnote 5: A famous Low Church divine, a favourite with Queen Caroline,
distinguished as a man of science and a scholar. He became Rector of St.
James', Piccadilly, but his sermons and his theological writings were not
considered quite orthodox. See note in Carruthers' edition of Pope,
"Moral Essays," Epist. iv.--_W. E. B._]




THE PHEASANT AND THE LARK
A FABLE BY DR. DELANY
1730

--quis iniquae
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?--_-Juv._ i, 30.

In ancient times, as bards indite,
(If clerks have conn'd the records right.)
A peacock reign'd, whose glorious sway
His subjects with delight obey:
His tail was beauteous to behold,
Replete with goodly eyes and gold;
Fair emblem of that monarch's guise,
Whose train at once is rich and wise;
And princely ruled he many regions,
And statesmen wise, and valiant legions.
  A pheasant lord,[1] above the rest,
With every grace and talent blest,
Was sent to sway, with all his skill,
The sceptre of a neighbouring hill.[2]
No science was to him unknown,
For all the arts were all his own:
In all the living learned read,
Though more delighted with the dead:
For birds, if ancient tales say true,
Had then their Popes and Homers too;
Could read and write in prose and verse,
And speak like ***, and build like Pearce.[3]
He knew their voices, and their wings,
Who smoothest soars, who sweetest sings;
Who toils with ill-fledged pens to climb,
And who attain'd the true sublime.
Their merits he could well descry,
He had so exquisite an eye;
And when that fail'd to show them clear,
He had as exquisite an ear;
It chanced as on a day he stray'd
Beneath an academic shade,
He liked, amidst a thousand throats,
The wildness of a Woodlark's[4] notes,
And search'd, and spied, and seized his game,
And took him home, and made him tame;
Found him on trial true and able,
So cheer'd and fed him at his table.
  Here some shrewd critic finds I'm caught,
And cries out, "Better fed than taught"--Then
jests on game and tame, and reads,
And jests, and so my tale proceeds.
  Long had he studied in the wood,
Conversing with the wise and good:
His soul with harmony inspired,
With love of truth and virtue fired:
His brethren's good and Maker's praise
Were all the study of his lays;
Were all his study in retreat,
And now employ'd him with the great.
His friendship was the sure resort
Of all the wretched at the court;
But chiefly merit in distress
His greatest blessing was to bless.--
  This fix'd him in his patron's breast,
But fired with envy all the rest:
I mean that noisy, craving crew,
Who round the court incessant flew,
And prey'd like rooks, by pairs and dozens,
To fill the maws of sons and cousins:
"Unmoved their heart, and chill'd their blood
To every thought of common good,
Confining every hope and care,
To their own low, contracted sphere."
These ran him down with ceaseless cry,
But found it hard to tell you why,
Till his own worth and wit supplied
Sufficient matter to deride:
"'Tis envy's safest, surest rule,
To hide her rage in ridicule:
The vulgar eye she best beguiles,
When all her snakes are deck'd with smiles:
Sardonic smiles, by rancour raised!
Tormented most when seeming pleased!"
Their spite had more than half expired,
Had he not wrote what all admired;
What morsels had their malice wanted,
But that he built, and plann'd, and planted!
How had his sense and learning grieved them,
But that his charity relieved them!
  "At highest worth dull malice reaches,
As slugs pollute the fairest peaches:
Envy defames, as harpies vile
Devour the food they first defile."
  Now ask the fruit of all his favour--
"He was not hitherto a saver."--
What then could make their rage run mad?
"Why, what he hoped, not what he had."
  "What tyrant e'er invented ropes,
Or racks, or rods, to punish hopes?
Th' inheritance of hope and fame
Is seldom Earthly Wisdom's aim;
Or, if it were, is not so small,
But there is room enough for all."
  If he but chance to breathe a song,
(He seldom sang, and never long,)
The noisy, rude, malignant crowd,
Where it was high, pronounced it loud:
Plain Truth was Pride; and, what was sillier,
Easy and Friendly was Familiar.
  Or, if he tuned his lofty lays,
With solemn air to Virtue's praise,
Alike abusive and erroneous,
They call'd it hoarse and inharmonious.
Yet so it was to souls like theirs,
Tuneless as Abel to the bears!
   A Rook[5] with harsh malignant caw
Began, was follow'd by a Daw;[6]
(Though some, who would be thought to know,
Are positive it was a crow:)
Jack Daw was seconded by Tit,
Tom Tit[7] could write, and so he writ;
A tribe of tuneless praters follow,
The Jay, the Magpie, and the Swallow;
And twenty more their throats let loose,
Down to the witless, waddling Goose.
  Some peck'd at him, some flew, some flutter'd,
Some hiss'd, some scream'd, and others mutter'd:
The Crow, on carrion wont to feast,
The Carrion Crow, condemn'd his taste:
The Rook, in earnest too, not joking,
Swore all his singing was but croaking.
Some thought they meant to show their wit,
Might think so still--"but that they writ"--
Could it be spite or envy?--"No--
Who did no ill could have no foe."--
So wise Simplicity esteem'd;
Quite otherwise True Wisdom deem'd;
This question rightly understood,
"What more provokes than doing good?
A soul ennobled and refined
Reproaches every baser mind:
As strains exalted and melodious
Make every meaner music odious."--
At length the Nightingale[8] was heard,
For voice and wisdom long revered,
Esteem'd of all the wise and good,
The Guardian Genius of the wood:
He long in discontent retired,
Yet not obscured, but more admired:
His brethren's servile souls disdaining,
He lived indignant and complaining:
They now afresh provoke his choler,
(It seems the Lark had been his scholar,
A favourite scholar always near him,
And oft had waked whole nights to hear him.)
Enraged he canvasses the matter,
Exposes all their senseless chatter,
Shows him and them in such a light,
As more inflames, yet quells their spite.
They hear his voice, and frighted fly,
For rage had raised it very high:
Shamed by the wisdom of his notes,
They hide their heads, and hush their throats.


[Footnote 1: Lord Carteret, Lord-lieutenant of Ireland.--_F_.]

[Footnote 2: Ireland.--_F_]

[Footnote 3: A famous modern architect, who built the Parliament-house in
Dublin.--_F_.]

[Footnote 4: Dr. Delany.--_F_.]

[Footnote 5: Dr. T----r.--_F._]

[Footnote 6: Right Hon. Rich. Tighe.--_F._]

[Footnote 7: Dr. Sheridan.--_F._]

[Footnote 8: Dean Swift.--_F._]


ANSWER TO DR. DELANY'S FABLE OF THE PHEASANT AND LARK.
1730


In ancient times, the wise were able
In proper terms to write a fable:
Their tales would always justly suit
The characters of every brute.
The ass was dull, the lion brave,
The stag was swift, the fox a knave;
The daw a thief, the ape a droll,
The hound would scent, the wolf would prowl:
A pigeon would, if shown by sop,
Fly from the hawk, or pick his pease up.
Far otherwise a great divine
Has learnt his fables to refine;
He jumbles men and birds together,
As if they all were of a feather:
You see him first the Peacock bring,
Against all rules, to be a king;
That in his tail he wore his eyes,
By which he grew both rich and wise.
Now, pray, observe the doctor's choice,
A Peacock chose for flight and voice;
Did ever mortal see a peacock
Attempt a flight above a haycock?
And for his singing, doctor, you know
Himself complain'd of it to Juno.
He squalls in such a hellish noise,
He frightens all the village boys.
This Peacock kept a standing force,
In regiments of foot and horse:
Had statesmen too of every kind,
Who waited on his eyes behind;
And this was thought the highest post;
For, rule the rump, you rule the roast.
The doctor names but one at present,
And he of all birds was a Pheasant.
This Pheasant was a man of wit,
Could read all books were ever writ;
And, when among companions privy,
Could quote you Cicero and Livy.
Birds, as he says, and I allow,
Were scholars then, as we are now;
Could read all volumes up to folios,
And feed on fricassees and olios:
This Pheasant, by the Peacock's will,
Was viceroy of a neighbouring hill;
And, as he wander'd in his park,
He chanced to spy a clergy Lark;
Was taken with his person outward,
So prettily he pick'd a cow-t--d:
Then in a net the Pheasant caught him,
And in his palace fed and taught him.
The moral of the tale is pleasant,
Himself the Lark, my lord the Pheasant:
A lark he is, and such a lark
As never came from Noah's ark:
And though he had no other notion,
But building, planning, and devotion;
Though 'tis a maxim you must know,
"Who does no ill can have no foe;"
Yet how can I express in words
The strange stupidity of birds?
This Lark was hated in the wood,
Because he did his brethren good.
At last the Nightingale comes in,
To hold the doctor by the chin:
We all can find out what he means,
The worst of disaffected deans:
Whose wit at best was next to none,
And now that little next is gone;
Against the court is always blabbing,
And calls the senate-house a cabin;
So dull, that but for spleen and spite,
We ne'er should know that he could write
Who thinks the nation always err'd,
Because himself is not preferr'd;
His heart is through his libel seen,
Nor could his malice spare the queen;
Who, had she known his vile behaviour,
Would ne'er have shown him so much favour.
A noble lord[1] has told his pranks,
And well deserves the nation's thanks.
O! would the senate deign to show
Resentment on this public foe,
Our Nightingale might fit a cage;
There let him starve, and vent his rage:
Or would they but in fetters bind
This enemy of human kind!
Harmonious Coffee,[2] show thy zeal,
Thou champion for the commonweal:
Nor on a theme like this repine,
For once to wet thy pen divine:
Bestow that libeller a lash,
Who daily vends seditious trash:
Who dares revile the nation's wisdom,
But in the praise of virtue is dumb:
That scribbler lash, who neither knows
The turn of verse, nor style of prose;
Whose malice, for the worst of ends,
Would have us lose our English friends:[3]
Who never had one public thought,
Nor ever gave the poor a groat.
One clincher more, and I have done,
I end my labours with a pun.
Jove send this Nightingale may fall,
Who spends his day and night in gall!
So, Nightingale and Lark, adieu;
I see the greatest owls in you
That ever screech'd, or ever flew.


[Footnote 1: Lord Allen, the same who is meant by Traulus.--_F._]

[Footnote 2: A Dublin gazetteer.--_F._]

[Footnote 3: See A New Song on a Seditious Pamphlet.--_F._]



DEAN SMEDLEY'S PETITION TO THE DUKE OF GRAFTON[1]

Non domus et fundus, non aeris acervus et auri.--HOR.
 _Epist._, I, ii, 47.

It was, my lord, the dexterous shift
Of t'other Jonathan, viz. Swift,
But now St. Patrick's saucy dean,
With silver verge, and surplice clean,
Of Oxford, or of Ormond's grace,
In looser rhyme to beg a place.
A place he got, yclept a stall,
And eke a thousand pounds withal;
And were he less a witty writer,
He might as well have got a mitre.
  Thus I, the Jonathan of Clogher,
In humble lays my thanks to offer,
Approach your grace with grateful heart,
My thanks and verse both void of art,
Content with what your bounty gave,
No larger income do I crave:
Rejoicing that, in better times,
Grafton requires my loyal lines.
Proud! while my patron is polite,
I likewise to the patriot write!
Proud! that at once I can commend
King George's and the Muses' friend!
Endear'd to Britain; and to thee
(Disjoin'd, Hibernia, by the sea)
Endear'd by twice three anxious years,
Employ'd in guardian toils and cares;
By love, by wisdom, and by skill;
For he has saved thee 'gainst thy will.
  But where shall Smedley make his nest,
And lay his wandering head to rest?
Where shall he find a decent house,
To treat his friends and cheer his spouse?
O! tack, my lord, some pretty cure,
In wholesome soil, and ether pure;
The garden stored with artless flowers,
In either angle shady bowers.
No gay parterre, with costly green,
Within the ambient hedge be seen:
Let Nature freely take her course,
Nor fear from me ungrateful force;
No shears shall check her sprouting vigour,
Nor shape the yews to antic figure:
A limpid brook shall trout supply,
In May, to take the mimic fly;
Round a small orchard may it run,
Whose apples redden to the sun.
Let all be snug, and warm, and neat;
For fifty turn'd a safe retreat,
A little Euston[2] may it be,
Euston I'll carve on every tree.
But then, to keep it in repair,
My lord--twice fifty pounds a-year
Will barely do; but if your grace
Could make them hundreds--charming place!
Thou then wouldst show another face.
  Clogher! far north, my lord, it lies,
'Midst snowy hills, inclement skies:
One shivers with the arctic wind,
One hears the polar axis grind.
Good John[3] indeed, with beef and claret,
Makes the place warm, that one may bear it.
He has a purse to keep a table,
And eke a soul as hospitable.
My heart is good; but assets fail,
To fight with storms of snow and hail.
Besides, the country's thin of people,
Who seldom meet but at the steeple:
The strapping dean, that's gone to Down,
Ne'er named the thing without a frown,
When, much fatigued with sermon study,
He felt his brain grow dull and muddy;
No fit companion could be found,
To push the lazy bottle round:
Sure then, for want of better folks
To pledge, his clerk was orthodox.
  Ah! how unlike to Gerard Street,
Where beaux and belles in parties meet;
Where gilded chairs and coaches throng,
And jostle as they troll along;
Where tea and coffee hourly flow,
And gape-seed does in plenty grow;
And Griz (no clock more certain) cries,
Exact at seven, "Hot mutton-pies!"
There Lady Luna in her sphere
Once shone, when Paunceforth was not near;
But now she wanes, and, as 'tis said,
Keeps sober hours, and goes to bed.
There--but 'tis endless to write down
All the amusements of the town;
And spouse will think herself quite undone,
To trudge to Connor[4] from sweet London;
And care we must our wives to please,
Or else--we shall be ill at ease.
  You see, my lord, what 'tis I lack,
'Tis only some convenient tack,
Some parsonage-house with garden sweet,
To be my late, my last retreat;
A decent church, close by its side,
There, preaching, praying, to reside;
And as my time securely rolls,
To save my own and other souls.


[Footnote 1: This piece is repeatedly and always satirically alluded to
in the preceding poems.--_Scott_.]

[Footnote 2: The name of the Duke's seat in Suffolk.--_N._]

[Footnote 3: Bishop Sterne.--_H._]

[Footnote 4: The bishopric of Connor is united to that of Down; but there
are two deans.--_Scott_.]




THE DUKE'S ANSWER
BY DR. SWIFT


Dear Smed, I read thy brilliant lines,
Where wit in all its glory shines;
Where compliments, with all their pride,
Are by their numbers dignified:
I hope to make you yet as clean
As that same Viz, St. Patrick's dean.
I'll give thee surplice, verge, and stall,
And may be something else withal;
And, were you not so good a writer,
I should present you with a mitre.
Write worse, then, if you can--be wise-
Believe me, 'tis the way to rise.
Talk not of making of thy nest:
Ah! never lay thy head to rest!
That head so well with wisdom fraught,
That writes without the toil of thought!
While others rack their busy brains,
You are not in the least at pains.
Down to your dean'ry now repair,
And build a castle in the air.
I'm sure a man of your fine sense
Can do it with a small expense.
There your dear spouse and you together
May breathe your bellies full of ether,
When Lady Luna[1] is your neighbour,
She'll help your wife when she's in labour,
Well skill'd in midwife artifices,
For she herself oft falls in pieces.
There you shall see a raree show
Will make you scorn this world below,
When you behold the milky-way,
As white as snow, as bright as day;
The glittering constellations roll
About the grinding arctic pole;
The lovely tingling in your ears,
Wrought by the music of the spheres--
Your spouse shall then no longer hector,
You need not fear a curtain-lecture;
Nor shall she think that she is undone
For quitting her beloved London.
When she's exalted in the skies,
She'll never think of mutton-pies;
When you're advanced above Dean Viz,
You'll never think of Goody Griz;
But ever, ever live at ease,
And strive, and strive your wife to please;
In her you'll centre all your joys,
And get ten thousand girls and boys;
Ten thousand girls and boys you'll get,
And they like stars shall rise and set.
While you and spouse, transform'd, shall soon
Be a new sun and a new moon:
Nor shall you strive your horns to hide,
For then your horns shall be your pride.


[Footnote 1: Diana, also called Lucina, for the reason given in the
text.--_W. E. B._]




PARODY ON A CHARACTER OF DEAN SMEDLEY,
WRITTEN IN LATIN BY HIMSELF[1]


The very reverend Dean Smedley,
Of dulness, pride, conceit, a medley,
Was equally allow'd to shine
As poet, scholar, and divine;
With godliness could well dispense,
Would be a rake, but wanted sense;
Would strictly after Truth inquire,
Because he dreaded to come nigh her.
For Liberty no champion bolder,
He hated bailiffs at his shoulder.
To half the world a standing jest,
A perfect nuisance to the rest;
From many (and we may believe him)
Had the best wishes they could give him.
To all mankind a constant friend,
Provided they had cash to lend.
One thing he did before he went hence,
He left us a laconic sentence,
By cutting of his phrase, and trimming
To prove that bishops were old women.
Poor Envy durst not show her phiz,
She was so terrified at his.
He waded, without any shame,
Through thick and thin to get a name,
Tried every sharping trick for bread,
And after all he seldom sped.
When Fortune favour'd, he was nice;
He never once would cog the dice;
But, if she turn'd against his play,
He knew to stop _ quatre trois_.
Now sound in mind, and sound in _corpus_,
(Says he) though swell'd like any porpoise,
He hies from hence at forty-four
(But by his leave he sinks a score)
To the East Indies, there to cheat,
Till he can purchase an estate;
Where, after he has fill'd his chest,
He'll mount his tub, and preach his best,
And plainly prove, by dint of text,
This world is his, and theirs the next.
Lest that the reader should not know
The bank where last he set his toe,
'Twas Greenwich. There he took a ship,
And gave his creditors the slip.
But lest chronology should vary,
Upon the ides of February,
In seventeen hundred eight-and-twenty,
To Fort St. George, a pedler went he.
Ye Fates, when all he gets is spent,
RETURN HIM BEGGAR AS HE WENT!


[Footnote 1: INSCRIPTION,
BY DEAN SMEDLEY, 1729.

[*text centered]
Reverendus Decanus, JONATHAN SMEDLEY,
Theologia instructus, in Poesi exercitatus,
Politioribus excultus literis;
Parce pius, impius minime;
Veritatis Indagator, Libertatis Assertor;
Subsannatus multis, fastiditus quibusdam,
Exoptatus plurimis, omnibus amicus,
Auctor hujus sententiae, PATRES SUNT VETULAE.
Per laudem et vituperium, per famam atque infamiam;
Utramque fortunam, variosque expertus casus,
Mente Sana, sano corpore, volens, laetusque,
Lustris plus quam XI numeratis,
Ad rem familiarem restaurandam augendamque,
Et ad Evangelium Indos inter Orientales praedicandum,
_Grevae_, idibus Februarii, navem ascendens,
Arcemque _Sancti_ petens _Georgii_, vernale per aequinoxium,
Anno Aerae Christianae MDCCXXVIII,
Transfretavit.
Fata vocant--revocentque precamur.]


END OF VOL. I




[Illustration]
Hester Vanhomrigh (Vanessa)
From a Picture in the possession G. Villiers Brinus Esq;


THE POEMS OF JONATHAN SWIFT, D.D.

EDITED BY WILLIAM ERNST BROWNING

BARRISTER, INNER TEMPLE
AUTHOR OF "THE LIFE OF LORD CHESTERFIELD"

VOL. II

LONDON
G. BELL AND SONS, LTD. 1910

CHISWICK PRESS: CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME II

                     PAGE

Cadenus and Vanessa 1
To Love 23
A Rebus by Vanessa 24
The Dean's Answer 25
Stella's Birth-Day 26
Stella's Birth-Day 26
To Stella 28
To Stella 32
Stella to Dr. Swift 35
To Stella 37
On the Great Buried Bottle 37
Epitaph 38
Stella's Birth-Day 38
Stella at Wood-Park 40
A New Year's Gift for Bec 43
Dingley and Brent 44
To Stella 45
Verses by Stella 46
A Receipt to restore Stella's Youth 46
Stella's Birth-Day 48
Bec's Birth-Day 49
On the Collar of Tiger 51
Stella's Birth-Day 51
Death and Daphne 54
Daphne 57

RIDDLES

Pethox the Great 59
On a Pen 62
On Gold 63
On the Posteriors 64
On a Horn 65
On a Corkscrew 66
The Gulf of all Human Possessions 67
Louisa to Strephon 70
A Maypole 71
On the Moon 72
On a Circle 73
On Ink 73
On the Five Senses 74
Fontinella to Florinda 75
An Echo 76
On a Shadow in a Glass 77
On Time 78
On the Gallows 78
On the Vowels 79
On Snow 79
On a Cannon 80
On a Pair of Dice 80
On a Candle 80
To Lady Carteret by Delany 82
Answered by Dr. Swift 83
To Lady Carteret 83
Answered by Sheridan 84
A Riddle 84
Answer by Mr. F----r 84
A Letter to Dr. Helsham 85
Probatur aliter 87


POEMS COMPOSED AT MARKET HILL

On cutting down the Thorn 89
To Dean Swift 92
Dean Swift at Sir Arthur Acheson's 93
On a very old Glass at Market Hill 94
Answered extempore by Dr. Swift 95
Epitaph 95
My Lady's Lamentation 95
A Pastoral Dialogue 99
The Grand Question debated 101
Drapier's Hill 106
The Dean's Reasons 107
The Revolution at Market Hill 110
Robin and Harry 113
A Panegyric on the Dean 115
Twelve Articles 125


POLITICAL POETRY

Parody 127
Jack Frenchman's Lamentation 129
The Garden Plot 132
Sid Hamet's Rod 133
The Famous Speech-Maker 136
Parody on the Recorder's Speech 143
Ballad 144
Atlas; or the Minister of State 147
Lines on Harley's being stabbed 148
An Excellent New Song 148
The Windsor Prophecy 150
Corinna, a Ballad 152
The Fable of Midas 153
Toland's Invitation to Dismal 156
Peace and Dunkirk 157
Imitation of Horace, Epist. I, vii 159
The Author upon Himself 163
The Fagot 166
Imitation of Horace, Sat. VI, ii 167
Horace paraphrased, Odes II, i 171
Dennis' Invitation to Steele 175
In Sickness 180
The Fable of the Bitches 181
To the Earl of Oxford in the Tower 182
On the Church's Danger 183
A Poem on High Church 183
The Story of Phaethon 184
A Tale of a Nettle 186
A Satirical Elegy 187


POEMS CHIEFLY RELATING TO IRISH POLITICS

Parody on Pratt's Speech 189
An Excellent New Song 192
The Run upon the Bankers 193
Upon the Horrid Plot 196
Quibbling Elegy on Judge Boat 198
The Epitaph 199
Verses on Whitshed's Motto 200
Prometheus 201
Verses on the Order of the Bath 203
Epigram on Wood's Brass Money 203
A Simile 204
Wood an Insect 205
Wood the Ironmonger 206
Wood's Petition 207
A New Song on Wood's Halfpence 209
A Serious Poem 211
An Excellent New Song 215
Verses on the Judge who condemned the Drapier's Printer 217
On the Same 218
On the Same 218
Epigram 218
Horace paraphrased, Odes I, xiv 219
Verses on St. Patrick's Well 221
On reading Dr. Young's Satire 224
The Dog and Thief 226
Mad Mullinix and Timothy 226
Tim and the Fables 234
Tom and Dick 235
Dick, a Maggot 236
Clad all in Brown 237
Dick's Variety 238
Traulus. Part I 239
Traulus. Part II 242
A Fable of the Lion 244
On the Irish Bishops 246
Horace, Odes IV, ix 248
On Walpole and Pulteney 250
Brother Protestants 252
Bettesworth's Exultation 254
Epigram to Serjeant Kite 255
The Yahoo's Overthrow 256
On the Archbishop of Cashel and Bettesworth 259
On the Irish Club 259
On Noisy Tom 260
On Dr. Rundle 261
Epigram 263
The Legion Club 264
On a Printer's being sent to Newgate 272
Vindication of the Libel 272
A Friendly Apology 274
Ay and No 275
A Ballad 276
A Wicked Treasonable Libel 277
Epigrams against Carthy 278-283
Poetical Epistle to Sheridan 283
Lines written on a Window 284
Lines written underneath by Sheridan 285
The Upstart 285
On the Arms of the Town of Waterford 286
Translation 287
Verses on Blenheim 287
An Excellent New Song 288
An Excellent New Song upon the Archbishop of Dublin 289
To the Archbishop of Dublin 291
To the Citizens 292
Punch's Petition to the Ladies 294
Epigram 296
Epigram on Josiah Hort 297
Epigram 297


TRIFLES

George Rochfort's Verses 298
A Left-handed Letter 298
To the Dean of St. Patrick's 300
To Mr. Thomas Sheridan 301
Ad Amicum Eruditum Thomam Sheridan 302
To the Dean of St. Patrick's 305
To the Dean of St. Patrick's 306
An Answer by Delany 306
A Reply by Sheridan 307
Another Reply by Sheridan 308
To Thomas Sheridan 309
Swift to Sheridan 310
An Answer by Sheridan 310
To Dr. Sheridan 311
The Answer by Dr. Sheridan 312
Dr. Sheridan to Dr. Swift 313
The Dean's Answer 314
Dr. Sheridan's Reply to the Dean 314
To the Same by Dr. Sheridan 315
The Dean of St. Patrick's to Thomas Sheridan 316
To the Dean of St. Patrick's 317
The Dean to Thomas Sheridan 318
To Dr. Sheridan 320
   1 P.S. 321
   2 P.S. 321
   3 P.S. 321
Dr. Sheridan's Answer 322
Dr. Swift's Reply 322
A Copy of a Copy of Verses 323
George-Nim-Dan-Dean's Answer 324
George-Nim-Dan-Dean's Invitation 326
To George-Nim-Dan-Dean, Esq 328
To Mr. Thomas Sheridan 330
On Dr. Sheridan's Circular Verses 331
On Dan Jackson's Picture 332
On the Same Picture 332
On the Same 333
On the Same Picture 333
On the Same Picture 333
Dan Jackson's Defence 335
Mr. Rochfort's Reply 336
Dr. Delany's Reply 338
Sheridan's Reply 339
A Rejoinder 340
Another Rejoinder 342
Sheridan's Submission 343
The Pardon 344
The Last Speech and Dying Words of Daniel Jackson 345
To the Rev. Daniel Jackson 347
Sheridan to Swift 349
Sheridan to Swift 350
Swift to Sheridan 350
Mary the Cook Maid's Letter 351
A Portrait from the Life 352
On Stealing a Crown when the Dean was asleep 353
The Dean's Answer 353
A Prologue to a Play 354
The Epilogue 355
The Song 355
A New Year's Gift for the Dean of St. Patrick's 356
To Quilca 358
The Blessings of a Country Life 359
The Plagues of a Country Life 359
A Faithful Inventory 359
Palinodia 361
A Letter to the Dean 362
An Invitation to Dinner 364
On the Five Ladies at Sot's Hole 365
The Five Ladies' Answer to the Beau 367
The Beau's Reply 368
Dr. Sheridan's Ballad on Ballyspellin 368
Answer by Dr. Swift 371
An Epistle to two Friends 373
To Dr. Sheridan 374
Dr. Helsham's Answer 374
A True and Faithful Inventory 376
A New Simile for the Ladies 377
An Answer to a Scandalous Poem 381
Peg Radcliffe the Hostess's Invitation 386
Verses by Sheridan 387


VERSES ADDRESSED TO SWIFT AND TO HIS MEMORY

To Dr. Swift on his Birth-Day 390
On Dr. Swift 390
To the Rev. Dr. Swift, Dean of St. Patrick's,
   a Birth-Day Poem, Nov. 30, 1736 391
Epigrams occasioned by Dr. Swift's intended Hospital
   for Idiots and Lunatics 393
On the Dean of St. Patrick's Birth-Day 394
An Epistle to Robert Nugent, Esq. 396
On the Drapier, by Dr. Dunkin 399
Epitaph proposed for Dr. Swift 400
To the Memory of Dr. Swift 401
A Schoolboy's Theme 403
Verses on the Battle of the Books 404
On Dr. Swift's leaving his Estate to Idiots 404
On several Petty Pieces lately published against Dean Swift 405
On Faulkner's Edition of Swift 405
Epigram on Lord Orrery's Remarks 406
To Dr. Delany, on his Book entitled "Observations
   on Lord Orrery's Remarks" 406
Epigram on Faulkner 407
An Inscription 407
An Epigram occasioned by the above 407
Index 409




POEMS OF JONATHAN SWIFT

POEMS ADDRESSED TO VANESSA AND STELLA

CADENUS AND VANESSA[1]
1713


The shepherds and the nymphs were seen
Pleading before the Cyprian queen.
The counsel for the fair began,
Accusing the false creature Man.
The brief with weighty crimes was charged
On which the pleader much enlarged;
That Cupid now has lost his art,
Or blunts the point of every dart;--
His altar now no longer smokes,
His mother's aid no youth invokes:
This tempts freethinkers to refine,
And bring in doubt their powers divine;
Now love is dwindled to intrigue,
And marriage grown a mo