ally, as yet, in places where all that is best
in them is out of sight. I look to him, nevertheless, unless he lose
himself in over-reverence for certain conventionalisms of the elder
schools, as one of the probable renovators and correctors of whatever is
failing or erroneous in the practice of English art.


FOOTNOTES

  [71] It sometimes happens that a morbid direction of growth will
    cause an exception here and there to this rule, the bough swelling
    beyond its legitimate size; knots and excrescences, of course,
    sometimes interfere with the effect of diminution. I believe that in
    the laurel, when it grows large and old, singular instances may be
    found of thick upper boughs and over quantity of wood at the
    extremities. All these accidents or exceptions are felt as such by
    the eye. They may occasionally be used by the painter in savage or
    grotesque scenery, or as points of contrast, but are no excuse for
    his ever losing sight of the general law.

  [72] Compare Part III. Sect. II. Chap. IV. § 6, 7.

  [73] This group I have before noticed as singularly (but, I doubt
    not, accidentally, and in consequence of the love of the two great
    painters for the same grand forms) resembling that introduced by
    Tintoret in the background of his Cain and Abel.

  [74] The above paragraphs I have left as originally written, because
    they are quite true as far as they reach; but like many other
    portions of this essay, they take in a very small portion of the
    truth. I shall not add to them at present, because I can explain my
    meaning better in our consideration of the laws of beauty; but the
    reader must bear in mind that what is above stated refers,
    throughout, to large masses of foliage seen under broad
    sunshine,--and it has especial reference to Turner's enormous scale
    of scene, and intense desire of light. In twilight, when tree-forms
    are seen against sky, other laws come into operation, as well as in
    subject of narrow limits and near foreground. It is, I think, to be
    regretted that Turner does not in his Academy pictures sometimes
    take more confined and gloomy subjects, like that grand one, near
    the Chartreuse, of the Liber Studiorum, wherein his magnificent
    power of elaborating close foliage might be developed; but, for the
    present, let the reader, with respect to what has been here said of
    close foliage, note the drawing of the leaves in that plate, in the
    Æsacus and Hesperie, and the Cephalus, and the elaboration of the
    foregrounds in the Yorkshire drawings; let him compare what is said
    of Turner's foliage painting above in Part II. Sect. I. Chap. VII. §
    40, § 41, and of Titian's previously, as well as Part III. Sect. I.
    Chap. VIII., and Sect. II. Chap. IV. § 21. I shall hereafter
    endeavor to arrange the subject in a more systematic manner; but
    what additional observations I may have to make will none of them be
    in any wise more favorable to Gaspar, Salvator, or Hobbima, than the
    above paragraphs.

  [75] Perhaps in some instances, this may be the case with the trees
    of Nicholas Poussin; but even with him the boughs only touch the
    line of limit with their central _points_ of extremity, and are not
    _sectors_ of the great curve--forming a part of it with expanded
    extremities, as in nature. Draw a few straight lines, from the
    centre to the circumference of a circle. The forms included between
    them are the forms of the individual boughs of a fine tree, with all
    their ramifications (only the external curve is not a circle, but
    more frequently two parabolas--which, I believe, it is in the
    oak--or an ellipse.) But each bough of the old masters is
    club-shaped, and broadest, not at the outside of the tree, but a
    little way towards its centre.

  [76] On the other hand, nothing can be more exquisitely ridiculous
    than the French illustrations of a second or third-rate order, as
    those to the Harmonies of Lamartine.

  [77] Of Stanfield's foliage I remember too little to enable me to
    form any definite judgment; it is a pity that he so much neglects
    this noble element of landscape.

  [78] It is true that many of Rembrandt's etchings are merely in
    line, but it may be observed that the subject is universally
    _conceived_ in light and shade, and that the lines are either merely
    guides in the arrangement, or an exquisite indication of the
    key-notes of shade, on which the after-system of it is to be
    based--portions of fragmentary finish, showing the completeness of
    the conception.




                                 CHAPTER II.

               GENERAL REMARKS RESPECTING THE TRUTH OF TURNER.


§ 1. No necessity of entering into discussion of architectural truth.

We have now arrived at some general conception of the extent of Turner's
knowledge, and the truth of his practice, by the deliberate examination
of the characteristics of the four great elements of landscape--sky,
earth, water, and vegetation. I have not thought it necessary to devote
a chapter to architecture, because enough has been said on this subject
in Part II. Sect. I. Chap. VII.; and its general truths, which are those
with which the landscape painter, as such, is chiefly concerned, require
only a simple and straightforward application of those rules of which
every other material object of a landscape has required a most difficult
and complicated application. Turner's knowledge of perspective probably
adds to his power in the arrangement of every order of subject; but
ignorance on this head is rather disgraceful than knowledge meritorious.
It is disgraceful, for instance, that any man should commit such
palpable and atrocious errors in ordinary perspective as are seen in the
quay in Claude's sea-piece, No. 14, National Gallery, or in the curved
portico of No. 30; but still these are not points to be taken into
consideration as having anything to do with artistical rank, just as,
though we should say it was disgraceful if a great poet could not spell,
we should not consider such a defect as in any way taking from his
poetical rank. Neither is there anything particularly belonging to
architecture, as such, which it is any credit to an artist to observe or
represent; it is only a simple and clear field for the manifestation of
his knowledge of general laws. Any surveyor or engineer could have drawn
the steps and balustrade in the Hero and Leander, as well as Turner has;
but there is no man living but himself who could have thrown the
accidental shadows upon them. I may, however, refer for general
illustration of Turner's power as an architectural draughtsman, to the
front of Rouen Cathedral, engraved in the Rivers of France, and to the
Ely in the England. I know nothing in art which can be set beside the
former of these for overwhelming grandeur and simplicity of effect, and
inexhaustible intricacy of parts. I have then only a few remarks farther
to offer respecting the general character of all those truths which we
have been hitherto endeavoring to explain and illustrate.


§ 2. Extreme difficulty of illustrating or explaining the highest truth.

§ 3. The _positive_ rank of Turner is in no degree shown in the
       foregoing pages, but only his relative rank.

§ 4. The exceeding refinement of his truth.

§ 5. There is nothing in his works which can be enjoyed without
       knowledge.

§ 6. And nothing which knowledge will not enable us to enjoy.

The difference in the accuracy of the lines of the Torso of the Vatican,
(the Maestro of M. Angelo,) from those in one of M. Angelo's finest
works, could perhaps scarcely be appreciated by any eye or feeling
undisciplined by the most perfect and practical anatomical knowledge. It
rests on points of such traceless and refined delicacy, that though we
feel them in the result, we cannot follow them in the details. Yet they
are such and so great as to place the Torso alone in art, solitary and
supreme; while the finest of M. Angelo's works, considered with respect
to truth alone, are said to be only on a level with antiques of the
second class, under the Apollo and Venus, that is, two classes or grades
below the Torso. But suppose the best sculptor in the world, possessing
the most entire appreciation of the excellence of the Torso, were to sit
down, pen in hand, to try and tell us wherein the peculiar truth of each
line consisted? Could any words that he could use make us feel the
hairbreadth of depth and distance on which all depends? or end in
anything more than bare assertions of the inferiority of this line to
that, which, if we did not perceive for ourselves, no explanation could
ever illustrate to us? He might as well endeavor to explain to us by
words some taste or other subject of sense, of which we had no
experience. And so it is with all truths of the highest order; they are
separated from those of average precision by points of extreme delicacy,
which none but the cultivated eye can in the least feel, and to express
which, all words are absolutely meaningless and useless. Consequently,
in all that I have been saying of the truth of artists, I have been able
to point out only coarse, broad, and explicable matters; I have been
perfectly unable to express (and indeed I have made no endeavor to
express) the finely drawn and distinguished truth in which all the real
excellence of art consists. All those truths which I have been able to
explain and demonstrate in Turner, are such as any artist of ordinary
powers of observation ought to be capable of rendering. It is
disgraceful to omit them; but it is no very great credit to observe
them. I have indeed proved that they have been neglected, and
disgracefully so, by those men who are commonly considered the Fathers
of Art; but in showing that they have been observed by Turner, I have
only proved him to be _above_ other men in knowledge of truth, I have
not given any conception of his own positive rank as a Painter of
Nature. But it stands to reason, that the men, who in broad, simple, and
demonstrable matters are perpetually violating truth, will not be
particularly accurate or careful in carrying out delicate and refined,
and undemonstrable matters; and it stands equally to reason, that the
man who, as far as argument or demonstration can go, is found invariably
truthful, will, in all probability, be truthful to the last line, and
shadow of a line. And such is, indeed, the case with every touch of this
consummate artist; the essential excellence--all that constitutes the
real and exceeding value of his works--is beyond and above expression;
it is a truth inherent in every line, and breathing in every hue, too
delicate and exquisite to admit of any kind of proof, nor to be
ascertained except by the highest of tests--the keen feeling attained by
extended knowledge and long study. Two lines are laid on canvas; one is
right and another wrong. There is no difference between them appreciable
by the compasses--none appreciable by the ordinary eye--none which can
be pointed out, if it is not seen. One person feels it,--another does
not; but the feeling or sight of the one can by no words be communicated
to the other: it would be unjust if it could, for that feeling and sight
have been the reward of years of labor. And there is, indeed, nothing in
Turner--not one dot nor line--whose meaning can be understood without
knowledge; because he never aims at sensual impressions, but at the deep
final truth, which only meditation can discover, and only experience
recognize. There is nothing done or omitted by him, which does not imply
such a comparison of ends, such rejection of the least worthy, (as far
as they are incompatible with the rest,) such careful selection and
arrangement of all that can be united, as can only be enjoyed by minds
capable of going through the same process, and discovering the reasons
for the choice. And, as there is nothing in his works which can be
enjoyed without knowledge, so there is nothing in them which knowledge
will not enable us to enjoy. There is no test of our acquaintance with
nature so absolute and unfailing as the degree of admiration we feel for
Turner's painting. Precisely as we are shallow in our knowledge, vulgar
in our feeling, and contracted in our views of principles, will the
works of this artist be stumbling-blocks or foolishness to
us:--precisely in the degree in which we are familiar with nature,
constant in our observation of her, and enlarged in our understanding of
her, will they expand before our eyes into glory and beauty. In every
new insight which we obtain into the works of God, in every new idea
which we receive from His creation, we shall find ourselves possessed of
an interpretation and a guide to something in Turner's works which we
had not before understood. We may range over Europe, from shore to
shore; and from every rock that we tread upon, every sky that passes
over our heads, every local form of vegetation or of soil, we shall
receive fresh illustration of his principles--fresh confirmation of his
facts. We shall feel, wherever we go, that he has been there before
us--whatever we see, that he has seen and seized before us: and we shall
at last cease the investigation, with a well-grounded trust, that
whatever we have been unable to account for, and what we still dislike
in his works, has reason for it, and foundation like the rest; and that
even where he has failed or erred, there is a beauty in the failure
which none are able to equal, and a dignity in the error which none are
worthy to reprove.


§ 7. His former rank and progress.

§ 8. Standing of his present works. Their mystery is the consequence of
       their fullness.

There has been marked and constant progress in his mind; he has not,
like some few artists, been without childhood; his course of study has
been as evidently as it has been swiftly progressive, and in different
stages of the struggle, sometimes one order of truth, sometimes another,
has been aimed at or omitted. But from the beginning to the present
height of his career, he has never sacrificed a greater truth to a
less. As he advanced, the previous knowledge or attainment was absorbed
in what succeeded, or abandoned only if incompatible, and never
abandoned without a gain; and his present works present the sum and
perfection of his accumulated knowledge, delivered with the impatience
and passion of one who feels too much, and knows too much, and has too
little time to say it in, to pause for expression, or ponder over his
syllables. There is in them the obscurity, but the truth, of prophecy;
the instinctive and burning language, which would express less if it
uttered more, which is indistinct only by its fulness, and dark with its
abundant meaning. He feels now, with long-trained vividness and keenness
of sense, too bitterly the impotence of the hand, and the vainness of
the color to catch one shadow or one image of the glory which God has
revealed to him. He has dwelt and communed with nature all the days of
his life; he knows her now too well, he cannot palter over the material
littleness of her outward form; he must give her soul, or he has done
nothing, and he cannot do this with the flax, and the earth, and the
oil. "I cannot gather the sunbeams out of the east, or I would make
_them_ tell you what I have seen; but read this, and interpret this, and
let us remember together. I cannot gather the gloom out of the
night-sky, or I would make that teach you what I have seen; but read
this, and interpret this, and let us feel together. And if you have not
that within you which I can summon to my aid, if you have not the sun in
your spirit, and the passion in your heart, which my words may awaken,
though they be indistinct and swift, leave me; for I will give you no
patient mockery, no laborious insult of that glorious nature, whose I am
and whom I serve. Let other servants imitate the voice and the gesture
of their master, while they forget his message. Hear that message from
me; but remember, that the teaching of Divine truth must still be a
mystery."




                                 CHAPTER III.

                CONCLUSION.--MODERN ART AND MODERN CRITICISM.


We have only, in conclusion, to offer a few general remarks respecting
modern art and modern criticism.


§ 1. The entire prominence hitherto given to the works of one artist
       caused only by our not being able to take cognizance of character.

§ 2. The feelings of different artists are incapable of full comparison.

§ 3. But the fidelity and truth of each are capable of real comparison.

§ 4. Especially because they are equally manifested in the treatment of
       all subjects.

§ 5. No man draws one thing well, if he can draw nothing else.

We wish, in the first place, to remove the appearance of invidiousness
and partiality which the constant prominence given in the present
portion of the work to the productions of one artist, can scarcely fail
of bearing in the minds of most readers. When we pass to the examination
of what is beautiful and expressive in art, we shall frequently find
distinctive qualities in the minds even of inferior artists, which have
led them to the pursuit and embodying of particular trains of thought,
altogether different from those which direct the compositions of other
men, and incapable of comparison with them. Now, when this is the case,
we should consider it in the highest degree both invidious and
illogical, to say of such different modes of exertion of the intellect,
that one is in all points greater or nobler than another. We shall
probably find something in the working of all minds which has an end and
a power peculiar to itself, and which is deserving of free and full
admiration, without any reference whatsoever to what has, in other
fields, been accomplished by other modes of thought, and directions of
aim. We shall, indeed, find a wider range and grasp in one man than in
another; but yet it will be our own fault if we do not discover
something in the most limited range of mind which is different from, and
in its way better than, anything presented to us by the more grasping
intellect. We all know that the nightingale sings more nobly than the
lark; but who, therefore, would wish the lark not to sing, or would deny
that it had a character of its own, which bore a part among the melodies
of creation no less essential than that of the more richly-gifted bird?
And thus we shall find and feel that whatever difference may exist
between the intellectual powers of one artist and another, yet wherever
there is any true genius, there will be some peculiar lesson which even
the humblest will teach us more sweetly and perfectly than those far
above them in prouder attributes of mind; and we should be as mistaken
as we should be unjust and invidious, if we refused to receive this
their peculiar message with gratitude and veneration, merely because it
was a sentence and not a volume. But the case is different when we
examine their relative fidelity to given facts. That fidelity depends on
no peculiar modes of thought or habits of character; it is the result of
keen sensibility, combined with high powers of memory and association.
These qualities, as such, are the same in all men; character or feeling
may direct their choice to this or that object, but the fidelity with
which they treat either the one or the other, is dependent on those
simple powers of sense and intellect which are like and comparable in
all, and of which we can always say that they are greater in this man,
or less in that without reference to the character of the individual.
Those feelings which direct Cox to the painting of wild, weedy banks,
and cool, melting skies, and those which directed Barret to the painting
of glowing foliage and melancholy twilight, are both just and beautiful
in their way, and are both worthy of high praise and gratitude, without
necessity, nay, without _proper_ possibility of comparing one with the
other. But the degree of fidelity with which the leaves of the one and
the light of the other are rendered, depends upon faculties of sight,
sense, and memory common to both, and perfectly comparable; and we may
say fearlessly, and without injustice, that one or the other, as the
case may be, is more faithful in that which they have chosen to
represent. It is also to be remembered that these faculties of sense and
memory are not partial in their effect; they will not induce fidelity in
the rendering of one class of object, and fail of doing so in another.
They act equally, and with equal results, whatever may be the matter
subjected to them; the same delicate sense which perceives the utmost
grace of the fibres of a tree, will be equally unerring in tracing the
character of cloud; and the quick memory which seizes and retains the
circumstances of a flying effect of shadow or color, will be equally
effectual in fixing the impression of the instantaneous form of a moving
figure or a breaking wave. There are indeed one or two broad
distinctions in the nature of the senses,--a sensibility to color, for
instance, being very different from a sensibility to form; so that a man
may possess one without the other, and an artist may succeed in mere
imitation of what is before him, of air, sunlight, etc., without
possessing sensibility at all. But wherever we have, in the drawing of
any one object, sufficient evidence of real intellectual power, of the
sense which perceives the essential qualities of a thing, and the
judgment which arranges them so as to illustrate each other, we may be
quite certain that the same sense and judgment will operate equally on
whatever is subjected to them, and that the artist will be equally great
and masterly in his drawing of all that he attempts. Hence we may be
quite sure that wherever an artist appears to be truthful in one branch
of art, and not in another, the apparent truth is either owing to some
trickery of imitation, or is not so great as we suppose it to be. In
nine cases out of ten, people who are celebrated for drawing only one
thing, and _can_ only draw one thing, draw that one thing worse than
anybody else. An artist may indeed confine himself to a limited range of
subject, but if he be really true in his rendering of this, his power of
doing more will be perpetually showing itself in accessories and minor
points. There are few men, for instance, more limited in subject than
Hunt, and yet I do not think there is another man in the old Water-Color
Society, with so keen an eye for truth, or with power so universal. And
this is the reason for the exceeding prominence which in the foregoing
investigation one or two artists have always assumed over the rest, for
the habits of accurate observation and delicate powers of hand which
they possess, have equal effect, and maintain the same superiority in
their works, to whatever class of subject they may be directed. And thus
we have been compelled, however unwillingly, to pass hastily by the
works of many gifted men, because, however pure their feeling, or
original their conceptions, they were wanting in those faculties of the
hand and mind which insure perfect fidelity to nature: it will be only
hereafter, when we are at liberty to take full cognizance of the
thought, however feebly it may be clothed in language, that we shall be
able to do real justice to the disciples either of modern or of ancient
art.


§ 6. General conclusions to be derived from our past investigation.

But as far as we have gone at present, and with respect only to the
_material_ truth, which is all that we have been able to investigate,
the conclusion to which we must be led is as clear as it is inevitable;
that modern artists, as a body, are far more just and full in their
views of material things than any landscape painters whose works are
extant--but that J. M. W. Turner is the only man who has ever given an
entire transcript of the whole system of nature, and is, in this point
of view, the only perfect landscape painter whom the world has ever
seen.


§ 7. Truth, a standard of all excellence.

Nor are we disposed to recede from our assertion made in Sec. I. Ch. I.
§ 10, that this material truth is indeed a perfect test of the relative
rank of painters, though it does not in itself constitute that rank. We
shall be able to prove that truth and beauty, knowledge and imagination,
invariably are associated in art; and we shall be able to show that not
only in truth to nature, but in all other points, Turner is the greatest
landscape painter who has ever lived. But his superiority is, in matters
of feeling, one of kind, not of degree. Superiority of degree implies a
superseding of others, superiority of kind only sustaining a more
important, but not more necessary part, than others. If _truth_ were all
that we required from art, all other painters might cast aside their
brushes in despair, for all that they have done he has done more fully
and accurately; but when we pass to the higher requirements of art,
beauty and character, their contributions are all equally necessary and
desirable, because different, and however inferior in position or rank,
are still perfect of their kind; their inferiority is only that of the
lark to the nightingale, or of the violet to the rose.


§ 8. Modern criticism. Changefulness of public taste.

§ 9. Yet associated with a certain degree of judgment.

§ 10. Duty of the press.

Such then is the rank and standing of our modern artists. We have,
living with us, and painting for us, the greatest painter of _all_ time;
a man with whose supremacy of power no intellect of past ages can be put
in comparison for a moment. Let us next inquire what is the rank of our
critics. Public taste, I believe, as far as it is the encourager and
supporter of art has been the same in all ages,--a fitful and
vacillating current of vague impression, perpetually liable to change,
subject to epidemic desires, and agitated by infectious passion, the
slave of fashion, and the fool of fancy, but yet always distinguishing
with singular clearsightedness, between that which is best and that
which is worst of the particular class of food which its morbid appetite
may call for; never failing to distinguish that which is produced by
intellect, from that which is not, though it may be intellect degraded
by ministering to its misguided will. Public taste may thus degrade a
race of men capable of the highest efforts in art into the portrait
painters of ephemeral fashions, but it will yet not fail of discovering
who, among these portrait painters, is the man of most mind. It will
separate the man who would have become Buonaroti from the man who would
have become Bandinelli, though it will employ both in painting curls,
and feathers, and bracelets. Hence, generally speaking, there is no
_comparative_ injustice done, no false elevation of the fool above the
man of mind, provided only that the man of mind will condescend to
supply the particular article which the public chooses to want. Of
course a thousand modifying circumstances interfere with the action of
the general rule; but, taking one case with another, we shall very
constantly find the price which the picture commands in the market a
pretty fair standard of the artist's rank of intellect. The press,
therefore, and all who pretend to lead the public taste, have not so
much to direct the multitude whom to go to, as what to ask for. Their
business is not to tell us which is our best painter, but to tell us
whether we are making our best painter do his best.


§ 11. Qualifications necessary for discharging it.

§ 12. General incapability of modern critics.

§ 13. And inconsistency with themselves.

Now none are capable of doing this, but those whose principles of
judgment are based both on thorough _practical_ knowledge of art, and on
broad general views of what is true and right, without reference to what
has been done at one time or another, or in one school or another.
Nothing can be more perilous to the cause of art, than the constant
ringing in our painters' ears of the names of great predecessors, as
their examples or masters. I had rather hear a great poet, entirely
original in his feeling and aim, rebuked or maligned for not being like
Wordsworth or Coleridge, than a great painter criticised for not putting
us in mind of Claude or Poussin. But such references to former
excellence are the only refuge and resource of persons endeavoring to be
critics without being artists. They cannot tell you whether a thing is
right or not; but they can tell you whether it is like something else or
not. And the whole tone of modern criticism--as far as it is worthy of
being called criticism--sufficiently shows it to proceed entirely from
persons altogether unversed in practice, and ignorant of truth, but
possessing just enough of feeling to enjoy the solemnity of ancient art,
who, not distinguishing that which is really exalted and valuable in the
modern school, nor having any just idea of the real ends or capabilities
of landscape art, consider nothing right which is not based on the
conventional principles of the ancients, and nothing true which has more
of nature in it than of Claude. But it is strange that while the noble
and unequalled works of modern landscape painters are thus maligned and
misunderstood, our historical painters--such as we have--are permitted
to pander more fatally every year to the vicious English taste, which
can enjoy nothing but what is theatrical, entirely unchastised, nay,
encouraged and lauded by the very men who endeavor to hamper our great
landscape painters with rules derived from consecrated blunders. The
very critic who has just passed one of the noblest works of Turner--that
is to say, a masterpiece of art, to which Time can show no
parallel--with a ribald jest, will yet stand gaping in admiration before
the next piece of dramatic glitter and grimace, suggested by the
society, and adorned with the appurtenances of the greenroom, which he
finds hung low upon the wall as a brilliant example of the ideal of
English art. It is natural enough indeed, that the persons who are
disgusted by what is pure and noble, should be delighted with what is
vicious and degraded; but it is singular that those who are constantly
talking of Claude and Poussin, should never even pretend to a thought of
Raffaelle. We could excuse them for not comprehending Turner, if they
only would apply the same cut-and-dried criticisms where they might be
applied with truth, and productive of benefit; but we endure not the
paltry compound of ignorance, false taste, and pretension, which assumes
the dignity of classical feeling, that it may be able to abuse whatever
is above the level of its understanding, but bursts into genuine rapture
with all that is meretricious, if sufficiently adapted to the calibre of
its comprehension.


§ 14. How the press may really advance the cause of art.

To notice such criticisms, however, is giving them far more importance
than they deserve. They can lead none astray but those whose opinions
are absolutely valueless, and we did not begin this chapter with any
intent of wasting our time on these small critics, but in the hope of
pointing out to the periodical press what kind of criticism is now most
required by our school of landscape art, and how it may be in their
power, if they will, to regulate its impulses, without checking its
energies, and really to advance both the cause of the artist, and the
taste of the public.


§ 15. Morbid fondness at the present day for unfinished works.

§ 16. By which the public defraud themselves.

§ 17. And in pandering to which, artists ruin themselves.

§ 18. Necessity of finishing works of art perfectly.

One of the most morbid symptoms of the general taste of the present day,
is a too great fondness for unfinished works. Brilliancy and rapidity of
execution are everywhere sought as the highest good, and so that a
picture be cleverly handled as far as it is carried, little regard is
paid to its imperfection as a whole. Hence some artists are permitted,
and others compelled, to confine themselves to a manner of working
altogether destructive of their powers, and to tax their energies, not
to concentrate the greatest quantity of thought on the least possible
space of canvas, but to produce the greatest quantity of glitter and
claptrap in the shortest possible time. To the idler and the trickster
in art, no system can be more advantageous; but to the man who is really
desirous of doing something worth having lived for--to a man of
industry, energy, or feeling, we believe it to be the cause of the most
bitter discouragement. If ever, working upon a favorite subject or a
beloved idea, he is induced to tax his powers to the utmost, and to
spend as much time upon his picture as he feels necessary for its
perfection, he will not be able to get so high a price for the result,
perhaps, of a twelvemonth's thought, as he might have obtained for
half-a-dozen sketches with a forenoon's work in each, and he is
compelled either to fall back upon mechanism, or to starve. Now the
press should especially endeavor to convince the public, that by this
purchase of imperfect pictures they not only prevent all progress and
development of high talent, and set tricksters and mechanics on a level
with men of mind, but defraud and injure themselves. For there is no
doubt whatever, that, estimated merely by the quantity of pleasure it is
capable of conveying, a well-finished picture is worth to its possessor
half-a-dozen incomplete ones; and that a perfect drawing is, simply as a
source of delight, better worth a hundred guineas than a drawing half as
finished is worth thirty. On the other hand, the body of our artists
should be kept in mind, that by indulging the public with rapid and
unconsidered work, they are not only depriving themselves of the benefit
which each picture ought to render to them, as a piece of practice and
study, but they are destroying the refinement of general taste, and
rendering it impossible for themselves ever to find a market for more
careful works, supposing that they were inclined to execute them. Nor
need any single artist be afraid of setting the example, and producing
labored works, at advanced prices, among the cheap, quick drawings of
the day. The public will soon find the value of the complete work, and
will be more ready to give a large sum for that which is inexhaustible,
than a quota of it for that which they are wearied of in a month. The
artist who never lets the price command the picture, will soon find the
picture command the price. And it ought to be a rule with every painter
never to let a picture leave his easel while it is yet capable of
improvement, or of having more thought put into it. The general effect
is often perfect and pleasing, and not to be improved upon, when the
details and facts are altogether imperfect and unsatisfactory. It may be
difficult--perhaps the most difficult task of art--to complete these
details, and not to hurt the general effect; but until the artist can do
this, his art is imperfect and his picture unfinished. That only is a
complete picture which has both the general wholeness and effect of
nature, and the inexhaustible perfection of nature's details. And it is
only in the effort to unite these that a painter really improves. By
aiming only at details, he becomes a mechanic; by aiming only at
generals, he becomes a trickster: his fall in both cases is sure. Two
questions the artist has, therefore, always to ask himself,--first, "Is
my whole right?" Secondly, "Can my details be added to? Is there a
single space in the picture where I can crowd in another thought? Is
there a curve in it which I can modulate--a line which I can graduate--a
vacancy I can fill? Is there a single spot which the eye, by any peering
or prying, can fathom or exhaust? If so, my picture is imperfect; and
if, in modulating the line or filling the vacancy, I hurt the general
effect, my art is imperfect."


§ 19. _Sketches_ not sufficiently encouraged.

But, on the other hand, though incomplete pictures ought neither to be
produced nor purchased, careful and real _sketches_ ought to be valued
much more highly than they are. Studies in chalk, of landscape, should
form a part of every Exhibition, and a room should be allotted to
drawings and designs of figures in the Academy. We should be heartily
glad to see the room which is now devoted to bad drawings of incorporeal
and imaginary architecture--of things which never were, and which, thank
Heaven! never will be--occupied instead, by careful studies for
historical pictures; not blots of chiaroscuro, but delicate outlines
with the pen or crayon.


§ 20. Brilliancy of execution or efforts at invention not to be
        tolerated in young artists.

§ 21. The duty and after privileges of all students.

From young artists, in landscape, nothing ought to be tolerated but
simple _bona fide imitation_ of nature. They have no business to ape the
execution of masters,--to utter weak and disjointed repetitions of other
men's words, and mimic the gestures of the preacher, without
understanding his meaning or sharing in his emotions. We do not want
their crude ideas of composition, their unformed conceptions of the
Beautiful, their unsystematized experiments upon the Sublime. We scorn
their velocity; for it is without direction: we reject their decision;
for it is without grounds: we contemn their composition; for it is
without materials: we reprobate their choice; for it is without
comparison. Their duty is neither to choose, nor compose, nor imagine,
nor experimentalize; but to be humble and earnest in following the steps
of nature, and tracing the finger of God. Nothing is so bad a symptom,
in the work of young artists, as too much dexterity of handling; for it
is a sign that they are satisfied with their work, and have tried to do
nothing more than they were able to do. Their work should be full of
failures; for these are the signs of efforts. They should keep to quiet
colors--grays and browns; and, making the early works of Turner their
example, as his latest are to be their object of emulation, should go to
nature in all singleness of heart, and walk with her laboriously and
trustingly, having no other thoughts but how best to penetrate her
meaning, and remember her instruction, rejecting nothing, selecting
nothing, and scorning nothing; believing all things to be right and
good, and rejoicing always in the truth. Then, when their memories are
stored, and their imaginations fed, and their hands firm, let them take
up the scarlet and the gold, give the reins to their fancy, and show us
what their heads are made of. We will follow them wherever they choose
to lead; we will check at nothing; they are then our masters, and are
fit to be so. They have placed themselves above our criticism, and we
will listen to their words in all faith and humility; but not unless
they themselves have before bowed, in the same submission, to a higher
Authority and Master.


§ 22. Necessity among our greater artists of more singleness of aim.

Among our greater artists, the chief want, at the present day, is that of
_solemnity_ and definite purpose. We have too much picture-manufacturing,
too much making up of lay figures with a certain quantity of foliage, and
a certain quantity of sky, and a certain quantity of water,--a little bit
of all that is pretty, a little sun, and a little shade,--a touch of
pink, and a touch of blue,--a little sentiment, and a little sublimity,
and a little humor, and a little antiquarianism,--all very neatly
associated in a very charming picture, but not working together for a
definite end. Or if the aim be higher, as was the case with Barrett and
Varley, we are generally put off with stale repetitions of eternal
composition; a great tree, and some goats, and a bridge and a lake, and
the Temple at Tivoli, etc. Now we should like to see our artists working
out, with all exertion of their concentrated powers, such marked pieces
of landscape character as might bear upon them the impression of solemn,
earnest, and pervading thought, definitely directed, and aided by every
accessory of detail, color, and idealized form, which the disciplined
feeling, accumulated knowledge, and unspared labor of the painter could
supply. I have alluded, in the second preface, to the deficiency of our
modern artists in these great points of earnestness and completeness; and
I revert to it, in conclusion, as their paramount failing, and one fatal
in many ways to the interests of art. Our landscapes are all descriptive,
not reflective, agreeable and conversational, but not impressive nor
didactic. They have no other foundation than

                     "That vivacious versatility,
           Which many people take for want of heart.
           They err; 'tis merely what is called "mobility;"
           A thing of temperament, and _not of art,
           Though seeming so from its supposed facility_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

           This makes your actors, _artists_, and romancers;
           Little that's great--but much of what is clever."

Only it is to be observed that--in painters--this vivacity is _not_
always versatile. It is to be wished that it were, but it is no such
easy matter to be versatile in painting. Shallowness of thought insures
not its variety, nor rapidity of production its originality. Whatever
may be the case in literature, facility is in art inconsistent with
invention. The artist who covers most canvas always shows, even in the
sum of his works, the least expenditure of thought.[79] I have never
seen more than four works of John Lewis on the walls of the Water-Color
Exhibition; I have counted forty from other hands; but have found in the
end that the forty were a multiplication of one, and the four a
concentration of forty. And therefore I would earnestly plead with all
our artists, that they should make it a law _never_ to repeat
themselves; for he who never repeats himself will not produce an
inordinate number of pictures, and he who limits himself in number gives
himself at least the opportunity of completion. Besides, all repetition
is degradation of the art; it reduces it from headwork to handwork; and
indicates something like a persuasion on the part of the artist that
nature is exhaustible or art perfectible; perhaps, even, by him
exhausted and perfected. All copyists are contemptible, but the copyist
of himself the most so, for he has the worst original.


§ 23. What should be their general aim.

Let then every picture be painted with earnest intention of impressing
on the spectator some elevated emotion, and exhibiting to him some one
particular, but exalted, beauty. Let a real subject be carefully
selected, in itself suggestive of, and replete with, this feeling and
beauty; let an effect of light and color be taken which may harmonize
with both; and a sky, not invented, but recollected, (in fact, all
so-called invention is in landscape nothing more than appropriate
recollection--good in proportion as it is distinct.) Then let the
details of the foreground be separately studied, especially those plants
which appear peculiar to the place: if any one, however unimportant,
occurs there, which occurs not elsewhere, it should occupy a prominent
position; for the other details, the highest examples of the ideal
forms[80] or characters which he requires are to be selected by the
artist from his former studies, or fresh studies made expressly for the
purpose, leaving as little as possible--nothing, in fact, beyond their
connection and arrangement--to mere imagination. Finally, when his
picture is thus perfectly realized in all its parts, let him dash as
much of it out as he likes; throw, if he will, mist around
it--darkness--or dazzling and confused light--whatever, in fact,
impetuous feeling or vigorous imagination may dictate or desire; the
forms, once so laboriously realized, will come out whenever they _do_
occur with a startling and impressive truth, which the uncertainty in
which they are veiled will enhance rather than diminish; and the
imagination, strengthened by discipline and fed with truth, will achieve
the utmost of creation that is possible to finite mind.

The artist who thus works will soon find that he cannot repeat himself
if he would; that new fields of exertion, new subjects of contemplation
open to him in nature day by day, and that, while others lament the
weakness of their invention, _he_ has nothing to lament but the
shortness of life.


§ 24. Duty of the press with respect to the works of Turner.

And now but one word more, respecting the great artist whose works have
formed the chief subject of this treatise. All the _greatest_ qualities
of those works--all that is mental in them, has not yet been so much as
touched upon. None but their lightest and least essential excellences
have been proved, and, therefore, the enthusiasm with which I speak of
them must necessarily appear overcharged and absurd. It, might, perhaps,
have been more prudent to have withheld the full expression of it till I
had shown the full grounds for it; but once written, such expression
must remain till I have justified it. And, indeed, I think there is
enough, even in the foregoing pages, to show that these works are, as
far as concerns the ordinary critics of the press, above all
animadversion, and above all praise; and that, by the public, they are
not to be received as in any way subjects or matters of opinion, but of
Faith. We are not to approach them to be pleased, but to be taught; not
to form a judgment, but to receive a lesson. Our periodical writers,
therefore, may save themselves the trouble either of blaming or
praising: their duty is not to pronounce opinions upon the work of a man
who has walked with nature threescore years; but to impress upon the
public the respect with which they are to be received, and to make
request to him, on the part of the people of England, that he would now
touch no unimportant work--that he would not spend time on slight or
small pictures, but give to the nation a series of grand, consistent,
systematic, and completed poems. We desire that he should follow out his
own thoughts and intents of heart, without reference to any human
authority. But we request, in all humility, that those thoughts may be
seriously and loftily given; and that the whole power of his unequalled
intellect may be exerted in the production of such works as may remain
forever for the teaching of the nations. In all that he says, we
believe; in all that he does we trust.[81] It is therefore that we pray
him to utter nothing lightly--to do nothing regardlessly. He stands upon
an eminence, from which he looks back over the universe of God, and
forward over the generations of men. Let every work of his hand be a
history of the one, and a lesson to the other. Let each exertion of his
mighty mind be both hymn and prophecy,--adoration, to the
Deity,--revelation to mankind.


FOOTNOTES

  [79] Of course this assertion does not refer to the differences in
    mode of execution, which enable one painter to work faster or slower
    than another, but only to the exertion of mind, commonly manifested
    by the artist, according as he is sparing or prodigal of production.

  [80] "Talk of improving nature when it _is_ nature--Nonsense."--_E.
    V. Rippingille_. I have not yet spoken of the difference--even in
    what we commonly call Nature--between imperfect and ideal form: the
    study of this difficult question must, of course, be deferred until
    we have examined the nature of our impressions of beauty; but it may
    not be out of place here to hint at the want of care in many of our
    artists to distinguish between the real work of nature and the
    diseased results of man's interference with her. Many of the works
    of our greatest artists have for their subjects nothing but hacked
    and hewn remnants of farm-yard vegetation, branded root and branch,
    from their birth, by the prong and the pruning-hook; and the
    feelings once accustomed to take pleasure in such abortions, can
    scarcely become perceptive of forms truly ideal. I have just said
    (423) that young painters should go to nature trustingly,--rejecting
    nothing, and selecting nothing: so they should; but they must be
    careful that it _is_ nature to whom they go--nature in her
    liberty--not as servant-of-all-work in the hands of the
    agriculturist, nor stiffened into court-dress by the landscape
    gardener. It must be the pure, wild volition and energy of the
    creation which they follow--not subdued to the furrow, and
    cicatrized to the pollard--not persuaded into proprieties, nor
    pampered into diseases. Let them work by the torrent-side, and in
    the forest shadows; not by purling brooks and under "tonsile
    shades." It is impossible to enter here into discussion of what man
    can or cannot do, by assisting natural operations: it is an
    intricate question: nor can I, without anticipating what I shall
    have hereafter to advance, show how or why it happens that the
    racehorse is _not_ the artist's ideal of a horse, nor a prize tulip
    his ideal of a flower; but so it is. As far as the painter is
    concerned, man never touches nature but to spoil;--he operates on
    her as a barber would on the Apollo; and if he sometimes increases
    some particular power or excellence,--strength or agility in the
    animal--tallness, or fruitfulness, or solidity in the tree,--he
    invariably loses that _balance_ of good qualities which is the chief
    sign of perfect specific form; above all, he destroys the appearance
    of free _volition_ and _felicity_, which, as I shall show hereafter,
    is one of the essential characters of organic beauty. Until,
    however, I can enter into the discussion of the nature of beauty,
    the only advice I can safely give the young painter, is to keep
    clear of clover-fields and parks, and to hold to the unpenetrated
    forest and the unfurrowed hill. There he will find that every
    influence is noble, even when destructive--that decay itself is
    beautiful,--and that, in the elaborate and lovely composition of all
    things, if at first sight it seems less studied than the works of
    men, the appearance of Art is only prevented by the presence of
    Power.

                      "Nature never did betray
             The heart that loved her: 'tis her privilege,
             Through all the years of this our life, to lead
             From joy to joy; for she can so inform
             The mind that is within us, so impress
             With quietness and beauty, and so feed
             With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
             Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men
             Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb
             Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold
             Is full of blessings."

                                              WORDSWORTH.

  [81] It has been hinted, in some of the reviews of the Second Volume
    of this work, that the writer's respect for Turner has diminished
    since the above passage was written. He would, indeed, have been
    deserving of little attention if, with the boldness manifested on
    the preceding pages, he had advanced opinions based on so shallow
    foundation as that the course of three years could effect
    modification of them. He was justified by the sudden accession of
    power which the great artist exhibited at the period when this
    volume was first published, as well as by the low standard of the
    criticism to which he was subjected, in claiming, with respect to
    his then works, a submission of judgment, greater indeed than may
    generally be accorded to even the highest human intellect, yet not
    greater than such a master might legitimately claim from such
    critics; and the cause of the peculiar form of advocacy into which
    the preceding chapters necessarily fell, has been already stated
    more than once. In the following sections it became necessary, as
    they treated a subject of intricate relations, and peculiar
    difficulty, to obtain a more general view of the scope and operation
    of art, and to avoid all conclusions in any wise referable to the
    study of particular painters. The reader will therefore find, not
    that lower rank is attributed to Turner, but that he is now compared
    with the greatest men, and occupies his true position among the most
    noble of all time.




                                 POSTSCRIPT.

The above passage was written in the year 1843; too late. It is true
that soon after the publication of this work, the abuse of the press,
which had been directed against Turner with unceasing virulence during
the production of his noblest works, sank into timid animadversion, or
changed into unintelligent praise; but not before illness, and, in some
degree, mortification, had enfeebled the hand and chilled the heart of
the painter.

This year (1851) he has no picture on the walls of the Academy; and the
_Times_ of May 3d says, "We miss those works of INSPIRATION!"

We miss! Who misses?--The populace of England rolls by to weary itself
in the great bazaar of Kensington, little thinking that a day will come
when those veiled vestals and prancing amazons, and goodly merchandise
of precious stones and gold, will all be forgotten as though they had
not been, but that the light which has faded from the walls of the
Academy is one which a million of Koh-i-Noors could not rekindle, and
that the year 1851 will in the far future be remembered less for what it
has displayed than for what it has withdrawn.

   DENMARK HILL, _June_, 1851.




                      END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


       *       *       *       *       *



[Illustration: LANDSCAPE FROM A PAINTING BY J. M. W. TURNER]


                               Library Edition

                             THE COMPLETE WORKS

                                     OF

                                JOHN RUSKIN


                             MODERN PAINTERS
                     VOLUME II--OF TRUTH AND THEORETIC
                                FACULTIES
                       _Volume III_--OF MANY THINGS


                       NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
                       NEW YORK             CHICAGO




                             MODERN PAINTERS.

                                VOLUME II.,

                                CONTAINING

                                 PART III.,

                             SECTIONS I. AND II.

                  OF THE IMAGINATIVE AND THEORETIC FACULTIES.




                            SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

                                  PART III.

                             OF IDEAS OF BEAUTY.



                                SECTION I.

                        OF THE THEORETIC FACULTY.


CHAPTER I.--Of the Rank and Relations of the Theoretic Faculty.
                                                                      PAGE
  §  1. With what care the subject is to be approached.                  1
  §  2. And of what importance considered.                               2
  §  3. The doubtful force of the term "utility".                        3
  §  4. Its proper sense.                                                4
  §  5. How falsely applied in these times.                              4
  §  6. The evil consequences of such interpretation. How connected
          with national power.                                           5
  §  7. How to be averted.                                               6
  §  8. Division of the pursuits of men into subservient and objective.  8
  §  9. Their relative dignities.                                       10
  § 10. How reversed through erring notions of the contemplative
          and imaginative faculties.                                    10
  § 11. Object of the present section.                                  11


CHAPTER II.--Of the Theoretic Faculty as concerned with Pleasures of
         Sense.

  §  1. Explanation of the term "theoretic".                            12
  §  2. Of the differences of rank in pleasures of sense.               12
  §  3. Use of the terms Temperate and Intemperate.                     13
  §  4. Right use of the term "intemperate".                            13
  §  5. Grounds of inferiority in the pleasures which are subjects of
          intemperance.                                                 14
  §  6. Evidence of higher rank in pleasures of sight and hearing.      15
  §  7. How the lower pleasures may be elevated in rank.                16
  §  8. Ideas of beauty how essentially moral.                          17
  §  9. How degraded by heartless reception.                            17
  § 10. How exalted by affection.                                       18


CHAPTER III.--Of Accuracy and Inaccuracy in Impressions of Sense.

  §  1. By what test is the health of the perceptive faculty to be
          determined?                                                   19
  §  2. And in what sense may the terms Right and Wrong be attached
          to its conclusions?                                           20
  §  3. What power we have over impressions of sense.                   21
  §  4. Depends on acuteness of attention.                              21
  §  5. Ultimate conclusions universal.                                 22
  §  6. What duty is attached to this power over impressions of sense.  22
  §  7. How rewarded.                                                   23
  §  8. Especially with respect to ideas of beauty.                     23
  §  9. Errors induced by the power of habit.                           24
  § 10. The necessity of submission in early stages of judgment.        24
  § 11. The large scope of matured judgment.                            25
  § 12. How distinguishable from false taste.                           25
  § 13. The danger of a spirit of choice.                               26
  § 14. And criminality.                                                27
  § 15. How certain conclusions respecting beauty are by reason
          demonstrable.                                                 27
  § 16. With what liabilities to error.                                 28
  § 17. The term "beauty" how limitable in the outset. Divided
          into typical and vital.                                       28


CHAPTER IV.--Of False Opinions held concerning Beauty.

  §  1. Of the false opinion that truth is beauty, and vice versa.      30
  §  2. Of the false opinion that beauty is usefulness. Compare
          Chap. xii. § 5.                                               31
  §  3. Of the false opinion that beauty results from custom. Compare
          Chap. vi. § 1.                                                31
  §  4. The twofold operation of custom. It deadens sensation, but
          confirms affection.                                           31
  §  5. But never either creates or destroys the essence of beauty.     32
  §  6. Instances.                                                      32
  §  7. Of the false opinion that beauty depends on the association of
          ideas.                                                        33
  §  8. Association. Is, 1st, rational. It is of no efficiency as a
          cause of beauty.                                              33
  §  9. Association accidental. The extent of its influence.            34
  § 10. The dignity of its function.                                    35
  § 11. How it is connected with impressions of beauty.                 36
  § 12. And what caution it renders necessary in the examination of
          them.                                                         36


CHAPTER V.--Of Typical Beauty:--First, of Infinity, or the Type of
         Divine Incomprehensibility.

  §  1. Impossibility of adequately treating the subject.               38
  §  2. With what simplicity of feeling to be approached.               38
  §  3. The child instinct respecting space.                            39
  §  4. Continued in after life.                                        40
  §  5. Whereto this instinct is traceable.                             40
  §  6. Infinity how necessary in art.                                  41
  §  7. Conditions of its necessity.                                    42
  §  8. And connected analogies.                                        42
  §  9. How the dignity of treatment is proportioned to the expression
          of infinity.                                                  43
  § 10. Examples among the Southern schools.                            44
  § 11. Among the Venetians.                                            44
  § 12. Among the painters of landscape.                                45
  § 13. Other modes in which the power of infinity is felt.             45
  § 14. The beauty of curvature.                                        46
  § 15. How constant in external nature.                                46
  § 16. The beauty of gradation.                                        47
  § 17. How found in nature.                                            47
  § 18. How necessary in Art.                                           48
  § 19. Infinity not rightly implied by vastness.                       49


CHAPTER VI.--Of Unity, or the Type of the Divine Comprehensiveness.

  §  1. The general conception of divine Unity.                         50
  §  2. The glory of all things is their Unity.                         50
  §  3. The several kinds of unity. Subjectional. Original. Of
          sequence, and of membership.                                  51
  §  4 Unity of membership. How secured.                                52
  §  5. Variety. Why required.                                          53
  §  6. Change, and its influence on beauty.                            54
  §  7. The love of change. How morbid and evil.                        55
  §  8. The conducing of variety towards unity of subjection.           55
  §  9. And towards unity of sequence.                                  57
  § 10. The nature of proportion. 1st, of apparent proportion.          57
  § 11. The value of apparent proportion in curvature.                  60
  § 12. How by nature obtained.                                         61
  § 13. Apparent proportion in melodies of line.                        61
  § 14. Error of Burke in this matter.                                  62
  § 15. Constructive proportion. Its influence in plants.               63
  § 16. And animals.                                                    64
  § 17. Summary.                                                        64


CHAPTER VII.--Of Repose, or the Type of Divine Permanence.

  §  1. Universal feeling respecting the necessity of repose in art.
          Its sources.                                                  65
  §  2. Repose how expressed in matter.                                 66
  §  3. The necessity to repose of an implied energy.                   66
  §  4. Mental repose, how noble.                                       67
  §  5. Its universal value as a test of art.                           68
  §  6. Instances in the Laocoon and Theseus.                           69
  §  7. And in altar tombs.                                             70


CHAPTER VIII.--Of Symmetry, or the Type of Divine Justice.

  §  1. Symmetry, what and how found in organic nature.                 72
  §  2. How necessary in art.                                           72
  §  3. To what its agreeableness is referable. Various instances.      73
  §  4. Especially in religious art.                                    73


CHAPTER IX.--Of Purity, or the Type of Divine Energy.

  §  1. The influence of light as a sacred symbol.                      75
  §  2. The idea of purity connected with it.                           75
  §  3. Originally derived from conditions of matter.                   76
  §  4. Associated ideas adding to the power of the impression.
          Influence of clearness.                                       76
  §  5. Perfect beauty of surface, in what consisting.                  77
  §  6. Purity only metaphorically a type of sinlessness.               78
  §  7. Energy, how expressed by purity of matter.                      79
  §  8. And of color.                                                   79
  §  9. Spirituality, how so expressed.                                 79


CHAPTER X.--Of Moderation, or the Type of Government by Law.

  §  1. Meaning of the terms Chasteness and Refinement.                 81
  §  2. How referable to temporary fashions.                            81
  §  3. How to the perception of completion.                            81
  §  4. Finish, by great masters esteemed essential.                    82
  §  5. Moderation, its nature and value.                               84
  §  6. It is the girdle of beauty.                                     84
  §  7. How found in natural curves and colors.                         84
  §  8. How difficult of attainment, yet essential to all good.         85


CHAPTER XI.--General Inferences respecting Typical Beauty.

  §  1. The subject incompletely treated, yet admitting of general
          conclusions.                                                  86
  §  2. Typical beauty not created for man's sake.                      87
  §  3. But degrees of it for his sake admitted.                        87
  §  4. What encouragement hence to be received.                        87


CHAPTER XII.--Of Vital Beauty:--First, as Relative.

  §  1. Transition from typical to vital Beauty.                        89
  §  2. The perfection of the theoretic faculty as concerned with
          vital beauty, is charity.                           90
  §  3. Only with respect to plants, less affection than sympathy.      91
  §  4. Which is proportioned to the appearance of energy in the
          plants.                                                       92
  §  5. This sympathy is unselfish, and does not regard utility.        93
  §  6. Especially with respect to animals.                             94
  §  7. And it is destroyed by evidences of mechanism.                  95
  §  8. The second perfection of the theoretic faculty as concerned
          with life is justice of moral judgment.                       96
  §  9. How impeded.                                                    97
  § 10. The influence of moral signs in expression.                     97
  § 11. As also in plants.                                              99
  § 12. Recapitulation.                                                100


CHAPTER XIII.--Of Vital Beauty:--Secondly, as Generic.

  §  1. The beauty of fulfilment of appointed function in every
          animal.                                                      101
  §  2. The two senses of the word "ideal." Either it refers to
          action of the imagination.                                   102
  §  3. Or to perfection of type.                                      103
  §  4. This last sense how inaccurate, yet to be retained.            103
  §  5. Of Ideal form. First, in the lower animals.                    104
  §  6. In what consistent.                                            104
  §  7. Ideal form in vegetables.                                      105
  §  8. The difference of position between plants and animals.         105
  §  9. Admits of variety in the ideal of the former.                  106
  § 10. Ideal form in vegetables destroyed by cultivation.             107
  § 11. Instance in the Soldanella and Ranunculus.                     108
  § 12. The beauty of repose and felicity, how consistent with such
          ideal.                                                       108
  § 13. The ideality of Art.                                           109
  § 14. How connected with the imaginative faculties.                  109
  § 15. Ideality, how belonging to ages and conditions.                110


CHAPTER XIV.--Of Vital Beauty:--Thirdly, in Man.

  §  1. Condition of the human creature entirely different from that
          of the lower animals.                                        111
  §  2. What room here for idealization.                               111
  §  3. How the conception of the bodily ideal is reached.             112
  §  4. Modifications of the bodily ideal owing to influence of mind.
          First, of intellect.                                         113
  §  5. Secondly, of the moral feelings.                               113
  §  6. What beauty is bestowed by them.                               115
  §  7. How the soul culture interferes harmfully with the bodily
          ideal.                                                       115
  §  8. The inconsistency among the effects of the mental virtues on
          the form.                                                    116
  §  9. Is a sign of God's kind purpose towards the race.              116
  § 10. Consequent separation and difference of ideals.                117
  § 11. The _effects_ of the Adamite curse are to be
          distinguished from signs of its immediate activity.          118
  § 12. Which latter only are to be banished from ideal form.          118
  § 13. Ideal form is only to be obtained by portraiture.              119
  § 14. Instances among the greater of the ideal Masters.              119
  § 15. Evil results of opposite practice in modern times.             120
  § 16. The right use of the model. 121
  § 17. Ideal form to be reached only by love.                         121
  § 18. Practical principles deducible.                                122
  § 19. Expressions chiefly destructive of ideal character. 1st,
          Pride.                                                       122
  § 20. Portraiture ancient and modern.                                123
  § 21. Secondly, Sensuality.                                          123
  § 22. How connected with impurity of color.                          124
  § 23. And prevented by its splendor.                                 124
  § 24. Or by severity of drawing.                                     125
  § 25. Degrees of descent in this respect: Rubens, Correggio, and
          Guido.                                                       125
  § 26. And modern art.                                                126
  § 27. Thirdly, ferocity and fear. The latter how to be distinguished
          from awe.                                                    126
  § 28. Holy fear, how distinct from human terror.                     127
  § 29. Ferocity is joined always with fear. Its unpardonableness.     127
  § 30. Such expressions how sought by painters powerless and impious. 128
  § 31. Of passion generally.                                          129
  § 32. It is never to be for itself exhibited--at least on the face.  130
  § 33. Recapitulation.                                                131


CHAPTER XV.--General Conclusions respecting the Theoretic Faculty.

  §  1. There are no sources of the emotion of beauty more than those
          found in things visible.                                     133
  §  2. What imperfection exists in visible things. How in a sort by
          imagination removable.                                       134
  §  3. Which however affects not our present conclusions.             134
  §  4. The four sources from which the pleasure of beauty is derived
          are all divine.                                              134
  §  5. What objections may be made to this conclusion.                135
  §  6. Typical beauty may be æsthetically pursued. Instances.         135
  §  7. How interrupted by false feeling.                              136
  §  8. Greatness and truth are sometimes by the Deity sustained and
          spoken in and through evil men.                              137
  §  9. The second objection arising from the coldness of Christian
          men to external beauty.                                      138
  § 10. Reasons for this coldness in the anxieties of the world. These
          anxieties overwrought and criminal.                          139
  § 11. Evil consequences of such coldness.                            140
  § 12. Theoria the service of Heaven.                                 140




                                SECTION II.

                        OF THE IMAGINATIVE FACULTY.


CHAPTER I.--Of the Three Forms of Imagination.

  §  1. A partial examination only of the imagination is to be
          attempted.                                                   142
  §  2. The works of the metaphysicians how nugatory with respect
          to this faculty.                                             143
  §  3. The definition of D. Stewart, how inadequate.                  143
  §  4. This instance nugatory.                                        144
  §  5. Various instances.                                             145
  §  6. The three operations of the imagination. Penetrative,
          associative, contemplative.                                  146


CHAPTER II.--Of Imagination Associative.

  §  1. Of simple conception.                                          147
  §  2. How connected with verbal knowledge.                           148
  §  3. How used in composition.                                       148
  §  4. Characteristics of composition.                                149
  §  5. What powers are implied by it. The first of the three
          functions of fancy.                                          150
  §  6. Imagination not yet manifested.                                150
  §  7. Imagination is the correlative conception of imperfect
          component parts.                                             151
  §  8. Material analogy with imagination.                             151
  §  9. The grasp and dignity of imagination.                          152
  § 10. Its limits.                                                    153
  § 11. How manifested in treatment of uncertain relations. Its
          deficiency illustrated.                                      154
  § 12. Laws of art, the safeguard of the unimaginative.               155
  § 13. Are by the imaginative painter despised. Tests of imagination. 155
  § 14. The monotony of unimaginative treatment.                       156
  § 15. Imagination never repeats itself.                              157
  § 16. Relation of the imaginative faculty to the theoretic.          157
  § 17. Modification of its manifestation.                             158
  § 18. Instances of absence of imagination.--Claude, Gaspar Poussin.  158
  § 19. Its presence.--Salvator, Nicolo Poussin, Titian, Tintoret.     159
  § 20. And Turner.                                                    160
  § 21. The due function of Associative imagination with respect to
          nature.                                                      161
  § 22. The sign of imaginative work is its appearance of absolute
          truth.                                                       161


CHAPTER III.--Of Imagination Penetrative.

  §  1. Imagination penetrative is concerned not with the combining
          but apprehending of things.                                  163
  §  2. Milton's and Dante's description of flame.                     163
  §  3. The imagination seizes always by the innermost point.          164
  §  4. It acts intuitively and without reasoning.                     165
  §  5. Signs of it in language.                                       165
  §  6. Absence of imagination, how shown.                             166
  §  7. Distinction between imagination and fancy.                     166
  §  8. Fancy how involved with imagination.                           168
  §  9. Fancy is never serious.                                        169
  § 10. Want of seriousness the bar to high art at the present time.   169
  § 11. Imagination is quiet; fancy, restless.                         170
  § 12. The detailing operation of fancy.                              170
  § 13. And suggestive, of the imagination.                            171
  § 14. This suggestiveness how opposed to vacancy.                    172
  § 15. Imagination addresses itself to imagination.                   173
          Instances from the works of Tintoret.                        173
  § 16. The entombment.                                                174
  § 17. The Annunciation.                                              174
  § 18. The Baptism of Christ. Its treatment by various painters.      176
  § 19. By Tintoret.                                                   177
  § 20. The Crucifixion.                                               178
  § 21. The Massacre of innocents.                                     179
  § 22. Various works in the Scuola di San Rocco.                      181
  § 23. The Last Judgment. How treated by various painters.            181
  § 24. By Tintoret.                                                   182
  § 25. The imaginative verity, how distinguished from realism.        183
  § 26. The imagination how manifested in sculpture.                   184
  § 27. Bandinelli, Canova, Mino da Fiesole.                           184
  § 28. Michael Angelo.                                                185
  § 29. Recapitulation. The perfect function of the imagination is
          the intuitive perception of ultimate truth.                  188
  § 30. Imagination how vulgarly understood.                           190
  § 31. How its cultivation is dependent on the moral feelings.        190
  § 32. On independence of mind.                                       191
  § 33. And on habitual reference to nature.                           191


CHAPTER IV.--Of Imagination Contemplative.

  §  1. Imagination contemplative is not part of the essence, but only
          a habit or mode of the faculty.                              192
  §  2. The ambiguity of conception.                                   192
  §  3. Is not in itself capable of adding to the charm of fair
          things.                                                      193
  §  4. But gives to the imagination its regardant power over them.    194
  §  5. The third office of fancy distinguished from imagination
         contemplative.                                                195
  §  6. Various instances.                                             197
  §  7. Morbid or nervous fancy.                                       200
  §  8. The action of contemplative imagination is not to be expressed
          by art.                                                      201
  §  9. Except under narrow limits.--1st. Abstract rendering of
          form without color.                                          201
  § 10. Of color without form.                                         202
  § 11. Or of both without texture.                                    202
  § 12. Abstraction or typical representation of animal form.          203
  § 13. Either when it is symbolically used.                           204
  § 14. Or in architectural decoration.                                205
  § 15. Exception in delicate and superimposed ornament.               206
  § 16. Abstraction necessary from imperfection of materials.          206
  § 17. Abstractions of things capable of varied accident are not
          imaginative.                                                 207
  § 18. Yet sometimes valuable.                                        207
  § 19. Exaggeration. Its laws and limits. First, in scale of
          representation.                                              208
  § 20. Secondly, of things capable of variety of scale.               209
  § 21. Thirdly, necessary in expression of characteristic features on
          diminished scale.                                            210
  § 22. Recapitulation.                                                211


CHAPTER V.--Of the Superhuman Ideal.

  §  1. The subject is not to be here treated in detail.               212
  §  2. The conceivable modes of manifestation of Spiritual Beings
          are four.                                                    212
  §  3. And these are in or through creature forms familiar to us.     213
  §  4. Supernatural character may be impressed on these either by
          phenomena inconsistent with their common nature (compare
          Chap. iv. § 16).                                             213
  §  5. Or by inherent Dignity.                                        213
  §  6. 1st. Of the expression of inspiration.                         214
  §  7. No representation of that which is more than creature is
          possible.                                                    215
  §  8. Supernatural character expressed by modification of
          accessories.                                                 216
  §  9. Landscape of the religious painters. Its character is
          eminently symmetrical.                                       217
  § 10. Landscape of Benozzo Gozzoli.                                  217
  § 11. Landscape of Perugino and Raffaelle.                           218
  § 12. Such Landscape is not to be imitated.                          218
  § 13. Color, and Decoration. Their use in representations of the
          Supernatural.                                                219
  § 14. Decoration so used must be generic.                            220
  § 15. And color pure.                                                220
  § 16. Ideal form of the body itself, of what variety susceptible.    221
  § 17. Anatomical development how far admissible.                     221
  § 18. Symmetry. How valuable.                                        221
  § 19. The influence of Greek art, how dangerous.                     222
  § 20. Its scope, how limited.                                        223
  § 21. Conclusion.                                                    224


ADDENDA.                                                               225




                        LIST OF PLATES TO VOLUME II.



                                                       _Page._

  Court of the Ducal Palace, Venice                         10
                     From a drawing by Ruskin.

  Tomb of the Ilaria di Caretto, Lucca                      72
                        From a photograph.

  The Adoration of the Magi                                158
            From a painting by Ruskin, after Tintoret.

  Study of Stone Pine, at Sestri                           198
                     From a drawing by Ruskin.




                               PART III.

                          OF IDEAS OF BEAUTY.

                              SECTION I.

                      OF THE THEORETIC FACULTY.




                             CHAPTER I.

         OF THE RANK AND RELATIONS OF THE THEORETIC FACULTY.


§ 1. With what care the subject is to be approached.

Although the hasty execution and controversial tone of the former
portions of this essay have been subjects of frequent regret to the
writer, yet the one was in some measure excusable in a work referred to
a temporary end, and the other unavoidable, in one directed against
particular opinions. Nor are either of any necessary detriment to its
availableness as a foundation for more careful and extended survey, in
so far as its province was confined to the assertion of obvious and
visible facts, the verification of which could in no degree be dependent
either on the care with which they might be classed, or the temper in
which they were regarded. Not so with respect to the investigation now
before us, which, being not of things outward, and sensibly
demonstrable, but of the value and meaning of mental impressions, must
be entered upon with a modesty and cautiousness proportioned to the
difficulty of determining the likeness, or community of such
impressions, as they are received by different men, and with seriousness
proportioned to the importance of rightly regarding those faculties over
which we have moral power, and therefore in relation to which we
assuredly incur a moral responsibility. There is not the thing left to
the choice of man to do or not to do, but there is some sort of degree
of duty involved in his determination; and by how much the more,
therefore, our subject becomes embarrassed by the cross influences of
variously admitted passion, administered discipline, or encouraged
affection, upon the minds of men, by so much the more it becomes matter
of weight and import to observe by what laws we should be guided, and of
what responsibilities regardful, in all that we admit, administer, or
encourage.


§ 2. And of what importance considered.

Nor indeed have I ever, even in the preceding sections, spoken with
levity, though sometimes perhaps with rashness. I have never treated the
subject as other than demanding heedful and serious examination, and
taking high place among those which justify as they reward our utmost
ardor and earnestness of pursuit. That it justifies them must be my
present task to prove; that it demands them has never been doubted. Art,
properly so called, is no recreation; it cannot be learned at spare
moments, nor pursued when we have nothing better to do. It is no
handiwork for drawing-room tables; no relief of the ennui of boudoirs;
it must be understood and undertaken seriously or not at all. To advance
it men's lives must be given, and to receive it their hearts. "Le
peintre Rubens s'amuse à être ambassadeur," said one with whom, but for
his own words, we might have thought that effort had been absorbed in
power, and the labor of his art in its felicity.--"E faticoso lo studio
della pittura, et sempre si fa il mare maggiore," said he, who of all
men was least likely to have left us discouraging report of anything
that majesty of intellect could grasp, or continuity of labor
overcome.[1] But that this labor, the necessity of which in all ages has
been most frankly admitted by the greatest men, is justifiable in a
moral point of view, that it is not the pouring out of men's lives upon
the ground, that it has functions of usefulness addressed to the
weightiest of human interests, and that the objects of it have calls
upon us which it is inconsistent alike with our human dignity and our
heavenward duty to disobey--has never been boldly asserted nor fairly
admitted; least of all is it likely to be so in these days of dispatch
and display, where vanity, on the one side, supplies the place of that
love of art which is the only effective patronage, and on the other, of
the incorruptible and earnest pride which no applause, no reprobation,
can blind to its shortcomings nor beguile of its hope.

And yet it is in the expectation of obtaining at least a partial
acknowledgment of this, as a truth influential both of aim and conduct,
that I enter upon the second division of my subject. The time I have
already devoted to the task I should have considered altogether
inordinate, and that which I fear may be yet required for its completion
would have been cause to me of utter discouragement, but that the object
I propose to myself is of no partial nor accidental importance. It is
not now to distinguish between disputed degrees of ability in
individuals, or agreeableness in canvases, it is not now to expose the
ignorance or defend the principles of party or person. It is to summon
the moral energies of the nation to a forgotten duty, to display the
use, force, and function of a great body of neglected sympathies and
desires, and to elevate to its healthy and beneficial operation that art
which, being altogether addressed to them, rises or falls with their
variableness of vigor,--now leading them with Tyrtæan fire, now singing
them to sleep with baby murmurings.


§ 3. The doubtful force of the term "utility."

Only as I fear that with many of us the recommendation of our own
favorite pursuits is rooted more in conceit of ourselves, than affection
towards others, so that sometimes in our very pointing of the way, we
had rather that the intricacy of it should be admired than unfolded,
whence a natural distrust of such recommendation may well have place in
the minds of those who have not yet perceived any value in the thing
praised, and because also, men in the present century understand the
word Useful in a strange way, or at least (for the word has been often
so accepted from the beginning of time) since in these days, they act
its more limited meaning farther out, and give to it more practical
weight and authority, it will be well in the outset that I define
exactly what kind of utility I mean to attribute to art, and especially
to that branch of it which is concerned with those impressions of
external beauty whose nature it is our present object to discover.


§ 4. Its proper sense.

That is to everything created, pre-eminently useful, which enables it
rightly and fully to perform the functions appointed to it by its
Creator. Therefore, that we may determine what is chiefly useful to man,
it is necessary first to determine the use of man himself.

Man's use and function (and let him who will not grant me this follow me
no farther, for this I purpose always to assume) is to be the witness of
the glory of God, and to advance that glory by his reasonable obedience
and resultant happiness.

Whatever enables us to fulfil this function, is in the pure and first
sense of the word useful to us. Pre-eminently therefore whatever sets
the glory of God more brightly before us. But things that only help us
to exist, are in a secondary and mean sense, useful, or rather, if they
be looked for alone, they are useless and worse, for it would be better
that we should not exist, than that we should guiltily disappoint the
purposes of existence.


§ 5. How falsely applied in these times.

And yet people speak in this working age, when they speak from their
hearts, as if houses, and lands, and food, and raiment were alone
useful, and as if sight, thought, and admiration,[2] were all
profitless, so that men insolently call themselves Utilitarians, who
would turn, if they had their way, themselves and their race into
vegetables; men who think, as far as such can be said to think, that the
meat is more than the life, and the raiment than the body, who look to
the earth as a stable, and to its fruit as fodder; vinedressers and
husbandmen, who love the corn they grind, and the grapes they crush,
better than the gardens of the angels upon the slopes of Eden; hewers of
wood and drawers of water, who think that the wood they hew and the
water they draw, are better than the pine-forests that cover the
mountains like the shadow of God, and than the great rivers that move
like his eternity. And so comes upon us that woe of the preacher, that
though God "hath made everything beautiful in his time, also he hath set
the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God
maketh from the beginning to the end."


§ 6. The evil consequences of such interpretation. How connected with
       national power.

This Nebuchadnezzar curse, that sends us to grass like oxen, seems to
follow but too closely on the excess or continuance of national power
and peace. In the perplexities of nations, in their struggles for
existence, in their infancy, their impotence, or even their
disorganization, they have higher hopes and nobler passions. Out of the
suffering comes the serious mind; out of the salvation, the grateful
heart; out of the endurance, the fortitude; out of the deliverance, the
faith; but now when they have learned to live under providence of laws,
and with decency and justice of regard for each other; and when they
have done away with violent and external sources of suffering, worse
evils seem arising out of their rest, evils that vex less and mortify
more, that suck the blood though they do not shed it, and ossify the
heart though they do not torture it. And deep though the causes of
thankfulness must be to every people at peace with others and at unity
in itself, there are causes of fear also, a fear greater than of sword
and sedition; that dependence on God may be forgotten because the bread
is given and the water is sure, that gratitude to him may cease because
his constancy of protection has taken the semblance of a natural law,
that heavenly hope may grow faint amidst the full fruition of the world,
that selfishness may take place of undemanded devotion, compassion be
lost in vain-glory, and love in dissimulation,[3] that enervation may
succeed to strength, apathy to patience, and the noise of jesting words
and foulness of dark thoughts, to the earnest purity of the girded loins
and the burning lamp. About the river of human life there is a wintry
wind, though a heavenly sunshine; the iris colors its agitation, the
frost fixes upon its repose. Let us beware that our rest become not the
rest of stones, which so long as they are torrent-tossed, and
thunder-stricken, maintain their majesty, but when the stream is silent,
and the storm passed, suffer the grass to cover them and the lichen to
feed on them, and are ploughed down into dust.


§ 7. How to be averted.

And though I believe that we have salt enough of ardent and holy mind
amongst us to keep us in some measure from this moral decay, yet the
signs of it must be watched with anxiety, in all matter however trivial,
in all directions however distant. And at this time, when the iron roads
are tearing up the surface of Europe, as grapeshot do the sea, when
their great sagene is drawing and twitching the ancient frame and
strength of England together, contracting all its various life, its
rocky arms and rural heart, into a narrow, finite, calculating
metropolis of manufactures, when there is not a monument throughout the
cities of Europe, that speaks of old years and mighty people, but it is
being swept away to build cafés and gaming-houses;[4] when the honor of
God is thought to consist in the poverty of his temple, and the column
is shortened, and the pinnacle shattered, the color denied to the
casement, and the marble to the altar, while exchequers are exhausted in
luxury of boudoirs, and pride of reception-rooms; when we ravage without
a pause all the loveliness of creation which God in giving pronounced
good, and destroy without a thought all those labors which men have
given their lives, and their sons' sons' lives to complete, and have
left for a legacy to all their kind, a legacy of more than their hearts'
blood, for it is of their souls' travail, there is need, bitter need, to
bring back, if we may, into men's minds, that to live is nothing,
unless to live be to know Him by whom we live, and that he is not to be
known by marring his fair works, and blotting out the evidence of his
influences upon his creatures, not amid the hurry of crowds and crash of
innovation, but in solitary places, and out of the glowing intelligences
which he gave to men of old. He did not teach them how to build for
glory and for beauty, he did not give them the fearless, faithful,
inherited energies that worked on and down from death to death,
generation after generation, that we, foul and sensual as we are, might
give the carved work of their poured-out spirit to the axe and the
hammer; he has not cloven the earth with rivers, that their white wild
waves might turn wheels and push paddles, nor turned it up under as it
were fire, that it might heat wells and cure diseases; he brings not up
his quails by the east wind, only to let them fall in flesh about the
camp of men: he has not heaped the rocks of the mountain only for the
quarry, nor clothed the grass of the field only for the oven.


§ 8. Division of the pursuits of men into subservient and objective.

All science and all art may be divided into that which is subservient to
life, and which is the object of it. As subservient to life, or
practical, their results are, in the common sense of the word, useful.
As the object of life or theoretic, they are, in the common sense,
useless; and yet the step between practical and theoretic science is the
step between the miner and the geologist, the apothecary and the
chemist; and the step between practical and theoretic art is that
between the bricklayer and the architect, between the plumber and the
artist, and this is a step allowed on all hands to be from less to
greater; so that the so-called useless part of each profession does by
the authoritative and right instinct of mankind assume the superior and
more noble place, even though books be sometimes written, and that by
writers of no ordinary mind, which assume that a chemist is rewarded for
the years of toil which have traced the greater part of the combinations
of matter to their ultimate atoms, by discovering a cheap way of
refining sugar, and date the eminence of the philosopher, whose life has
been spent in the investigation of the laws of light, from the time of
his inventing an improvement in spectacles.

But the common consent of men proves and accepts the proposition, that
whatever part of any pursuit ministers to the bodily comforts, and
admits of material uses, is ignoble, and whatsoever part is addressed to
the mind only, is noble; and that geology does better in reclothing dry
bones and revealing lost creations, than in tracing veins of lead and
beds of iron; astronomy better in opening to us the houses of heaven
than in teaching navigation; botany better in displaying structure than
in expressing juices; surgery better in investigating organization than
in setting limbs; only it is ordained that, for our encouragement, every
step we make in the more exalted range of science adds something also to
its practical applicabilities; that all the great phenomena of nature,
the knowledge of which is desired by the angels only, by us partly, as
it reveals to farther vision the being and the glory of Him in whom they
rejoice and we live, dispense yet such kind influences and so much of
material blessing as to be joyfully felt by all inferior creatures, and
to be desired by them with such single desire as the imperfection of
their nature may admit;[5] that the strong torrents which, in their own
gladness fill the hills with hollow thunder and the vales with winding
light, have yet their bounden charge of field to feed and barge to bear;
that the fierce flames to which the Alp owes its upheaval and the
volcano its terror, temper for us the metal vein and quickening spring;
and that for our incitement, I say not our reward, for knowledge is its
own reward, herbs have their healing, stones their preciousness, and
stars their times.


§ 9. Their relative dignities.

§ 10. How reversed through erring notions of the contemplative and
        imaginative faculties.

It would appear, therefore, that those pursuits which are altogether
theoretic, whose results are desirable or admirable in themselves and
for their own sake, and in which no farther end to which their
productions or discoveries are referred, can interrupt the contemplation
of things as they are, by the endeavor to discover of what selfish uses
they are capable (and of this order are painting and sculpture), ought
to take rank above all pursuits which have any taint in them of
subserviency to life, in so far as all such tendency is the sign of less
eternal and less holy function.[6] And such rank these two sublime arts
would indeed assume in the minds of nations, and become objects of
corresponding efforts, but for two fatal and widespread errors
respecting the great faculties of mind concerned in them.

The first of these, or the theoretic faculty, is concerned with the
moral perception and appreciation of ideas of beauty. And the error
respecting it is the considering and calling it æsthetic, degrading it
to a mere operation of sense, or perhaps worse, of custom, so that the
arts which appeal to it sink into a mere amusement, ministers to morbid
sensibilities, ticklers and fanners of the soul's sleep.

The second great faculty is the imaginative, which the mind exercises in
a certain mode of regarding or combining the ideas it has received from
external nature, and the operations of which become in their turn
objects of the theoretic faculty to other minds.

[Illustration: COURT OF THE DUCAL PALACE, VENICE. From a drawing by
Ruskin.]

And the error respecting this faculty is, that its function is one of
falsehood, that its operation is to exhibit things as they are _not_,
and that in so doing it mends the works of God.


§ 11. Object of the present section.

Now, as these are the two faculties to which I shall have occasion
constantly to refer during that examination of the ideas of beauty and
relation on which we are now entering, because it is only as received
and treated by these, that those ideas become exalted and profitable, it
becomes necessary for me, in the outset, to explain their power and
define their sphere, and to vindicate, in the system of our nature,
their true place for the intellectual lens and moral retina by which and
on which our informing thoughts are concentrated and represented.


FOOTNOTES

  [1] Tintoret. (Ridolfi. Vita.)

  [2] We live by admiration, hope, and love. (Excursion, Book IV.)

  [3] Rom. xii. 9.

  [4] The extent of ravage among works of art, or of historical
    interest, continually committing throughout the continent may,
    perhaps, be in some measure estimated from the following facts, to
    which the experience of every traveller may add indefinitely:

    At Beauvois--The magnificent old houses supported on columns of
    workmanship (so far as I recollect) unique in the north of France,
    at the corner of the market-place, have recently been destroyed for
    the enlarging of some ironmongery and grocery warehouses. The arch
    across the street leading to the cathedral has been destroyed also,
    for what purpose, I know not.

    At Rouen--The last of the characteristic houses on the quay is now
    disappearing. When I was last there, I witnessed the destruction of
    the noble gothic portal of the church of St. Nicholas, whose
    position interfered with the courtyard of an hotel; the greater part
    of the ancient churches are used as smithies, or warehouses for
    goods. So also at Tours (St. Julien). One of the most interesting
    and superb pieces of middle-age domestic architecture in Europe,
    opposite the west front of the cathedral, is occupied as a café, and
    its lower story concealed by painted wainscotings; representing, if
    I recollect right, twopenny rolls surrounded by circles of admiring
    cherubs.

    At Geneva--The wooden projections or loggias which were once the
    characteristic feature of the city, have been entirely removed
    within the last ten years.

    At Pisa--The old Baptistery is at this present time in process of
    being "restored," that is, dashed to pieces, and common stone
    painted black and varnished, substituted for its black marble. In
    the Campo Santo, the invaluable frescoes, which might be protected
    by merely glazing the arcades, are left exposed to wind and weather.
    While I was there last year I saw a monument put up against the
    lower part of the wall, to some private person; the bricklayers
    knocked out a large space of the lower brickwork, with what
    beneficial effect to the loose and blistered stucco on which the
    frescoes are painted above, I leave the reader to imagine; inserted
    the tablet, and then plastered over the marks of the insertion,
    destroying a portion of the border of one of the paintings. The
    greater part of Giotto's "Satan before God," has been destroyed by
    the recent insertion of one of the beams of the roof.

    The tomb of Antonio Puccinello, which was the last actually put up
    against the frescoes, and which destroyed the terminal subject of
    the Giotto series, bears date 1808.

    It has been proposed (or at least it is so reported) that the church
    of La Spina should be destroyed in order to widen the quay.

    At Florence--One of its most important and characteristic streets,
    that in which stands the church of Or San Michele, has been within
    the last five years entirely destroyed and rebuilt in the French
    style; consisting now almost exclusively of shops of bijouterie and
    parfumerie. Owing to this direction of public funds, the fronts of
    the Duomo, Santa Croce, St. Lorenzo, and half the others in Florence
    remain in their original bricks.

    The old refectory of Santa Croce, containing an invaluable Cenacolo,
    if not by Giotto, at least one of the finest works of his school, is
    used as a carpet manufactory. In order to see the fresco, I had to
    get on the top of a loom. The _cenacolo_ (of Raffaelle?) recently
    discovered, I saw when the refectory it adorns was used as a
    coach-house. The fresco, which gave Raffaelle the idea of the Christ
    of the Transfiguration, is in an old wood shed at San Miniato,
    concealed behind a heap of faggots. In June, last year, I saw
    Gentile da Fabriano's picture of the Adoration of the Magi,
    belonging to the Academy of Florence, put face upmost in a shower of
    rain in an open cart; on my suggesting the possibility of the rain
    hurting it, an old piece of matting was thrown over its face, and it
    was wheeled away "per essere pulita." What fate this signified, is
    best to be discovered from the large Perugino in the Academy; whose
    divine distant landscape is now almost concealed by the mass of
    French ultramarine, painted over it apparently with a common house
    brush, by the picture cleaner.

    Not to detain the reader by going through the cities of Italy, I
    will only further mention, that at Padua, the rain beats through the
    west window of the Arena chapel, and runs down _over_ the frescoes.
    That at Venice, in September last, I saw three buckets set in the
    scuola di San Rocco to catch the rain which came _through_ the
    _canvases_ of Tintoret on the roof; and that while the old works of
    art are left thus unprotected, the palaces are being restored in the
    following modes. The English residents knock out bow windows to see
    up and down the canal. The Italians paint all the _marble_ white or
    cream color, stucco the fronts, and paint them in blue and white
    stripes to imitate alabaster. (This has been done with Danieli's
    hotel, with the north angle of the church of St. Mark, there
    replacing the real alabasters which have been torn down, with a
    noble old house in St. Mark's place, and with several in the narrow
    canals.) The marbles of St. Mark's, and carvings, are being
    _scraped_ down to make them look bright--the lower arcade of the
    Doge's palace is whitewashed--the entrance porch is being
    restored--the operation having already proceeded so far as the
    knocking off of the heads of the old statues--an iron railing
    painted black and yellow has been put round the court. Faded
    tapestries, and lottery tickets (the latter for the benefit of
    charitable institutions) are exposed for sale in the council
    chambers.

  [5] Hooker, Eccl. Pol. Book I. chap. ii. § 2.

  [6] I do not assert that the accidental utility of a theoretic
    pursuit, as of botany for instance, in any way degrades it, though
    it cannot be considered as elevating it. But essential utility, a
    purpose to which the pursuit is in some measure referred, as in
    architecture, invariably degrades, because then the theoretic part
    of the art is comparatively lost sight of; and thus architecture
    takes a level below that of sculpture or painting, even when the
    powers of mind developed in it are of the same high order.

    When we pronounce the name of Giotto, our venerant thoughts are at
    Assisi and Padua, before they climb the Campanile of Santa Maria del
    Fiore. And he who would raise the ghost of Michael Angelo, must
    haunt the Sistine and St. Lorenzo, not St. Peter's.




                               CHAPTER II.

      OF THE THEORETIC FACULTY AS CONCERNED WITH PLEASURES OF SENSE.


§ 1. Explanation of the term "theoretic."

I proceed therefore first, to examine the nature of what I have called
the Theoretic faculty, and to justify my substitution of the term
"theoretic" for æsthetic, which is the one commonly employed with
reference to it.

Now the term "æsthesis" properly signifies mere sensual perception of
the outward qualities and necessary effects of bodies, in which sense
only, if we would arrive at any accurate conclusions on this difficult
subject, it should always be used. But I wholly deny that the
impressions of beauty are in any way sensual,--they are neither sensual
nor intellectual, but moral, and for the faculty receiving them, whose
difference from mere perception I shall immediately endeavor to explain,
no term can be more accurate or convenient than that employed by the
Greeks, "theoretic," which I pray permission, therefore, always to use,
and to call the operation of the faculty itself, Theoria.


§ 2. Of the differences of rank in pleasures of sense.

Let us begin at the lowest point, and observe, first, what differences
of dignity may exist between different kinds of æsthetic or sensual
pleasure, properly so called.

Now it is evident that the being common to brutes, or peculiar to man,
can alone be no rational test of inferiority, or dignity in pleasures.
We must not assume that man is the nobler animal, and then deduce the
nobleness of his delights; but we must prove the nobleness of the
delights, and thence the nobleness of the animal. The dignity of
affection is no way lessened because a large measure of it may be found
in lower animals, neither is the vileness of gluttony and lust abated
because they are common to men. It is clear, therefore, that there is a
standard of dignity in the pleasures and passions themselves, by which
we also class the creatures capable of, or suffering them.


§ 3. Use of the terms Temperate and Intemperate.

The first great distinction, we observe, is that noted of Aristotle,
that men are called temperate and intemperate with regard to some, and
not so with respect to others, and that those, with respect to which
they are so called, are, by common consent, held to be the vilest. But
Aristotle, though exquisitely subtle in his notation of facts, does not
frequently give us satisfactory account of, or reason for them. Content
with stating the fact of these pleasures being held the lowest, he shows
not why this estimation of them is just, and confuses the reader by
observing casually respecting the higher pleasures, what is indeed true,
but appears at first opposed to his own position, namely, that "men may
be conceived, as also in these taking pleasure, either rightly, or more
or less than is right."[7] Which being so, and evident capability of
excess or defect existing in pleasures of this higher order, we ought to
have been told how it happens that men are not called intemperate when
they indulge in excess of this kind, and what is that difference in the
nature of the pleasure which diminishes the criminality of its excess.
This let us attempt to ascertain.


§ 4. Right use of the term "intemperate."

Men are held intemperate ([Greek: akolastoi]) only when their desires
overcome or prevent the action of their reason, and they are indeed
intemperate in the exact degree in which such prevention or interference
takes place, and so are actually [Greek: akolastoi], in many instances,
and with respect to many resolves, which lower not the world's
estimation of their temperance. For so long as it can be supposed that
the reason has acted imperfectly owing to its own imperfection, or to
the imperfection of the premises submitted to it, (as when men give an
inordinate preference to their own pursuits, because they cannot, in the
nature of things, have sufficiently experienced the goodness and benefit
of others,) and so long as it may be presumed that men have referred to
reason in what they do, and have not suffered its orders to be disobeyed
through mere impulse and desire, (though those orders may be full of
error owing to the reason's own feebleness,) so long men are not held
intemperate. But when it is palpably evident that the reason cannot have
erred but that its voice has been deadened or disobeyed, and that the
reasonable creature has been dragged dead round the walls of his own
citadel by mere passion and impulse,--then, and then only, men are of
all held intemperate. And this is evidently the case with respect to
inordinate indulgence in pleasures of touch and taste, for these, being
destructive in their continuance not only of all other pleasures, but
of the very sensibilities by which they themselves are received, and as
this penalty is actually known and experienced by those indulging in
them, so that the reason cannot but pronounce right respecting their
perilousness, there is no palliation of the wrong choice; and the man,
as utterly incapable of will,[8] is called intemperate, or [Greek:
akolastos].

It would be well if the reader would for himself follow out this
subject, which it would be irrelevant here to pursue farther, observing
how a certain degree of intemperance is suspected and attributed to men
with respect to higher impulses; as, for instance, in the case of anger,
or any other passion criminally indulged, and yet is not so attributed,
as in the case of sensual pleasures; because in anger the reason is
supposed not to have had time to operate, and to be itself affected by
the presence of the passion, which seizes the man involuntarily and
before he is aware; whereas, in the case of the sensual pleasures, the
act is deliberate, and determined on beforehand, in direct defiance of
reason. Nevertheless, if no precaution be taken against immoderate
anger, and the passions gain upon the man, so as to be evidently wilful
and unrestrained, and admitted contrary to all reason, we begin to look
upon him as, in the real sense of the word, intemperate, or [Greek:
akolastos], and assign to him, in consequence, his place among the
beasts, as definitely as if he had yielded to the pleasurable
temptations of touch or taste.


§ 5. Grounds of inferiority in the pleasures which are subjects of
       intemperance.

We see, then, that the primal ground of inferiority in these pleasures
is that which _proves_ their indulgence to be contrary to reason; namely
their destructiveness upon prolongation, and their incapability of
co-existing continually with other delights or perfections of the
system.

And this incapability of continuance directs us to the second cause of
their inferiority; namely, that they are given to us as subservient to
life, as instruments of our preservation--compelling us to seek the
things necessary to our being, and that, therefore, when this their
function is fully performed, they ought to have an end; and can be only
artificially, and under high penalty, prolonged. But the pleasures of
sight and hearing are given as gifts. They answer not any purposes of
mere existence, for the distinction of all that is useful or dangerous
to us might be made, and often is made, by the eye, without its
receiving the slightest pleasure of sight. We might have learned to
distinguish fruits and grain from flowers, without having any superior
pleasure in the aspect of the latter. And the ear might have learned to
distinguish the sounds that communicate ideas, or to recognize
intimations of elemental danger without perceiving either music in the
voice, or majesty in the thunder. And as these pleasures have no
function to perform, so there is no limit to their continuance in the
accomplishment of their end, for they are an end in themselves, and so
may be perpetual with all of us--being in no way destructive, but rather
increasing in exquisiteness by repetition.


§ 6. Evidence of higher rank in pleasures of sight and hearing.

Herein, then, we find very sufficient ground for the higher estimation
of these delights, first, in their being eternal and inexhaustible, and
secondly, in their being evidently no means or instrument of life, but
an object of life. Now in whatever is an object of life, in whatever may
be infinitely and for itself desired, we may be sure there is something
of divine, for God will not make anything an object of life to his
creatures which does not point to, or partake of, Himself. And so,
though we were to regard the pleasures of sight merely as the highest of
sensual pleasures, and though they were of rare occurrence, and, when
occurring, isolated and imperfect, there would still be a supernatural
character about them, owing to their permanence and self-sufficiency,
where no other sensual pleasures are permanent or self-sufficient. But
when, instead of being scattered, interrupted, or chance-distributed,
they are gathered together, and so arranged to enhance each other as by
chance they could not be, there is caused by them not only a feeling of
strong affection towards the object in which they exist, but a
perception of purpose and adaptation of it to our desires; a perception,
therefore, of the immediate operation of the Intelligence which so
formed us, and so feeds us.

Out of which perception arise joy, admiration, and gratitude.

Now the mere animal consciousness of the pleasantness I call æsthesis;
but the exulting, reverent, and grateful perception of it I call
theoria. For this, and this only, is the full comprehension and
contemplation of the beautiful as a gift of God, a gift not necessary to
our being, but added to, and elevating it, and twofold, first of the
desire, and secondly of the thing desired.


§ 7. How the lower pleasures may be elevated in rank.

And that this joyfulness and reverence are a necessary part of theoretic
pleasure is very evident when we consider that, by the presence of these
feelings, even the lower and more sensual pleasures may be rendered
theoretic. Thus Aristotle has subtly noted, that "we call not men
intemperate so much with respect to the scents of roses or herb-perfumes
as of ointments and of condiments," (though the reason that he gives for
this be futile enough.) For the fact is, that of scents artificially
prepared the extreme desire is intemperance, but of natural and
God-given scents, which take their part in the harmony and pleasantness
of creation, there can hardly be intemperance; not that there is any
absolute difference between the two kinds, but that these are likely to
be received with gratitude and joyfulness rather than those, so that we
despise the seeking of essences and unguents, but not the sowing of
violets along our garden banks. But all things may be elevated by
affection, as the spikenard of Mary, and in the Song of Solomon, the
myrrh upon the handles of the lock, and that of Isaac concerning his
son. And the general law for all these pleasures is, that when sought in
the abstract and ardently, they are foul things, but when received with
thankfulness and with reference to God's glory, they become theoretic;
and so I can find something divine in the sweetness of wild fruits, as
well as in the pleasantness of the pure air, and the tenderness of its
natural perfumes that come and go as they list.


§ 8. Ideas of beauty how essentially moral.

It will be understood why I formerly said in the chapter respecting
ideas of beauty, that those ideas were the subject of moral and not of
intellectual, nor altogether of sensual perception; and why I spoke of
the pleasures connected with them as derived from "those material
sources which are agreeable to our moral nature in its purity and
perfection." For, as it is necessary to the existence of an idea of
beauty, that the sensual pleasure which may be its basis, should be
accompanied first with joy, then with love of the object, then with the
perception of kindness in a superior Intelligence, finally with
thankfulness and veneration towards that Intelligence itself, and as no
idea can be at all considered as in any way an idea of beauty, until it
be made up of these emotions, any more than we can be said to have an
idea of a letter of which we perceive the perfume and the fair writing,
without understanding the contents of it, or intent of it; and as these
emotions are in no way resultant from, nor obtainable by, any operation
of the intellect, it is evident that the sensation of beauty is not
sensual on the one hand, nor is it intellectual on the other, but is
dependent on a pure, right, and open state of the heart, both for its
truth and for its intensity, insomuch that even the right after action
of the intellect upon facts of beauty so apprehended, is dependent on
the acuteness of the heart feeling about them; and thus the Apostolic
words come true, in this minor respect as in all others, that men are
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
having the understanding darkened because of the hardness of their
hearts, and so being past feeling, give themselves up to lasciviousness;
for we do indeed see constantly that men having naturally acute
perceptions of the beautiful, yet not receiving it with a pure heart,
nor into their hearts at all, never comprehend it, nor receive good from
it, but make it a mere minister to their desires, and accompaniment and
seasoning of lower sensual pleasures, until all their emotions take the
same earthly stamp, and the sense of beauty sinks into the servant of
lust.


§ 9. How degraded by heartless reception.

§ 10. How exalted by affection.

Nor is what the world commonly understands by the cultivation of taste,
anything more or better than this, at least in times of corrupt and
over-pampered civilization, when men build palaces and plant groves and
gather luxuries, that they and their devices may hang in the corners of
the world like fine-spun cobwebs, with greedy, puffed-up, spider-like
lusts in the middle. And this, which in Christian times is the abuse and
corruption of the sense of beauty, was in that Pagan life of which St.
Paul speaks, little less than the essence of it, and the best they had;
for I know not that of the expressions of affection towards external
nature to be found among Heathen writers, there are any of which the
balance and leading thought cleaves not towards the sensual parts of
her. Her beneficence they sought, and her power they shunned, her
teaching through both, they understood never. The pleasant influences of
soft winds and ringing streamlets, and shady coverts; of the violet
couch, and plane-tree shade,[9] they received, perhaps, in a more noble
way than we, but they found not anything except fear, upon the bare
mountain, or in the ghostly glen. The Hybla heather they loved more for
its sweet hives than its purple hues. But the Christian theoria seeks
not, though it accepts, and touches with its own purity, what the
Epicurean sought, but finds its food and the objects of its love
everywhere, in what is harsh and fearful, as well as what is kind, nay,
even in all that seems coarse and commonplace; seizing that which is
good, and delighting more sometimes at finding its table spread in
strange places, and in the presence of its enemies, and its honey coming
out of the rock, than if all were harmonized into a less wondrous
pleasure; hating only what is self-sighted and insolent of men's work,
despising all that is not of God, unless reminding it of God, yet able
to find evidence of him still, where all seems forgetful of him, and to
turn that into a witness of his working which was meant to obscure it,
and so with clear and unoffended sight beholding him forever, according
to the written promise,--Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God.


FOOTNOTES

  [7] [Greek: hôs dei, kai kath' hyperbolên kai elleipsin.]

  [8] Comp. Hooker, Eccl. Pol. Book i. chap. 8.

  [9] Plato, Phædrus, § 9.




                         CHAPTER III.

     OF ACCURACY AND INACCURACY IN IMPRESSIONS OF SENSE.


§ 1. By what test is the health of the perceptive faculty to be
       determined?

Hitherto we have observed only the distinctions of dignity among
pleasures of sense, considered merely as such, and the way in which any
of them may become theoretic in being received with right feeling.

But as we go farther, and examine the distinctive nature of ideas of
beauty, we shall, I believe, perceive something in them besides æsthetic
pleasure, which attests a more important function belonging to them than
attaches to other sensual ideas, and exhibits a more exalted character
in the faculty by which they are received. And this was what I alluded
to, when I said in the chapter already referred to (§ 1), that "we may
indeed perceive, as far as we are acquainted with the nature of God,
that we have been so constructed as in a healthy state of mind to derive
pleasure from whatever things are illustrative of that nature."

This point it is necessary now farther to develop.

Our first inquiry must evidently be, how we are authorized to affirm of
any man's mind, respecting impressions of sight, that it is in a healthy
state or otherwise. What canon or test is there by which we may
determine of these impressions that they are or are not _rightly_
esteemed beautiful? To what authority, when men are at variance with
each other on this subject, shall it be deputed to judge which is right?
or is there any such authority or canon at all?

For it does not at first appear easy to prove that men ought to like one
thing rather than another, and although this is granted generally by
men's speaking of bad or good taste, it is frequently denied when we
pass to particulars, by the assertion of each individual that he has a
right to his opinion--a right which is sometimes claimed even in moral
matters, though then palpably without foundation, but which does not
appear altogether irrational in matters æsthetic, wherein little
operation of voluntary choice is supposed possible. It would appear
strange, for instance, to assert, respecting a particular person who
preferred the scent of violets to roses, that he had no right to do so.
And yet, while I have said that the sensation of beauty is intuitive and
necessary, as men derive pleasure from the scent of a rose, I have
assumed that there are some sources from which it is rightly derived,
and others from which it is wrongly derived, in other words that men
have no right to think some things beautiful, and no right to remain
apathetic with regard to others.


§ 2. And in what sense may the terms Right and Wrong be attached to its
       conclusions?

Hence then arise two questions, according to the sense in which the word
right is taken; the first, in what way an impression of sense may be
deceptive, and therefore a conclusion respecting it untrue; and the
second, in what way an impression of sense, or the preference of one,
may be a subject of will, and therefore of moral duty or delinquency.

To the first of these questions, I answer that we cannot speak of the
immediate impression of sense as false, nor of its preference to others
as mistaken, for no one can be deceived respecting the actual sensation
he perceives or prefers. But falsity may attach to his assertion or
supposition, either that what he himself perceives is from the same
object perceived by others, or is always to be by himself perceived, or
is always to be by himself preferred; and when we speak of a man as
wrong in his impressions of sense, we either mean that he feels
differently from all, or a majority, respecting a certain object, or
that he prefers at present those of his impressions, which ultimately he
will not prefer.

To the second I answer, that over immediate impressions and immediate
preferences we have no power, but over ultimate impressions, and
especially ultimate preferences we have; and that, though we can neither
at once choose whether we shall see an object, red, green, or blue, nor
determine to like the red better than the blue, or the blue better than
the red, yet we can, if we choose, make ourselves ultimately susceptible
of such impressions in other degrees, and capable of pleasures in them
in different measure; and because, wherever power of any kind is given,
there is responsibility attached, it is the duty of men to prefer
certain impressions of sense to others, because they have the power of
doing so, this being precisely analogous to the law of the moral world,
whereby men are supposed not only capable of governing their likes and
dislikes, but the whole culpability or propriety of actions is dependent
upon this capability, so that men are guilty or otherwise, not for what
they do, but for what they desire, the command being not, thou shalt
obey, but thou shalt love, the Lord thy God, which, if men were not
capable of governing and directing their affections, would be the
command of an impossibility.


§ 3. What power we have over impressions of sense.

I assert, therefore, that even with respect to impressions of sense, we
have a power of preference, and a corresponding duty, and I shall show
first the nature of the power, and afterwards the nature of the duty.

Let us take an instance from one of the lowest of the senses, and
observe the kind of power we have over the impressions of lingual taste.
On the first offering of two different things to the palate, it is not
in our power to prevent or command the instinctive preference. One will
be unavoidably and helplessly preferred to the other. But if the same
two things be submitted to judgment frequently and attentively, it will
be often found that their relations change. The palate, which at first
perceived only the coarse and violent qualities of either, will, as it
becomes more experienced, acquire greater subtilty and delicacy of
discrimination, perceiving in both agreeable or disagreeable qualities
at first unnoticed, which on continued experience will probably become
more influential than the first impressions; and whatever this final
verdict may be, it is felt by the person who gives it, and received by
others as a more correct one than the first.


§ 4. Depends on acuteness of attention.

So, then, the power we have over the preference of impressions of taste
is not actual nor immediate, but only a power of testing and comparing
them frequently and carefully, until that which is the more permanent,
the more consistently agreeable, be determined. But when the instrument
of taste is thus in some degree perfected and rendered subtile, by its
being practised upon a single object, its conclusions will be more rapid
with respect to others, and it will be able to distinguish more quickly
in other things, and even to prefer at once, those qualities which are
calculated finally to give it most pleasure, though more capable with
respect to those on which it is more frequently exercised; whence
people are called judges with respect to this or that particular object
of taste.


§ 5. Ultimate conclusions universal.

Now that verdicts of this kind are received as authoritative by others,
proves another and more important fact, namely, that not only changes of
opinion take place in consequence of experience, but that those changes
are from variation of opinion to unity of opinion; and that whatever may
be the differences of estimate among unpractised or uncultivated tastes,
there will be unity of taste among the experienced. And that therefore
the operation of repeated trial and experience is to arrive at
principles of preference in some sort common to all, and which are a
part of our nature.

I have selected the sense of taste for an instance, because it is the
least favorable to the position I hold, since there is more latitude
allowed, and more actual variety of verdict in the case of this sense
than of any other; and yet, however susceptible of variety even the
ultimate approximations of its preferences may be, the authority of
judges is distinctly allowed, and we hear every day the admission, by
those of unpractised palate, that they are, or may be wrong in their
opinions respecting the real pleasurableness of things either to
themselves, or to others.


§ 6. What duty is attached to this power over impressions of sense.

The sense, however, in which they thus use the word "wrong" is merely
that of falseness or inaccuracy in conclusion, not of moral delinquency.
But there is, as I have stated, a duty, more or less imperative,
attached to every power we possess, and therefore to this power over the
lower senses as well as to all others.

And this duty is evidently to bring every sense into that state of
cultivation, in which it shall both form the truest conclusions
respecting all that is submitted to it, and procure us the greatest
amount of pleasure consistent with its due relation to other senses and
functions. Which three constituents of perfection in sense, true
judgment, maximum sensibility, and right relation to others, are
invariably co-existent and involved one by the other, for the true
judgment is the result of the high sensibility, and the high sensibility
of the right relation. Thus, for instance, with respect to pleasures of
taste, it is our duty not to devote such inordinate attention to the
discrimination of them as must be inconsistent with our pursuit, and
destructive of our capacity of higher and preferable pleasures, but to
cultivate the sense of them in that way which is consistent with all
other good, by temperance, namely, and by such attention as the mind at
certain resting moments may fitly pay even to so ignoble a source of
pleasure as this, by which discipline we shall bring the faculty of
taste itself to its real maximum of sensibility; for it may not be
doubted but that health, hunger, and such general refinement of bodily
habits as shall make the body a perfect and fine instrument in all
respects, are better promoters of actual sensual enjoyment of taste,
than the sickened, sluggish, hard-stimulated fastidiousness of
Epicurism.


§ 7. How rewarded.

So also it will certainly be found with all the senses, that they
individually receive the greatest and purest pleasure when they are in
right condition and degree of subordination to all the rest; and that by
the over cultivation of any one, (for morbid sources of pleasure and
correspondent temptations to irrational indulgence, confessedly are
attached to all,) we shall add more to their power as instruments of
punishment than of pleasure.

We see then, in this example of the lowest sense, that the power we have
over sensations and preferences depends mainly on the exercise of
attention through certain prolonged periods, and that by this exercise,
we arrive at ultimate, constant, and common sources of agreeableness,
casting off those which are external, accidental, and individual.


§ 8. Especially with respect to ideas of beauty.

That then which is required in order to the attainment of accurate
conclusions respecting the essence of the beautiful, is nothing more
than earnest, loving, and unselfish attention to our impressions of it,
by which those which are shallow, false, or peculiar to times and
temperaments, may be distinguished from those that are eternal. And this
dwelling upon, and fond contemplation of them, (the anschauung of the
Germans,) is perhaps as much as was meant by the Greek theoria; and it
is indeed a very noble exercise of the souls of men, and one by which
they are peculiarly distinguished from the anima of lower creatures,
which cannot, I think, be proved to have any capacity of contemplation
at all, but only a restless vividness of perception and conception, the
"fancy" of Hooker (Eccl. Pol. Book i. Chap. vi. 2). And yet this
dwelling upon them comes not up to that which I wish to express by the
word theoria, unless it be accompanied by full perception of their being
a gift from and manifestation of God, and by all those other nobler
emotions before described, since not until so felt is their essential
nature comprehended.


§ 9. Errors induced by the power of habit.

But two very important points are to be observed respecting the
direction and discipline of the attention in the early stages of
judgment. The first, that, for many beneficent purposes, the nature of
man has been made reconcilable by custom to many things naturally
painful to it, and even improper for it, and that therefore, though by
continued experience, united with thought, we may discover that which is
best of several, yet if we submit ourselves to authority or fashion, and
close our eyes, we may be by custom made to tolerate, and even to love
and long for, that which is naturally painful and pernicious to us,
whence arise incalculable embarrassments on the subject of art.


§ 10. The necessity of submission in early stages of judgment.

The second, that, in order to the discovery of that which is best of two
things, it is necessary that both should be equally submitted to the
attention; and therefore that we should have so much faith in authority
as shall make us repeatedly observe and attend to that which is said to
be right, even though at present we may not feel it so. And in the right
mingling of this faith with the openness of heart, which proves all
things, lies the great difficulty of the cultivation of the taste, as
far as the spirit of the scholar is concerned, though even when he has
this spirit, he may be long retarded by having evil examples submitted
to him by ignorant masters.

The temper, therefore, by which right taste is formed, is first,
patient. It dwells upon what is submitted to it, it does not trample
upon it lest it should be pearls, even though it look like husks, it is
a good ground, soft, penetrable, retentive, it does not send up thorns
of unkind thoughts, to choke the weak seed, it is hungry and thirsty
too, and drinks all the dew that falls on it, it is an honest and good
heart, that shows no too ready springing before the sun be up, but fails
not afterwards; it is distrustful of itself, so as to be ready to
believe and to try all things, and yet so trustful of itself, that it
will neither quit what it has tried, nor take anything without trying.
And that pleasure which it has in things that it finds true and good, is
so great that it cannot possibly be led aside by any tricks of fashion,
nor diseases of vanity, it cannot be cramped in its conclusions by
partialities and hypocrisies, its visions and its delights are too
penetrating, too living, for any whitewashed object or shallow fountain
long to endure or supply. It clasps all that it loves so hard, that it
crushes it if it be hollow.


§ 11. The large scope of matured judgment.

Now, the conclusions of this disposition are sure to be eventually
right, more and more right according to the general maturity of all the
powers, but it is sure to come right at last, because its operation is
in analogy to, and in harmony with, the whole spirit of the Christian
moral system, and that which it will ultimately love and rest in, are
great sources of happiness common to all the human race, and based on
the relations they hold to their Creator.

These common and general sources of pleasure are, I believe, a certain
seal, or impress of divine work and character, upon whatever God has
wrought in all the world; only, it being necessary for the perception of
them, that their contraries should also be set before us, these divine
qualities, though inseparable from all divine works, are yet suffered to
exist in such varieties of degree, that their most limited manifestation
shall, in opposition to their most abundant, act as a foil or contrary,
just as we conceive of cold as contrary to heat, though the most extreme
cold we can produce or conceive is not inconsistent with an unknown
amount of heat in the body.


§ 12. How distinguishable from false taste.

Our purity of taste, therefore, is best tested by its universality, for
if we can only admire this thing or that, we may be sure that our cause
for liking is of a finite and false nature. But if we can perceive
beauty in everything of God's doing, we may argue that we have reached
the true perception of its universal laws. Hence, false taste may be
known by its fastidiousness, by its demands of pomp, splendor, and
unusual combination, by its enjoyment only of particular styles and
modes of things, and by its pride also, for it is forever meddling,
mending, accumulating, and self-exulting, its eye is always upon itself,
and it tests all things around it by the way they fit it. But true
taste is forever growing, learning, reading, worshipping, laying its
hand upon its mouth because it is astonished, casting its shoes from off
its feet because it finds all ground holy, lamenting over itself and
testing itself by the way that it fits things. And it finds whereof to
feed, and whereby to grow, in all things, and therefore the complaint so
often made by young artists that they have not within their reach
materials, or subjects enough for their fancy, is utterly groundless,
and the sign only of their own blindness and inefficiency; for there is
that to be seen in every street and lane of every city, that to be felt
and found in every human heart and countenance, that to be loved in
every road-side weed and moss-grown wall, which in the hands of faithful
men, may convey emotions of glory and sublimity continual and exalted.


§ 13. The danger of a spirit of choice.

Let therefore the young artist beware of the spirit of choice,[10] it is
an insolent spirit at the best and commonly a base and blind one too,
checking all progress and blasting all power, encouraging weaknesses,
pampering partialities, and teaching us to look to accidents of nature
for the help and the joy which should come from our own hearts. He draws
nothing well who thirsts not to draw _every_thing; when a good painter
shrinks, it is because he is humbled, not fastidious, when he stops, it
is because he is surfeited, and not because he thinks nature has given
him unkindly food, or that he fears famine.[11] I have seen a man of
true taste pause for a quarter of an hour to look at the channellings
that recent rain had traced in a heap of cinders.


§ 14. And criminality.

And here is evident another reason of that duty which we owe respecting
impressions of sight, namely, to discipline ourselves to the enjoyment
of those which are eternal in their nature, not only because these are
the most acute, but because they are the most easily, constantly, and
unselfishly attainable. For had it been ordained by the Almighty that
the highest pleasures of sight should be those of most difficult
attainment, and that to arrive at them it should be necessary to
accumulate gilded palaces tower over tower, and pile artificial
mountains around insinuated lakes, there would have been a direct
contradiction between the unselfish duties and inherent desires of every
individual. But no such contradiction exists in the system of Divine
Providence, which, leaving it open to us, if we will, as creatures in
probation, to abuse this sense like every other, and pamper it with
selfish and thoughtless vanities as we pamper the palate with deadly
meats, until the appetite of tasteful cruelty is lost in its sickened
satiety, incapable of pleasure unless, Caligula like, it concentrate the
labor of a million of lives into the sensation of an hour, leaves it
also open to us, by humble and loving ways, to make ourselves
susceptible of deep delight from the meanest objects of creation, and of
a delight which shall not separate us from our fellows, nor require the
sacrifice of any duty or occupation, but which shall bind us closer to
men and to God, and be with us always, harmonized with every action,
consistent with every claim, unchanging and eternal.


§ 15. How certain conclusions respecting beauty are by reason
        demonstrable.

Seeing then that these qualities of material objects which are
calculated to give us this universal pleasure, are demonstrably constant
in their address to human nature, they must belong in some measure to
whatever has been esteemed beautiful throughout successive ages of the
world (and they are also by their definition common to all the works of
God). Therefore it is evident that it must be possible to reason them
out, as well as to feel them out; possible to divest every object of
that which makes it accidentally or temporarily pleasant, and to strip
it bare of distinctive qualities, until we arrive at those which it has
in common with all other beautiful things, which we may then safely
affirm to be the cause of its ultimate and true delightfulness.


§ 16. With what liabilities to error.

Now this process of reasoning will be that which I shall endeavor to
employ in the succeeding investigations, a process perfectly safe, so
long as we are quite sure that we are reasoning concerning objects which
produce in us one and the same sensation, but not safe if the sensation
produced be of a different nature, though it may be equally agreeable;
for what produces a different sensation must be a different cause. And
the difficulty of reasoning respecting beauty arises chiefly from the
ambiguity of the word, which stands in different people's minds for
totally different sensations, for which there can be no common cause.

When, for instance, Mr. Alison endeavors to support his position that
"no man is sensible to beauty in those objects with regard to which he
has not previous ideas," by the remark that "the beauty of a theory, or
of a relic of antiquity, is unintelligible to a peasant," we see at once
that it is hopeless to argue with a man who, under his general term
beauty, may, for anything we know, be sometimes speaking of mathematical
demonstrability and sometimes of historical interest; while even if we
could succeed in limiting the term to the sense of external
attractiveness, there would be still room for many phases of error; for
though the beauty of a snowy mountain and of a human cheek or forehead,
so far as both are considered as mere matter, is the same, and traceable
to certain qualities of color and line, common to both, and by reason
extricable, yet the flush of the cheek and moulding of the brow, as they
express modesty, affection, or intellect, possess sources of
agreeableness which are not common to the snowy mountain, and the
interference of whose influence we must be cautious to prevent in our
examination of those which are material and universal.[12]


§ 17. The term "beauty" how limitable in the outset. Divided into
        typical and vital.

The first thing, then, that we have to do, is accurately to discriminate
and define those appearances from which we are about to reason as
belonging to beauty, properly so called, and to clear the ground of all
the confused ideas and erroneous theories with which the misapprehension
or metaphorical use of the term has encumbered it.

By the term beauty, then, properly are signified two things. First, that
external quality of bodies already so often spoken of, and which,
whether it occur in a stone, flower, beast, or in man, is absolutely
identical, which, as I have already asserted, may be shown to be in
some sort typical of the Divine attributes, and which, therefore, I
shall, for distinction's sake, call typical beauty; and, secondarily,
the appearance of felicitous fulfilment of function in living things,
more especially of the joyful and right exertion of perfect life in man.
And this kind of beauty I shall call vital beauty.

Any application of the word beautiful to other appearances or qualities
than these, is either false or metaphorical, as, for instance, to the
splendor of a discovery, the fitness of a proportion, the coherence of a
chain of reasoning, or the power of bestowing pleasure which objects
receive from association, a power confessedly great, and interfering, as
we shall presently find, in a most embarrassing way with the
attractiveness of inherent beauty.

But in order that the mind of the reader may not be biassed at the
outset by that which he may happen to have received of current theories
respecting beauty, founded on the above metaphorical uses of the word,
(theories which are less to be reprobated as accounting falsely for the
sensations of which they treat, than as confusing two or more
pleasurable sensations together,) I shall briefly glance at the four
erroneous positions most frequently held upon this subject, before
proceeding to examine those typical and vital properties of things, to
which I conceive that all our original conceptions of beauty may be
traced.


FOOTNOTES


  [10]                "Nothing comes amiss,--
               A good digestion turneth all to health."--G. HERBERT.

  [11] Yet note the difference between the choice that comes of pride,
    and the choice that comes of love, and compare Chap. xv. § 6.

  [12] Compare Spenser. (Hymn to Beauty.)

               "But ah, believe me, there is more than so,
                That works such wonders in the minds of men."




                           CHAPTER IV.

            OF FALSE OPINIONS HELD CONCERNING BEAUTY.


§ 1. Of the false opinion that truth is beauty, and vice versa.

I purpose at present to speak only of four of the more current opinions
respecting beauty, for of the errors connected with the pleasurableness
of proportion, and of the expression of right feelings in the
countenance, I shall have opportunity to treat in the succeeding
chapters; (compare Ch. VI. Ch. XVI.)

Those erring or inconsistent positions which I would at once dismiss
are, the first, that the beautiful is the true, the second, that the
beautiful is the useful, the third, that it is dependent on custom, and
the fourth, that it is dependent on the association of ideas.

To assert that the beautiful is the true, appears, at first, like
asserting that propositions are matter, and matter propositions. But
giving the best and most rational interpretation we can, and supposing
the holders of this strange position to mean only that things are
beautiful which appear what they indeed are, and ugly which appear what
they are not, we find them instantly contradicted by each and every
conclusion of experience. A stone looks as truly a stone as a rose looks
a rose, and yet is not so beautiful; a cloud may look more like a castle
than a cloud, and be the more beautiful on that account. The mirage of
the desert is fairer than its sands; the false image of the under heaven
fairer than the sea. I am at a loss to know how any so untenable a
position could ever have been advanced; but it may, perhaps, have arisen
from some confusion of the beauty of art with the beauty of nature, and
from an illogical expansion of the very certain truth, that nothing is
beautiful in art, which, professing to be an imitation, or a statement,
is not as such in some sort true.


§ 2. Of the false opinion that beauty is usefulness. Compare Chap. xii.
       § 5.

That the beautiful is the useful, is an assertion evidently based on
that limited and false sense of the latter term which I have already
deprecated. As it is the most degrading and dangerous supposition which
can be advanced on the subject, so, fortunately, it is the most
palpably absurd. It is to confound admiration with hunger, love with
lust, and life with sensation; it is to assert that the human creature
has no ideas and no feelings, except those ultimately referable to its
brutal appetites. It has not a single fact nor appearance of fact to
support it, and needs no combating, at least until its advocates have
obtained the consent of the majority of mankind, that the most beautiful
productions of nature are seeds and roots; and of art, spades and
millstones.


§ 3. Of the false opinion that beauty results from custom. Compare Chap.
       vi. § 1.

Somewhat more rational grounds appear for the assertion that the sense
of the beautiful arises from familiarity with the object, though even
this could not long be maintained by a thinking person. For all that can
be alleged in defence of such a supposition is, that familiarity
deprives some objects which at first appeared ugly, of much of their
repulsiveness, whence it is as rational to conclude that familiarity is
the cause of beauty, as it would be to argue that because it is possible
to acquire a taste for olives, therefore custom is the cause of
lusciousness in grapes. Nevertheless, there are some phenomena resulting
from the tendency of our nature to be influenced by habit of which it
may be well to observe the limits.


§ 4. The twofold operation of custom. It deadens sensation, but confirms
       affection.

§ 5. But never either creates or destroys the essence of beauty.

Custom has a twofold operation: the one to deaden the frequency and
force of repeated impressions, the other to endear the familiar object
to the affections. Commonly, where the mind is vigorous, and the power
of sensation very perfect, it has rather the last operation than the
first; with meaner minds, the first takes place in the higher degree, so
that they are commonly characterized by a desire of excitement, and the
want of the loving, fixed, theoretic power. But both take place in some
degree with all men, so that as life advances, impressions of all kinds
become less rapturous owing to their repetition. It is however
beneficently ordained that repulsiveness shall be diminished by custom
in a far greater degree than the sensation of beauty, so that the
anatomist in a little time loses all sense of horror in the torn flesh,
and carous bone, while the sculptor ceases not to feel to the close of
his life, the deliciousness of every line of the outward frame. So then
as in that with which we are made familiar, the repulsiveness is
constantly diminishing, and such claims as it may be able to put forth
on the affections are daily becoming stronger, while in what is
submitted to us of new or strange, that which may be repulsive is felt
in its full force, while no hold is as yet laid on the affections, there
is a very strong preference induced in most minds for that to which they
are not accustomed over that they know not, and this is strongest in
those which are least open to sensations of positive beauty. But however
far this operation may be carried, its utmost effect is but the
deadening and approximating the sensations of beauty and ugliness. It
never mixes nor crosses, nor in any way alters them; it has not the
slightest connection with nor power over their nature. By tasting two
wines alternately, we may deaden our perception of their flavor; nay, we
may even do more than can ever be done in the case of sight, we may
confound the two flavors together. But it will hardly be argued
therefore that custom is the cause of either flavor. And so, though by
habit we may deaden the effect of ugliness or beauty, it is not for that
reason to be affirmed that habit is the cause of either sensation. We
may keep a skull beside us as long as we please, we may overcome its
repulsiveness, we may render ourselves capable of perceiving many
qualities of beauty about its lines, we may contemplate it for years
together if we will, it and nothing else, but we shall not get ourselves
to think as well of it as of a child's fair face.


§ 6. Instances.

It would be easy to pursue the subject farther, but I believe that every
thoughtful reader will be perfectly well able to supply farther
illustrations, and sweep away the sandy foundations of the opposite
theory, unassisted. Let it, however, be observed, that in spite of all
custom, an Englishman instantly acknowledges, and at first sight, the
superiority of the turban to the hat, or of the plaid to the coat, that
whatever the dictates of immediate fashion may compel, the superior
gracefulness of the Greek or middle age costumes is invariably felt, and
that, respecting what has been asserted of negro nations looking with
disgust on the white face, no importance whatever is to be attached to
the opinions of races who have never received any ideas of beauty
whatsoever, (these ideas being only received by minds under some
certain degree of cultivation,) and whose disgust arises naturally from
what they may suppose to be a sign of weakness or ill health. It would
be futile to proceed into farther detail. I pass to the last and most
weighty theory, that the agreeableness in objects which we call beauty
is the result of the association with them of agreeable or interesting
ideas.


§ 7. Of the false opinion that beauty depends on the association of
       ideas.

Frequent has been the support, and wide the acceptance of this
supposition, and yet I suppose that no two consecutive sentences were
ever written in defence of it, without involving either a contradiction
or a confusion of terms. Thus Alison, "There are scenes undoubtedly more
beautiful than Runnymede, yet to those who recollect the great event
that passed there, there is no scene perhaps which so strongly seizes on
the imagination." Here we are wonder-struck at the audacious obtuseness
which would prove the power of imagination by its overcoming that very
other power (of inherent beauty) whose existence the arguer denies. For
the only logical conclusion which can possibly be drawn from the above
sentence is, that imagination is _not_ the source of beauty, for
although no scene seizes so strongly on the imagination, yet there are
scenes "more beautiful than Runnymede." And though instances of
self-contradiction as laconic and complete as this are to be found in
few writers except Alison, yet if the arguments on the subject be fairly
sifted from the mass of confused language with which they are always
encumbered and placed in logical form, they will be found invariably to
involve one of these two syllogisms, either, association gives pleasure,
and beauty gives pleasure, therefore association is beauty. Or, the
power of association is stronger than the power of beauty, therefore the
power of association _is_ the power of beauty.


§ 8. Association. Is, 1st, rational. It is of no efficiency as a cause
       of beauty.

Nevertheless it is necessary for us to observe the real value and
authority of association in the moral system, and how ideas of actual
beauty may be affected by it, otherwise we shall be liable to
embarrassment throughout the whole of the succeeding argument.

Association is of two kinds. Rational and accidental. By rational
association I understand the interest which any object may bear
historically as having been in some way connected with the affairs or
affections of men; an interest shared in the minds of all who are aware
of such connection: which to call beauty is mere and gross confusion of
terms, it is no theory to be confuted, but a misuse of language to be
set aside, a misuse involving the positions that in uninhabited
countries the vegetation has no grace, the rock no dignity, the cloud no
color, and that the snowy summits of the Alps receive no loveliness from
the sunset light, because they have not been polluted by the wrath,
ravage, and misery of men.


§ 9. Association accidental. The extent of its influence.

By accidental association, I understand the accidental connection of
ideas and memories with material things, owing to which those material
things are regarded as agreeable or otherwise, according to the nature
of the feelings or recollections they summon; the association being
commonly involuntary and oftentimes so vague as that no distinct image
is suggested by the object, but we feel a painfulness in it or pleasure
from it, without knowing wherefore. Of this operation of the mind (which
is that of which I spoke as causing inextricable embarrassments on the
subject of beauty) the experience is constant, so that its more
energetic manifestations require no illustration. But I do not think
that the minor degrees and shades of this great influence have been
sufficiently appreciated. Not only all vivid emotions and all
circumstances of exciting interest leave their light and shadow on the
senseless things and instruments among which or through whose agency
they have been felt or learned, but I believe that the eye cannot rest
on a material form, in a moment of depression or exultation, without
communicating to that form a spirit and a life, a life which will make
it afterwards in some degree loved or feared, a charm or a painfulness
for which we shall be unable to account even to ourselves, which will
not indeed be perceptible, except by its delicate influence on our
judgment in cases of complicated beauty. Let the eye but rest on a rough
piece of branch of curious form during a conversation with a friend,
rest, however, unconsciously, and though the conversation be forgotten,
though every circumstance connected with it be as utterly lost to the
memory as though it had not been, yet the eye will, through the whole
life after, take a certain pleasure in such boughs which it had not
before, a pleasure so slight, a trace of feeling so delicate as to
leave us utterly unconscious of its peculiar power, but undestroyable by
any reasoning, a part, thenceforward, of our constitution, destroyable
only by the same arbitrary process of association by which it was
created. Reason has no effect upon it whatsoever. And there is probably
no one opinion which is formed by any of us, in matters of taste, which
is not in some degree influenced by unconscious association of this
kind. In many who have no definite rules of judgment, preference is
decided by little else, and thus, unfortunately, its operations are
mistaken for, or rather substituted for, those of inherent beauty, and
its real position and value in the moral system is in a great measure
overlooked.


§ 10. The dignity of its function.

For I believe that mere pleasure and pain have less associative power
than duty performed or omitted, and that the great use of the
associative faculty is not to add beauty to material things, but to add
force to the conscience. But for this external and all-powerful witness,
the voice of the inward guide might be lost in each particular instance,
almost as soon as disobeyed; the echo of it in after time, whereby,
though perhaps feeble as warning, it becomes powerful as punishment,
might be silenced, and the strength of the protection pass away in the
lightness of the lash. Therefore it has received the power of enlisting
external and unmeaning things in its aid, and transmitting to all that
is indifferent, its own authority to reprove or reward, so that, as we
travel the way of life, we have the choice, according to our working, of
turning all the voices of nature into one song of rejoicing, and all her
lifeless creatures into a glad company, whereof the meanest shall be
beautiful in our eyes, by its kind message, or of withering and
quenching her sympathy into a fearful, withdrawn, silence of
condemnation, or into a crying out of her stones, and a shaking of her
dust against us. Nor is it any marvel that the theoretic faculty should
be overpowered by this momentous operation, and the indifferent appeals
and inherent glories of external things in the end overlooked, when the
perfection of God's works is felt only as the sweetness of his promises,
and their admirableness only as the threatenings of his power.


§ 11. How it is connected with impressions of beauty.

But it is evident that the full exercise of this noble function of the
associative faculty is inconsistent with absolute and incontrovertible
conclusions on subjects of theoretic preference. For it is quite
impossible for any individual to distinguish in himself the unconscious
underworking of indefinite association, peculiar to him individually,
from those great laws of choice under which he is comprehended with all
his race. And it is well for us that it is so, the harmony of God's good
work is not in us interrupted by this mingling of universal and peculiar
principles; for by these such difference is secured in the feelings as
shall make fellowship itself more delightful, by its inter-communicate
character, and such variety of feeling also in each of us separately as
shall make us capable of enjoying scenes of different kinds and orders,
instead of morbidly seeking for some perfect epitome of the beautiful in
one; and also that deadening by custom of theoretic impressions to which
I have above alluded, is counterbalanced by the pleasantness of acquired
association; and the loss of the intense feeling of the youth, which
"had no need of a remoter charm, by thought supplied, or any interest,
unborrowed from the eye," is replaced by the gladness of conscience, and
the vigor of the reflecting and imaginative faculties, as they take
their wide and aged grasp of the great relations between the earth and
its dead people.


§ 12. And what caution it renders necessary in the examination of them.

In proportion therefore to the value, constancy, and efficiency of this
influence, we must be modest and cautious in the pronouncing of positive
opinions on the subject of beauty. For every one of us has peculiar
sources of enjoyment necessarily opened to him in certain scenes and
things, sources which are sealed to others, and we must be wary on the
one hand, of confounding these in ourselves with ultimate conclusions of
taste, and so forcing them upon all as authoritative, and on the other
of supposing that the enjoyments of others which we cannot share are
shallow or unwarrantable, because incommunicable. I fear, for instance,
that in the former portion of this work I may have attributed too much
community and authority to certain affections of my own for scenery
inducing emotions of wild, impetuous, and enthusiastic characters, and
too little to those which I perceive in others for things peaceful,
humble, meditative, and solemn. So also between youth and age there will
be found differences of seeking, which are not wrong, nor of false
choice in either, but of different temperament, the youth sympathizing
more with the gladness, fulness, and magnificence of things, and the
gray hairs with their completion, sufficiency and repose. And so,
neither condemning the delights of others, nor altogether distrustful of
our own, we must advance, as we live on, from what is brilliant to what
is pure, and from what is promised to what is fulfilled, and from what
is our strength to what is our crown, only observing in all things how
that which is indeed wrong, and to be cut up from the root, is dislike,
and not affection. For by the very nature of these beautiful qualities,
which I have defined to be the signature of God upon his works, it is
evident that in whatever we altogether dislike, we see not all; that the
keenness of our vision is to be tested by the expansiveness of our love,
and that as far as the influence of association has voice in the
question, though it is indeed possible that the inevitable painfulness
of an object, for which we can render no sufficient reason, may be owing
to its recalling of a sorrow, it is more probably dependent on its
accusation of a crime.




                              CHAPTER V.

     OF TYPICAL BEAUTY:--FIRST, OF INFINITY, OR THE TYPE OF DIVINE
                         INCOMPREHENSIBILITY.


§ 1. Impossibility of adequately treating the subject.

The subject being now in some measure cleared of embarrassment, let us
briefly distinguish those qualities or types on whose combination is
dependent the power of mere material loveliness. I pretend neither to
enumerate nor perceive them all, for it may be generally observed that
whatever good there may be, desirable by man, more especially good
belonging to his moral nature, there will be a corresponding
agreeableness in whatever external object reminds him of such good,
whether it remind him by arbitrary association or by typical
resemblance, and that the infinite ways, whether by reason or experience
discoverable, by which matter in some sort may remind us of moral
perfections, are hardly within any reasonable limits to be explained, if
even by any single mind they might all be traced. Yet certain palpable
and powerful modes there are, by observing which, we may come at such
general conclusions on the subject as may be practically useful, and
more than these I shall not attempt to obtain.


§ 2. With what simplicity of feeling to be approached.

And first, I would ask of the reader to enter upon the subject with me,
as far as may be, as a little child, ridding himself of all conventional
and authoritative thoughts, and especially of such associations as arise
from his respect for Pagan art, or which are in any way traceable to
classical readings. I recollect that Mr. Alison traces his first
perceptions of beauty in external nature to this most corrupt source,
thus betraying so total and singular a want of natural sensibility as
may well excuse the deficiencies of his following arguments. For there
was never yet the child of any promise (so far as the theoretic
faculties are concerned) but awaked to the sense of beauty with the
first gleam of reason; and I suppose there are few, among those who love
nature otherwise than by profession and at second-hand, who look not
back to their youngest and least-learned days as those of the most
intense, superstitious, insatiable, and beatific perception of her
splendors. And the bitter decline of this glorious feeling, though many
note it not, partly owing to the cares and weight of manhood, which
leave them not the time nor the liberty to look for their lost treasure,
and partly to the human and divine affections which are appointed to
take its place, yet has formed the subject not indeed of lamentation,
but of holy thankfulness for the witness it bears to the immortal origin
and end of our nature, to one whose authority is almost without appeal
in all questions relating to the influence of external things upon the
pure human soul.

              "Heaven lies about us in our infancy,--
               Shades of the prison-house begin to close
               Upon the growing boy.
               But he beholds the light, and whence it flows
               He sees it in his joy.
               The youth, who daily farther from the east
               Must travel, still is nature's priest,
               And by the vision splendid
               Is on his way attended.
               At length the Man perceives it die away
               And fade into the light of common day."

And if it were possible for us to recollect all the unaccountable and
happy instincts of the careless time, and to reason upon them with the
maturer judgment, we might arrive at more rapid and right results than
either the philosophy or the sophisticated practice of art have yet
attained. But we lose the perceptions before we are capable of
methodizing or comparing them.


§ 3. The child instinct respecting space.

§ 4. Continued in after life.

One, however, of these child instincts, I believe that few forget; the
emotion, namely, caused by all open ground, or lines of any spacious
kind against the sky, behind which there might be conceived the sea. It
is an emotion more pure than that caused by the sea itself, for I
recollect distinctly running down behind the banks of a high beach to
get their land line cutting against the sky, and receiving a more
strange delight from this than from the sight of the ocean: I am not
sure that this feeling is common to all children, (or would be common if
they were all in circumstances admitting it), but I have ascertained it
to be frequent among those who possess the most vivid sensibilities for
nature; and I am certain that the modification of it, which belongs to
our after years, is common to all, the love, namely, of a light
distance appearing over a comparatively dark horizon. This I have tested
too frequently to be mistaken, by offering to indifferent spectators
forms of equal abstract beauty in half tint, relieved, the one against
dark sky, the other against a bright distance. The preference is
invariably given to the latter, and it is very certain that this
preference arises not from any supposition of there being greater truth
in this than the other, for the same preference is unhesitatingly
accorded to the same effect in nature herself. Whatever beauty there may
result from effects of light on foreground objects, from the dew of the
grass, the flash of the cascade, the glitter of the birch trunk, or the
fair daylight hues of darker things, (and joyfulness there is in all of
them), there is yet a light which the eye invariably seeks with a deeper
feeling of the beautiful, the light of the declining or breaking day,
and the flakes of scarlet cloud burning like watch-fires in the green
sky of the horizon; a deeper feeling, I say, not perhaps more acute, but
having more of spiritual hope and longing, less of animal and present
life, more manifest, invariably, in those of more serious and determined
mind, (I use the word serious, not as being opposed to cheerful, but to
trivial and volatile;) but, I think, marked and unfailing even in those
of the least thoughtful dispositions. I am willing to let it rest on the
determination of every reader, whether the pleasure which he has
received from these effects of calm and luminous distance be not the
most singular and memorable of which he has been conscious, whether all
that is dazzling in color, perfect in form, gladdening in expression, be
not of evanescent and shallow appealing, when compared with the still
small voice of the level twilight behind purple hills, or the scarlet
arch of dawn over the dark, troublous-edged sea.


§ 5. Whereto this instinct is traceable.

Let us try to discover that which effects of this kind possess or
suggest, peculiar to themselves, and which other effects of light and
color possess not. There _must_ be something in them of a peculiar
character, and that, whatever it be, must be one of the primal and most
earnest motives of beauty to human sensation.

Do they show finer characters of form than can be developed by the
broader daylight? Not so; for their power is almost independent of the
forms they assume or display; it matters little whether the bright
clouds be simple or manifold, whether the mountain line be subdued or
majestic, the fairer forms of earthly things are by them subdued and
disguised, the round and muscular growth of the forest trunks is sunk
into skeleton lines of quiet shade, the purple clefts of the hill-side
are labyrinthed in the darkness, the orbed spring and whirling wave of
the torrent have given place to a white, ghastly, interrupted gleaming.
Have they more perfection or fulness of color? Not so; for their effect
is oftentimes deeper when their hues are dim, than when they are
blazoned with crimson and pale gold; and assuredly, in the blue of the
rainy sky, in the many tints of morning flowers, in the sunlight on
summer foliage and field, there are more sources of mere sensual
color-pleasure than in the single streak of wan and dying light. It is
not then by nobler form, it is not by positiveness of hue, it is not by
intensity of light, (for the sun itself at noonday is effectless upon
the feelings,) that this strange distant space possesses its attractive
power. But there is one thing that it has, or suggests, which no other
object of sight suggests in equal degree, and that is,--Infinity. It is
of all visible things the least material, the least finite, the farthest
withdrawn from the earth prison-house, the most typical of the nature of
God, the most suggestive of the glory of his dwelling-place. For the sky
of night, though we may know it boundless, is dark, it is a studded
vault, a roof that seems to shut us in and down, but the bright distance
has no limit, we feel its infinity, as we rejoice in its purity of
light.


§ 6. Infinity how necessary in art.

Now not only is this expression of infinity in distance most precious
wherever we find it, however solitary it may be, and however unassisted
by other forms and kinds of beauty, but it is of that value that no such
other forms will altogether recompense us for its loss; and much as I
dread the enunciation of anything that may seem like a conventional
rule, I have no hesitation in asserting, that no work of any art, in
which this expression of infinity is possible, can be perfect, or
supremely elevated without it, and that in proportion to its presence,
it will exalt and render impressive even the most tame and trivial
themes. And I think if there be any one grand division, by which it is
at all possible to set the productions of painting, so far as their
mere plan or system is concerned, on our right and left hands, it is
this of light and dark background, of heaven light or of object light.
For I know not any truly great painter of any time, who manifests not
the most intense pleasure in the luminous space of his backgrounds, or
who ever sacrifices this pleasure where the nature of his subject admits
of its attainment, as on the other hand I know not that the habitual use
of dark backgrounds can be shown as having ever been co-existent with
pure or high feeling, and, except in the case of Rembrandt, (and then
under peculiar circumstances only,) with any high power of intellect. It
is however necessary carefully to observe the following modifications of
this broad principle.


§ 7. Conditions of its necessity.

The absolute necessity, for such indeed I consider it, is of no more
than such a mere luminous distant point as may give to the feelings a
species of escape from all the finite objects about them. There is a
spectral etching of Rembrandt, a presentation of Christ in the temple,
where the figure of a robed priest stands glaring by its gems out of the
gloom, holding a crosier. Behind it there is a subdued window light seen
in the opening between two columns, without which the impressiveness of
the whole subject would, I think, be incalculably brought down. I cannot
tell whether I am at present allowing too much weight to my own fancies
and predilections, but without so much escape into the outer air and
open heaven as this, I can take permanent pleasure in no picture.


§ 8. And connected analogies.

And I think I am supported in this feeling by the unanimous practice, if
not the confessed opinion, of all artists. The painter of portrait is
unhappy without his conventional white stroke under the sleeve, or
beside the arm-chair; the painter of interiors feels like a caged bird,
unless he can throw a window open, or set the door ajar; the landscapist
dares not lose himself in forest without a gleam of light under its
farthest branches, nor ventures out in rain, unless he may somewhere
pierce to a better promise in the distance, or cling to some closing gap
of variable blue above;--escape, hope, infinity, by whatever
conventionalism sought, the desire is the same in all, the instinct
constant, it is no mere point of light that is wanted in the etching of
Rembrandt above instanced, a gleam of armor or fold of temple curtain
would have been utterly valueless, neither is it liberty, for though we
cut down hedges and level hills, and give what waste and plain we
choose, on the right hand and the left, it is all comfortless and
undesired, so long as we cleave not a way of escape forward; and however
narrow and thorny and difficult the nearer path, it matters not, so only
that the clouds open for us at its close. Neither will any amount of
beauty in nearer form, make us content to stay with it, so long as we
are shut down to that alone, nor is any form so cold or so hurtful but
that we may look upon it with kindness, so only that it rise against the
infinite hope of light beyond. The reader can follow out the analogies
of this unassisted.


§ 9. How the dignity of treatment is proportioned to the expression of
       infinity.

But although this narrow portal of escape be all that is absolutely
necessary, I think that the dignity of the painting increases with the
extent and amount of the expression. With the earlier and mightier
painters of Italy, the practice is commonly to leave their distance of
pure and open sky, of such simplicity, that it in nowise shall interfere
with or draw the attention from the interest of the figures, and of such
purity, that especially towards the horizon, it shall be in the highest
degree expressive of the infinite space of heaven. I do not mean to say
that they did this with any occult or metaphysical motives. They did it,
I think, with the child-like, unpretending simplicity of all earnest
men; they did what they loved and felt; they sought what the heart
naturally seeks, and gave what it most gratefully receives; and I look
to them as in all points of principle (not, observe, of knowledge or
empirical attainment) as the most irrefragable authorities, precisely on
account of the child-like innocence, which never deemed itself
authoritative, but acted upon desire, and not upon dicta, and sought for
sympathy, not for admiration.


§ 10. Examples among the Southern schools.

And so we find the same simple and sweet treatment, the open sky, the
tender, unpretending, horizontal white clouds, the far winding and
abundant landscape, in Giotto, Taddeo Gaddi, Laurati, Angelico, Benozzo,
Ghirlandajo, Francia, Perogino, and the young Raffaelle, the first
symptom of conventionality appearing in Perugino, who, though with
intense feeling of light and color he carried the glory of his luminous
distance far beyond all his predecessors, began at the same time to use
a somewhat morbid relief of his figures against the upper sky. Thus in
the Assumption of the Florentine Academy, in that of l'Annunziata; and
of the Gallery of Bologna, in all which pictures the lower portions are
incomparably the finest, owing to the light distance behind the heads.
Raffaelle, in his fall, betrayed the faith he had received from his
father and his master, and substituted for the radiant sky of the
Madonna del Cardellino, the chamber-wall of the Madonna della
Sediola--and the brown wainscot of the Baldacchino. Yet it is curious to
observe how much of the dignity even of his later pictures, depends on
such portions as the green light of the lake, and sky behind the rocks,
in the St. John of the tribune, and how the repainted distortion of the
Madonna dell' Impannata, is redeemed into something like elevated
character, merely by the light of the linen window from which it takes
its name.


§ 11. Among the Venetians.

That which by the Florentines was done in pure simplicity of heart, was
done by the Venetians with intense love of the color and splendor of the
sky itself, even to the frequent sacrificing of their subject to the
passion of its distance. In Carpaccio, John Bellini, Giorgione, Titian,
Veronese, and Tintoret, the preciousness of the luminous sky, so far as
it might be at all consistent with their subject, is nearly constant;
abandoned altogether in portraiture only, seldom even there, and never
with advantage. Titian and Veronese, who had less exalted feeling than
the others, affording a few instances of exception, the latter
overpowering his silvery distances with foreground splendor, the other
sometimes sacrificing them to a luscious fulness of color, as in the
Flagellation in the Louvre, by a comparison of which with the unequalled
majesty of the Entombment opposite, the whole power and applicability of
the general principle may at once be tested.


§ 12. Among the painters of landscape.

But of the value of this mode of treatment there is a farther and more
convincing proof than its adoption either by the innocence of the
Florentine or the ardor of the Venetian, namely, that when retained or
imitated from them by the landscape painters of the seventeenth
century, when appearing in isolation from all other good, among the
weaknesses and paltrinesses of Claude, the mannerisms of Gaspar, and the
caricatures and brutalities of Salvator, it yet redeems and upholds all
three, conquers all foulness by its purity, vindicates all folly by its
dignity, and puts an uncomprehended power of permanent address to the
human heart, upon the lips of the senseless and the profane.[13]


§ 13. Other modes in which the power of infinity is felt.

§ 14. The beauty of curvature.

Now, although I doubt not that the general value of this treatment will
be acknowledged by all lovers of art, it is not certain that the point
to prove which I have brought it forward, will be as readily conceded,
namely, the inherent power of all representations of infinity over the
human heart; for there are, indeed, countless associations of pure and
religious kind, which combine with each other to enhance the impression,
when presented in this particular form, whose power I neither deny nor
am careful to distinguish, seeing that they all tend to the same Divine
point, and have reference to heavenly hopes; delights they are in seeing
the narrow, black, miserable earth fairly compared with the bright
firmament, reachings forward unto the things that are before, and
joyfulness in the apparent though unreachable nearness and promise of
them. But there are other modes in which infinity may be represented,
which are confused by no associations of the kind, and which would, as
being in mere matter, appear trivial and mean, but for their
incalculable influence on the forms of all that we feel to be beautiful.
The first of these is the curvature of lines and surfaces, wherein it at
first appears futile to insist upon any resemblance or suggestion of
infinity, since there is certainly in our ordinary contemplation of it,
no sensation of the kind. But I have repeated again and again that the
ideas of beauty are instinctive, and that it is only upon consideration,
and even then in doubtful and disputable way, that they appear in their
typical character; neither do I intend at all to insist upon the
particular meaning which they appear to myself to bear, but merely on
their actual and demonstrable agreeableness, so that, in the present
case, while I assert positively, and have no fear of being able to
prove, that a curve of any kind is more beautiful than a right line, I
leave it to the reader to accept or not, as he pleases, that reason of
its agreeableness, which is the only one that I can at all trace,
namely, that every curve divides itself infinitely by its changes of
direction.


§ 15. How constant in external nature.

That all forms of acknowledged beauty are composed exclusively of curves
will, I believe, be at once allowed; but that which there will be need
more especially to prove, is the subtilty and constancy of curvature in
all natural forms whatsoever. I believe that, except in crystals, in
certain mountain forms admitted for the sake of sublimity or contrast,
(as in the slope of debris,) in rays of light, in the levels of calm
water and alluvial land, and in some few organic developments, there are
no lines nor surfaces of nature without curvature, though as we before
saw in clouds, more especially in their under lines towards the horizon,
and in vast and extended plains, right lines are often suggested which
are not actual. Without these we could not be sensible of the value of
the contrasting curves, and while, therefore, for the most part, the eye
is fed in natural forms with a grace of curvature which no hand nor
instrument can follow, other means are provided to give beauty to those
surfaces which are admitted for contrast, as in water by its reflection
of the gradations which it possesses not itself. In freshly-broken
ground, which nature has not yet had time to model, in quarries and
pits which are none of her cutting, in those convulsions and evidences
of convulsion, of whose influence on ideal landscape I shall presently
have occasion to speak, and generally in all ruin and disease, and
interference of one order of being with another, (as in the cattle line
of park trees,) the curves vanish, and violently opposed or broken and
unmeaning lines take their place.


§ 16. The beauty of gradation.

What curvature is to lines, gradation is to shades and colors. It is
_there_ infinity, and divides them into an infinite number of degrees.
Absolutely, without gradation no natural surface can possibly be, except
under circumstances of so rare conjunction as to amount to a lusus
naturæ; for we have seen that few surfaces are without curvature, and
every curved surface must be gradated by the nature of light, which is
most intense when it impinges at the highest angle, and for the
gradation of the few plane surfaces that exist, means are provided in
local color, aerial perspective, reflected lights, etc., from which it
is but barely conceivable that they should ever escape. Hence for
instances of the complete absence of gradation we must look to man's
work, or to his disease and decrepitude. Compare the gradated colors of
the rainbow with the stripes of a target, and the gradual concentration
of the youthful blood in the cheek with an abrupt patch of rouge, or
with the sharply drawn veining of old age.


§ 17. How found in Nature.

Gradation is so inseparable a quality of all natural shade and color
that the eye refuses in art to understand anything as either, which
appears without it, while on the other hand nearly all the gradations of
nature are so subtile and between degrees of tint so slightly separated,
that no human hand can in any wise equal, or do anything more than
suggest the idea of them. In proportion to the space over which
gradation extends, and to its invisible subtilty, is its grandeur, and
in proportion to its narrow limits and violent degrees, its vulgarity.
In Correggio, it is morbid and vulgar in spite of its refinement of
execution, because the eye is drawn to it, and it is made the most
observable and characteristic part of the picture; whereas natural
gradation is forever escaping observation to that degree that the
greater part of artists in working from nature see it not, (except in
certain of its marked developments,) but either lay down such
continuous lines and colors, as are both disagreeable and impossible,
or, receiving the necessity of gradation as a principle instead of a
fact, use it in violently exaggerated measure, and so lose both the
dignity of their own work, and by the constant dwelling of their eyes
upon exaggerations, their sensibility to that of the natural forms. So
that we find the majority of painters divided between the two evil
extremes of insufficiency and affectation, and only a few of the
greatest men capable of making gradation constant and yet extended over
enormous spaces and within degrees of narrow difference, as in the body
of a high light.


§ 18. How necessary in Art.

From the necessity of gradation results what is commonly given as a rule
of art, though its authority as a rule obtains only from its being a
fact of nature, that the extremes of high light and pure color, can
exist only in points. The common rules respecting sixths and eighths,
held concerning light and shade, are entirely absurd and conventional;
according to the subject and the effect of light, the greater part of
the picture will be or ought to be light or dark; but that principle
which is not conventional, is that of all light, however high, there is
some part that is higher than the rest, and that of all color, however
pure, there is some part that is purer than the rest, and that generally
of all shade, however deep, there is some part deeper than the rest,
though this last fact is frequently sacrificed in art, owing to the
narrowness of its means. But on the right gradation or focussing of
light and color depends in great measure, the value of both. Of this, I
have spoken sufficiently in pointing out the singular constancy of it in
the works of Turner. Part II. Sect. II. Chap. II. § 17. And it is
generally to be observed that even raw and valueless color, if rightly
and subtilely gradated will in some measure stand for light, and that
the most transparent and perfect hue will be in some measure
unsatisfactory, if entirely unvaried. I believe the early skies of
Raffaelle owe their luminousness more to their untraceable and subtile
gradation than to inherent quality of hue.


§ 19. Infinity not rightly implied by vastness.

Such are the expressions of infinity which we find in creation, of which
the importance is to be estimated, rather by their frequency than their
distinctness. Let, however, the reader bear constantly in mind that I
insist not on his accepting any interpretation of mine, but only on his
dwelling so long on those objects, which he perceives to be beautiful,
as to determine whether the qualities to which I trace their beauty, be
necessarily there or no. Farther expressions of infinity there are in
the mystery of nature, and in some measure in her vastness, but these
are dependent on our own imperfections, and therefore, though they
produce sublimity, they are unconnected with beauty. For that which we
foolishly call vastness is, rightly considered, not more wonderful, not
more impressive, than that which we insolently call littleness, and the
infinity of God is not mysterious, it is only unfathomable, not
concealed, but incomprehensible: it is a clear infinity, the darkness of
the pure unsearchable sea.


FOOTNOTES

  [13] In one of the smaller rooms of the Pitti palace, over the door,
    is a temptation of St. Anthony, by Salvator, wherein such power as
    the artist possessed is fully manifested, with little,
    comparatively, that is offensive. It is a vigorous and ghastly
    thought, in that kind of horror which is dependent on scenic effect,
    perhaps unrivalled, and I shall have occasion to refer to it again
    in speaking of the powers of imagination. I allude to it here,
    because the sky of the distance affords a remarkable instance of the
    power of light at present under discussion. It is formed of flakes
    of black cloud, with rents and openings of intense and lurid green,
    and at least half of the impressiveness of the picture depends on
    these openings. Close them, make the sky one mass of gloom, and the
    spectre will be awful no longer. It owes to the light of the
    distance both its size and its spirituality. The time would fail me
    if I were to name the tenth part of the pictures which occur to me,
    whose vulgarity is redeemed by this circumstance alone, and yet let
    not the artist trust to such morbid and conventional use of it as
    may be seen in the common blue and yellow effectism of the present
    day. Of the value of moderation and simplicity in the use of this,
    as of all other sources of pleasurable emotion, I shall presently
    have occasion to speak farther.




                                 CHAPTER VI.

             OF UNITY, OR THE TYPE OF THE DIVINE COMPREHENSIVENESS.


§ 1. The general conception of divine Unity.

"All things," says Hooker, "(God only excepted,) besides the nature
which they have in themselves, receive externally some perfection from
other things." Hence the appearance of separation or isolation in
anything, and of self-dependence, is an appearance of imperfection: and
all appearances of connection and brotherhood are pleasant and right,
both as significative of perfection in the things united, and as typical
of that Unity which we attribute to God, and of which our true
conception is rightly explained and limited by Dr. Brown in his XCII.
lecture; that Unity which consists not in his own singleness or
separation, but in the necessity of his inherence in all things that be,
without which no creature of any kind could hold existence for a moment.
Which necessity of Divine essence I think it better to speak of as
comprehensiveness, than as unity, because unity is often understood in
the sense of oneness or singleness, instead of universality, whereas the
only Unity which by any means can become grateful or an object of hope
to men, and whose types therefore in material things can be beautiful,
is that on which turned the last words and prayer of Christ before his
crossing of the Kidron brook. "Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word. That they all
may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee."


§ 2. The glory of all things is their Unity.

And so there is not any matter, nor any spirit, nor any creature, but it
is capable of an unity of some kind with other creatures, and in that
unity is its perfection and theirs, and a pleasure also for the
beholding of all other creatures that can behold. So the unity of
spirits is partly in their sympathy, and partly in their giving and
taking, and always in their love; and these are their delight and their
strength, for their strength is in their co-working and army fellowship,
and their delight is in the giving and receiving of alternate and
perpetual currents of good, their inseparable dependency on each other's
being, and their essential and perfect depending on their Creator's: and
so the unity of earthly creatures is their power and their peace, not
like the dead and cold peace of undisturbed stones and solitary
mountains, but the living peace of trust, and the living power of
support, of hands that hold each other and are still: and so the unity
of matter is, in its noblest form, the organization of it which builds
it up into temples for the spirit, and in its lower form, the sweet and
strange affinity, which gives to it the glory of its orderly elements,
and the fair variety of change and assimilation that turns the dust into
the crystal, and separates the waters that be above the firmament from
the waters that be beneath, and in its lowest form; it is the working
and walking and clinging together that gives their power to the winds,
and its syllables and soundings to the air, and their weight to the
waves, and their burning to the sunbeams, and their stability to the
mountains, and to every creature whatsoever operation is for its glory
and for others good.

Now of that which is thus necessary to the perfection of all things, all
appearance, sign, type, or suggestion must be beautiful, in whatever
matter it may appear. And so to the perfection of beauty in lines, or
colors, or forms, or masses, or multitudes, the appearance of some
species of unity is in the most determined sense of the word essential.


§ 3. The several kinds of unity. Subjectional. Original. Of sequence,
       and of membership.

But of the appearances of unity, as of unity itself, there are several
kinds which it will be found hereafter convenient to consider
separately. Thus there is the unity of different and separate things,
subjected to one and the same influence, which may be called
subjectional unity, and this is the unity of the clouds, as they are
driven by the parallel winds, or as they are ordered by the electric
currents, and this the unity of the sea waves, and this of the bending
and undulation of the forest masses, and in creatures capable of will it
is the unity of will or of inspiration. And there is unity of origin,
which we may call original unity, which is of things arising from one
spring and source, and speaking always of this their brotherhood, and
this in matter is the unity of the branches of the trees, and of the
petals and starry rays of flowers, and of the beams of light, and in
spiritual creatures it is their filial relation to Him from whom they
have their being. And there is unity of sequence, which is that of
things that form links in chains, and steps in ascent, and stages in
journeys, and this, in matter, is the unity of communicable forces in
their continuance from one thing to another, and it is the passing
upwards and downwards of beneficent effects among all things, and it is
the melody of sounds, and the beauty of continuous lines, and the
orderly succession of motions and times. And in spiritual creatures it
is their own constant building up by true knowledge and continuous
reasoning to higher perfection, and the singleness and
straight-forwardness of their tendencies to more complete communion with
God. And there is the unity of membership, which we may call essential
unity, which is the unity of things separately imperfect into a perfect
whole, and this is the great unity of which other unities are but parts
and means, it is in matter the harmony of sounds and consistency of
bodies, and among spiritual creatures, their love and happiness and very
life in God.


§ 4. Unity of membership. How secured.

Now of the nature of this last kind of unity, the most important whether
in moral or in those material things with which we are at present
concerned, there is this necessary to be observed, that it cannot exist
between things similar to each other. Two or more equal and like things
cannot be members one of another, nor can they form one, or a whole
thing. Two they must remain, both in nature and in our conception, so
long as they remain alike, unless they are united by a third different
from both. Thus the arms, which are like each other, remain two arms in
our conception. They could not be united by a third arm, they must be
united by something which is not an arm, and which, imperfect without
them as they without it, shall form one perfect body; nor is unity even
thus accomplished, without a difference and opposition of direction in
the setting on of the like members. Therefore among all things which are
to have unity of membership one with another, there must be difference
or variety; and though it is possible that many like things may be made
members of one body, yet it is remarkable that this structure appears
characteristic of the lower creatures, rather than the higher, as the
many legs of the caterpillar, and the many arms and suckers of the
radiata, and that, as we rise in order of being, the number of similar
members becomes less, and their structure commonly seems based on the
principle of the unity of two things by a third, as Plato has it in the
Timæus, § II.


§ 5. Variety. Why required.

Hence, out of the necessity of unity, arises that of variety, a
necessity often more vividly, though never so deeply felt, because lying
at the surfaces of things, and assisted by an influential principle of
our nature, the love of change, and the power of contrast. But it is a
mistake which has led to many unfortunate results, in matters respecting
art, to insist on any inherent agreeableness of variety, without
reference to a farther end. For it is not even true that variety as
such, and in its highest degree, is beautiful. A patched garment of many
colors is by no means so agreeable as one of a single and continuous
hue; the splendid colors of many birds are eminently painful from their
violent separation and inordinate variety, while the pure and colorless
swan is, under certain circumstances, the most beautiful of all
feathered creatures.[14] A forest of all manner of trees is poor, if not
disagreeable in effect,[15] a mass of one species of tree is sublime. It
is therefore only harmonious and chordal variety, that variety which is
necessary to secure and extend unity, (for the greater the number of
objects, which by their differences become members of one another, the
more extended and sublime is their unity,) which is rightly agreeable,
and so I name not variety as essential to beauty, because it is only so
in a secondary and casual sense.[16]


§ 6. Change, and its influence on beauty.

§ 7. The love of change. How morbid and evil.

Of the love of change as a principle of human nature, and the
pleasantness of variety resulting from it, something has already been
said, (Ch. IV. § 4,) only as there I was opposing the idea that our
being familiar with objects was the cause of our delight in them, so
here, I have to oppose the contrary position, that their strangeness is
the cause of it. For neither familiarity nor strangeness have more
operation on, or connection with, impressions of one sense than of
another, and they have less power over the impressions of sense
generally, than over the intellect in its joyful accepting of fresh
knowledge, and dull contemplation of that it has long possessed. Only in
their operation on the senses they act contrarily at different times, as
for instance the newness of a dress or of some kind of unaccustomed food
may make it for a time delightful, but as the novelty passes away, so
also may the delight, yielding to disgust or indifference, which in
their turn, as custom begins to operate, may pass into affection and
craving, and that which was first a luxury, and then a matter of
indifference, becomes a necessity:[17] whereas in subjects of the
intellect, the chief delight they convey is dependent upon their being
newly and vividly comprehended, and as they become subjects of
contemplation they lose their value, and become tasteless and
unregarded, except as instruments for the reaching of others, only that
though they sink down into the shadowy, effectless, heap of things
indifferent, which we pack, and crush down, and stand upon, to reach
things new, they sparkle afresh at intervals as we stir them by throwing
a new stone into the heap, and letting the newly admitted lights play
upon them. And both in subjects of the intellect and the senses it is to
be remembered, that the love of change is a weakness and imperfection of
our nature, and implies in it the state of probation, and that it is to
teach us that things about us here are not meant for our continual
possession or satisfaction, that ever such passion of change was put in
us as that "custom lies upon us with a weight, heavy as frost, and deep
almost as life," and only such weak back and baby grasp given to our
intellect as that "the best things we do are painful, and the exercise
of them grievous, being continued without intermission, so as in those
very actions whereby we are especially perfected in this life we are not
able to persist." And so it will be found that they are the
weakest-minded and the hardest-hearted men that most love variety and
change, for the weakest-minded are those who both wonder most at things
new, and digest worst things old, in so far that everything they have
lies rusty, and loses lustre for want of use; neither do they make any
stir among their possessions, nor look over them to see what may be made
of them, nor keep any great store, nor are householders with storehouses
of things new and old, but they catch at the new-fashioned garments, and
let the moth and thief look after the rest; and the hardest-hearted men
are those that least feel the endearing and binding power of custom, and
hold on by no cords of affection to any shore, but drive with the waves
that cast up mire and dirt. And certainly it is not to be held that the
perception of beauty and desire of it, are greatest in the hardest heart
and weakest brain; but the love of variety is so, and therefore variety
can be no cause of the beautiful, except, as I have said, when it is
necessary for the perception of unity, neither is there any better test
of that which is indeed beautiful than its surviving or annihilating the
love of change; and this is a test which the best judges of art have
need frequently to use; and the wisest of them will use it always, for
there is much in art that surprises by its brilliancy, or attracts by
its singularity, that can hardly but by course of time, though assuredly
it will by course of time, be winnowed away from the right and real
beauty whose retentive power is forever on the increase, a bread of the
soul for which the hunger is continual.


§ 8. The conducting of variety towards unity of subjection.

Receiving, therefore, variety only as that which accomplishes unity, or
makes it perceived, its operation is found to be very precious, both in
that which I have called unity of subjection, and unity of sequence, as
well as in unity of membership; for although things in all respects the
same may, indeed, be subjected to one influence, yet the power of the
influence, and their obedience to it, is best seen by varied operation
of it on their individual differences, as in clouds and waves there is a
glorious unity of rolling, wrought out by the wild and wonderful
differences of their absolute forms, which, if taken away, would leave
in them only multitudinous and petty repetition, instead of the majestic
oneness of shared passion. And so in the waves and clouds of human
multitude when they are filled with one thought, as we find frequently
in the works of the early Italian men of earnest purpose, who despising,
or happily ignorant of, the sophistications of theories, and the
proprieties of composition, indicated by perfect similarity of action
and gesture on the one hand, and by the infinite and truthful variation
of expression on the other, the most sublime strength because the most
absorbing unity, of multitudinous passion that ever human heart
conceived. Hence, in the cloister of St. Mark's, the intense, fixed,
statue-like silence of ineffable adoration upon the spirits in prison at
the feet of Christ, side by side, the hands lifted, and the knees bowed,
and the lips trembling together;[18] and in St. Domenico of Fiesole,[19]
that whirlwind rush of the Angels and the redeemed souls round about him
at his resurrection, so that we hear the blast of the horizontal
trumpets mixed with the dying clangor of their ingathered wings. The
same great feeling occurs throughout the works of the serious men,
though most intensely in Angelico, and it is well to compare with it the
vileness and falseness of all that succeeded, when men had begun to
bring to the cross foot their systems instead of their sorrow. Take as
the most marked and degraded instance, perhaps, to be anywhere found,
Bronzino's treatment of the same subject (Christ visiting the spirits in
prison,) in the picture now in the Tuscan room of the Uffizii, which,
vile as it is in color, vacant in invention, void in light and shade, a
heap of cumbrous nothingnesses, and sickening offensivenesses, is of all
its voids most void in this, that the academy models therein huddled
together at the bottom, show not so much unity or community of attention
to the academy model with the flag in its hand above, as a street crowd
would be to a fresh-staged charlatan. Some _point_ to the God who has
burst the gates of death, as if the rest were incapable of
distinguishing him for themselves, and others turn their backs upon him,
to show their unagitated faces to the spectator.


§ 9. And towards unity of sequence.

In unity of sequence, the effect of variety is best exemplified by the
melodies of music, wherein by the differences of the notes, they are
connected with each other in certain pleasant relations. This connection
taking place in quantities is proportion, respecting which certain
general principles must be noted, as the subject is one open to many
errors, and obscurely treated of by writers on art.


§ 10. The nature of proportion. 1st, of apparent proportion.

Proportion is of two distinct kinds. Apparent: when it takes place
between qualities for the sake of connection only, without any ultimate
object or casual necessity; and constructive: when it has reference to
some function to be discharged by the quantities, depending on their
proportion. From the confusion of these two kinds of proportion have
arisen the greater part of the erroneous conceptions of the influence of
either.

Apparent proportion, or the sensible relation of quantities, is one of
the most important means of obtaining unity between things which
otherwise must have remained distinct in similarity, and as it may
consist with every other kind of unity, and persist when every other
means of it fails, it may be considered as lying at the root of most of
our impressions of the beautiful. There is no sense of rightness, or
wrongness connected with it, no sense of utility, propriety, or
expediency. These ideas enter only where the proportion of quantities
has reference to some function to be performed by them. It cannot be
asserted that it is right or that it is wrong that A should be to B, as
B to C; unless A, B, and C have some desirable operation dependent on
that relation. But nevertheless it may be highly agreeable to the eye
that A, B, and C, if visible things, should have visible connection of
ratio, even though nothing be accomplished by such connection. On the
other hand, constructive proportion, or the adaptation of quantities to
functions, is agreeable not to the eye, but to the mind, which is
cognizant of the function to be performed. Thus the pleasantness or
rightness of the proportions of a column depends not on the mere
relation of diameter and height, (which is not proportion at all, for
proportion is between three terms at least,) but on three other involved
terms, the strength of materials, the weight to be borne, and the scale
of the building. The proportions of a wooden column are wrong in a stone
one, and of a small building wrong in a large one,[20] and this owing
solely to mechanical considerations, which have no more to do with
ideas of beauty, than the relation between the arms of a lever, adapted
to the raising of a given weight; and yet it is highly agreeable to
perceive that such constructive proportion has been duly observed, as
it is agreeable to see that anything is fit for its purpose or for ours,
and also that it has been the result of intelligence in the workman of
it, so that we sometimes feel a pleasure in apparent non-adaptation, if
it be a sign of ingenuity; as in the unnatural and seemingly impossible
lightness of Gothic spires and roofs.

Now, the errors against which I would caution the reader in this matter
are three. The first, is the overlooking or denial of the power of
apparent proportion, of which power neither Burke nor any other writer
whose works I have met with, take cognizance. The second, is the
attribution of _beauty_ to the appearances of constructive proportion.
The third, the denial with Burke of _any_ value or agreeableness in
constructive proportion.


§ 11. The value of apparent proportion in curvature.

Now, the full proof of the influence of apparent proportion, I must
reserve for illustration by diagram; one or two instances however may be
given at present for the better understanding of its nature.

We have already asserted that all curves are more beautiful than right
lines. All curves, however, are not equally beautiful, and their
differences of beauty depend on the different proportions borne to each
other by those infinitely small right lines of which they may be
conceived as composed.

When these lines are equal and contain equal angles, there can be no
connection or unity of sequence in them. The resulting curve, the
circle, is therefore the least beautiful of all curves.

When the lines bear to each other some certain proportion; or when, the
lines remaining equal, the angles vary; or when by any means whatsoever,
and in whatever complicated modes, such differences as shall imply
connection are established between the infinitely small segments, the
resulting curves become beautiful. The simplest of the beautiful curves
are the conic, and the various spirals; but it is as rash as it is
difficult to endeavor to trace any ground of superiority or inferiority
among the infinite numbers of the higher curves. I believe that almost
all are beautiful in their own nature, and that their comparative beauty
depends on the constant quantities involved in their equations. Of this
point I shall speak hereafter at greater length.


§ 12. How by nature obtained.

The universal forces of nature, and the individual energies of the
matter submitted to them, are so appointed and balanced, that they are
continually bringing out curves of this kind in all visible forms, and
that circular lines become nearly impossible under any circumstances.
The gradual acceleration, for instance, of velocity, in streams that
descend from hill-sides, as it gradually increases their power of
erosion increases in the same gradual degree the rate of curvature in
the descent of the slope, until at a certain degree of steepness this
descent meets, and is concealed by the right line of the detritus. The
junction of this right line with the plain is again modified by the
farther bounding of the larger blocks, and by the successively
diminishing proportion of landslips caused by erosion at the bottom, so
that the whole line of the hill is one of curvature, first, gradually
increasing in rapidity to the maximum steepness of which the particular
rock is capable, and then decreasing in a decreasing ratio, until it
arrives at the plain level. This type of form, modified of course more
or less by the original boldness of the mountain, and dependent both on
its age, its constituent rock, and the circumstances of its exposure, is
yet in its general formula applicable to all. So the curves of all
things in motion, and of all organic forms, most rudely and simply in
the shell spirals, and in their most complicated development in the
muscular lines of the higher animals.

This influence of apparent proportion, a proportion, be it observed,
which has no reference to ultimate ends, but which is itself, seemingly,
the end and object of operation in many of the forces of nature, is
therefore at the root of all our delight in any beautiful form
whatsoever. For no form can be beautiful which is not composed of curves
whose unity is secured by relations of this kind.


§ 13. Apparent proportion in melodies of line.

Not only however in curvature, but in all associations of lines
whatsoever, it is desirable that there should be reciprocal relation,
and the eye is unhappy without perception of it. It is utterly vain to
endeavor to reduce this proportion to finite rules, for it is as various
as musical melody, and the laws to which it is subject are of the same
general kind, so that the determination of right or wrong proportion is
as much a matter of feeling and experience as the appreciation of good
musical composition; not but that there is a science of both, and
principles which may not be infringed, but that within these limits the
liberty of invention is infinite, and the degrees of excellence infinite
also, whence the curious error of Burke in imagining that because he
could not fix upon some one given proportion of lines as better than any
other, therefore proportion had no value nor influence at all, which is
the same as to conclude that there is no such thing as melody in music,
because there are melodies more than one.


§ 14. Error of Burke in this matter.

The argument of Burke on this subject is summed up in the following
words:--"Examine the head of a beautiful horse, find what proportion
that bears to his body and to his limbs, and what relations these have
to each other, and when you have settled these proportions, as a
standard of beauty, then take a dog or cat, or any other animal, and
examine how far the same proportions between their heads and their
necks, between those and the body, and so on, are found to hold; I think
we may safely say, that they differ in every species, yet that there are
individuals found in a great many species, so differing, that have a
very striking beauty. Now if it be allowed that very different, and even
contrary forms and dispositions, are consistent with beauty, it amounts,
I believe, to a concession, that no certain measures operating from a
natural principle are necessary to produce it, at least so far as the
brute species is concerned."

In this argument there are three very palpable fallacies: the first is
the rough application of measurement to the heads, necks, and limbs,
without observing the subtile differences of proportion and position of
parts in the members themselves, for it would be strange if the
different adjustment of the ears and brow in the dog and horse, did not
require a harmonizing difference of adjustment in the head and neck. The
second fallacy is that above specified, the supposition that proportion
cannot be beautiful if susceptible of variation, whereas the whole
meaning of the term has reference to the adjustment and functional
correspondence of infinitely variable quantities. And the third error is
the oversight of the very important fact, that, although "different and
even contrary forms and dispositions are consistent with beauty," they
are by no means consistent with equal _degrees_ of beauty, so that,
while we find in all the presence of such proportion and harmony of
form, as gifts them with positive agreeableness consistent with the
station and dignity of each, we perceive, also, such superiority of
proportion in some (as the horse, eagle, lion, and man for instance) as
may best be in harmony with the nobler functions and more exalted powers
of the animals.


§ 15. Constructive proportion. Its influence in plants.

And this allowed superiority of some animal forms to others is, in
itself argument against the second error above named, that of
attributing the sensation of beauty to the perception of expedient or
constructive proportion. For everything that God has made is equally
well constructed with reference to its intended functions. But all
things are not equally beautiful. The megatherium is absolutely as well
proportioned, with the view of adaptation of parts to purposes, as the
horse or the swan; but by no means so handsome as either. The fact is,
that the perception of expediency of proportion can but rarely affect
our estimates of beauty, for it implies a knowledge which we very rarely
and imperfectly possess, and the want of which we tacitly acknowledge.

Let us consider that instance of the proportion of the stalk of a plant
to its head, given by Burke. In order to judge of the expediency of this
proportion, we must know, First, the scale of the plant (for the smaller
the scale, the longer the stem may safely be). Secondly, the toughness
of the materials of the stem and the mode of their mechanical structure.
Thirdly, the specific gravity of the head. Fourthly, the position of the
head which the nature of fructification requires. Fifthly, the accidents
and influences to which the situation for which the plant was created is
exposed. Until we know all this, we cannot say that proportion or
disproportion exists, and because we cannot know all this, the idea of
expedient proportion enters but slightly into our impression of
vegetable beauty, but rather, since the existence of the plant proves
that these proportions have been observed, and we know that nothing but
our own ignorance prevents us from perceiving them, we take the
proportion on credit, and are delighted by the variety of results which
the Divine intelligence has attained in the various involutions of these
quantities, and perhaps most when, to outward appearance, such
proportions have been violated; more by the slenderness of the campanula
than the security of the pine.


§ 16. And animals.

What is obscure in plants, is utterly incomprehensible in animals, owing
to the greater number of means employed and functions performed. To
judge of expedient proportion in them, we must know all that each member
has to do, all its bones, all its muscles, and the amount of nervous
energy communicable to them; and yet, forasmuch as we have more
experience and instinctive sense of the strength of muscles than of
wood, and more practical knowledge of the use of a head or a foot than
of a flower or a stem, we are much more likely to presume upon our
judgment respecting proportions here, we are very apt to assert that the
plesiosaurus and camelopard have necks too long, that the turnspit has
legs too short, and the elephant a body too ponderous.

But the painfulness arising from the idea of this being the case is
occasioned partly by our sympathy with the animal, partly by our false
apprehension of incompletion in the Divine work,[21] nor in either case
has it any connection with impressions of that typical beauty of which
we are at present speaking; though some, perhaps, with that vital beauty
which will hereafter come under discussion.


§ 17. Summary.

I wish therefore the reader to hold, respecting proportion generally.
First, That apparent proportion, or the melodious connection of
quantities, is a cause of unity, and therefore one of the sources of all
beautiful form. Secondly, That constructive proportion is agreeable to
the mind when it is known or supposed, and that its seeming absence is
painful in a like degree, but that this pleasure and pain have nothing
in common with those dependent on ideas of beauty.

Farther illustrations of the value of unity I shall reserve for our
detailed examination, as the bringing them forward here would interfere
with the general idea of the subject-matter of the theoretic faculty
which I wish succinctly to convey.


FOOTNOTES

  [14] Compare Chap. ix. § 5, note.

  [15] Spenser's various forest is the Forest of Error.

  [16] It must be matter of no small wonderment to practical men to
    observe how grossly the nature and connection of unity and variety
    have been misunderstood and misstated, by those writers upon taste,
    who have been guided by no experience of art; most singularly
    perhaps by Mr. Alison, who, confounding unity with uniformity, and
    leading his readers through thirty pages of discussion respecting
    uniformity and variety, the intelligibility of which is not by any
    means increased by his supposing uniformity to be capable of
    existence in single things; at last substitutes for these two terms,
    sufficiently contradictory already, those of similarity and
    dissimilarity, the reconciliation of which opposites in one thing we
    must, I believe, leave Mr. Alison to accomplish.

  [17] [Greek: Kai to tauta prattein pollakis hêdy;--to gar synêthes
    hêdy ên; kai to metaballein hêdy; eis physin gar gignetai
    metaballein.]--Arist. Rhet. I. II. 20.

  [18] Fra Angelico's fresco, in a cell of the upper cloister. He
    treated the subject frequently. Another characteristic example
    occurs in the Vita di Christo of the Academy, a series now
    unfortunately destroyed by the picture cleaners. Simon Memmi in
    Santa Maria Novella (Chapelle des Espagnols) has given another very
    beautiful instance. In Giotto the principle is universal, though his
    multitudes are somewhat more dramatically and powerfully varied in
    gesture than Angelico's. In Mino da Fiesole's altar-piece in the
    church of St. Ambrogiot at Florence, close by Cosimo Rosselli's
    fresco, there is a beautiful example in marble.

  [19] The Predella of the picture behind the altar.

  [20] It seems never to have been rightly understood, even by the
    more intelligent among our architects, that proportion is in any way
    connected with positive size; it seems to be held among them that a
    small building may be expanded to a large one merely by
    proportionally expanding all its parts: and that the harmony will be
    equally agreeable on whatever scale it be rendered. Now this is true
    of apparent proportion, but utterly false of constructive; and, as
    much of the value of architectural proportion is constructive, the
    error is often productive of the most painful results. It may be
    best illustrated by observing the conditions of proportion in
    animals. Many persons have thoughtlessly claimed admiration for the
    strength--supposed gigantic--of insects and smaller animals; because
    capable of lifting weights, leaping distances, and surmounting
    obstacles, of proportion apparently overwhelming. Thus the Formica
    Herculanea will lift in its mouth, and brandish like a baton, sticks
    thicker than itself and six times its length, all the while
    scrambling over crags of about the proportionate height of the
    Cliffs of Dover, three or four in a minute. There is nothing
    extraordinary in this, nor any exertion of strength necessarily
    greater than human, in proportion to the size of the body. For it is
    evident that if the size and strength of any creature be expanded or
    diminished in proportion to each other, the distance through which
    it can leap, the time it can maintain exertion, or any other third
    term resultant, remains constant; that is, diminish weight of powder
    and of ball proportionately, and the distance carried is constant or
    nearly so. Thus, a grasshopper, a man, and a giant 100 feet high,
    supposing their muscular strength equally proportioned to their
    size, can or could all leap, not proportionate distance, but the
    same or nearly the same distance--say, four feet the grasshopper, or
    forty-eight times his length; six feet the man or his length
    exactly; ten feet the giant or the tenth of his length. Hence all
    small animals can, _coeteris paribus_, perform feats of strength
    and agility, exactly so much greater than those to be executed by
    large ones, as the animals themselves are smaller; and to enable an
    elephant to leap like a grasshopper, he must be endowed with
    strength a million times greater in _proportion_ to his size. Now
    the consequence of this general mechanical law is, that as we
    increase the scale of animals, their means of power, whether muscles
    of motion or bones of support, must be increased in a more than
    proportionate degree, or they become utterly unwieldy, and incapable
    of motion;--and there is a limit to this increase of strength. If
    the elephant had legs as long as a spider's, no combination of
    animal matter that could be hide-bound would have strength enough to
    move them: to support the megatherium, we must have a humerus a foot
    in diameter, though perhaps not more than two feet long, and that in
    a vertical position under him, while the gnat can hang on the window
    frame, and poise himself to sting, in the middle of crooked stilts
    like threads; stretched out to ten times the breadth of his body on
    each side. Increase the size of the megatherium a little more, and
    no phosphate of lime will bear him; he would crush his own legs to
    powder. (Compare Sir Charles Bell, "Bridgewater Treatise on the
    Hand," p. 296, and the note.) Hence there is not only a limit to the
    size of animals, in the conditions of matter, but to their activity
    also, the largest being always least capable of exertion; and this
    would be the case to a far greater extent, but that nature
    beneficently alters her proportions as she increases her scale;
    giving, as we have seen, long legs and enormous wings to the smaller
    tribes, and short and thick proportion to the larger. So in
    vegetables--compare the stalk of an ear of oat, and the trunk of a
    pine, the mechanical relations being in both the same. So also in
    waves, of which the large never can be mere exaggerations of the
    small, but have different slopes and curvatures: so in mountains and
    all things else, necessarily, and from ordinary mechanical laws.
    Whence in architecture, according to the scale of the building, its
    proportions must be altered; and I have no hesitation in calling
    that unmeaning exaggeration of parts in St. Peter's, of flutings,
    volutes, friezes, etc., in the proportions of a smaller building, a
    vulgar blunder, and one that destroys all the majesty that the
    building ought to have had--and still more I should so call all
    imitations and adaptations of large buildings on a small scale. The
    true test of right proportion is that it shall itself inform us of
    the scale of the building, and be such that even in a drawing it
    shall instantly induce the conception of the actual size, or size
    intended. I know not what Fuseli means by that aphorism of his:--

    "Disproportion of parts is the element of hugeness--proportion, of
    grandeur. All Gothic styles of Architecture are huge. The Greek
    alone is grand." When a building _is_ vast, it ought to look so; and
    the proportion is right which exhibits its vastness. Nature loses no
    size by her proportion; her buttressed mountains have more of Gothic
    than of Greek in them.

  [21] For the just and severe reproof of which, compare Sir Charles
    Bell, (on the hand,) pp. 31, 32.




                           CHAPTER VII.

           OF REPOSE, OR THE TYPE OF DIVINE PERMANENCE.


§ 1. Universal feeling respecting the necessity of repose in art. Its
       sources.

There is probably no necessity more imperatively felt by the artist, no
test more unfailing of the greatness of artistical treatment, than that
of the appearance of repose, and yet there is no quality whose semblance
in mere matter is more difficult to define or illustrate. Nevertheless,
I believe that our instinctive love of it, as well as the cause to which
I attribute that love, (although here also, as in the former cases, I
contend not for the interpretation, but for the fact,) will be readily
allowed by the reader. As opposed to passion, changefulness, or
laborious exertion, repose is the especial and separating characteristic
of the eternal mind and power; it is the "I am" of the Creator opposed
to the "I become" of all creatures; it is the sign alike of the supreme
knowledge which is incapable of surprise, the supreme power which is
incapable of labor, the supreme volition which is incapable of change;
it is the stillness of the beams of the eternal chambers laid upon the
variable waters of ministering creatures; and as we saw before that the
infinity which was a type of the Divine nature on the one hand, became
yet more desirable on the other from its peculiar address to our prison
hopes, and to the expectations of an unsatisfied and unaccomplished
existence, so the types of this third attribute of the Deity might seem
to have been rendered farther attractive to mortal instinct, through the
infliction upon the fallen creature of a curse necessitating a labor
once unnatural and still most painful, so that the desire of rest
planted in the heart is no sensual nor unworthy one, but a longing for
renovation and for escape from a state whose every phase is mere
preparation for another equally transitory, to one in which permanence
shall have become possible through perfection. Hence the great call of
Christ to men, that call on which St. Augustine fixed essential
expression of Christian hope, is accompanied by the promise of rest;[22]
and the death bequest of Christ to men is peace.


§ 2. Repose how expressed in matter.

Repose, as it is expressed in material things, is either a simple
appearance of permanence and quietness, as in the massy forms of a
mountain or rock, accompanied by the lulling effect of all mighty sight
and sound, which all feel and none define, (it would be less sacred if
more explicable,) [Greek: heudousin dioreôn koruphai te kai pharanges],
or else it is repose proper, the rest of things in which there is
vitality or capability of motion actual or imagined; and with respect to
these the expression of repose is greater in proportion to the amount
and sublimity of the action which is not taking place, as well as to the
intensity of the negation of it. Thus we speak not of repose in a stone,
because the motion of a stone has nothing in it of energy nor vitality,
neither its repose of stability. But having once seen a great rock come
down a mountain side, we have a noble sensation of its rest, now bedded
immovably among the under fern, because the power and fearfulness of its
motion were great, and its stability and negation of motion are now
great in proportion. Hence the imagination, which delights in nothing
more than the enhancing of the characters of repose, effects this
usually by either attributing to things visibly energetic an ideal
stability, or to things visibly stable an ideal activity or vitality.
Hence Wordsworth, of the cloud, which in itself having too much of
changefulness for his purpose, is spoken of as one "that heareth not the
loud winds when they call, and moveth altogether, if it move at all."
And again of children, which, that it may remove from them the child
restlessness, the imagination conceives as rooted flowers "Beneath an
old gray oak, as violets, lie." On the other hand, the scattered rocks,
which have not, as such, vitality enough for rest, are gifted with it by
the living image: they "lie couched around us like a flock of sheep."


§ 3. The necessity to repose of an implied energy.

Thus, as we saw that unity demanded for its expression what at first
might have seemed its contrary (variety) so repose demands for its
expression the implied capability of its opposite, energy, and this even
in its lower manifestations, in rocks and stones and trees. By comparing
the modes in which the mind is disposed to regard the boughs of a fair
and vigorous tree, motionless in the summer air, with the effect
produced by one of these same boughs hewn square and used for threshold
or lintel, the reader will at once perceive the connection of vitality
with repose, and the part they both bear in beauty.


§ 4. Mental repose, how noble.

But that which in lifeless things ennobles them by seeming to indicate
life, ennobles higher creatures by indicating the exaltation of their
earthly vitality into a Divine vitality; and raising the life of sense
into the life of faith--faith, whether we receive it in the sense of
adherence to resolution, obedience to law, regardfulness of promise, in
which from all time it has been the test as the shield of the true being
and life of man, or in the still higher sense of trustfulness in the
presence, kindness, and word of God; in which form it has been exhibited
under the Christian dispensation. For whether in one or other form,
whether the faithfulness of men whose path is chosen and portion fixed,
in the following and receiving of that path and portion, as in the
Thermopylæ camp; or the happier faithfulness of children in the good
giving of their Father, and of subjects in the conduct of their king, as
in the "Stand still and see the salvation of God" of the Red Sea shore,
there is rest and peacefulness, the "standing still" in both, the
quietness of action determined, of spirit unalarmed, of expectation
unimpatient: beautiful, even when based only as of old, on the
self-command and self-possession, the persistent dignity or the
uncalculating love of the creature,[23] but more beautiful yet when the
rest is one of humility instead of pride, and the trust no more in the
resolution we have taken, but in the hand we hold.


§ 5. Its universal value as a test of art.

Hence I think that there is no desire more intense or more exalted than
that which exists in all rightly disciplined minds for the evidences of
repose in external signs, and what I cautiously said respecting
infinity, I say fearlessly respecting repose, that no work of art can be
great without it, and that all art is great in proportion to the
appearance of it. It is the most unfailing test of beauty, whether of
matter or of motion, nothing can be ignoble that possesses it, nothing
right that has it not, and in strict proportion to its appearance in the
work is the majesty of mind to be inferred in the artificer. Without
regard to other qualities, we may look to this for our evidence, and by
the search for this alone we may be led to the rejection of all that is
base, and the accepting of all that is good and great, for the paths of
wisdom are all peace. We shall see by this light three colossal images
standing up side by side, looming in their great rest of spirituality
above the whole world horizon, Phidias, Michael Angelo, and Dante; and
then, separated from their great religious thrones only by less fulness
and earnestness of Faith, Homer, and Shakspeare; and from these we may
go down step by step among the mighty men of every age, securely and
certainly observant of diminished lustre in every appearance of
restlessness and effort, until the last trace of true inspiration
vanishes in the tottering affectations or the tortured insanities of
modern times. There is no art, no pursuit, whatsoever, but its results
may be classed by this test alone; everything of evil is betrayed and
winnowed away by it, glitter and confusion and glare of color,
inconsistency or absence of thought, forced expression, evil choice of
subject, over accumulation of materials, whether in painting or
literature, the shallow and unreflecting nothingness of the English
schools of art, the strained and disgusting horrors of the French, the
distorted feverishness of the German:--pretence, over decoration, over
division of parts in architecture, and again in music, in acting, in
dancing, in whatsoever art, great or mean, there are yet degrees of
greatness or meanness entirely dependent on this single quality of
repose.


§ 6. Instances in the Laocoon and Theseus.

Particular instances are at present both needless and cannot but be
inadequate; needless, because I suppose that every reader, however
limited his experience of art, can supply many for himself, and
inadequate, because no number of them could illustrate the full extent
of the influence of the expression. I believe, however, that by
comparing the disgusting convulsions of the Laocoon, with the Elgin
Theseus, we may obtain a general idea of the effect of the influence, as
shown by its absence in one, and presence in the other, of two works
which, as far as artistical merit is concerned, are in some measure
parallel, not that I believe, even in this respect, the Laocoon
justifiably comparable with the Theseus. I suppose that no group has
exercised so pernicious an influence on art as this, a subject ill
chosen, meanly conceived and unnaturally treated, recommended to
imitation by subtleties of execution and accumulation of technical
knowledge.[24]


§ 7. And in altar tombs.

In Christian art, it would be well to compare the feeling of the finer
among the altar tombs of the middle ages, with any monumental works
after Michael Angelo, perhaps more especially with works of Roubilliac
or Canova.

In the Cathedral of Lucca, near the entrance door of the north transept,
there is a monument of Jacopo della Quercia's to Ilaria di Caretto, the
wife of Paolo Guinigi. I name it not as more beautiful or perfect than
other examples of the same period, but as furnishing an instance of the
exact and right mean between the rigidity and rudeness of the earlier
monumental effigies, and the morbid imitation of life, sleep, or death,
of which the fashion has taken place in modern times.[25] She is lying
on a simple couch, with a hound at her feet, not on the side, but with
the head laid straight and simply on the hard pillow, in which, let it
be observed, there is no effort at deceptive imitation of pressure. It
is understood as a pillow, but not mistaken for one. The hair is bound
in a flat braid over the fair brow, the sweet and arched eyes are
closed, the tenderness of the loving lips is set and quiet, there is
that about them which forbids breath, something which is not death nor
sleep, but the pure image of both. The hands are not lifted in prayer,
neither folded, but the arms are laid at length upon the body, and the
hands cross as they fall. The feet are hidden by the drapery, and the
forms of the limbs concealed, but not their tenderness.

If any of us, after staying for a time beside this tomb, could see
through his tears, one of the vain and unkind encumbrances of the grave,
which, in these hollow and heartless days, feigned sorrow builds to
foolish pride, he would, I believe, receive such a lesson of love as no
coldness could refuse, no fatuity forget, and no insolence disobey.


FOOTNOTES

  [22] Matt. xi. 28.

  [23]         "The universal instinct of repose,
                The longing for confirmed tranquillity
                Inward and outward, humble, yet sublime.
                The life where hope and memory are as one.
                Earth quiet and unchanged; the human soul
                Consistent in self-rule; and heaven revealed
                To meditation, in that quietness."

                                WORDSWORTH. Excursion, Book iii.

    But compare carefully (for this is put into the mouth of one
    diseased in thought and erring in seeking) the opening of the ninth
    book; and observe the difference between the mildew of
    inaction,--the slumber of Death; and the Patience of the Saints--the
    Rest of the Sabbath Eternal. (Rev. xiv. 13.)

    Compare also, Chap. I. § 6.

  [24] I would also have the reader compare with the meagre lines and
    contemptible tortures of the Laocoon, the awfulness and quietness of
    M. Angelo's treatment of a subject in most respects similar, (the
    plague of the Fiery Serpents,) but of which the choice was justified
    both by the place which the event holds in the typical system he had
    to arrange, and by the grandeur of the plague itself, in its
    multitudinous grasp, and its mystical salvation; sources of
    sublimity entirely wanting to the slaughter of the Dardan priest. It
    is good to see how his gigantic intellect reaches after repose, and
    truthfully finds it, in the falling hand of the near figure, and in
    the deathful decline of that whose hands are held up even in their
    venom coldness to the cross; and though irrelevant to our present
    purpose, it is well also to note how the grandeur of this treatment
    results, not merely from choice, but from a greater knowledge and
    more faithful rendering of truth. For whatever knowledge of the
    human frame there may be in the Laocoon, there is certainly none of
    the habits of serpents. The fixing of the snake's head in the side
    of the principal figure is as false to nature, as it is poor in
    composition of line. A large serpent never wants to bite, it wants
    to hold, it seizes therefore always where it can hold best, by the
    extremities, or throat, it seizes once and forever, and that before
    it coils, following up the seizure with the twist of its body round
    the victim, as invisibly swift as the twist of a whip lash round any
    hard object it may strike, and then it holds fast, never moving the
    jaws or the body, if its prey has any power of struggling left, it
    throws round another coil, without quitting the hold with the jaws;
    if Laocoon had had to do with real serpents, instead of pieces of
    tape with heads to them, he would have been held still, and not
    allowed to throw his arms or legs about. It is most instructive to
    observe the accuracy of Michael Angelo in the rendering of these
    circumstances; the binding of the arms to the body, and the knotting
    of the whole mass of agony together, until we hear the crashing of
    the bones beneath the grisly sliding of the engine folds. Note also
    the expression in all the figures of another circumstance, the
    torpor and cold numbness of the limbs induced by the serpent venom,
    which, though justifiably overlooked by the sculptor of the Laocoon,
    as well as by Virgil--in consideration of the rapidity of the death
    by crushing, adds infinitely to the power of the Florentine's
    conception, and would have been better hinted by Virgil, than that
    sickening distribution of venom on the garlands. In fact, Virgil has
    missed both of truth and impressiveness every way--the "morsu
    depascitur" is unnatural butchery--the "perfusus veneno" gratuitous
    foulness--the "clamores horrendos," impossible degradation; compare
    carefully the remarks on this statue in Sir Charles Bell's Essay on
    Expression, (third edition, p. 192) where he has most wisely and
    uncontrovertibly deprived the statue of all claim to expression of
    energy and fortitude of mind, and shown its common and coarse intent
    of mere bodily exertion and agony, while he has confirmed Payne
    Knight's just condemnation of the passage in Virgil.

    If the reader wishes to see the opposite or imaginative view of the
    subject, let him compare Winkelmann; and Schiller, Letters on
    Æsthetic Culture.

  [25] Whenever, in monumental work, the sculptor reaches a deceptive
    appearance of life or death, or of concomitant details, he has gone
    too far. The statue should be felt for such, not look like a dead or
    sleeping body; it should not convey the impression of a corpse, nor
    of sick and outwearied flesh, but it should be the marble _image_ of
    death or weariness. So the concomitants should be distinctly marble,
    severe and monumental in their lines, not shroud, not bedclothes,
    not actual armor nor brocade, not a real soft pillow, not a
    downright hard stuffed mattress, but the mere type and suggestion of
    these: a certain rudeness and incompletion of finish is very noble
    in all. Not that they are to be unnatural, such lines as are given
    should be pure and true, and clear of the hardness and mannered
    rigidity of the strictly Gothic types, but lines so few and grand as
    to appeal to the imagination only, and always to stop short of
    realization. There is a monument put up lately by a modern Italian
    sculptor in one of the side chapels of Santa Croce, the face fine
    and the execution dexterous. But it looks as if the person had been
    restless all night, and the artist admitted to a faithful study of
    the disturbed bedclothes in the morning.




                                CHAPTER VIII.

                 OF SYMMETRY, OR THE TYPE OF DIVINE JUSTICE.


§ 1. Symmetry, what and how found in organic nature.

§ 2. How necessary in art.

We shall not be long detained by the consideration of this, the fourth
constituent of beauty, as its nature is universally felt and understood.
In all perfectly beautiful objects, there is found the opposition of one
part to another and a reciprocal balance obtained; in animals the
balance being commonly between opposite sides, (note the
disagreeableness occasioned by the exception in flat fish, having the
eyes on one side of the head,) but in vegetables the opposition is less
distinct, as in the boughs on opposite sides of trees, and the leaves
and sprays on each side of the boughs, and in dead matter less perfect
still, often amounting only to a certain tendency towards a balance, as
in the opposite sides of valleys and alternate windings of streams. In
things in which perfect symmetry is from their nature impossible or
improper, a balance must be at least in some measure expressed before
they can be beheld with pleasure. Hence the necessity of what artists
require as opposing lines or masses in composition, the propriety of
which, as well as their value, depends chiefly on their inartificial and
natural invention. Absolute equality is not required, still less
absolute similarity. A mass of subdued color may be balanced by a point
of a powerful one, and a long and latent line overpowered by a short and
conspicuous one. The only error against which it is necessary to guard
the reader with respect to symmetry, is the confounding it with
proportion, though it seems strange that the two terms could ever have
been used as synonymous. Symmetry is the _opposition_ of _equal_
quantities to each other. Proportion the _connection_ of _unequal_
quantities with each other. The property of a tree in sending out equal
boughs on opposite sides is symmetrical. Its sending out shorter and
smaller towards the top, proportional. In the human face its balance
of opposite sides is symmetry, its division upwards, proportion.

[Illustration: TOMB OF THE ILARIA DI CARETTO, LUCCA. From a photograph.]


§ 3. To what its agreeableness is referable. Various instances.

§ 4. Especially in religious art.

Whether the agreeableness of symmetry be in any way referable to its
expression of the Aristotelian [Greek: isotês], that is to say of
abstract justice, I leave the reader to determine; I only assert
respecting it, that it is necessary to the dignity of every form, and
that by the removal of it we shall render the other elements of beauty
comparatively ineffectual: though, on the other hand, it is to be
observed that it is rather a mode of arrangement of qualities than a
quality itself; and hence symmetry has little power over the mind,
unless all the other constituents of beauty be found together with it. A
form may be symmetrical and ugly, as many Elizabethan ornaments, and yet
not so ugly as it had been if unsymmetrical, but bettered always by
increasing degrees of symmetry; as in star figures, wherein there is a
circular symmetry of many like members, whence their frequent use for
the plan and ground of ornamental designs; so also it is observable that
foliage in which the leaves are concentrically grouped, as in the
chestnuts, and many shrubs--rhododendrons for instance--(whence the
perfect beauty of the Alpine rose)--is far nobler in its effect than any
other, so that the sweet chestnut of all trees most fondly and
frequently occurs in the landscape of Tintoret and Titian, beside which
all other landscape grandeur vanishes: and even in the meanest things
the rule holds, as in the kaleidoscope, wherein agreeableness is given
to forms altogether accidental merely by their repetition and reciprocal
opposition; which orderly balance and arrangement are essential to the
perfect operation of the more earnest and solemn qualities of the
beautiful, as being heavenly in their nature, and contrary to the
violence and disorganization of sin, so that the seeking of them and
submission to them is always marked in minds that have been subjected to
high moral discipline, constant in all the great religious painters, to
the degree of being an offence and a scorn to men of less tuned and
tranquil feeling. Equal ranks of saints are placed on each side of the
picture, if there be a kneeling figure on one side, there is a
corresponding one on the other, the attendant angels beneath and above
are arranged in like order. The Raffaelle at Blenheim, the Madonna di
St. Sisto, the St. Cicilia, and all the works of Perugino, Francia, and
John Bellini present some such form, and the balance at least is
preserved even in pictures of action necessitating variety of grouping,
as always by Giotto; and by Ghirlandajo in the introduction of his
chorus-like side figures, and by Tintoret most eminently in his noblest
work, the Crucifixion, where not only the grouping but the arrangement
of light is absolutely symmetrical. Where there is no symmetry, the
effects of passion and violence are increased, and many very sublime
pictures derive their sublimity from the want of it, but they lose
proportionally in the diviner quality of beauty. In landscape the same
sense of symmetry is preserved, as we shall presently see, even to
artificialness, by the greatest men, and it is one of the principal
sources of deficient feeling in the landscapes of the present day, that
the symmetry of nature is sacrificed to irregular picturesqueness. Of
this, however, hereafter.




                                CHAPTER IX.

                  OF PURITY, OR THE TYPE OF DIVINE ENERGY.


§ 1. The influence of light as a sacred symbol.

It may at first appear strange that I have not in my enumeration of the
types of Divine attributes, included that which is certainly the most
visible and evident of all, as well as the most distinctly expressed in
Scripture; God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. But I could
not logically class the presence of an actual substance or motion with
mere conditions and modes of being, neither could I logically separate
from any of these, that which is evidently necessary to the perception
of all. And it is also to be observed, that though the love of light is
more instinctive in the human heart than any other of the desires
connected with beauty, we can hardly separate its agreeableness in its
own nature from the sense of its necessity and value for the purposes of
life, neither the abstract painfulness of darkness from the sense of
danger and incapacity connected with it; and note also that it is not
_all_ light, but light possessing the universal qualities of beauty,
diffused or infinite rather than in points, tranquil, not startling and
variable, pure, not sullied or oppressed, which is indeed pleasant and
perfectly typical of the Divine nature.


§ 2. The idea of purity connected with it.

Observe, however, that there is one quality, the idea of which had been
just introduced in connection with light, which might have escaped us in
the consideration of mere matter, namely purity, and yet I think that
the original notion of this quality is altogether material, and has only
been attributed to color when such color is suggestive of the condition
of matter from which we originally received the idea. For I see not in
the abstract how one color should be considered purer than another,
except as more or less compounded, whereas there is certainly a sense of
purity or impurity in the most compound and neutral colors, as well as
in the simplest, a quality difficult to define, and which the reader
will probably be surprised by my calling the type of energy, with which
it has certainly little traceable connection in the mind.


§ 3. Originally derived from conditions of matter.

§ 4. Associated ideas adding to the power of the impression. Influence
       of clearness.

§ 5. Perfect beauty of surface, in what consisting.

I believe however if we carefully analyze the nature of our ideas of
impurity in general, we shall find them refer especially to conditions
of matter in which its various elements are placed in a relation
incapable of healthy or proper operation; and most distinctly to
conditions in which the negation of vital or energetic action is most
evident, as in corruption and decay of all kinds, wherein particles
which once, by their operation on each other, produced a living and
energetic whole, are reduced to a condition of perfect passiveness, in
which they are seized upon and appropriated, one by one, piecemeal, by
whatever has need of them, without any power of resistance or energy of
their own. And thus there is a peculiar painfulness attached to any
associations of inorganic with organic matter, such as appear to involve
the inactivity and feebleness of the latter, so that things which are
not felt to be foul in their own nature, yet become so in association
with things of greater inherent energy; as dust or earth, which in a
mass excites no painful sensation, excites a most disagreeable one when
strewing or staining an animal's skin, because it implies a decline and
deadening of the vital and healthy power of the skin. But all reasoning
about this impression is rendered difficult, by the host of associated
ideas connected with it; for the ocular sense of impurity connected with
corruption is infinitely enhanced by the offending of other senses and
by the grief and horror of it in its own nature, as the special
punishment and evidence of sin, and on the other hand, the ocular
delight in purity is mingled, as I before observed, with the love of the
mere element of light, as a type of wisdom and of truth; whence it seems
to me that we admire the transparency of bodies, though probably it is
still rather owing to our sense of more perfect order and arrangement of
particles, and not to our love of light, that we look upon a piece of
rock crystal as purer than a piece of marble, and on the marble as purer
than a piece of chalk. And let it be observed also that the most lovely
objects in nature are only partially transparent. I suppose the utmost
possible sense of beauty is conveyed by a feebly translucent, smooth,
but not lustrous surface of white, and pale warm red, subdued by the
most pure and delicate grays, as in the finer portions of the human
frame; in wreaths of snow, and in white plumage under rose light,[26] so
Viola of Olivia in Twelfth Night, and Homer of Atrides wounded.[27] And
I think that transparency and lustre, both beautiful in themselves, are
incompatible with the highest beauty because they destroy form, on the
full perception of which more of the divinely character of the object
depends than upon its color. Hence, in the beauty of snow and of flesh,
so much translucency is allowed as is consistent with the full
explanation of the forms, while we are suffered to receive more intense
impressions of light and transparency from other objects which,
nevertheless, owing to their necessarily unperceived form, are not
perfectly nor affectingly beautiful. A fair forehead outshines its
diamond diadem. The sparkle of the cascade withdraws not our eyes from
the snowy summits in their evening silence.


§ 6. Purity only metaphorically a type of sinlessness.

It may seem strange to many readers that I have not spoken of purity in
that sense in which it is most frequently used, as a type of
sinlessness. I do not deny that the frequent metaphorical use of it in
Scripture may have and ought to have much influence on the sympathies
with which we regard it, and that probably the immediate agreeableness
of it to most minds arises far more from this source than from that to
which I have chosen to attribute it. But, in the first place, if it be
indeed in the signs of Divine and not of human attributes that beauty
consists, I see not how the idea of sin can be formed with respect to
the Deity, for it is an idea of a relation borne by us to Him, and not
in any way to be attached to his abstract nature. And if the idea of sin
is incapable of being formed with respect to Him, so also is its
negative, for we cannot form an idea of negation, where we cannot form
an idea of presence. If for instance one could conceive of taste or
flavor in a proposition of Euclid, so also might we of insipidity, but
if not of the one, then not of the other. So that, in speaking of the
goodness of God, it cannot be that we mean anything more than his Love,
Mercifulness, and Justice, and these attributes I have shown to be
expressed by other qualities of beauty, and I cannot trace any rational
connection between them and the idea of spotlessness in matter. Neither
can I trace any more distinct relation between this idea, and any of the
virtues which make up the righteousness of man, except perhaps those of
truth and openness, of which I have already spoken as more expressed by
the transparency than the mere purity of matter. So that I conceive the
whole use of the terms purity, spotlessness, etc., in moral subjects, to
be merely metaphorical, and that it is rather that we illustrate these
virtues by the desirableness of material purity, than that we desire
material purity because it is illustrative of these virtues.


§ 7. Energy, how expressed by purity of matter.

I repeat, then, that the only idea which I think can be legitimately
connected with purity of matter, is this of vital and energetic
connection among its particles, and that the idea of foulness is
essentially connected with dissolution and death. Thus the purity of the
rock, contrasted with the foulness of dust or mould, is expressed by the
epithet "living," very singularly given in the rock, in almost all
languages; singularly I say, because life is almost the last attribute
one would ascribe to stone, but for this visible energy and connection
of its particles: and so of water as opposed to stagnancy. And I do not
think that, however pure a powder or dust may be, the idea of beauty is
ever connected with it, for it is not the mere purity, but the _active_
condition of the substance which is desired, so that as soon as it
shoots into crystals, or gathers into efflorescence, a sensation of
_active_ or real purity is received which was not felt in the calcined
caput mortuum.


§ 8. And of color.

§ 9. Spirituality, how so expressed.

And again in color. I imagine that the quality of it which we term
purity is dependent on the full energizing of the rays that compose it,
whereof if in compound hues any are overpowered and killed by the rest,
so as to be of no value nor operation, foulness is the consequence;
while so long as all act together, whether side by side, or from
pigments seen one through the other, so that all the coloring matter
employed comes into play in the harmony desired, and none be quenched
nor killed, purity results. And so in all cases I suppose that pureness
is made to us desirable, because expressive of the constant presence and
energizing of the Deity in matter, through which all things live and
move, and have their being, and that foulness is painful as the
accompaniment of disorder and decay, and always indicative of the
withdrawal of Divine support. And the practical analogies of life, the
invariable connection of outward foulness with mental sloth and
degradation, as well as with bodily lethargy and disease, together with
the contrary indications of freshness and purity belonging to every
healthy and active organic frame, (singularly seen in the effort of the
young leaves when first their inward energy prevails over the earth,
pierces its corruption, and shakes its dust away from their own white
purity of life,) all these circumstances strengthen the instinct by
associations countless and irresistible. And then, finally, with the
idea of purity comes that of spirituality, for the essential
characteristic of matter is its inertia, whence, by adding to it purity
or energy, we may in some measure spiritualize even matter itself. Thus
in the descriptions of the Apocalypse it is its purity that fits it for
its place in heaven; the river of the water of life, that proceeds out
of the throne of the Lamb, is clear as crystal, and the pavement of the
city is pure gold, like unto clear glass.[28]


FOOTNOTES

  [26] The reader will observe that I am speaking at present of mere
    material qualities. If he would obtain perfect ideas respecting
    loveliness of luminous surface, let him closely observe a swan with
    its wings expanded in full light five minutes before sunset. The
    human cheek or the rose leaf are perhaps hardly so pure, and the
    forms of snow, though individually as beautiful, are less
    exquisitely combined.

  [27]         [Greek: hôs d' ote tis t' elephanta gynê phoiniki miênê
                       Mêonis.]

    So Spenser of Shamefacedness, an exquisite piece of glowing
    color--and sweetly of Belphoebe--(so the roses and lilies of all
    poets.) Compare the making of the image of Florimell.

               "The substance whereof she the body made
                Was purest snow, in massy mould congealed,
                Which she had gathered in a shady glade
                Of the Riphoean hills.
                The same she tempered with fine mercury,
                And mingled them with perfect vermily."

    With Una he perhaps overdoes the white a little. She is two degrees
    of comparison above snow. Compare his questioning in the Hymn to
    Beauty, about that mixture made of colors fair; and goodly
    temperament, of pure complexion.

               "Hath white and red in it such wondrous power
                That it can pierce through the eyes into the heart?"

    Where the distinction between typical and vital beauty is very
    gloriously carried out.

  [28] I have not spoken here of any of the associations connected
    with warmth or coolness of color, they are partly connected with
    vital beauty, compare Chap. xiv. § 22, 23, and partly with
    impressions of the sublime, the discussion of which is foreign to
    the present subject; purity, however, it is which gives value to
    both, for neither warm nor cool color, can be beautiful, if impure.

    Neither have I spoken of any questions relating to melodies of
    color, a subject of separate science--whose general principle has
    been already stated in the seventh chapter respecting unity of
    sequence. Those qualities only are here noted which give absolute
    beauty, whether to separate color or to melodies of it--for all
    melodies are not beautiful, but only those which are expressive of
    certain pleasant or solemn emotions; and the rest startling, or
    curious, or cheerful, or exciting, or sublime, but not beautiful,
    (and so in music.) And all questions relating to this grandeur,
    cheerfulness, or other characteristic impression of color must be
    considered under the head of ideas of relation.




                              CHAPTER X.

            OF MODERATION, OR THE TYPE OF GOVERNMENT BY LAW.


§ 1. Meaning of the terms Chasteness and Refinement.

Of objects which, in respect of the qualities hitherto considered,
appear to have equal claims to regard, we find, nevertheless, that
certain are preferred to others in consequence of an attractive power,
usually expressed by the terms "chasteness, refinement, or elegance,"
and it appears also that things which in other respects have little in
them of natural beauty, and are of forms altogether simple and adapted
to simple uses, are capable of much distinction and desirableness in
consequence of these qualities only. It is of importance to discover the
real nature of the ideas thus expressed.


§ 2. How referable to temporary fashions.

Something of the peculiar meaning of the words is referable to the
authority of fashion and the exclusiveness of pride, owing to which that
which is the mode of a particular time is submissively esteemed, and
that which by its costliness or its rarity is of difficult attainment,
or in any way appears to have been chosen as the best of many things,
(which is the original sense of the words elegant and exquisite,) is
esteemed for the witness it bears to the dignity of the chooser.

But neither of these ideas are in any way connected with eternal beauty,
neither do they at all account for that agreeableness of color and form
which is especially termed chasteness, and which it would seem to be a
characteristic of rightly trained mind in all things to prefer, and of
common minds to reject.


§ 3. How to the perception of completion.

§ 4. Finish, by great masters esteemed essential.

There is however another character of artificial productions, to which
these terms have partial reference, which it is of some importance to
note, that of finish, exactness, or refinement, which are commonly
desired in the works of men, owing both to their difficulty of
accomplishment and consequent expression of care and power (compare
Chapter on Ideas of Power, Part I. Sect, i.,) and from their greater
resemblance to the working of God, whose "absolute exactness," says
Hooker, "all things imitate, by tending to that which is most exquisite
in every particular." And there is not a greater sign of the
imperfection of general taste, than its capability of contentment with
forms and things which, professing completion, are yet not exact nor
complete, as in the vulgar with wax and clay and china figures, and in
bad sculptors with an unfinished and clay-like modelling of surface, and
curves and angles of no precision or delicacy; and in general, in all
common and unthinking persons with an imperfect rendering of that which
might be pure and fine, as church-wardens are content to lose the sharp
lines of stone carving under clogging obliterations of whitewash, and as
the modern Italians scrape away and polish white all the sharpness and
glory of the carvings on their old churches, as most miserably and
pitifully on St. Mark's at Venice, and the Baptisteries of Pistoja and
Pisa, and many others; so also the delight of vulgar painters in coarse
and slurred painting, merely for the sake of its coarseness,[29] as of
Spagnoletto, Salvator, or Murillo, opposed to the divine finish which
the greatest and mightiest of men disdained not, but rather wrought out
with painfulness and life spending; as Leonardo and Michael Angelo, (for
the latter, however many things he left unfinished, did finish, if at
all, with a refinement that the eye cannot follow, but the feeling only,
as in the Pieta of Genoa,) and Perugino always, even to the gilding of
single hairs among his angel tresses, and the young Raffaelle, when he
was heaven taught, and Angelico, and Pinturicchio, and John Bellini, and
all other such serious and loving men. Only it is to be observed that
this finish is not a part or constituent of beauty, but the full and
ultimate rendering of it, so that it is an idea only connected with the
works of men, for all the works of the Deity are finished with the same,
that is, infinite care and completion: and so what degrees of beauty
exist among them can in no way be dependent upon this source, inasmuch
as there are between them no degrees of care. And therefore, as there
certainly is admitted a difference of degree in what we call chasteness,
even in Divine work, (compare the hollyhock or the sunflower with the
vale lily,) we must seek for it some other explanation and source than
this.


§ 5. Moderation, its nature and value

And if, bringing down our ideas of it from complicated objects to simple
lines and colors, we analyze and regard them carefully, I think we shall
be able to trace them to an under-current of constantly agreeable
feeling, excited by the appearance in material things of a
self-restrained liberty, that is to say, by the image of that acting of
God with regard to all his creation, wherein, though free to operate in
whatever arbitrary, sudden, violent, or inconstant ways he will, he yet,
if we may reverently so speak, restrains in himself this his omnipotent
liberty, and works always in consistent modes, called by us laws. And
this restraint or moderation, according to the words of Hooker, ("that
which doth moderate the force and power, that which doth appoint the
form and measure of working, the same we term a law,") is in the Deity
not restraint, such as it is said of creatures, but, as again says
Hooker, "the very being of God is a law to his working," so that every
appearance of painfulness or want of power and freedom in material
things is wrong and ugly; for the right restraint, the image of Divine
operation, is both in them, and in men, a willing and not painful
stopping short of the utmost degree to which their power might reach,
and the appearance of fettering or confinement is the cause of ugliness
in the one, as the slightest painfulness or effort in restraint is a
sign of sin in the other.


§ 6. It is the girdle of beauty.

§ 7. How found in natural curves and colors.

§ 8. How difficult of attainment, yet essential to all good.

I have put this attribute of beauty last, because I consider it the
girdle and safeguard of all the rest, and in this respect the most
essential of all, for it is possible that a certain degree of beauty may
be attained even in the absence of one of its other constituents, as
sometimes in some measure without symmetry or without unity. But the
least appearance of violence or extravagance, of the want of moderation
and restraint, is, I think, destructive of all beauty whatsoever in
everything, color, form, motion, language, or thought, giving rise to
that which in color we call glaring, in form inelegant, in motion
ungraceful, in language coarse, in thought undisciplined, in all
unchastened; which qualities are in everything most painful, because the
signs of disobedient and irregular operation. And herein we at last find
the reason of that which has been so often noted respecting the subtilty
and almost invisibility of natural curves and colors, and why it is that
we look on those lines as least beautiful which fall into wide and far
license of curvature, and as most beautiful which approach nearest (so
that the curvilinear character be distinctly asserted) to the government
of the right line, as in the pure and severe curves of the draperies of
the religious painters; and thus in color it is not red, but rose-color
which is most beautiful, neither such actual green as we find in summer
foliage partly, and in our painting of it constantly; but such gray
green as that into which nature modifies her distant tints, or such pale
green and uncertain as we see in sunset sky, and in the clefts of the
glacier and the chrysoprase, and the sea-foam; and so of all colors, not
that they may not sometimes be deep and full, but that there is a solemn
moderation even in their very fulness, and a holy reference beyond and
out of their own nature to great harmonies by which they are governed,
and in obedience to which is their glory. Whereof the ignorance is shown
in all evil colorists by the violence and positiveness of their hues,
and by dulness and discordance consequent, for the very brilliancy and
real power of all color is dependent on the chastening of it, as of a
voice on its gentleness, and as of action on its calmness, and as all
moral vigor on self-command. And therefore as that virtue which men
last, and with most difficulty attain unto, and which many attain not at
all, and yet that which is essential to the conduct and almost to the
being of all other virtues, since neither imagination, nor invention,
nor industry, nor sensibility, nor energy, nor any other good having, is
of full avail without this of self-command, whereby works truly
masculine and mighty are produced, and by the signs of which they are
separated from that lower host of things brilliant, magnificent and
redundant, and farther yet from that of the loose, the lawless, the
exaggerated, the insolent, and the profane, I would have the necessity
of it foremost among all our inculcating, and the name of it largest
among all our inscribing, in so far that, over the doors of every school
of Art, I would have this one word, relieved out in deep letters of pure
gold,--Moderation.


FOOTNOTES

  [29] It is to be carefully noted that when rude execution is
    evidently not the result of imperfect feeling and desire (as in
    these men above named, it is) but of thought; either impatient,
    which there was necessity to note swiftly, or impetuous, which it
    was well to note in mighty manner, as pre-eminently and in both
    kinds the case with Tintoret, and often with Michael Angelo, and in
    lower and more degraded modes with Rubens, and generally in the
    sketches and first thoughts of great masters; there is received a
    very noble pleasure, connected both with ideas of power (compare
    again Part I. Sect. ii. Chap. I.) and with certain actions of the
    imagination of which we shall speak presently. But this pleasure is
    not received from the beauty of the work, for nothing can be
    perfectly beautiful unless complete, but from its simplicity and
    sufficiency to its immediate purpose, where the purpose is not of
    beauty at all, as often in things rough-hewn, pre-eminently for
    instance in the stones of the foundations of the Pitti and Strozzi
    palaces, whose noble rudeness is to be opposed both to the useless
    polish, and the barbarous rustications of modern times, (although
    indeed this instance is not without exception to be received, for
    the majesty of these rocky buildings depends also in some measure
    upon the real beauty and finish of the natural curvilinear
    fractures, opposed to the coarseness of human chiselling,) and
    again, as it respects works of higher art, the pleasure of their
    hasty or imperfect execution is not indicative of their beauty, but
    of their majesty and fulness of thought and vastness of power. Shade
    is only beautiful when it magnifies and sets forth the forms of fair
    things, so negligence is only noble when it is, as Fuseli hath it,
    "the shadow of energy." Which that it may be, secure the substance
    and the shade will follow, but let the artist beware of stealing the
    manner of giant intellects when he has not their intention, and of
    assuming large modes of treatment when he has little thoughts to
    treat. There is large difference between indolent impatience of
    labor and intellectual impatience of delay, large difference between
    leaving things unfinished because we have more to do, or because we
    are satisfied with what we have done. Tintoret, who prayed hard, and
    hardly obtained, that he might be permitted, the charge of his
    colors only being borne, to paint a new built house from base to
    battlement, was not one to shun labor, it is the pouring in upon him
    of glorious thoughts in inexpressible multitude that his sweeping
    hand follows so fast. It is as easy to know the slightness of
    earnest haste from the slightness of blunt feeling, indolence, or
    affectation, as it is to know the dust of a race, from the dust of
    dissolution.




                                CHAPTER XI.

                GENERAL INFERENCES RESPECTING TYPICAL BEAUTY.


§ 1. The subject incompletely treated, yet admitting of general
       conclusions.

I have now enumerated, and in some measure explained those
characteristics of mere matter by which I conceive it becomes agreeable
to the theoretic faculty, under whatever form, dead, organized, or
animated, it may present itself. It will be our task in the succeeding
volume to examine, and illustrate by examples, the mode in which these
characteristics appear in every division of creation, in stones,
mountains, waves, clouds, and all organic bodies; beginning with
vegetables, and then taking instances in the range of animals from the
mollusc to man; examining how one animal form is nobler than another, by
the more manifest presence of these attributes, and chiefly endeavoring
to show how much there is of admirable and lovely, even in what is
commonly despised. At present I have only to mark the conclusions at
which we have as yet arrived respecting the rank of the theoretic
faculty, and then to pursue the inquiry farther into the nature of vital
beauty.

As I before said, I pretend not to have enumerated all the sources of
material beauty, nor the analogies connected with them; it is probable
that others may occur to many readers, or to myself as I proceed into
more particular inquiry, but I am not careful to collect all conceivable
evidence on the subject. I desire only to assert and prove some certain
principles, and by means of these to show, in some measure, the inherent
worthiness and glory of God's works and something of the relations they
bear to each other and to us, leaving the subject to be fully pursued,
as it only can be, by the ardor and affection of those whom it may
interest.


§ 2. Typical beauty not created for man's sake.

§ 3. But degrees of it for his sake admitted.

§ 4. What encouragement hence to be received.

The qualities above enumerated are not to be considered as stamped upon
matter for our teaching or enjoyment only, but as the necessary
consequence of the perfection of God's working, and the inevitable stamp
of his image on what he creates. For it would be inconsistent with his
Infinite perfection to work imperfectly in any place, or in any matter;
wherefore we do not find that flowers and fair trees, and kindly skies,
are given only where man may see them and be fed by them, but the Spirit
of God works everywhere alike, where there is no eye to see, covering
all lonely places with an equal glory, using the same pencil and
outpouring the same splendor, in the caves of the waters where the
sea-snakes swim, and in the desert where the satyrs dance, among the
fir-trees of the stork, and the rocks of the conies, as among those
higher creatures whom he has made capable witnesses of his working.
Nevertheless, I think that the admission of different degrees of this
glory and image of himself upon creation, has the look of something
meant especially for us; for although, in pursuance of the appointed
system of government by universal laws, these same degrees exist where
we cannot witness them, yet the existence of degrees at all seems at
first unlikely in Divine work, and I cannot see reason for it unless
that palpable one of increasing in us the understanding of the sacred
characters by showing us the results of their comparative absence. For I
know not that if all things had been equally beautiful, we could have
received the idea of beauty at all, or if we had, certainly it had
become a matter of indifference to us, and of little thought, whereas
through the beneficent ordaining of degrees in its manifestation, the
hearts of men are stirred by its occasional occurrence in its noblest
form, and all their energies are awakened in the pursuit of it, and
endeavor to arrest it or recreate it for themselves. But whatever doubt
there may be respecting the exact amount of modification of created
things admitted reference to us, there can be none respecting the
dignity of that faculty by which we receive the mysterious evidence of
their divine origin. The fact of our deriving constant pleasure from
whatever is a type or semblance of Divine attributes, and from nothing
but that which is so, is the most glorious of all that can be
demonstrated of human nature; it not only sets a great gulf of specific
separation between us and the lower animals, but it seems a promise of a
communion ultimately deep, close, and conscious, with the Being whose
darkened manifestations we here feebly and unthinkingly delight in.
Probably to every order of intelligence more of his image becomes
palpable in all around them, and the glorified spirits and the angels
have perceptions as much more full and rapturous than ours, as ours than
those of beasts and creeping things. And receiving it, as we must, for
an universal axiom that "no natural desire can be entirely frustrate,"
and seeing that these desires are indeed so unfailing in us that they
have escaped not the reasoners of any time, but were held divine of old,
and in even heathen countries,[30] it cannot be but that there is in
these visionary pleasures, lightly as we now regard them, cause for
thankfulness, ground for hope, anchor for faith, more than in all the
other manifold gifts and guidances, wherewith God crowns the years, and
hedges the paths of men.


FOOTNOTES

  [30] [Greek: Hê dè teleía eudaimonía theôrêtikê tís eotin henérgeia.
    * * tois mèn gàr theois apas ho bios makarios, tois d anthrôpois,
    eph hoson homoiôma ti tês toiantês henergeias hupárchei. tôn d
    hallôn zôôn oudèn èudaimonei. hepeidê oudamê koinônei
    theôrias.]--Arist. Eth. Lib. 10th. The concluding book of the Ethics
    should be carefully read. It is all most valuable.




                               CHAPTER XII.

                   OF VITAL BEAUTY. FIRST, AS RELATIVE.


§ 1. Transition from typical to vital Beauty.

I proceed more particularly to examine the nature of that second kind of
beauty of which I spoke in the third chapter, as consisting in "the
appearance of felicitous fulfilment of function in living things." I
have already noticed the example of very pure and high typical beauty
which is to be found in the lines and gradations of unsullied snow: if,
passing to the edge of a sheet of it, upon the lower Alps, early in May,
we find, as we are nearly sure to find, two or three little round
openings pierced in it, and through these emergent, a slender, pensive,
fragile flower[31] whose small dark, purple-fringed bell hangs down and
shudders over the icy cleft that it has cloven, as if partly wondering
at its own recent grave, and partly dying of very fatigue after its hard
won victory; we shall be, or we ought to be, moved by a totally
different impression of loveliness from that which we receive among the
dead ice and the idle clouds. There is now uttered to us a call for
sympathy, now offered to us an image of moral purpose and achievement,
which, however unconscious or senseless the creature may indeed be that
so seems to call, cannot be heard without affection, nor contemplated
without worship, by any of us whose heart is rightly tuned, or whose
mind is clearly and surely sighted.

Throughout the whole of the organic creation every being in a perfect
state exhibits certain appearances, or evidences, of happiness, and
besides is in its nature, its desires, its modes of nourishment,
habitation, and death, illustrative or expressive of certain moral
dispositions or principles. Now, first, in the keenness of the sympathy
which we feel in the happiness, real or apparent, of all organic beings,
and which, as we shall presently see, invariably prompts us, from the
joy we have in it, to look upon those as most lovely which are most
happy; and secondly, in the justness of the moral sense which rightly
reads the lesson they are all intended to teach, and classes them in
orders of worthiness and beauty according to the rank and nature of that
lesson, whether it be of warning or example, of those that wallow or of
those that soar, of the fiend-hunted swine by the Gennesaret lake, or of
the dove returning to its ark of rest; in our right accepting and
reading of all this, consists, I say, the ultimately perfect condition
of that noble theoretic faculty, whose place in the system of our nature
I have already partly vindicated with respect to typical, but which can
only fully be established with respect to vital beauty.


§ 2. The perfection of the theoretic faculty as concerned with vital
       beauty, is charity.

Its first perfection, therefore, relating to vital beauty, is the
kindness and unselfish fulness of heart, which receives the utmost
amount of pleasure from the happiness of all things. Of which in high
degree the heart of man is incapable, neither what intense enjoyment the
angels may have in all that they see of things that move and live, and
in the part they take in the shedding of God's kindness upon them, can
we know or conceive: only in proportion as we draw near to God, and are
made in measure like unto him, can we increase this our possession of
charity, of which the entire essence is in God only.

Wherefore it is evident that even the ordinary exercise of this faculty
implies a condition of the whole moral being in some measure right and
healthy, and that to the entire exercise of it there is necessary the
entire perfection of the Christian character, for he who loves not God,
nor his brother, cannot love the grass beneath his feet and the
creatures that fill those spaces in the universe which he needs not, and
which live not for his uses; nay, he has seldom grace to be grateful
even to those that love him and serve him, while, on the other hand,
none can love God nor his human brother without loving all things which
his Father loves, nor without looking upon them every one as in that
respect his brethren also, and perhaps worthier than he, if in the under
concords they have to fill, their part is touched more truly. Wherefore
it is good to read of that kindness and humbleness of St. Francis of
Assisi, who spoke never to bird nor to cicala, nor even to wolf and
beast of prey, but as his brother; and so we find are moved the minds of
all good and mighty men, as in the lesson that we have from the Mariner
of Coleridge, and yet more truly and rightly taught in the Heartleap
well,

               "Never to blend our pleasure, or our pride,
                With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels,"

and again in the White Doe of Rylstone, with the added teaching of that
gift, which we have from things beneath us, in thanks for the love they
cannot equally return; that anguish of our own,

               "Is tempered and allayed by sympathies,
                Aloft ascending and descending deep,
                Even to the inferior kinds,"

so that I know not of anything more destructive of the whole theoretic
faculty, not to say of the Christian character and human intellect, than
those accursed sports in which man makes of himself, cat, tiger,
serpent, chaetodon, and alligator in one, and gathers into one
continuance of cruelty for his amusement all the devices that brutes
sparingly and at intervals use against each other for their
necessities.[32]


§ 3. Only with respect to plants, less affection than sympathy.

As we pass from those beings of whose happiness and pain we are certain
to those in which it is doubtful or only seeming, as possibly in
plants, (though I would fain hold, if I might, "the faith that every
flower, enjoys the air it breathes," neither do I ever crush or gather
one without some pain,) yet our feeling for them has in it more of
sympathy than of actual love, as receiving from them in delight far more
than we can give; for love, I think, chiefly grows in giving, at least
its essence is the desire of doing good, or giving happiness, and we
cannot feel the desire of that which we cannot conceive, so that if we
conceive not of a plant as capable of pleasure, we cannot desire to give
it pleasure, that is, we cannot love it in the entire sense of the term.

Nevertheless, the sympathy of very lofty and sensitive minds usually
reaches so far as to the conception of life in the plant, and so to
love, as with Shelley, of the sensitive plant, and Shakspeare always, as
he has taught us in the sweet voices of Ophelia and Perdita, and
Wordsworth always, as of the daffodils, and the celandine.

               "It doth not love the shower, nor seek the cold.
                This neither is its courage, nor its choice,
                But its necessity in being old,"--

and so all other great poets (that is to say, great seers;[33]) nor do I
believe that any mind, however rude, is without some slight perception
or acknowledgment of joyfulness in breathless things, as most certainly
there are none but feel instinctive delight in the appearances of such
enjoyment.


§ 4. Which is proportioned to the appearance of energy in the plants.

For it is matter of easy demonstration, that setting the characters of
typical beauty aside, the pleasure afforded by every organic form is in
proportion to its appearance of healthy vital energy; as in a rose-bush,
setting aside all considerations of gradated flushing of color and fair
folding of line, which it shares with the cloud or the snow-wreath, we
find in and through all this, certain signs pleasant and acceptable as
signs of life and enjoyment in the particular individual plant itself.
Every leaf and stalk is seen to have a function, to be constantly
exercising that function, and as it seems _solely_ for the good and
enjoyment of the plant. It is true that reflection will show us that the
plant is not living for itself alone, that its life is one of
benefaction, that it gives as well as receives, but no sense of this
whatsoever mingles with our perception of physical beauty in its forms.
Those forms which appear to be necessary to its health, the symmetry of
its leaflets, the smoothness of its stalks, the vivid green of its
shoots, are looked upon by us as signs of the plant's own happiness and
perfection; they are useless to us, except as they give us pleasure in
our sympathizing with that of the plant, and if we see a leaf withered
or shrunk or worm-eaten, we say it is ugly, and feel it to be most
painful, not because it hurts _us_, but because it seems to hurt the
plant, and conveys to us an idea of pain and disease and failure of life
in _it_.

That the amount of pleasure we receive is in exact proportion to the
appearance of vigor and sensibility in the plant, is easily proved by
observing the effect of those which show the evidences of it in the
least degree, as, for instance, any of the cacti not in flower. Their
masses are heavy and simple, their growth slow, their various parts
jointed on one to another, as if they were buckled or pinned together
instead of growing out of each other, (note the singular imposition in
many of them, the prickly pear for instance, of the fruit upon the body
of the plant, so that it looks like a swelling or disease,) and often
farther opposed by harsh truncation of line as in the cactus
truncatophylla. All these circumstances so concur to deprive the plant
of vital evidences, that we receive from it more sense of pain than of
beauty; and yet even here, the sharpness of the angles, the symmetrical
order and strength of the spines, the fresh and even color of the body,
are looked for earnestly as signs of healthy condition, our pain is
increased by their absence, and indefinitely increased if blotches, and
other appearances of bruise and decay interfere with that little life
which the plant seems to possess.

The same singular characters belong in animals to the crustacea, as to
the lobster, crab, scorpion, etc., and in great measure deprive them of
the beauty which we find in higher orders, so that we are reduced to
look for their beauty to single parts and joints, and not to the whole
animal.


§ 5. This sympathy is unselfish, and does not regard utility.

Now I wish particularly to impress upon the reader that all these
sensations of beauty in the plant arise from our unselfish sympathy with
its happiness, and not from any view of the qualities in it which may
bring good to us, nor even from our acknowledgment in it of any moral
condition beyond that of mere felicity; for such an acknowledgment,
belongs to the second operation of the theoretic faculty (compare § 2,)
and not to the sympathetic part which we are at present examining; so
that we even find that in this respect, the moment we begin to look upon
any creature as subordinate to some purpose out of itself, some of the
sense of organic beauty is lost. Thus, when we are told that the leaves
of a plant are occupied in decomposing carbonic acid, and preparing
oxygen for us, we begin to look upon it with some such indifference as
upon a gasometer. It has become a machine; some of our sense of its
happiness is gone; its emanation of inherent life is no longer pure. The
bending trunk, waving to and fro in the wind above the waterfall, is
beautiful because it is happy, though it is perfectly useless to us. The
same trunk, hewn down and thrown across the stream, has lost its beauty.
It serves as a bridge,--it has become useful; it lives not for itself,
and its beauty is gone, or what it retains is purely typical, dependent
on its lines and colors, not on its functions. Saw it into planks, and
though now adapted to become permanently useful, its whole beauty is
lost forever, or to be regained only in part when decay and ruin shall
have withdrawn it again from use, and left it to receive from the hand
of nature the velvet moss and varied lichen, which may again suggest
ideas of inherent happiness, and tint its mouldering sides with hues of
life.

There is something, I think, peculiarly beautiful and instructive in
this unselfishness of the theoretic faculty, and in its abhorrence of
all utility which is based on the pain or destruction of any creature,
for in such ministering to each other as is consistent with the essence
and energy of both, it takes delight, as in the clothing of the rock by
the herbage, and the feeding of the herbage by the stream.


§ 6. Especially with respect to animals.

§ 7. And it is destroyed by evidences of mechanism.

But still more distinct evidence of its being indeed the expression of
happiness to which we look for our first pleasure in organic form, is
to be found in the way in which we regard the bodily frame of animals:
of which it is to be noted first, that there is not anything which
causes so intense and tormenting a sense of ugliness as any scar, wound,
monstrosity, or imperfection which seems inconsistent with the animal's
ease and health; and that although in vegetables, where there is no
immediate sense of pain, we are comparatively little hurt by
excrescences and irregularities, but are sometimes even delighted with
them, and fond of them, as children of the oak-apple, and sometimes look
upon them as more interesting than the uninjured conditions, as in the
gnarled and knotted trunks of trees; yet the slightest approach to
anything of the kind in animal form is regarded with intense horror,
merely from the sense of pain it conveys. And, in the second place, it
is to be noted that whenever we dissect the animal frame, or conceive it
as dissected, and substitute in our ideas the neatness of mechanical
contrivance for the pleasure of the animal; the moment we reduce
enjoyment to ingenuity, and volition to leverage, that instant all sense
of beauty disappears. Take, for instance, the action of the limb of the
ostrich, which is beautiful so long as we see it in its swift uplifting
along the desert sands, and trace in the tread of it her scorn of the
horse and his rider, but would infinitely lose of its impressiveness, if
we could see the spring ligament playing backwards and forwards in
alternate jerks over the tubercle at the hock joint. Take again the
action of the dorsal fin of the shark tribe. So long as we observe the
uniform energy of motion in the whole frame, the lash of the tail, bound
of body, and instantaneous lowering of the dorsal, to avoid the
resistance of the water as it turns, there is high sense of organic
power and beauty. But when we dissect the dorsal, and find that its
superior ray is supported in its position by a peg in a notch at its
base, and that when the fin is to be lowered, the peg has to be taken
out, and when it is raised put in again; although we are filled with
wonder at the ingenuity of the mechanical contrivance, all our sense of
beauty is gone, and not to be recovered until we again see the fin
playing on the animal's body, apparently by its own will alone, with the
life running along its rays. It is by a beautiful ordinance of the
Creator that all these mechanisms are concealed from sight, though open
to investigation, and that in all which is outwardly manifested we seem
to see his presence rather than his workmanship, and the mysterious
breath of life, rather than the manipulation of matter.

As, therefore, it appears from all evidence that it is the sense of
felicity which we first desire in organic form, it is evident from
reason, as demonstrable by experience, that those forms will be the most
beautiful (always, observe, leaving typical beauty out of the question)
which exhibit most of power, and seem capable of most quick and joyous
sensation. Hence we find gradations of beauty from the apparent
impenetrableness of hide and slow motion of the elephant and rhinoceros,
from the foul occupation of the vulture, from the earthy struggling of
the worm, to the brilliancy of the butterfly, the buoyancy of the lark,
the swiftness of the fawn and the horse, the fair and kingly sensibility
of man.


§ 8. The second perfection of the theoretic faculty as concerned with
       life is justice of moral judgment.

Thus far then, the theoretic faculty is concerned with the happiness of
animals, and its exercise depends on the cultivation of the affections
only. Let us next observe how it is concerned with the moral functions
of animals, and therefore how it is dependent on the cultivation of
every moral sense. There is not any organic creature, but in its history
and habits it shall exemplify or illustrate to us some moral excellence
or deficiency, or some point of God's providential government, which it
is necessary for us to know. Thus the functions and the fates of animals
are distributed to them, with a variety which exhibits to us the dignity
and results of almost every passion and kind of conduct, some filthy and
slothful, pining and unhappy; some rapacious, restless, and cruel; some
ever earnest and laborious, and, I think, unhappy in their endless
labor, creatures, like the bee, that heap up riches and cannot tell who
shall gather them, and others employed like angels in endless offices of
love and praise. Of which when, in right condition of mind, we esteem
those most beautiful, whose functions are the most noble, whether as
some, in mere energy, or as others, in moral honor, so that we look with
hate on the foulness of the sloth, and the subtlety of the adder, and
the rage of the hyena: with the honor due to their earthly wisdom we
invest the earnest ant and unwearied bee; but we look with full
perception of sacred function to the tribes of burning plumage and
choral voice.[34] And so what lesson we might receive for our earthly
conduct from the creeping and laborious things, was taught us by that
earthly king who made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones (yet
thereafter was less rich towards God). But from the lips of an heavenly
King, who had not where to lay his head, we were taught what lesson we
have to learn from those higher creatures who sow not, nor reap, nor
gather into barns, for their Heavenly Father feedeth them.


§ 9. How impeded.

§ 10. The influence of moral signs in expression.

There is much difficulty in the way of our looking with this rightly
balanced judgment on the moral functions of the animal tribes, owing to
the independent and often opposing characters of typical beauty, which
are among them, as it seems, arbitrarily distributed, so that the most
fierce and cruel are often clothed in the liveliest colors, and
strengthened by the noblest forms, with this only exception, that so far
as I know, there is no high beauty in any slothful animal, but even
among those of prey, its characters exist in exalted measure upon those
that range and pursue, and are in equal degree withdrawn from those that
lie subtly and silently in the covert of the reed and fens. But that
mind only is fully disciplined in its theoretic power, which can, when
it chooses, throwing off the sympathies and repugnancies with which the
ideas of destructiveness or of innocence accustom us to regard the
animal tribes, as well as those meaner likes and dislikes which arise, I
think, from the greater or less resemblance of animal powers to our own,
can pursue the pleasures of typical beauty down to the scales of the
alligator, the coils of the serpent, and the joints of the beetle; and
again, on the other hand, regardless of the impressions of typical
beauty, accept from each creature, great or small, the more important
lessons taught by its position in creation as sufferer or chastiser, as
lowly or having dominion, as of foul habit or lofty aspiration, and from
the several perfections which all illustrate or possess, courage,
perseverance, industry, or intelligence, or, higher yet, of love and
patience, and fidelity and rejoicing, and never wearied praise. Which
moral perfections that they indeed are productive, in proportion to
their expression, of instant beauty instinctively felt, is best proved
by comparing those parts of animals in which they are definitely
expressed, as for instance the eye, of which we shall find those ugliest
which have in them no expression nor life whatever, but a corpse-like
stare, or an indefinite meaningless glaring, as in some lights, those of
owls and cats, and mostly of insects and of all creatures in which the
eye seems rather an external, optical instrument than a bodily member
through which emotion and virtue of soul may be expressed, (as
pre-eminently in the chameleon,) because the seeming want of sensibility
and vitality in a living creature is the most painful of all wants. And
next to these in ugliness come the eyes that gain vitality indeed, but
only by means of the expression of intense malignity, as in the serpent
and alligator; and next to these, to whose malignity is added the virtue
of subtlety and keenness, as of the lynx and hawk; and then, by
diminishing the malignity and increasing the expressions of
comprehensiveness and determination, we arrive at those of the lion and
eagle, and at last, by destroying malignity altogether, at the fair eye
of the herbivorous tribes, wherein the superioity of beauty consists
always in the greater or less sweetness and gentleness primarily, as in
the gazelle, camel, and ox, and in the greater or less intellect,
secondarily, as in the horse and dog, and finally, in gentleness and
intellect both in man. And again, taking the mouth, another source of
expression, we find it ugliest where it has none, as mostly in fish, or
perhaps where without gaining much in expression of any kind, it becomes
a formidable destructive instrument, as again in the alligator, and
then, by some increase of expression, we arrive at birds' beaks, wherein
there is more obtained by the different ways of setting on the mandibles
than is commonly supposed, (compare the bills of the duck and the
eagle,) and thence we reach the finely developed lips of the carnivora,
which nevertheless lose that beauty they have, in the actions of
snarling and biting, and from these we pass to the nobler because
gentler and more sensible, of the horse, camel, and fawn, and so again
up to man, only there is less traceableness of the principle in the
mouths of the lower animals, because they are in slight measure only
capable of expression, and chiefly used as instruments, and that of low
function, whereas in man the mouth is given most definitely as a means
of expression, beyond and above its lower functions. Compare the remarks
of Sir Charles Bell on this subject in his Essay on Expression, and
compare the mouth of the negro head given by him (p. 28, third edition)
with that of Raffaelle's St. Catherine. I shall illustrate the subject
farther hereafter by giving the mouth of one of the demons of Orcagna's
Inferno, with projecting incisors, and that of a fish and a swine, in
opposition to pure graminivorous and human forms; but at present it is
sufficient for my purpose to insist on the single great principle, that,
wherever expression is possible, and uninterfered with by characters of
typical beauty, which confuse the subject exceedingly as regards the
mouth, (for the typical beauty of the carnivorous lips is on a grand
scale, while it exists in very low degree in the beaks of birds,)
wherever, I say, these considerations do not interfere, the beauty of
the animal form is in exact proportion to the amount of moral or
intellectual virtue expressed by it; and wherever beauty exists at all,
there is some kind of virtue to which it is owing, as the majesty of the
lion's eye is owing not to its ferocity, but to its seriousness and
seeming intellect, and of the lion's mouth to its strength and
sensibility, and not its gnashing of teeth, nor wrinkling in its wrath;
and farther be it noted, that of the intellectual or moral virtues, the
moral are those which are attended with most beauty, so that the gentle
eye of the gazelle is fairer to look upon than the more keen glance of
men, if it be unkind.


§ 11. As also in plants.

Of the parallel effects of expression upon plants there is little to be
noted, as the mere naming of the subject cannot but bring countless
illustrations to the mind of every reader: only this, that, as we saw
they were less susceptible of our sympathetic love, owing to the absence
in them of capability of enjoyment, so they are less open to the
affections based upon the expression of moral virtue, owing to their
want of volition; so that even on those of them which are deadly and
unkind we look not without pleasure, the more because this their evil
operation cannot be by them outwardly expressed, but only by us
empirically known; so that of the outward seemings and expressions of
plants, there are few but are in some way good and therefore beautiful,
as of humility, and modesty, and love of places and things, in the
reaching out of their arms, and clasping of their tendrils; and energy
of resistance, and patience of suffering, and beneficence one towards
another in shade and protection, and to us also in scents and fruits
(for of their healing virtues, however important to us, there is no more
outward sense nor seeming than of their properties mortal or dangerous).


§ 12 Recapitulation.

Whence, in fine, looking to the whole kingdom of organic nature, we find
that our full receiving of its beauty depends first on the sensibility
and then on the accuracy and touchstone faithfulness of the heart in its
moral judgments, so that it is necessary that we should not only love
all creatures well, but esteem them in that order which is according to
God's laws and not according to our own human passions and
predilections, not looking for swiftness, and strength, and cunning,
rather than for patience and kindness, still less delighting in their
animosity and cruelty one towards another, neither, if it may be
avoided, interfering with the working of nature in any way, nor, when we
interfere to obtain service, judging from the morbid conditions of the
animal or vegetable so induced; for we see every day the theoretic
faculty entirely destroyed in those who are interested in particular
animals, by their delight in the results of their own teaching, and by
the vain straining of curiosity for new forms such as nature never
intended, as the disgusting types for instance, which we see earnestly
sought for by the fanciers of rabbits and pigeons, and constantly in
horses, substituting for the true and balanced beauty of the free
creature some morbid development of a single power, as of swiftness in
the racer, at the expense, in certain measure, of the animal's healthy
constitution and fineness of form; and so the delight of horticulturists
in the spoiling of plants; so that in all cases we are to beware of such
opinions as seem in any way referable to human pride, or even to the
grateful or pernicious influence of things upon ourselves, and to cast
the mind free, and out of ourselves, humbly, and yet always in that
noble position of pause above the other visible creatures, nearer God
than they, which we authoritatively hold, thence looking down upon them,
and testing the clearness of our moral vision by the extent, and
fulness, and constancy of our pleasure in the light of God's love as it
embraces them, and the harmony of his holy laws, that forever bring
mercy out of rapine, and religion out of wrath.


FOOTNOTES

  [31] Soldanella Alpina.

  [32] I would have Mr. Landseer, before he gives us any more writhing
    otters, or yelping packs, reflect whether that which is best worthy
    of contemplation in a hound be its ferocity, or in an otter its
    agony, or in a human being its victory, hardly achieved even with
    the aid of its more sagacious brutal allies over a poor little
    fish-catching creature, a foot long.

  [33] Compare Milton.

                          "They at her coming sprung
               And touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew"

  [34]        "Type of the wise--who soar, but never roam,
               True to the kindred points of heaven and home."
                               (WORDSWORTH.--To the Skylark.)




                                CHAPTER XIII.

                   OF VITAL BEAUTY.--SECONDLY AS GENERIC.


§ 1. The beauty of fulfilment of appointed function in every animal.

Hitherto we have observed the conclusions of the theoretic faculty with
respect to the relations of happiness, and of more or less exalted
function existing between different orders of organic being. But we must
pursue the inquiry farther yet, and observe what impressions of beauty
are connected with more or less perfect fulfilment of the appointed
function by different individuals of the same species. We are now no
longer called to pronounce upon worthiness of occupation or dignity of
disposition; but both employment and capacity being known, and the
animal's position and duty fixed, we have to regard it in that respect
alone, comparing it with other individuals of its species, and to
determine how far it worthily executes its office; whether, if scorpion,
it hath poison enough, or if tiger, strength enough, or if dove,
innocence enough, to sustain rightly its place in creation, and come up
to the perfect idea of dove, tiger, or scorpion.

In the first or sympathetic operation of the theoretic faculty, it will
be remembered, we receive pleasure from the signs of mere happiness in
living things. In the second theoretic operation of comparing and
judging, we constituted ourselves such judges of the lower creatures as
Adam was made by God when they were brought to him to be named, and we
allowed of beauty in them as they reached, more or less, to that
standard of moral perfection by which we test ourselves. But, in the
third place, we are to come down again from the judgment seat, and
taking it for granted that every creature of God is in some way good,
and has a duty and specific operation providentially accessory to the
well-being of all, we are to look in this faith to that employment and
nature of each, and to derive pleasure from their entire perfection and
fitness for the duty they have to do, and in their entire fulfilment of
it: and so we are to take pleasure and find beauty in the magnificent
binding together of the jaws of the ichthyosaurus for catching and
holding, and in the adaptation of the lion for springing, and of the
locust for destroying, and of the lark for singing, and in every
creature for the doing of that which God has made it to do. Which
faithful pleasure in the perception of the perfect operation of lower
creatures I have placed last among the perfections of the theoretic
faculty concerning them, because it is commonly last acquired, both
owing to the humbleness and trustfulness of heart which it demands, and
because it implies a knowledge of the habits and structure of every
creature, such as we can but imperfectly possess.


§ 2. The two senses of the word "ideal." Either it refers to action of
       the imagination.

The perfect _idea_ of the form and condition in which all the properties
of the species are fully developed, is called the ideal of the species.
The question of the nature of ideal conception of species, and of the
mode in which the mind arrives at it, has been the subject of so much
discussion, and source of so much embarrassment, chiefly owing to that
unfortunate distinction between idealism and realism which leads most
people to imagine the ideal opposed to the real, and therefore _false_,
that I think it necessary to request the reader's most careful attention
to the following positions.

Any work of art which represents, not a material object, but the mental
conception of a material object, is, in the primary sense of the word
ideal; that is to say, it represents an idea, and not a thing. Any work
of art which represents or realizes a material object, is, in the
primary sense of the term, unideal.

Ideal works of art, therefore, in this first sense, represent the result
of an act of imagination, and are good or bad in proportion to the
healthy condition and general power of the imagination, whose acts they
represent.

Unideal works of art (the studious production of which is termed
realism) represent actual existing things, and are good or bad in
proportion to the perfection of the representation.

All entirely bad works of art may be divided into those which,
professing to be imaginative, bear no stamp of imagination, and are
therefore false, and those which, professing to be representative of
matter, miss of the representation and are therefore nugatory.

It is the habit of most observers to regard art as representative of
matter, and to look only for the entireness of representation; and it
was to this view of art that I limited the arguments of the former
sections of the present work, wherein having to oppose the conclusions
of a criticism entirely based upon the realist system, I was compelled
to meet that criticism on its own grounds. But the greater part of works
of art, more especially those devoted to the expression of ideas of
beauty, are the results of the agency of imagination, their worthiness
depending, as above stated, on the healthy condition of the imagination.

Hence it is necessary for us, in order to arrive at conclusions
respecting the worthiness of such works, to define and examine the
nature of the imaginative faculty, and to determine first what are the
signs or conditions of its existence at all; and secondly, what are the
evidences of its healthy and efficient existence, upon which examination
I shall enter in the second section of the present part.


§ 3. Or to perfection of type.

But there is another sense of the word ideal besides this, and it is
that with which we are here concerned. It is evident that, so long as we
use the word to signify that art which represents ideas and not things,
we may use it as truly of the art which represents an idea of Caliban,
and not real Caliban, as of the art which represents an idea of
Antinous, and not real Antinous. For that is as much imagination which
conceives the monster as which conceives the man. If, however, Caliban
and Antinous be creatures of the same species, and the form of the one
contain not the fully developed types or characters of the species,
while the form of the other presents the greater part of them, then the
latter is said to be a form more ideal than the other, as a nearer
approximation to the general idea or conception of the species.


§ 4. This last sense how inaccurate, yet to be retained.

Now it is evident that this use of the word ideal is much less accurate
than the other, from which it is derived, for it rests on the assumption
that the assemblage of all the characters of a species in their perfect
development cannot exist but in the imagination. For if it can actually
and in reality exist, it is not right to call it ideal or imaginary; it
would be better to call it characteristic or general, and to reserve the
word ideal for the results of the operation of the imagination, either
on the perfect or imperfect forms.

Nevertheless, the word ideal has been so long and universally accepted
in this sense, that I think it better to continue the use of it, so only
that the reader will be careful to observe the distinction in the sense,
according to the subject matter under discussion. At present then, using
it as expressive of the noble generic form which indicates the full
perfection of the creature in all its functions, I wish to examine how
far this perception exists or may exist in nature, and if not in nature,
how it is by us discoverable or imaginable.


§ 5. Of Ideal form. First, in the lower animals.

Now it is better, when we wish to arrive at truth, always to take
familiar instances, wherein the mind is not likely to be biassed by any
elevated associations or favorite theories. Let us ask therefore, first,
what kind of ideal form may be attributed to a limpet or an oyster, that
is to say, whether all oysters do or do not come up to the entire notion
or idea of an oyster. I apprehend that, although in respect of size,
age, and kind of feeding, there may be some difference between them, yet
of those which are of full size and healthy condition there will be
found many which fulfil the conditions of an oyster in every respect,
and that so perfectly, that we could not, by combining the features of
two or more together, produce a more perfect oyster than any that we
see. I suppose also, that, out of a number of healthy fish, birds, or
beasts of the same species, it would not be easy to select an individual
as superior to _all_ the rest; neither by comparing two or more of the
nobler examples together, to arrive at the conception of a form superior
to that of either; but that, though the accidents of more abundant food
or more fitting habitation may induce among them some varieties of size,
strength, and color, yet the entire generic form would be presented by
many, neither would any art be able to add to or diminish from it.


§ 6. In what consistent.

It is, therefore, hardly right to use the word ideal of the generic
forms of these creatures, of which we see actual examples; but if we are
to use it, then be it distinctly understood that their ideality consists
in the full development of all the powers and properties of the creature
as such, and is inconsistent with accidental or imperfect developments,
and even with great variation from average size, the ideal size being
neither gigantic nor diminutive, but the utmost grandeur and entireness
of proportion at a certain point above the mean size; for as more
individuals always fall short of generic size than rise above it, the
generic is above the average or mean size. And this perfection of the
creature invariably involves the utmost possible degree of all those
properties of beauty, both typical and vital, which it is appointed to
possess.


§ 7. Ideal form in vegetables.

Let us next observe the conditions of ideality in vegetables. Out of a
large number of primroses or violets, I apprehend that, although one or
two might be larger than all the rest, the greater part would be very
sufficient primroses and violets. And that we could, by no study nor
combination of violets, conceive of a better violet than many in the
bed. And so generally of the blossoms and separate members of all
vegetables.

But among the entire forms of the complex vegetables, as of oak-trees,
for instance, there exists very large and constant difference, some
being what we hold to be fine oaks, as in parks, and places where they
are taken care of, and have their own way, and some are but poor and
mean oaks, which have had no one to take care of them, but have been
obliged to maintain themselves.

That which we have to determine is, whether ideality be predicable of
the fine oaks only, or whether the poor and mean oaks also may be
considered as ideal, that is, coming up to the conditions of oak, and
the general notion of oak.


§ 8. The difference of position between plants and animals.

Now there is this difference between the positions held in creation by
animals and plants, and thence in the dispositions with which we regard
them; that the animals, being for the most part locomotive, are capable
both of living where they choose, and of obtaining what food they want,
and of fulfilling all the conditions necessary to their health and
perfection. For which reason they are answerable for such health and
perfection, and we should be displeased and hurt if we did not find it
in one individual as well as another.


§ 9. Admits of variety in the ideal of the former.

But the case is evidently different with plants. They are intended
fixedly to occupy many places comparatively unfit for them, and to fill
up all the spaces where greenness, and coolness, and ornament, and
oxygen are wanted, and that with very little reference to their comfort
or convenience. Now it would be hard upon the plant if, after being tied
to a particular spot, where it is indeed much wanted, and is a great
blessing, but where it has enough to do to live, whence it cannot move
to obtain what it wants or likes, but must stretch its unfortunate arms
here and there for bare breath and light, and split its way among rocks,
and grope for sustenance in unkindly soil; it would be hard upon the
plant, I say, if under all these disadvantages, it were made answerable
for its appearance, and found fault with because it was not a fine plant
of the kind. And so we find it ordained that in order that no unkind
comparisons may be drawn between one and another, there are not
appointed to plants the fixed number, position, and proportion of
members which are ordained in animals, (and any variation from which in
these is unpardonable,) but a continually varying number and position,
even among the more freely growing examples, admitting therefore all
kinds of license to those which have enemies to contend with, and that
without in any way detracting from their dignity and perfection.

So then there is in trees no perfect form which can be fixed upon or
reasoned out as ideal; but that is always an ideal oak which, however
poverty-stricken, or hunger-pinched, or tempest-tortured, is yet seen to
have done, under its appointed circumstances, all that could be expected
of oak.

The ideal, therefore, of the park oak is that to which I alluded in the
conclusion of the former part of this work, full size, united terminal
curve, equal and symmetrical range of branches on each side. The ideal
of the mountain oak may be anything, twisting, and leaning, and
shattered, and rock-encumbered, so only that amidst all its misfortunes,
it maintain the dignity of oak; and, indeed, I look upon this kind of
tree as more ideal than the other, in so far as by its efforts and
struggles, more of its nature, enduring power, patience in waiting for,
and ingenuity in obtaining what it wants, is brought out, and so more of
the essence of oak exhibited, than under more fortunate conditions.


§ 10. Ideal form in vegetables destroyed by cultivation.

And herein, then, we at last find the cause of that fact which we have
twice already noted, that the exalted or seemingly improved condition,
whether of plant or animal, induced by human interference, is not the
true and artistical ideal of it.[35] It has been well shown by Dr.
Herbert,[36] that many plants are found alone on a certain soil or
subsoil in a wild state, not because such soil is favorable to them, but
because they alone are capable of existing on it, and because all
dangerous rivals are by its inhospitality removed. Now if we withdraw
the plant from this position, which it hardly endures, and supply it
with the earth, and maintain about it the temperature that it delights
in; withdrawing from it at the same time all rivals which, in such
conditions nature would have thrust upon it, we shall indeed obtain a
magnificently developed example of the plant, colossal in size, and
splendid in organization, but we shall utterly lose in it that moral
ideal which is dependent on its right fulfilment of its appointed
functions. It was intended and created by the Deity for the covering of
those lonely spots where no other plant could live; it has been thereto
endowed with courage, and strength, and capacities of endurance
unequalled; its character and glory are not therefore in the gluttonous
and idle feeling of its own over luxuriance, at the expense of other
creatures utterly destroyed and rooted out for its good alone, but in
its right doing of its hard duty; and forward climbing into those spots
of forlorn hope where it alone can bear witness to the kindness and
presence of the Spirit that cutteth out rivers among the rocks, as it
covers the valleys with corn: and there, in its vanward place, and only
there, where nothing is withdrawn for it, nor hurt by it, and where
nothing can take part of its honor, nor usurp its throne, are its
strength, and fairness, and price, and goodness in the sight of God, to
be truly esteemed.


§ 11. Instance in the Soldanella and Ranunculus.

The first time that I saw the soldanella alpina, before spoken of, it
was growing, of magnificent size, on a sunny Alpine pasture, among
bleating of sheep and lowing of cattle, associated with a profusion of
geum montanum, and ranunculus pyrenæus. I noticed it only because new to
me, nor perceived any peculiar beauty in its cloven flower. Some days
after, I found it alone, among the rack of the higher clouds, and
howling of glacier winds, and, as I described it, piercing through an
edge of avalanche, which in its retiring had left the new ground brown
and lifeless, and as if burned by recent fire; the plant was poor and
feeble, and seemingly exhausted with its efforts, but it was then that I
comprehended its ideal character, and saw its noble function and order
of glory among the constellations of the earth.

The ranunculus glacialis might perhaps, by cultivation, be blanched from
its wan and corpse-like paleness to purer white, and won to more
branched and lofty development of its ragged leaves. But the ideal of
the plant is to be found only in the last, loose stones of the moraine,
alone there; wet with the cold, unkindly drip of the glacier water, and
trembling as the loose and steep dust to which it clings yields ever and
anon, and shudders and crumbles away from about its root.


§ 12. The beauty of repose and felicity, how consistent with such ideal.

And if it be asked how this conception of the utmost beauty of ideal
form is consistent with what we formerly argued respecting the
pleasantness of the appearance of felicity in the creature, let it be
observed, and forever held, that the right and true happiness of every
creature, is in this very discharge of its function, and in those
efforts by which its strength and inherent energy are developed: and
that the repose of which we also spoke as necessary to all beauty, is,
as was then stated, repose not of inanition, nor of luxury, nor of
irresolution, but the repose of magnificent energy and being; in action,
the calmness of trust and determination; in rest, the consciousness of
duty accomplished and of victory won, and this repose and this felicity
can take place as well in the midst of trial and tempest, as beside the
waters of comfort; they perish only when the creature is either
unfaithful to itself, or is afflicted by circumstances unnatural and
malignant to its being, and for the contending with which it was neither
fitted nor ordained. Hence that rest which is indeed glorious is of the
chamois couched breathless on his granite bed, not of the stalled ox
over his fodder, and that happiness which is indeed beautiful is in the
bearing of those trial tests which are appointed for the proving of
every creature, whether it be good, or whether it be evil; and in the
fulfilment to the uttermost of every command it has received, and the
out-carrying to the uttermost of every power and gift it has gotten from
its God.


§ 13. The ideality of Art.

Therefore the task of the painter in his pursuit of ideal form is to
attain accurate knowledge, so far as may be in his power, of the
character, habits, and peculiar virtues and duties of every species of
being; down even to the stone, for there is an ideality of stones
according to their kind, an ideality of granite and slate and marble,
and it is in the utmost and most exalted exhibition of such individual
character, order, and use, that all ideality of art consists. The more
cautious he is in assigning the right species of moss to its favorite
trunk, and the right kind of weed to its necessary stone, in marking the
definite and characteristic leaf, blossom, seed, fracture, color, and
inward anatomy of everything, the more truly ideal his work becomes. All
confusion of species, all careless rendering of character, all unnatural
and arbitrary association, is vulgar and unideal in proportion to its
degree.


§ 14. How connected with the imaginative faculties.

It is to be noted, however, that nature sometimes in a measure herself
conceals these generic differences, and that when she displays them it
is commonly on a scale too small for human hand to follow.

The pursuit and seizure of the generic differences in their concealment,
and the display of them on a larger and more palpable scale, is one of
the wholesome and healthy operations of the imagination of which we are
presently to speak.[37]

Generic differences being commonly exhibited by art in different manner
and way from that of their natural occurrence, are in this respect more
strictly and truly ideal in art than in reality.


§ 15. Ideality, how belonging to ages and conditions.

This only remains to be noted, that, of all creatures whose existence
involves birth, progress, and dissolution, ideality is predicable all
through their existence, so that they be perfect with reference to their
supposed period of being. Thus there is an ideal of infancy, of youth,
of old age, of death, and of decay. But when the ideal form of the
species is spoken of or conceived in general terms, the form is
understood to be of that period when the generic attributes are
perfectly developed, and previous to the commencement of their decline.
At which period all the characters of vital and typical beauty are
commonly most concentrated in them, though the arrangement and
proportion of these characters varies at different periods, youth having
more of the vigorous beauty, and age of the reposing; youth of typical
outward fairness, and age of expanded and etherealized moral expression;
the babe, again, in some measure atoning in gracefulness for its want of
strength, so that the balanced glory of the creature continues in solemn
interchange, perhaps even

               "Filling more and more with crystal light,
                As pensive evening deepens into night."

Hitherto, however, we have confined ourselves to the examination of
ideal form in the lower animals, and we have found that, to arrive at
it, no combination of forms nor exertion of fancy is required, but only
simple choice among those naturally presented, together with careful
investigation and anatomizing of the habits of the creatures. I fear we
shall arrive at a very different conclusion, in considering the ideal
form of man.


FOOTNOTES

  [35] I speak not here of those conditions of vegetation which have
    especial reference to man, as of seeds and fruits, whose sweetness
    and farina seem in great measure given, not for the plant's sake,
    but for his, and to which therefore the interruption in the harmony
    of creation of which he was the cause is extended, and their
    sweetness and larger measure of good to be obtained only by his
    redeeming labor. His curse has fallen on the corn and the vine, and
    the wild barley misses of its fulness, that he may eat bread by the
    sweat of his brow.

  [36] Journal of the Horticultural Society. Part I.

  [37] Compare Sect. II. Chap. IV.




                               CHAPTER XIV.

                     OF VITAL BEAUTY.--THIRDLY, IN MAN.


§ 1. Condition of the human creature entirely different from that of the
       lower animals.

Having thus passed gradually through all the orders and fields of
creation, and traversed that goodly line of God's happy creatures who
"leap not, but express a feast, where all the guests sit close, and
nothing wants," without finding any deficiency which human invention
might supply, nor any harm which human interference might mend, we come
at last to set ourselves face to face with ourselves, expecting that in
creatures made after the image of God we are to find comeliness and
completion more exquisite than in the fowls of the air and the things
that pass through the paths of the sea.

But behold now a sudden change from all former experience. No longer
among the individuals of the race is there equality or likeness, a
distributed fairness and fixed type visible in each, but evil diversity,
and terrible stamp of various degradation; features seamed with
sickness, dimmed by sensuality, convulsed by passion, pinched by
poverty, shadowed by sorrow, branded with remorse; bodies consumed with
sloth, broken down by labor, tortured by disease, dishonored in foul
uses; intellects without power, hearts without hope, minds earthly and
devilish; our bones full of the sin of our youth, the heaven revealing
our iniquity, the earth rising up against us, the roots dried up
beneath, and the branch cut off above; well for us only, if, after
beholding this our natural face in a glass, we desire not straightway to
forget what manner of men we be.


§ 2. What room here for idealization.

Herein there is at last something, and too much, for that short stopping
intelligence and dull perception of ours to accomplish, whether in
earnest fact, or in the seeking for the outward image of beauty:--to
undo the devil's work, to restore to the body the grace and the power
which inherited disease has destroyed, to return to the spirit the
purity, and to the intellect the grasp that they had in Paradise. Now,
first of all, this work, be it observed is in no respect a work of
imagination. Wrecked we are, and nearly all to pieces; but that little
good by which we are to redeem ourselves is to be got out of the old
wreck, beaten about and full of sand though it be; and not out of that
desert island of pride on which the devils split first, and we after
them: and so the only restoration of the body that we can reach is not
to be coined out of our fancies, but to be collected out of such
uninjured and bright vestiges of the old seal as we can find and set
together, and so the ideal of the features, as the good and perfect soul
is seen in them, is not to be reached by imagination, but by the seeing
and reaching forth of the better part of the soul to that of which it
must first know the sweetness and goodness in itself, before it can much
desire, or rightly find, the signs of it in others.

I say much desire and rightly find, because there is not any soul so
sunk but that it shall in some measure feel the impression of mental
beauty in the human features, and detest in others its own likeness, and
in itself despise that which of itself it has made.


§ 3. How the conception of the bodily ideal is reached.

Now, of the ordinary process by which the realization of ideal bodily
form is reached, there is explanation enough in all treatises on art,
and it is so far well comprehended that I need not stay long to consider
it. So far as the sight and knowledge of the human form, of the purest
race, exercised from infancy constantly, but not excessively in all
exercises of dignity, not in twists and straining dexterities, but in
natural exercises of running, casting, or riding; practised in
endurance, not of extraordinary hardship, for that hardens and degrades
the body, but of natural hardship, vicissitudes of winter and summer,
and cold and heat, yet in a climate where none of these are severe;
surrounded also by a certain degree of right luxury, so as to soften and
refine the forms of strength; so far as the sight of all this could
render the mental intelligence of what is right in human form so acute
as to be able to abstract and combine from the best examples so
produced, that which was most perfect in each, so far the Greek
conceived and attained the ideal of bodily form: and on the Greek modes
of attaining it, as well as on what he produced, as a perfect example of
it, chiefly dwell those writers whose opinions on this subject I have
collected; wholly losing sight of what seems to me the most important
branch of the inquiry, namely, the influence for good or evil of the
mind upon the bodily shape, the wreck of the mind itself, and the modes
by which we may conceive of its restoration.


§ 4. Modifications of the bodily ideal owing to influence of mind.
       First, of intellect.

Now, the operation of the mind upon the body, and evidence of it
thereon, may be considered under the following three general heads.

First, the operation of the intellectual powers upon the features, in
the fine cutting and chiselling of them, and removal from them of signs
of sensuality and sloth, by which they are blunted and deadened, and
substitution of energy and intensity for vacancy and insipidity, (by
which wants alone the faces of many fair women are utterly spoiled and
rendered valueless,) and by the keenness given to the eye and fine
moulding and development to the brow, of which effects Sir Charles Bell
has well noted the desirableness and opposition to brutal types, (p. 59,
third edition;) only this he has not sufficiently observed, that there
are certain virtues of the intellect in measure inconsistent with each
other, as perhaps great subtlety with great comprehensiveness, and high
analytical with high imaginative power, or that at least, if consistent
and compatible, their signs upon the features are not the same, so that
the outward form cannot express both, without in a measure expressing
neither; and so there are certain separate virtues of the outward form
correspondent with the more constant employment or more prevailing
capacity of the brain, as the piercing keenness, or open and reflective
comprehensiveness of the eye and forehead, and that all these virtues of
form are ideal, only those the most so which are the signs of the
worthiest powers of intellect, though which these be, we will not at
present stay to inquire.


§ 5. Secondly, of the moral feelings.

§ 6. What beauty is bestowed by them

The second point to be considered in the influence of mind upon body, is
the mode of operation and conjunction of the moral feelings on and with
the intellectual powers, and then their conjoint influence on the bodily
form. Now, the operation of the right moral feelings on the intellect is
always for the good of the latter, for it is not possible that
selfishness should reason rightly in any respect, but must be blind in
its estimation of the worthiness of all things, neither anger, for that
overpowers the reason or outcries it, neither sensuality, for that
overgrows and chokes it, neither agitation, for that has no time to
compare things together, neither enmity, for that must be unjust,
neither fear, for that exaggerates all things, neither cunning and
deceit, for that which is voluntarily untrue will soon be unwittingly
so: but the great reasoners are self-command, and trust unagitated, and
deep-looking Love, and Faith, which as she is above Reason, so she best
holds the reins of it from her high seat: so that they err grossly who
think of the right development even of the intellectual type as
possible, unless we look to higher sources of beauty first.
Nevertheless, though in their operation _upon_ them the moral feelings
are thus elevatory of the mental faculties, yet in their conjunction
_with_ them they seem to occupy, in their own fulness, such room as to
absorb and overshadow all else, so that the simultaneous exercise of
both is in a sort impossible; for which cause we occasionally find the
moral part in full development and action, without corresponding
expanding of the intellect (though never without healthy condition of
it,) as in that of Wordsworth,

                     "In such high hour
               Of visitation from the Living God,
               Thought was not;"

only I think that if we look far enough, we shall find that it is not
intelligence itself, but the immediate act and effort of a laborious,
struggling, and imperfect intellectual faculty, with which high moral
emotion is inconsistent; and that though we cannot, while we feel
deeply, reason shrewdly, yet I doubt if, _except_ when we feel deeply,
we can ever comprehend fully; so that it is only the climbing and
mole-like piercing, and not the sitting upon their central throne, nor
emergence into light, of the intellectual faculties which the full heart
feeling allows not. Hence, therefore, in the indications of the
countenance, they are only the hard cut lines, and rigid settings, and
wasted hollows, that speak of past effort and painfulness of mental
application, which are inconsistent with expression of moral feeling,
for all these are of infelicitous augury; but not the full and serene
development of habitual command in the look, and solemn thought in the
brow, only these, in their unison with the signs of emotion, become
softened and gradually confounded with a serenity and authority of
nobler origin. But of the sweetness which that higher serenity (of
happiness,) and the dignity which that higher authority (of Divine law,
and not human reason,) can and must stamp on the features, it would be
futile to speak here at length, for I suppose that both are acknowledged
on all hands, and that there is not any beauty but theirs to which men
pay long obedience: at all events, if not by sympathy discovered, it is
not in words explicable with what divine lines and lights the exercise
of godliness and charity will mould and gild the hardest and coldest
countenance, neither to what darkness their departure will consign the
loveliest. For there is not any virtue the exercise of which, even
momentarily, will not impress a new fairness upon the features, neither
on them only, but on the whole body, both the intelligence and the moral
faculties have operation, for even all the movement and gestures,
however slight, are different in their modes according to the mind that
governs them, and on the gentleness and decision of just feeling there
follows a grace of action, and through continuance of this a grace of
form, which by no discipline may be taught or attained.


§ 7. How the soul culture interferes harmfully with the bodily ideal.

The third point to be considered with respect to the corporeal
expression of mental character is, that there is a certain period of the
soul culture when it begins to interfere with some of the characters of
typical beauty belonging to the bodily frame, the stirring of the
intellect wearing down the flesh, and the moral enthusiasm burning its
way out to heaven, through the emaciation of the earthen vessel; and
that there is, in this indication of subduing of the mortal by the
immortal part, an ideal glory of perhaps a purer and higher range than
that of the more perfect material form. We conceive, I think, more nobly
of the weak presence of Paul, than of the fair and ruddy countenance of
Daniel.


§ 8. The inconsistency among the effects of the mental virtues on the
       form.

§ 9. Is a sign of God's kind purpose towards the race.

§ 10. Consequent separation and difference of ideals.

Now, be it observed that in our consideration of these three directions
of mental influence, we have several times been compelled to stop short
of definite conclusions owing to the apparent inconsistency of certain
excellences and beauties to which they tend, as, first, of different
kinds of intellect with each other; and secondly, of the moral faculties
with the intellectual, (and if we had separately examined the moral
emotions, we should have found certain inconsistencies among them also,)
and again of the soul culture generally with the bodily perfections.
Such inconsistencies we should find in the perfections of no other
animal. The strength or swiftness of the dog are not inconsistent with
his sagacity, nor is bodily labor in the ant or bee destructive of their
acuteness of instinct. And this peculiarity of relation among the
perfections of man is no result of his fall or sinfulness, but an
evidence of his greater nobility, and of the goodness of God towards
him. For the individuals of each race of lower animals, being not
intended to hold among each other those relations of charity which are
the privilege of humanity, are not adapted to each other's assistance,
admiration, or support, by differences of power and function. But the
love of the human race is increased by their individual differences, and
the unity of the creature, as before we saw of all unity, made perfect
by each having something to bestow and to receive, bound to the rest by
a thousand various necessities and various gratitudes, humility in each
rejoicing to admire in his fellow that which he finds not in himself,
and each being in some respect the complement of his race. Therefore, in
investigating the signs of the ideal or perfect type of humanity, we
must not presume on the singleness of that type, and yet, on the other
hand, we must cautiously distinguish between differences conceivably
existing in a perfect state, and differences resulting from immediate
and present operation of the Adamite curse. Of which the former are
differences that bind, and the latter that separate. For although we can
suppose the ideal or perfect human heart, and the perfect human
intelligence, equally adapted to receive every right sensation and
pursue every order of truth, yet as it is appointed for some to be in
authority and others in obedience, some in solitary functions and others
in relative ones, some to receive and others to give, some to teach and
some to discover; and as all these varieties of office are not only
conceivable as existing in a perfect state of man, but seem almost to be
implied by it, and at any rate cannot be done away with but by a total
change of his constitution and dependencies, of which the imagination
can take no hold; so there are habits and capacities of expression
induced by these various offices, which admit of many separate ideals of
equal perfection, according to the functions of the creatures, so that
there is an ideal of authority, of judgment, of affection, of reason,
and of faith; neither can any combination of these ideals be attained,
not that the just judge is to be supposed incapable of affection, nor
the king incapable of obedience, but as it is impossible that any
essence short of the Divine should at the same instant be equally
receptive of all emotions, those emotions which, by right and order,
have the most usual victory, both leave the stamp of their habitual
presence on the body, and render the individual more and more
susceptible of them in proportion to the frequency of their prevalent
recurrence; added to which causes of distinctive character are to be
taken into account the differences of age and sex, which, though
seemingly of more finite influence, cannot be banished from any human
conception. David, ruddy and of a fair countenance, with the brook stone
of deliverance in his hand, is not more ideal than David leaning on the
old age of Barzillai, returning chastened to his kingly home. And they
who are as the angels of God in heaven, yet cannot be conceived as so
assimilated that their different experiences and affections upon earth
shall then be forgotten and effectless: the child taken early to his
place cannot be imagined to wear there such a body, nor to have such
thoughts, as the glorified apostle who has finished his course and kept
the faith on earth. And so whatever perfections and likeness of love we
may attribute to either the tried or the crowned creatures, there is the
difference of the stars in glory among them yet; differences of original
gifts, though not of occupying till their Lord come, different
dispensations of trial and of trust, of sorrow and support, both in
their own inward, variable hearts, and in their positions of exposure or
of peace, of the gourd shadow and the smiting sun, of calling at heat of
day or eleventh hour, of the house unroofed by faith, and the clouds
opened by revelation: differences in warning, in mercies, in sicknesses,
in signs, in time of calling to account; like only they all are by that
which is not of them, but the gift of God's unchangeable mercy. "I will
give unto this last even as unto thee."


§ 11. The _effects_ of the Adamite curse are to be distinguished from
        signs of its immediate activity.

§ 12. Which latter only are to be banished from ideal form.

Hence, then, be it observed, that what we must determinedly banish from
the human form and countenance in our seeking of its ideal, is not
everything which can be ultimately traced to the Adamite fall for its
cause, but only the immediate operation and presence of the degrading
power or sin. For there is not any part of our feeling of nature, nor
can there be through eternity, which shall not be in some way influenced
and affected by the fall, and that not in any way of degradation, for
the renewing in the divinity of Christ is a nobler condition than ever
that of Paradise, and yet throughout eternity it must imply and refer to
the disobedience, and the corrupt state of sin and death, and the
suffering of Christ himself, which can we conceive of any redeemed soul
as for an instant forgetting, or as remembering without sorrow? Neither
are the alternations of joy and such sorrow as by us is inconceivable,
being only as it were a softness and silence in the pulse of an infinite
felicity, inconsistent with the state even of the unfallen, for the
angels who rejoice over repentance cannot but feel an uncomprehended
pain as they try and try again in vain, whether they may not warm hard
hearts with the brooding of their kind wings. So that we have not to
banish from the ideal countenance the evidences of sorrow, nor of past
suffering, nor even of past and conquered sin, but only the immediate
operation of any evil, or the immediate coldness and hollowness of any
good emotion. And hence in that contest before noted, between the body
and the soul, we may often have to indicate the body as far conquered
and outworn, and with signs of hard struggle and bitter pain upon it,
and yet without ever diminishing the purity of its ideal; and because it
is not in the power of any human imagination to reason out or conceive
the countless modifications of experience, suffering, and separated
feeling, which have modelled and written their indelible images in
various order upon every human countenance, so no right ideal can be
reached by any combination of feature nor by any moulding and melting of
individual beauties together, and still less without model or example
conceived; but there is a perfect ideal to be wrought out of _every_
face around us that has on its forehead the writing and the seal of the
angel ascending from the East,[38] by the earnest study and penetration
of the written history thereupon, and the banishing of the blots and
stains, wherein we still see in all that is human, the visible and
instant operation of unconquered sin.


§ 13. Ideal form is only to be obtained by portraiture.

Now I see not how any of the steps of the argument by which we have
arrived at this conclusion can be evaded, and yet it would be difficult
to state anything more directly opposite to the usual teaching and
practice of artists. It is usual to hear portraiture opposed to the
pursuit of ideality, and yet we find that no face can be ideal which is
not a portrait. Of this general principle, however, there are certain
modifications which we must presently state; let us first, however,
pursue it a little farther, and deduce its practical consequences.


§ 14. Instances among the greater of the ideal Masters.

These are, first, that the pursuit of idealism in humanity, as of
idealism in lower nature, can be successful only when followed through
the most constant, patient, and humble rendering of actual models,
accompanied with that earnest mental as well as ocular study of each,
which can interpret all that is written upon it, disentangle the
hieroglyphics of its sacred history, rend the veil of the bodily temple,
and rightly measure the relations of good and evil contending within it
for mastery,[39] that everything done without such study must be shallow
and contemptible, that generalization or combination of individual
character will end less in the mending than the losing of it, and,
except in certain instances of which we shall presently take note, is
valueless and vapid, even if it escape being painful from its want of
truth, which in these days it often in some measure does, for we indeed
find faces about us with want enough of life or wholesome character in
them to justify anything. And that habit of the old and great painters
of introducing portrait into all their highest works, I look to, not as
error in them, but as the very source and root of their superiority in
all things, for they were too great and too humble not to see in every
face about them that which was above them, and which no fancies of
theirs could match nor take place of, wherefore we find the custom of
portraiture constant with them, both portraiture of study and for
purposes of analysis, as with Leonardo; and actual, professed,
serviceable, hardworking portraiture of the men of their time, as with
Raffaelle, and Titian, and Tintoret; and portraiture of Love, as with
Fra Bartolomeo of Savonarola, and Simon Memmi of Petrarch, and Giotto of
Dante, and Gentile Bellini of a beloved imagination of Dandolo, and with
Raffaelle constantly; and portraiture in real downright necessity of
models, even in their noblest works, as was the practice of Ghirlandajo
perpetually, and Masaccio and Raffaelle, and manifestly of the men of
highest and purest ideal purpose, as again, Giotto, and in his
characteristic monkish heads, Angelico, and John Bellini, (note
especially the St. Christopher at the side of that mighty picture of St.
Jerome, at Venice,) and so of all: which practice had indeed a perilous
tendency for men of debased mind, who used models such as and where they
ought not, as Lippi and the corrupted Raffaelle; and is found often at
exceeding disadvantage among men who looked not at their models with
intellectual or loving penetration, but took the outside of them, or
perhaps took the evil and left the good, as Titian in that Academy study
at Venice which is called a St. John, and all workers whatsoever that I
know of, after Raffaelle's time, as Guido and the Caracci, and such
others: but it is nevertheless the necessary and sterling basis of all
ideal art, neither has any great man ever been able to do without it,
nor dreamed of doing without it even to the close of his days.


§ 15. Evil results of opposite practice in modern times.

And therefore there is not any greater sign of the utter want of
vitality and hopefulness in the schools of the present day than that
unhappy prettiness and sameness under which they mask, or rather for
which they barter, in their lentile thirst, all the birthright and power
of nature, which prettiness, wrought out and spun fine in the study, out
of empty heads, till it hardly betters the blocks on which dresses and
hair are tried in barbers' windows and milliners' books, cannot but be
revolting to any man who has his eyes, even in a measure, open to the
divinity of the immortal seal on the common features that he meets in
the highways and hedges hourly and momentarily, outreaching all efforts
of conception as all power of realization, were it Raffaelle's three
times over, even when the glory of the wedding garment is not there.


§ 16. The right use of the model.

So far, then, of the use of the model and the preciousness of it in all
art, from the highest to the lowest. But the use of the model is not
all. It must be used in a certain way, and on this choice of right or
wrong way all our ends are at stake, for the art, which is of no power
without the model, is of pernicious and evil power if the model be
wrongly used. What the right use is, has been at least established, if
not fully explained, in the argument by which we arrived at the general
principle.

The right ideal is to be reached, we have asserted, only by the
banishment of the immediate signs of sin upon the countenance and body.
How, therefore, are the signs of sin to be known and separated?


§ 17. Ideal form to be reached only by love.

No intellectual operation is here of any avail. There is not any
reasoning by which the evidences of depravity are to be traced in
movements of muscle or forms of feature; there is not any knowledge, nor
experience, nor diligence of comparison that can be of avail. Here, as
throughout the operation of the theoretic faculty, the perception is
altogether moral, an instinctive love and clinging to the lines of
light. Nothing but love can read the letters, nothing but sympathy catch
the sound, there is no pure passion that can be understood or painted
except by pureness of heart; the foul or blunt feeling will see itself
in everything, and set down blasphemies; it will see Beelzebub in the
casting out of devils, it will find its god of flies in every alabaster
box of precious ointment. The indignation of zeal towards God (nemesis)
it will take for anger against man, faith and veneration it will miss
of, as not comprehending, charity it will turn into lust, compassion
into pride, every virtue it will go over against, like Shimei, casting
dust. But the right Christian mind will in like manner find its own
image wherever it exists, it will seek for what it loves, and draw it
out of all dens and caves, and it will believe in its being, often when
it cannot see it, and always turn away its eyes from beholding vanity;
and so it will lie lovingly over all the faults and rough places of the
human heart, as the snow from heaven does over the hard, and black, and
broken mountain rocks, following their forms truly, and yet catching
light for them to make them fair, and that must be a steep and unkindly
crag indeed which it cannot cover.


§ 18. Practical principles deducible.

Now of this spirit there will always be little enough in the world, and
it cannot be given nor taught by men, and so it is of little use to
insist on it farther, only I may note some practical points respecting
the ideal treatment of human form, which may be of use in these
thoughtless days. There is not the face, I have said, which the painter
may not make ideal if he choose, but that subtile feeling which shall
find out all of good that there is in any given countenance is not,
except by concern for other things than art, to be acquired. But certain
broad indications of evil there are which the bluntest feeling may
perceive, and which the habit of distinguishing and casting out would
both ennoble the schools of art, and lead in time to greater acuteness
of perception with respect to the less explicable characters of soul
beauty.


§ 19. Expressions chiefly destructive of ideal character. 1st. Pride.

Those signs of evil which are commonly most manifest on the human
features are roughly divisible into these four kinds, the signs of
pride, of sensuality, of fear, and of cruelty. Any one of which will
destroy the ideal character of the countenance and body.


§ 20. Portraiture ancient and modern.

Now of these, the first, pride, is perhaps the most destructive of all
the four, seeing it is the undermost and original story of all sin; and
it is base also from the necessary foolishness of it, because at its
best, that is when grounded on a just estimation of our own elevation
or superiority above certain others, it cannot but imply that our eyes
look downward only, and have never been raised above our own measure,
for there is not the man so lofty in his standing nor capacity but he
must be humble in thinking of the cloud habitation and far sight of the
angelic intelligences above him, and in perceiving what infinity there
is of things he cannot know nor even reach unto, as it stands compared
with that little body of things he can reach, and of which nevertheless
he can altogether understand not one; not to speak of that wicked and
fond attributing of such excellency as he may have to himself, and
thinking of it as his own getting, which is the real essence and
criminality of pride, nor of those viler forms of it, founded on false
estimation of things beneath us and irrational contemning of them: but
taken at its best, it is still base to that degree that there is no
grandeur of feature which it cannot destroy and make despicable, so that
the first step towards the ennobling of any face is the ridding it of
its vanity; to which aim there cannot be anything more contrary than
that principle of portraiture which prevails with us in these days,
whose end seems to be the expression of vanity throughout, in face and
in all circumstances of accompaniment, tending constantly to insolence
of attitude, and levity and haughtiness of expression, and worked out
farther in mean accompaniments of worldly splendor and possession,
together with hints or proclamations of what the person has done or
supposes himself to have done, which, if known, it is gratuitous in the
portrait to exhibit, and if unknown, it is insolent in the portrait to
proclaim; whence has arisen such a school of portraiture as must make
the people of the nineteenth century the shame of their descendants, and
the butt of all time. To which practices are to be opposed both the
glorious severity of Holbein, and the mighty and simple modesty of
Raffaelle, Titian, Giorgione, and Tintoret, with whom armor does not
constitute the warrior, neither silk the dame. And from what feeling the
dignity of that portraiture arose is best traceable at Venice, where we
find their victorious doges painted neither in the toil of battle nor
the triumph of return, nor set forth with thrones and curtains of state,
but kneeling always crownless, and returning thanks to God for his help,
or as priests, interceding for the nation in its affliction. Which
feeling and its results have been so well traced out by Rio,[40] that I
need not speak of it farther.


§ 21. Secondly, Sensuality.

§ 22. How connected with impurity of color.

§ 23. And prevented by its splendor.

§ 24. Or by severity of drawing.

That second destroyer of ideal form, the appearance of sensual
character, though not less fatal in its operation on modern art, is more
difficult to trace, owing to its peculiar subtlety. For it is not
possible to say by what minute differences the right conception of the
human form is separated from that which is luscious and foul: for the
root of all is in the love and seeking of the painter, who, if of impure
and feeble mind, will cover all that he touches with clay staining, as
Bandinelli puts a foul scent of human flesh about his marble Christ, and
as many whom I will not here name, among moderns; but if of mighty mind
or pure, may pass through all places of foulness, and none will stay
upon him, as Michael Angelo, or he will baptize all things and wash them
with pure water, as our own Stothard. Now, so far as this power is
dependent on the seeking of the artist, and is only to be seen in the
work of good and spiritually-minded men, it is vain to attempt to teach
or illustrate it, neither is it here the place to take note of the way
in which it belongs to the representation of the mental image of things,
instead of things themselves, of which we are to speak in treating of
the imagination; but thus much may here be noted of broad, practical
principle, that the purity of flesh painting depends in very
considerable measure on the intensity and warmth of its color. For if it
be opaque, and clay cold, and colorless, and devoid of all the radiance
and value of flesh, the lines of its true beauty, being severe and firm,
will become so hard in the loss of the glow and gradation by which
nature illustrates them, that the painter will be compelled to sacrifice
them for a luscious fulness and roundness, in order to give the
conception of flesh; which, being done, destroys ideality of form as of
color, and gives all over to lasciviousness of surface; showing also
that the painter sought for this, and this only, since otherwise he had
not taken a subject in which he knew himself compelled to surrender all
sources of dignity. Whereas, right splendor of color both bears out a
nobler severity of form, and is in itself purifying and cleansing, like
fire, furnishing also to the painter an excuse for the choice of his
subject, seeing that he may be supposed as not having painted it but in
the admiration of its abstract glory of color and form, and with no
unworthy seeking. But the mere power of perfect and glowing color will
in some sort redeem even a debased tendency of mind itself, as eminently
the case with Titian, who, though of little feeling, and often treating
base subjects, or elevated subjects basely, as in the disgusting
Magdalen of the Pitti palace, and that of the Barberigo at Venice, yet
redeems all by his glory of hue, so that he cannot paint altogether
coarsely; and with Giorgione, who had nobler and more serious intellect,
the sense of nudity is utterly lost, and there is no need nor desire of
concealment any more, but his naked figures move among the trees like
fiery pillars, and lie on the grass like flakes of sunshine.[41] With
the religious painters on the other hand, such nudity as they were
compelled to treat is redeemed as much by severity of form and hardness
of line as by color, so that generally their draped figures are
preferable, as in the Francia of our own gallery. But these, with
Michael Angelo and the Venetians, except Titian, form a great group,
pure in sight and aim, between which and all other schools by which the
nude has been treated, there is a gulf fixed, and all the rest, compared
with them, seem striving how best to illustrate that of Spenser.

              "Of all God's works, which doe this worlde adorn,
               There is no one more faire, and excellent
               Than is man's body both for power and forme
               Whiles it is kept in sober government.
               But none than it more foul and indecent
               Distempered through misrule and passions bace."


§ 25. Degrees of descent in this respect: Rubens, Correggio, and Guido.

§ 26. And modern art.

Of these last, however, with whom ideality is lost, there are some
worthier than others, according to that measure of color they reach, and
power they possess, whence much may be forgiven to Rubens, (as to our
own Etty,) less, as I think, to Correggio, who with less apparent and
evident coarseness has more of inherent sensuality, wrought out with
attractive and luscious refinement, and that alike in all subjects, as
in the Madonna of the Incoronazione, over the high altar of San Giovanni
at Parma, of which the head and upper portion of the figure, now
preserved in the library, might serve as a model of attitude and
expression to a ballet figurante:[42] and again in the lascivious St.
Catherine of the Giorno, and in the Charioted Diana, (both at Parma,)
not to name any of his works of aim more definitely evil. Beneath which
again will fall the works devoid alike of art and decency, as that
Susannah of Guido, in our own gallery, and so we may descend to the
absolute clay of the moderns, only noticing in all how much of what is
evil and base in subject or tendency, is redeemed by what is pure and
right in hue, so that I do not assert that the purpose and object of
many of the grander painters of the nude, as Titian for instance, was
always elevated, but only that we, who cannot paint the lamp of fire
within the earthen pitcher, must take other weapons in our left hands.
And it is to be noted, also, that in climates where the body can be more
openly and frequently visited by sun and weather, the nude both comes to
be regarded in a way more grand and pure, as necessarily awakening no
ideas of base kind, (as pre-eminently with the Greeks,) and also from
that exposure receives a firmness and sunny elasticity very different
from the silky softness of the clothed nations of the north, where every
model necessarily looks as if accidentally undressed; and hence from the
very fear and doubt with which we approach the nude, it becomes
expressive of evil, and for that daring frankness of the old men, which
seldom missed of human grandeur, even when it failed of holy feeling, we
have substituted a mean, carpeted, gauze-veiled, mincing sensuality of
curls and crisping pins, out of which I believe nothing can come but
moral enervation and mental paralysis.


§ 27. Thirdly, ferocity and fear. The latter how to be distinguished
        from awe.

§ 28. Holy fear, how distinct from human terror.

§ 29. Ferocity is joined always with fear. Its unpardonableness.

Respecting those two other vices of the human face, the expressions of
fear and ferocity, there is less to be noted, as they only occasionally
enter into the conception of character; only it is most necessary to
make careful distinction between the conception of power,
destructiveness, or majesty, in matter, influence, or agent, and the
actual fear of any of these, for it is possible to conceive of
terribleness, without being in a position obnoxious to the danger of it,
and so without fear, and the feeling arising from this contemplation of
dreadfulness, ourselves being in safety, as of a stormy sea from the
shore, is properly termed awe, and is a most noble passion; whereas fear
mortal and extreme, may be felt respecting things ignoble, as the
falling from a window, and without any conception of terribleness or
majesty in the thing, or the accident dreaded; and even when fear is
felt respecting things sublime, as thunder, or storm of battle, yet the
tendency of it is to destroy all power of contemplation of their
majesty, and to freeze and shrink all the intellect into a shaking heap
of clay, for absolute acute fear is of the same unworthiness and
contempt from whatever source it arise, and degrades the mind and the
outward bearing of the body alike, even though it be among hail of
heaven and fire running along the ground. And so among the children of
God, while there is always that fearful and bowed apprehension of his
majesty, and that sacred dread of all offence to him, which is called
the fear of God, yet of real and essential fear there is not any but
clinging of confidence to him, as their Rock, Fortress, and Deliverer,
and perfect love, and casting out of fear, so that it is not possible
that while the mind is rightly bent on him, there should be dread of
anything either earthly or supernatural, and the more dreadful seems the
height of his majesty, the less fear they feel that dwell in the shadow
of it, ("Of whom shall I be afraid?") so that they are as David was,
devoted to his fear; whereas, on the other hand, those who, if they may
help it, never conceive of God, but thrust away all thought and memory
of him, and in his real terribleness and omnipresence fear him not nor
know him, yet are of real, acute, piercing, and ignoble fear, haunted
for evermore; fear inconceiving and desperate that calls to the rocks,
and hides in the dust; and hence the peculiar baseness of the expression
of terror, a baseness attributed to it in all times, and among all
nations, as of a passion atheistical, brutal, and profane. So also, it
is always joined with ferocity, which is of all passions the least
human; for of sensual desires there is license to men, as necessity; and
of vanity there is intellectual cause, so that when seen in a brute it
is pleasant and a sign of good wit; and of fear there is at times
necessity and excuse, as being allowed for prevention of harm; but of
ferocity there is no excuse nor palliation, but it is pure essence of
tiger and demon, and it casts on the human face the paleness alike of
the horse of Death, and the ashes of hell.


§ 30. Such expressions how sought by painters powerless and impious.

Wherefore, of all subjects that can be admitted to sight, the
expressions of fear and ferocity are the most foul and detestable, and
so there is in them I know not what sympathetic attractiveness for minds
cowardly and base, as the vulgar of most nations, and forasmuch as they
are easily rendered by men who can render nothing else, they are often
trusted in by the herd of painters incapable and profane, as in that
monstrous abortion of the first room of the Louvre, called the Deluge,
whose subject is pure, acute, mortal fear; and so generally the
senseless horrors of the modern French schools, spawn of the guillotine:
also there is not a greater test of grandeur or meanness of mind than
the expressions it will seek for and develop in the features and forms
of men in fierce strife, whether determination and devotion, and all the
other attributes of that unselfishness which constitutes heroism, as in
the warrior of Agasias; and distress not agitated nor unworthy, though
mortal, as in the Dying Gladiator, or brutal ferocity and butchered
agony, of which the lowest and least palliated examples are those
battles of Salvator Rosa, which none but a man, base-born and
thief-bred, could have dwelt upon for an instant without sickening, of
which I will only name that example in the Pitti palace, wherein the
chief figure in the foreground is a man with his arm cut off at the
shoulder, run through the other hand into the breast with a lance.[43]
And manifold instances of the same feeling are to be found in the
repainting of the various representations of the Inferno, so common
through Italy, more especially that of Orcagna's in the Campo Santo,
wherein the few figures near the top that yet remain untouched are grand
in their severe drawing and expressions of enduring despair, while those
below, repainted by Solazzino, depend for their expressiveness upon
torrents of blood; so in the Inferno of Santa Maria Novella, and of the
Arena chapel, not to speak of the horrible images of the Passion, by
which vulgar Romanism has always striven to excite the languid
sympathies of its untaught flocks. Of which foulness let us reason no
farther, the very image and memory of them being pollution, only
noticing this, that there has always been a morbid tendency in Romanism
towards the contemplation of bodily pain, owing to the attribution of
saving power to it, which, like every other moral error, has been of
fatal effect in art, leaving not altogether without the stain and blame
of it, even the highest of the pure Romanist painters; as Fra Angelico,
for instance, who, in his Passion subjects, always insists weakly on the
bodily torture, and is unsparing of blood; and Giotto, though his
treatment is usually grander, as in that Crucifixion over the door of
the Convent of St. Mark's, where the blood is hardly actual, but issues
from the feet in a typical and conventional form, and becomes a crimson
cord which is twined strangely beneath about a skull; only that which
these holy men did to enhance, even though in their means mistaken, the
impression and power of the sufferings of Christ, or of his saints, is
always in a measure noble, and to be distinguished with all reverence
from the abominations of the irreligious painters following, as of
Camillo Procaccini, in one of his martyrdoms in the Gallery of the
Brera, at Milan, and other such, whose names may be well spared to the
reader.


§ 31. Of passion generally.

§ 32. It is never to be for itself exhibited--at least on the face.

These, then, are the four passions whose presence in any degree on the
human face is degradation. But of all passion it is to be generally
observed, that it becomes ignoble either when entertained respecting
unworthy objects, and therefore shallow or unjustifiable, or when of
impious violence, and so destructive of human dignity. Thus grief is
noble or the reverse, according to the dignity and worthiness of the
object lamented, and the grandeur of the mind enduring it. The sorrow of
mortified vanity or avarice is simply disgusting, even that of bereaved
affection may be base if selfish and unrestrained. All grief that
convulses the features is ignoble, because it is commonly shallow and
certainly temporary, as in children, though in the shock and shiver of a
strong man's features under sudden and violent grief there may be
something of sublime. The grief of Guercino's Hagar, in the Brera
gallery at Milan, is partly despicable, partly disgusting, partly
ridiculous; it is not the grief of the injured Egyptian, driven forth
into the desert with the destiny of a nation in her heart, but of a
servant of all work, turned away for stealing tea and sugar. Common
painters forget that passion is not absolutely and in itself great or
violent, but only in proportion to the weakness of the mind it has to
deal with; and that in exaggerating its outward signs, they are not
exalting the passion, but evaporating the hero.[44] They think too much
of passions as always the same in their nature, forgetting that the love
of Achilles is different from the love of Paris, and of Alcestis from
that of Laodamia. The use and value of passion is not as a subject in
contemplation in itself, but as it breaks up the fountains of the great
deep of the human mind, or displays its mightiness and ribbed majesty,
as mountains are seen in their stability best among the coil of clouds;
whence, in fine, I think it is to be held that all passion which attains
overwhelming power, so that it is not as resisting, but as conquered,
that the creature is contemplated, is unfit for high art, and
destructive of the ideal character of the countenance: and in this
respect, I cannot but hold Raffaelle to have erred in his endeavor to
express passion of such acuteness in the human face; as in the fragment
of the Massacre of the Innocents in our own gallery, (wherein, repainted
though it be, I suppose the purpose of the master is yet to be
understood,) for if such subjects are to be represented at all, their
entire expression may be given without degrading the face, as we shall
presently see done with unspeakable power by Tintoret,[45] and I think
that all subjects of the kind, all human misery, slaughter, famine,
plague, peril, and crime, are better in the main avoided, as of
unprofitable and hardening influence, unless so far as out of the
suffering, hinted rather than expressed, we may raise into nobler relief
the eternal enduring of fortitude and affection, of mercy and
self-devotion, or when, as by the threshing-floor of Ornan, and by the
cave of Lazarus, the angel of the Lord is to be seen in the
chastisement, and his love to be manifested to the despair of men.


§ 33. Recapitulation

Thus, then, we have in some sort enumerated those evil signs which are
most necessary to be shunned in the seeking of ideal beauty,[46] though
it is not the knowledge of them, but the dread and hatred of them, which
will effectually aid the painter; as on the other hand it is not by mere
admission of the loveliness of good and holy expression that its subtile
characters are to be traced. Raffaelle himself, questioned on this
subject, made doubtful answer; he probably could not trace through what
early teaching, or by what dies of emotion the image had been sealed
upon his heart. Our own Bacon, who well saw the impossibility of
reaching it by the combination of many separate beauties, yet explains
not the nature of that "kind of felicity" to which he attributes
success. I suppose those who have conceived and wrought the loveliest
things, have done so by no theorizing, but in simple labor of love, and
could not, if put to a bar of rationalism, defend all points of what
they had done, but painted it in their own delight, and to the delight
of all besides, only always with that respect of conscience and "fear of
swerving from that which is right, which maketh diligent observers of
circumstances the loose regard whereof is the nurse of vulgar folly, no
less than Solomon's attention thereunto was of natural furtherances the
most effectual to make him eminent above others, for he gave good heed,
and pierced everything to the very ground."[47]

With which good heed, and watching of the instants when men feel warmly
and rightly, as the Indians do for the diamond in their washing of sand,
and that with the desire and hope of finding true good in men, and not
with the ready vanity that sets itself to fiction instantly, and carries
its potter's wheel about with it always, (off which there will come only
clay vessels of regular shape after all,) instead of the pure
mirror that can show the seraph standing by the human body--standing as
signal to the heavenly land:[48] with this heed and this charity, there
are none of us that may not bring down that lamp upon his path of which
Spenser sang:--

                "That beauty is not, as fond men misdeem
                 An outward show of things, that only seem;
                 But that fair lamp, from whose celestial ray
                 That light proceeds, which kindleth lover's fire,
                 Shall never be extinguished nor decay.
                 But when the vital spirits do expire,
                 Unto her native planet shall retire,
                 For it is heavenly born and cannot die,
                 Being a parcel of the purest sky."


FOOTNOTES

  [38] Rev. vii. 2.

  [39] Compare Part II. Sec. I. Chap. III § 6.

  [40] De la Poësie Chrétienne. Forme de l'Art. Chap. VIII.

  [41] As in the noble Louvre picture.

  [42] The Madonna turns her back to Christ, and bends her head over
    her shoulder to receive the crown, the arms being folded with
    studied grace over the bosom.

  [43] Compare Michelet, (Du Prêtre, de la Femme, de la Famille,)
    Chap. III. note. He uses language too violent to be quoted; but
    excuses Salvator by reference to the savage character of the Thirty
    Years' War. That this excuse has no validity may be proved by
    comparing the painter's treatment of other subjects. See Sec. II.
    Chap. III. § 19, note.

  [44]        "The fire, that mounts the liquor, till it run o'er
                In seeming to augment it, wastes it."

                                                HENRY VIII.

  [45] Sect. II. Chap. III. § 22.

  [46] Let it be observed that it is always of beauty, not of human
    character in its lower and criminal modifications, that we have been
    speaking. That variety of character, therefore, which we have
    affirmed to be necessary, is the variety of Giotto and Angelico, not
    of Hogarth. Works concerned with the exhibition of general
    character, are to be spoken of in the consideration of Ideas of
    Relation.

  [47] Hooker, Book V. Chap. I. § 2.

  [48]         "Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat,
                And by the holy rood,
                A man all light, a seraph man
                By every corse there stood.
                This seraph band, each waved his hand,
                It was a heavenly sight;
                They stood as signals to the land,
                Each one a lovely light."

                                 ANCIENT MARINER




                            CHAPTER XV.

        GENERAL CONCLUSIONS RESPECTING THE THEORETIC FACULTY.


§ 1. There are no sources of the emotion of beauty more than those found
       in things visible.

§ 2. What imperfection exists in visible things. How in a sort by
       imagination removable.

§ 3. Which however affects not our present conclusions.

Of the sources of beauty open to us in the visible world, we have now
obtained a view which, though most feeble in its grasp and scanty in its
detail, is yet general in its range. Of no other sources than these
visible can we, by any effort in our present condition of existence,
conceive. For what revelations have been made to humanity inspired, or
caught up to heaven of things to the heavenly region belonging, have
been either by unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a man to
utter, or else by their very nature incommunicable, except in types and
shadows; and ineffable by words belonging to earth, for of things
different from the visible, words appropriated to the visible can convey
no image. How different from earthly gold that clear pavement of the
city might have seemed to the eyes of St. John, we of unreceived sight
cannot know; neither of that strange jasper and sardine can we conceive
the likeness which he assumed that sat on the throne above the crystal
sea; neither what seeming that was of slaying that the Root of David
bore in the midst of the elders; neither what change it was upon the
form of the fourth of them that walked in the furnace of Dura, that even
the wrath of idolatry knew for the likeness of the Son of God. The
knowing that is here permitted to us is either of things outward only,
as in those it is whose eyes faith never opened, or else of that dark
part that her glass shows feebly, of things supernatural, that gleaming
of the Divine form among the mortal crowd, which all may catch if they
will climb the sycamore and wait; nor how much of God's abiding at the
house may be granted to those that so seek, and how much more may be
opened to them in the breaking of bread, cannot be said; but of that
only we can reason which is in a measure revealed to all, of that which
is by constancy and purity of affection to be found in the things and
the beings around us upon earth. Now among all those things whose beauty
we have hitherto examined, there has been a measure of imperfection.
Either inferiority of kind, as the beauty of the lower animals, or
resulting from degradation, as in man himself; and although in
considering the beauty of human form, we arrived at some conception of
restoration, yet we found that even the restoration must be in some
respect imperfect, as incapable of embracing all qualities, moral and
intellectual, at once, neither to be freed from all signs of former evil
done or suffered. Consummate beauty, therefore, is not to be found on
earth, though often such intense measure of it as shall drown all
capacity of receiving; neither is it to be respecting humanity
legitimately conceived. But by certain operations of the imagination
upon ideas of beauty received from things around us, it is possible to
conceive respecting superhuman creatures (of that which is more than
creature, no creature ever conceived) a beauty in some sort greater than
we see. Of this beauty, however, it is impossible to determine anything
until we have traced the imaginative operations to which it owes its
being, of which operations this much may be prematurely said, that they
are not creative, that no new ideas are elicited by them, and that their
whole function is only a certain dealing with, concentrating or mode of
regarding the impressions received from external things, that therefore,
in the beauty to which they will conduct us, there will be found no new
element, but only a peculiar combination or phase of those elements that
we now know, and that therefore we may at present draw all the
conclusions with respect to the rank of the theoretic faculty, which the
knowledge of its subject matter can warrant.


§ 4. The four sources from which the pleasure of beauty is derived are
       all divine.

We have seen that this subject matter is referable to four general
heads. It is either the record of conscience, printed in things
external, or it is a symbolizing of Divine attributes in matter, or it
is the felicity of living things, or the perfect fulfilment of their
duties and functions. In all cases it is something Divine, either the
approving voice of God, the glorious symbol of him, the evidence of his
kind presence, or the obedience to his will by him induced and
supported.

All these subjects of contemplation are such as we may suppose will
remain sources of pleasure to the perfected spirit throughout eternity.
Divine in their nature, they are addressed to the immortal part of men.


§ 5. What objections may be made to this conclusion.

There remain, however, two points to be noticed before I can hope that
this conclusion will be frankly accepted by the reader. If it be the
moral part of us to which beauty addresses itself, how does it happen,
it will be asked, that it is ever found in the works of impious men, and
how is it possible for such to desire or conceive it?

On the other hand, how does it happen that men in high state of moral
culture are often insensible to the influence of material beauty, and
insist feebly upon it as an instrument of soul culture.

These two objections I shall endeavor briefly to answer, not that they
can be satisfactorily treated without that detailed examination of the
whole body of great works of art, on which I purpose to enter in the
following volume. For the right determination of these two questions is
indeed the whole end and aim of my labor, (and if it could be here
accomplished, I should bestow no effort farther,) namely, the proving
that no supreme power of art can be attained by impious men; and that
the neglect of art, as an interpreter of divine things, has been of evil
consequence to the Christian world.

At present, however, I would only meet such objections as must
immediately arise in the reader's mind.


§ 6. Typical beauty may be æsthetically pursued. Instances.

§ 7. How interrupted by false feeling.

And first, it will be remembered that I have, throughout the examination
of typical beauty, asserted its instinctive power, the moral meaning of
it being only discoverable by faithful thought. Now this instinctive
sense of it varies in intensity among men, being given, like the hearing
ear of music, to some more than to others: and if those to whom it is
given in large measure be unfortunately men of impious or unreflecting
spirit, it is very possible that the perceptions of beauty should be by
them cultivated on principles merely æsthetic, and so lose their
hallowing power; for though the good seed in them is altogether divine,
yet, there being no blessing in the springing thereof, it brings forth
wild grapes in the end. And yet these wild grapes are well discernible,
like the deadly gourds of Gilgal. There is in all works of such men a
taint and stain, and jarring discord, blacker and louder exactly in
proportion to the moral deficiency, of which the best proof and measure
is to be found in their treatment of the human form, (since in landscape
it is nearly impossible to introduce definite expression of evil,) of
which the highest beauty has been attained only once, and then by no
system taught painter, but by a most holy Dominican monk of Fiesole; and
beneath him all stoop lower and lower in proportion to their inferior
sanctity, though with more or less attainment of that which is noble,
according to their intellectual power and earnestness, as Raffaelle in
his St. Cecilia, (a mere study of a passionate, dark-eyed, large formed
Italian model,) and even Perugino, in that there is about his noblest
faces a shortcoming, indefinable; an absence of the full outpouring of
the sacred spirit that there is in Angelico; traceable, I doubt not, to
some deficiencies and avaricious flaws of his heart, whose consequences
in his conduct were such as to give Vasari hope that his lies might
stick to him (for the contradiction of which in the main, if there be
not contradiction enough in every line that the hand of Perugino drew,
compare Rio, de la Poësie Chrétienne, and note also what Rio has
singularly missed observing, that Perugino, in his portrait of himself
in the Florence gallery, has put a scroll into the hand, with the words
"Timete Deum," thus surely indicating that which he considered his duty
and message:) and so all other even of the sacred painters, not to speak
of the lower body of men in whom, on the one hand, there is marked
sensuality and impurity in all that they seek of beauty, as in
Correggio and Guido, or, on the other, a want in measure of the sense of
beauty itself, as in Rubens and Titian, showing itself in the adoption
of coarse types of feature and form; sometimes also (of which I could
find instances in modern times,) in a want of evidence of delight in
what they do; so that, after they have rendered some passage of
exceeding beauty, they will suffer some discordant point to interfere
with it, and it will not hurt them, as if they had no pleasure in that
which was best, but had done it in inspiration that was not profitable
to them, as deaf men might touch an instrument with a feeling in their
heart, which yet returns not outwardly upon them, and so know not when
they play false: and sometimes by total want of choice, for there is a
choice of love in all rightly tempered men, not that ignorant and
insolent choice which rejects half nature as empty of the right, but
that pure choice that fetches the right out of everything; and where
this is wanting, we may see men walking up and down in dry places,
finding no rest, ever and anon doing something noble, and yet not
following it up, but dwelling the next instant on something impure or
profitless with the same intensity and yet impatience, so that they are
ever wondered at and never sympathized with, and while they dazzle all,
they lead none; and then, beneath these again, we find others on whose
works there are definite signs of evil mind, ill-repressed, and then
inability to avoid, and at last perpetual seeking for and feeding upon
horror and ugliness, and filthiness of sin, as eminently in Salvator and
Caravaggio, and the lower Dutch schools, only in these last less
painfully as they lose the villanous in the brutal, and the horror of
crime in its idiocy.


§ 8. Greatness and truth are sometimes by the Deity sustained and spoken
       in and through evil men.

But secondly, it is to be noted that it is neither by us uncertainable
what moments of pure feeling or aspiration may occur to men of minds
apparently cold and lost, nor by us to be pronounced through what
instruments, and in what strangely occurrent voices, God may choose to
communicate good to men. It seems to me that much of what is great, and
to all men beneficial, has been wrought by those who neither intended
nor knew the good they did, and that many mighty harmonies have been
discoursed by instruments that had been dumb or discordant, but that
God knew their stops. The Spirit of Prophecy consisted with the avarice
of Balaam, and the disobedience of Saul. Could we spare from its page
that parable, which he said, who saw the vision of the Almighty, falling
into a trance, but having his eyes open, though we know that the sword
of his punishment was then sharp in its sheath beneath him in the plains
of Moab? or shall we not lament with David over the shield cast away on
the Gilboa mountains, of him to whom God gave _another heart_ that day
when he turned his back to go from Samuel? It is not our part to look
hardly, nor to look always, to the character or the deeds of men, but to
accept from all of them, and to hold fast that which we can prove good,
and feel to be ordained for us. We know that whatever good there is in
them is itself divine, and wherever we see the virtue of ardent labor
and self-surrendering to a single purpose, wherever we find constant
reference made to the written scripture of natural beauty, this at least
we know is great and good, this we know is not granted by the counsel of
God, without purpose, nor maintained without result: Their
interpretation we may accept, into their labor we may enter, but they
themselves must look to it, if what they do has no intent of good, nor
any reference to the Giver of all gifts. Selfish in their industry,
unchastened in their wills, ungrateful for the Spirit that is upon them,
they may yet be helmed by that Spirit whithersoever the Governor
listeth; involuntary instruments they may become of others' good;
unwillingly they may bless Israel, doubtingly discomfit Amalek, but
shortcoming there will be of their glory, and sure, of their punishment.


§ 9. The second objection arising from the coldness of Christian men to
       external beauty.

I believe I shall be able, incidentally, in succeeding investigations,
to prove this shortcoming, and to examine the sources of it, not
absolutely indeed, (seeing that all reasoning on the characters of men
must be treacherous, our knowledge on this head being as corrupt as it
is scanty, while even in living with them it is impossible to trace the
working, or estimate the errors of great and self-secreted minds,) but
at least enough to establish the general principle upon such grounds of
fact as may satisfy those who demand the practical proof (often in a
measure impossible) of things which can hardly be doubted in their
rational consequence. At present, it would be useless to enter on an
examination for which we have no materials; and I proceed, therefore, to
notice that other and opposite error of Christian men in thinking that
there is little use or value in the operation of the theoretic faculty,
not that I at present either feel myself capable, or that this is the
place for the discussion of that vast question of the operation of taste
(as it is called) on the minds of men, and the national value of its
teaching, but I wish shortly to reply to that objection which might be
urged to the real moral dignity of the faculty, that many Christian men
seem to be in themselves without it, and even to discountenance it in
others.

It has been said by Schiller, in his letters on æsthetic culture, that
the sense of beauty never farthered the performance of a single duty.


§ 10. Reasons for this coldness in the anxieties of the world. These
        anxieties overwrought and criminal.

§ 11. Evil consequences of such coldness.

§ 12. Theoria the service of Heaven.

Although this gross and inconceivable falsity will hardly be accepted by
any one in so many terms, seeing that there are few so utterly lost but
that they receive, and know that they receive, at certain moments,
strength of some kind, or rebuke from the appealings of outward things;
and that it is not possible for a Christian man to walk across so much
as a rood of the natural earth, with mind unagitated and rightly poised,
without receiving strength and hope from some stone, flower, leaf, or
sound, nor without a sense of a dew falling upon him out of the sky;
though, I say, this falsity is not wholly and in terms admitted, yet it
seems to be partly and practically so in much of the doing and teaching
even of holy men, who in the recommending of the love of God to us,
refer but seldom to those things in which it is most abundantly and
immediately shown; though they insist much on his giving of bread, and
raiment, and health, (which he gives to all inferior creatures,) they
require us not to thank him for that glory of his works which he has
permitted us alone to perceive: they tell us often to meditate in the
closet, but they send us not, like Isaac, into the fields at even, they
dwell on the duty of self-denial, but they exhibit not the duty of
delight. Now there are reasons for this, manifold, in the toil and
warfare of an earnest mind, which, in its efforts at the raising of men
from utter loss and misery, has often but little time or disposition to
take heed of anything more than the bare life, and of those so occupied
it is not for us to judge, but I think, that, of the weaknesses,
distresses, vanities, schisms, and sins, which often even in the holiest
men, diminish their usefulness, and mar their happiness, there would be
fewer if, in their struggle with nature fallen, they sought for more aid
from nature undestroyed. It seems to me that the real sources of
bluntness in the feelings towards the splendor of the grass and glory of
the flower, are less to be found in ardor of occupation, in seriousness
of compassion, or heavenliness of desire, than in the turning of the eye
at intervals of rest too selfishly within; the want of power to shake
off the anxieties of actual and near interest, and to leave results in
God's hands; the scorn of all that does not seem immediately apt for our
purposes, or open to our understanding, and perhaps something of pride,
which desires rather to investigate than to feel. I believe that the
root of almost every schism and heresy from which the Christian church
has ever suffered, has been the effort of men to earn, rather than to
receive, their salvation; and that the reason that preaching is so
commonly ineffectual is, that it calls on men oftener to work for God,
than to behold God working for them. If, for every rebuke that we utter
of men's vices, we put forth a claim upon their hearts; if for every
assertion of God's demands from them, we could substitute a display of
his kindness to them; if side by side with every warning of death, we
could exhibit proofs and promises of immortality; if, in fine, instead
of assuming the being of an awful Deity, which men, though they cannot
and dare not deny, are always unwilling, sometimes unable, to conceive,
we were to show them a near, visible, inevitable, but all beneficent
Deity, whose presence makes the earth itself a heaven, I think there
would be fewer deaf children sitting in the market-place. At all events,
whatever may be the inability in this present life to mingle the full
enjoyment of the Divine works with the full discharge of every practical
duty, and confessedly in many cases this must be, let us not attribute
the inconsistency to any indignity of the faculty of contemplation, but
to the sin and the suffering of the fallen state, and the change of
order from the keeping of the garden to the tilling of the ground. We
cannot say how far it is right or agreeable with God's will, while men
are perishing round about us, while grief, and pain, and wrath, and
impiety, and death, and all the powers of the air, are working wildly
and evermore, and the cry of blood going up to heaven, that any of us
should take hand from the plough; but this we know, that there will come
a time when the service of God shall be the beholding of him; and
though in these stormy seas, where we are now driven up and down, his
Spirit is dimly seen on the face of the waters, and we are left to cast
anchors out of the stern, and wish for the day, that day will come,
when, with the evangelists on the crystal and stable sea, all the
creatures of God shall be full of eyes within, and there shall be "no
more curse, but his servants shall serve him, and shall see his face."




                              SECTION II.

                      OF THE IMAGINATIVE FACULTY.




                              CHAPTER I.

                   OF THE THREE FORMS OF IMAGINATION.


§ 1. A partial examination only of the imagination is to be attempted.

We have hitherto been exclusively occupied with those sources of
pleasure which exist in the external creation, and which in any faithful
copy of it must to a certain extent exist also.

These sources of beauty, however, are not presented by any very great
work of art in a form of pure transcript. They invariably receive the
reflection of the mind under whose shadow they have passed, and are
modified or colored by its image.

This modification is the Work of Imagination.

As, in the course of our succeeding investigation, we shall be called
upon constantly to compare sources of beauty existing in nature with the
images of them presented by the human mind, it is very necessary for us
shortly to review the conditions and limits of the imaginative faculty,
and to ascertain by what tests we may distinguish its sane, healthy, and
profitable operation, from that which is erratic, diseased, and
dangerous.

It is neither desirable nor possible here to examine or illustrate in
full the essence of this mighty faculty. Such an examination would
require a review of the whole field of literature, and would alone
demand a volume. Our present task is not to explain or exhibit full
portraiture of this function of the mind in all its relations, but only
to obtain some certain tests by which we may determine whether it be
very imagination or no, and unmask all impersonations of it, and this
chiefly with respect to art, for in literature the faculty takes a
thousand forms, according to the matter it has to treat, and becomes
like the princess of the Arabian tale, sword, eagle, or fire, according
to the war it wages, sometimes piercing, sometimes soaring, sometimes
illumining, retaining no image of itself, except its supernatural power,
so that I shall content myself with tracing that particular form of it,
and unveiling those imitations of it only, which are to be found, or
feared, in painting, referring to other creations of mind only for
illustration.


§ 2. The works of the metaphysicians how nugatory with respect to this
       faculty.

Unfortunately, the works of metaphysicians will afford us in this most
interesting inquiry no aid whatsoever. They who are constantly
endeavoring to fathom and explain the essence of the faculties of mind,
are sure in the end to lose sight of all that cannot be explained,
(though it may be defined and felt,) and because, as I shall presently
show, the essence of the imaginative faculty is utterly mysterious and
inexplicable, and to be recognized in its results only, or in the
negative results of its absence, the metaphysicians, as far as I am
acquainted with their works, miss it altogether, and never reach higher
than a definition of fancy by a false name.

What I understand by fancy will presently appear, not that I contend for
nomenclature, but only for distinction between two mental faculties, by
whatever name they be called, one the source of all that is great in the
poetic arts; the other merely decorative and entertaining, but which are
often confounded together, and which have so much in common as to render
strict definition of either difficult.


§ 3. The definition of D. Stewart, how inadequate.

Dugald Stewart's meagre definition may serve us for a starting point.
"Imagination," he says, "includes conception or simple apprehension,
which enables us to form a notion of those former objects of perception
or of knowledge, out of which we are to make a selection; abstraction,
which separates the selected materials from the qualities and
circumstances which are connected with them in nature; and judgment or
taste, which selects the materials and directs their combination. To
these powers we may add that particular habit of association to which I
formerly gave the name of fancy, as it is this which presents to our
choice all the different materials which are subservient to the efforts
of imagination, and which may therefore be considered as forming the
ground-work of poetical genius."

(By fancy in this passage, we find on referring to the chapter treating
of it, that nothing more is meant than the rapid occurrence of ideas of
sense to the mind.)

Now, in this definition, the very point and purpose of all the inquiry
is missed. We are told that judgment or taste "directs the combination."
In order that anything may be directed, an end must be previously
determined: What is the faculty that determines this end? and of what
frame and make, how boned and fleshed, how conceived or seen, is the end
itself? Bare judgment, or taste, cannot approve of what has no
existence; and yet by Dugald Stewart's definition we are left to their
catering among a host of conceptions, to produce a combination which, as
they work for, they must see and approve before it exists. This power of
prophecy is the very essence of the whole matter, and it is just that
inexplicable part which the metaphysician misses.


§ 4. This instance nugatory.

As might be expected from his misunderstanding of the faculty, he has
given an instance entirely nugatory.[49] It would be difficult to find
in Milton a passage in which less power of imagination was shown, than
the description of Eden, if, as I suppose, this be the passage meant, at
the beginning of the fourth book, in which I can find three expressions
only in which this power is shown, the "_burnished_ with golden rind,
hung amiable" of the Hesperian fruit, the "_lays forth_ her purple
grape" of the vine and the "_fringed_ bank with myrtle crowned," of the
lake, and these are not what Stewart meant, but only that accumulation
of bowers, groves, lawns, and hillocks, which is not imagination at all,
but composition, and that of the commonest kind. Hence, if we take any
passage in which there is real imagination, we shall find Stewart's
hypothesis not only inefficient and obscure, but utterly inapplicable.


§ 5. Various instances.

Take one or two at random.

               "On the other side,
                Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
                Unterrified, and like a comet burned
                That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
                In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
                Shakes pestilence and war."

(Note that the word incensed is to be taken in its literal and material
sense, set on fire.) What taste or judgment was it that directed this
combination? or is there nothing more than taste or judgment here?

               "Ten paces huge
                He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee
                His massy spear upstaid, as if on earth
                Winds under ground, or waters forcing way
                _Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat
                Half-sunk with all his pines._

               "Together both ere the high lawns appeared
                _Under the opening eyelids_ of the morn,
                We drove a field, and both together heard
                What time the gray-fly winds her _sultry_ horn.

               "Missing thee, I walk unseen
                On the dry smooth shaven green.
                To behold the wandering moon
                Riding near her highest noon,
                _Like one that had been led astray_,
                Through the heavens' wide pathless way,
                And oft _as if her head she bowed_
                Stooping through a fleecy cloud."

It is evident that Stewart's explanation utterly fails in all these
instances, for there is in them no "combination" whatsoever, but a
particular mode of regarding the qualities or appearances of a single
thing, illustrated and conveyed to us by the image of another; and the
act of imagination, observe, is not the selection of this image, but the
mode of regarding the object.

But the metaphysician's definition fails yet more utterly, when we look
at the imagination neither as regarding, nor combining, but as
penetrating.

               "My gracious Silence, Hail:
                Wouldst thou have laughed, had I come coffin'd home
                That weep'st to see me triumph. Ah! my dear,
                Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
                And mothers that lack sons."

How did Shakspeare _know_ that Virgilia could not speak?

This knowledge, this intuitive and penetrative perception, is still one
of the forms, the highest, of imagination, but there is no combination
of images here.


§ 6. The three operations of the imagination. Penetrative, associative,
       contemplative.

We find, then, that the imagination has three totally distinct
functions. It combines, and by combination creates new forms; but the
secret principle of this combination has not been shown by the analysts.
Again, it treats or regards both the simple images and its own
combinations in peculiar ways; and, thirdly, it penetrates, analyzes,
and reaches truths by no other faculty discoverable. These its three
functions, I shall endeavor to illustrate, but not in this order: the
most logical mode of treatment would be to follow the order in which
commonly the mind works; that is, penetrating first, combining next, and
treating or regarding, finally; but this arrangement would be
inconvenient, because the acts of penetration and of regard are so
closely connected, and so like in their relations to other mental acts,
that I wish to examine them consecutively, and the rather, because they
have to do with higher subject matter than the mere act of combination,
whose distinctive nature, that property which makes it imagination and
not composition, it will I think be best to explain at setting out, as
we easily may, in subjects familiar and material. I shall therefore
examine the imaginative faculty in these three forms; first, as
combining or associative; secondly, as analytic or penetrative; thirdly,
as regardant or contemplative.


FOOTNOTES

  [49] He continues thus, "To illustrate these observations, let us
    consider the steps by which Milton must have proceeded, in creating
    his imaginary garden of Eden. When he first proposed to himself that
    subject of description, it is reasonable to suppose that a variety
    of the most striking scenes which he had seen, crowded into his
    mind. The association of ideas suggested them and the power of
    conception placed each of them before him with all its beauties and
    imperfections. In every natural scene, if we destine it for any
    particular purpose, there are defects and redundancies, which art
    may sometimes, but cannot always correct. But the power of
    imagination is unlimited. She can create and annihilate, and dispose
    at pleasure her woods, her rocks, and her rivers. Milton,
    accordingly, would not copy his Eden from any one scene, but would
    select from each the features which were most eminently beautiful.
    The power of abstraction enabled him to make the separation, and
    taste directed him in the selection."




                              CHAPTER II.

                     OF IMAGINATION ASSOCIATIVE.


§ 1. Of simple conception.

In order to render our inquiry as easy as possible, we shall consider
the dealing of the associative imagination with the simplest possible
matter, that is,--with conceptions of material things. First, therefore,
we must define the nature of these conceptions themselves.

After beholding and examining any material object, our knowledge
respecting it exists in two different forms. Some facts exist in the
brain in a verbal form, as known, but not conceived, as, for instance,
that it was heavy or light, that it was eight inches and a quarter long,
etc., of which length we cannot have accurate conception, but only such
a conception as might attach to a length of seven inches or nine; and
which fact we may recollect without any conception of the object at all.
Other facts respecting it exist in the brain in a visible form, not
always visible, but voluntarily visible, as its being white, or having
such and such a complicated shape, as the form of a rose-bud, for
instance, which it would be difficult to express verbally, neither is it
retained by the brain in a verbal form, but a visible one, that is, when
we wish for knowledge of its form for immediate use, we summon up a
vision or image of the thing; we do not remember it in words, as we
remember the fact that it took so many days to blow, or that it was
gathered at such and such a time.

The knowledge of things retained in this visible form is called
conception by the metaphysicians, which term I shall retain; it is
inaccurately called imagination by Taylor, in the passage quoted by
Wordsworth in the preface to his poems, not but that the term
imagination is etymologically and rightly expressive of it, but we want
that term for a higher faculty.


§ 2. How connected with verbal knowledge.

There are many questions respecting this faculty of conception of very
great interest, such as the exact amount of aid that verbal knowledge
renders so visible, (as, for instance, the verbal knowledge that a
flower has five, or seven, or ten petals, or that a muscle is inserted
at such and such a point of the bone, aids the conception of the flower
or the limb;) and again, what amount of aid the visible knowledge
renders to the verbal, as for instance, whether any one, being asked a
question about some animal or thing, which instantly and from verbal
knowledge he cannot answer, may have such power of summoning up the
image of the animal or thing as to ascertain the fact, by actual
beholding, (which I do not assert, but can conceive to be possible;) and
again, what is that indefinite and subtile character of the conception
itself in most men, which admits not of being by themselves traced or
realized, and yet is a sure test of likeness in any representation of
the thing; like an intaglio, with a front light on it, whose lines
cannot be seen, and yet they will fit one definite form only, and that
accurately; these and many other questions it is irrelevant at present
to determine,[50] since to forward our present purpose, it will be well
to suppose the conception, aided by verbal knowledge, to be absolutely
perfect, and we will suppose a man to retain such clear image of a large
number of the material things he has seen, as to be able to set down any
of them on paper with perfect fidelity and absolute memory[51] of their
most minute features.

In thus setting them down on paper, he works, I suppose, exactly as he
would work from nature, only copying the remembered image in his mind,
instead of the real thing. He is, therefore, still nothing more than a
copyist. There is no exercise of imagination in this whatsoever.


§ 3. How used in composition.

But over these images, vivid and distinct as nature herself, he has a
command which over nature he has not. He can summon any that he chooses,
and if, therefore, any group of them which he received from nature be
not altogether to his mind, he is at liberty to remove some of the
component images, add others foreign, and re-arrange the whole.

Let us suppose, for instance, that he has perfect knowledge of the forms
of the Aiguilles Verte and Argentière, and of the great glacier between
them at the upper extremity of the valley of Chamonix. The forms of the
mountains please him, but the presence of the glacier suits not his
purpose. He removes the glacier, sets the mountains farther apart, and
introduces between them part of the valley of the Rhone.

This is composition, and is what Dugald Stewart mistook for imagination,
in the kingdom of which noble faculty it has no part nor lot.


§ 4. Characteristics of composition.

The essential characters of composition, properly so called, are these.
The mind which desires the new feature summons up before it those images
which it supposes to be of the kind wanted, of these it takes the one
which it supposes to be fittest, and tries it: if it will not answer, it
tries another, until it has obtained such an association as pleases it.

In this operation, if it be of little sensibility, it regards only the
absolute beauty or value of the images brought before it; and takes that
or those which it thinks fairest or most interesting, without any regard
to their sympathy with those for whose company they are destined. Of
this kind is all vulgar composition; the "Mulino" of Claude, described
in the preface to the first part, being a characteristic example.

If the mind be of higher feeling, it will look to the sympathy or
contrast of the features, to their likeness or dissimilarity; it will
take, as it thinks best, features resembling or discordant, and if when
it has put them together, it be not satisfied, it will repeat the
process on the features themselves, cutting away one part and putting in
another, so working more and more delicately down to the lowest details,
until by dint of experiment, of repeated trials and shiftings, and
constant reference to principles, (as that two lines must not mimic one
another, that one mass must not be equal to another,) etc., it has
morticed together a satisfactory result.


§ 5. What powers are implied by it. The first of the three functions of
       fancy.

This process will be more and more rapid and effective, in proportion to
the artist's powers of conception and association, these in their turn
depending on his knowledge and experience. The distinctness of his
powers of conception will give value, point, and truth to every fragment
that he draws from memory. His powers of association, and his knowledge
of nature will pour out before him in greater or less number and
appositeness the images from which to choose. His experience guides him
to quick discernment in the combination, when made, of the parts that
are offensive and require change.

The most elevated power of mind of all these, is that of association, by
which images apposite or resemblant, or of whatever kind wanted, are
called up quickly and in multitudes. When this power is very brilliant,
it is called fancy, not that this is the only meaning of the word fancy,
but it is the meaning of it in relation to that function of the
imagination which we are here considering; for fancy has three
functions; one subordinate to each of the three functions of the
imagination.

Great differences of power are manifested among artists in this respect,
some having hosts of distinct images always at their command, and
rapidly discerning resemblance or contrast; others having few images,
and obscure, at their disposal, nor readily governing those they have.

Where the powers of fancy are very brilliant, the picture becomes highly
interesting; if her images are systematically and rightly combined, and
truthfully rendered, it will become even impressive and instructive; if
wittily and curiously combined, it will be captivating and entertaining.


§ 6. Imagination not yet manifested.

But all this time the imagination has not once shown itself. All this
(except the gift of fancy) may be taught, all this is easily
comprehended and analyzed; but imagination is neither to be taught, nor
by any efforts to be attained, nor by any acuteness of discernment
dissected or analyzed.

We have seen that in composition the mind can only take cognizance of
likeness or dissimilarity, or of abstract beauty among the ideas it
brings together. But neither likeness nor dissimilarity secures harmony.
We saw in the chapter on unity that likeness destroyed harmony or unity
of membership, and that difference did not necessarily secure it, but
only that particular imperfection in each of the harmonizing parts which
can only be supplied by its fellow part. If, therefore, the combination
made is to be harmonious, the artist must induce in each of its
component parts (suppose two only, for simplicity's sake,) such
imperfection as that the other shall put it right. If one of them be
perfect by itself, the other will be an excrescence. Both must be faulty
when separate, and each corrected by the presence of the other. If he
can accomplish this, the result will be beautiful; it will be a whole,
an organized body with dependent members;--he is an inventor. If not,
let his separate features be as beautiful, as apposite, or as resemblant
as they may, they form no whole. They are two members glued together. He
is only a carpenter and joiner.


§ 7. Imagination is the correlative conception of imperfect component
       parts.

Now, the conceivable imperfections of any single feature are infinite.
It is impossible, therefore, to fix upon a form of imperfection in the
one, and try with this all the forms of imperfection of the other until
one fits; but the two imperfections must be corelatively and
simultaneously conceived.

This is imagination, properly so called, imagination associative, the
grandest mechanical power that the human intelligence possesses, and one
which will appear more and more marvellous the longer we consider it. By
its operation, two ideas are chosen out of an infinite mass, (for it
evidently matters not whether the imperfections be conceived out of the
infinite number conceivable, or selected out of a number recollected,)
two ideas which are separately wrong, which together shall be right, and
of whose unity, therefore, the idea must be formed at the instant they
are seized, as it is only in that unity that either are good, and
therefore only the _conception of that unity can prompt the preference_.
Now, what is that prophetic action of mind, which, out of an infinite
mass of things that cannot be tried together, seizes, at the same
instant two that are fit for each other, together right; yet each
disagreeable alone.


§ 8. Material analogy with imagination.

This operation of mind, so far as I can see, is absolutely
inexplicable, but there is something like it in chemistry.

"The action of sulphuric acid on metallic zinc affords an instance of
what was once called disposing affinity. Zinc decomposes pure water at
common temperatures with extreme slowness; but as soon as sulphuric acid
is added, decomposition of the water takes place rapidly, though the
acid merely unites with oxide of zinc. The former explanation was, that
the affinity of the acid for oxide of zinc disposed the metal to unite
with oxygen, and thus enabled it to decompose water; that is, the oxide
of zinc was supposed to produce an effect previous to its existence. The
obscurity of this explanation arises from regarding changes as
consecutive, which are in reality simultaneous. There is no succession
in the process, the oxide of zinc is not formed previously to its
combination with the acid, but at the same instant. There is, as it
were, but one chemical change, which consists in the combination at one
and the same moment of zinc with oxygen, and of oxide of zinc with the
acid; and this change occurs because these two affinities, acting
together, overcome the attraction of oxygen and hydrogen for one
another."[52]

Now, if the imaginative artist will permit us, with all deference, to
represent his combining intelligence under the figure of sulphuric acid;
and if we suppose the fragment of zinc to be embarrassed among
infinitely numerous fragments of diverse metals, and the oxygen
dispersed and mingled among gases countless and indistinguishable, we
shall have an excellent type in material things of the action of the
imagination on the immaterial. Both actions are, I think, inexplicable,
for however simultaneous the chemical changes may be, yet the causing
power is the affinity of the acid for what has no existence. It is
neither to be explained how that affinity operates on atoms uncombined,
nor how the artist's desire for an unconceived whole prompts him to the
selection of necessary divisions.


§ 9. The grasp and dignity of imagination.

Now, this operation would be wonderful enough, if it were concerned with
two ideas only. But a powerfully imaginative mind seizes and combines
at the same instant, not only two, but all the important ideas of its
poem or picture, and while it works with any one of them, it is at the
same instant working with and modifying all in their relations to it,
never losing sight of their bearings on each other; as the motion of a
snake's body goes through all parts at once, and its volition acts at
the same instant in coils that go contrary ways.

This faculty is indeed something that looks as if man were made after
the image of God. It is inconceivable, admirable, altogether divine; and
yet wonderful as it may seem, it is palpably evident that no less an
operation is necessary for the production of any great work, for, by the
definition of unity of membership, (the essential characteristic of
greatness,) not only certain couples or groups of parts, but _all_ the
parts of a noble work must be separately imperfect; each must imply, and
ask for all the rest, and the glory of every one of them must consist in
its relation to the rest, neither while so much as one is wanting can
any be right. And it is evidently impossible to conceive in each
separate feature, a certain want or wrongness which can only be
corrected by the other features of the picture, (not by one or two
merely, but by all,) unless together with the want, we conceive also of
what is wanted, that is of all the rest of the work or picture. Hence
Fuseli:--

"Second thoughts are admissible in painting and poetry only as dressers
of the first conception; no great idea was ever formed in fragments."

"He alone can conceive and compose who sees the whole at once before
him."


§ 10. Its limits.

There is, however, a limit to the power of all human imagination. When
the relations to be observed are absolutely necessary, and highly
complicated, the mind cannot grasp them, and the result is a total
deprivation of all power of imagination associative in such matter. For
this reason, no human mind has ever conceived a new animal. For as it is
evident that in an animal, every part implies all the rest; that is, the
form of the eye involves the form of the brow and nose, these the form
of the forehead and lip, these of the head and chin, and so on, so that
it is physically impossible to conceive of any one of these members,
unless we conceive the relation it bears to the whole animal; and as
this relation is necessary, certain, and complicated, allowing of no
license or inaccuracy, the intellect utterly fails under the load, and
is reduced to mere composition, putting the bird's wing on men's
shoulders, or half the human body to half the horse's, in doing which
there is no action of imagination, but only of fancy; though in the
treatment and contemplation of the compound form there may be much
imagination, as we shall presently see. (Chap. III. § 30.)


§ 11. How manifested in treatment of uncertain relations. Its deficiency
        illustrated.

The matter, therefore, in which associative imagination can be shown is
that which admits of great license and variety of arrangements, and in
which a certain amount of relation only is required; as especially in
the elements of landscape painting, in which best it may be illustrated.

When an unimaginative painter is about to draw a tree, (and we will
suppose him, for better illustration of the point in question, to have
good feeling and correct knowledge of the nature of trees,) he probably
lays on his paper such a general form as he knows to be characteristic
of the tree to be drawn, and such as he believes will fall in agreeably
with the other masses of his picture, which we will suppose partly
prepared. When this form is set down, he assuredly finds it has done
something he did not intend it to do. It has mimicked some prominent
line, or overpowered some necessary mass. He begins pruning and
changing, and after several experiments, succeeds in obtaining a form
which does no material mischief to any other. To this form he proceeds
to attach a trunk, and having probably a received notion or rule (for
the unimaginative painter never works without a principle) that tree
trunks ought to lean first one way and then the other as they go up, and
ought not to stand under the middle of the tree, he sketches a
serpentine form of requisite propriety; when it has gone up far enough,
that is till it begins to look disagreeably long, he will begin to
ramify it, and if there be another tree in the picture with two large
branches, he knows that this, by all laws of composition, ought to have
three or four, or some different number; one because he knows that if
three or four branches start from the same point they will look formal,
therefore he makes them start from points one above another, and because
equal distances are improper, therefore they shall start at unequal
distances. When they are fairly started, he knows they must undulate or
go backwards and forwards, which accordingly he makes them do at random;
and because he knows that all forms ought to be contrasted, therefore he
makes one bend down while the other three go up. The three that go up he
knows must not go up without interfering with each other, and so he
makes two of them cross. He thinks it also proper that there should be
variety of character in them, so he makes the one that bends down
graceful and flexible, and of the two that cross, he splinters one and
makes a stump of it. He repeats the process among the more complicated
minor boughs, until coming to the smallest, he thinks farther care
unnecessary, but draws them freely, and by chance. Having to put on the
foliage, he will make it flow properly in the direction of the tree's
growth, he will make all the extremities graceful, but will be
grievously plagued by finding them come all alike, and at last will be
obliged to spoil a number of them altogether, in order to obtain
opposition. They will not, however, be united in this their spoliation,
but will remain uncomfortably separate and individually ill-tempered. He
consoles himself by the reflection that it is unnatural for all of them
to be equally perfect.


§ 12. Laws of art, the safeguard of the unimaginative.

Now I suppose that through the whole of this process he has been able to
refer to his definite memory or conception of nature for every one of
the fragments he has successively added, that the details, color,
fractures, insertions, etc., of his boughs, are all either actual
recollections or based on secure knowledge of the tree, (and herein I
allow far more than is commonly the case with unimaginative painters.)
But as far as the process of combination is concerned, it is evident
that from beginning to end his laws have been his safety, and his plague
has been his liberty. He has been compelled to work at random, or under
the guidance of feeling only, whenever there was anything left to his
own decision. He has never been decided in anything except in what he
_must_ or _must not_ do. He has walked as a drunken man on a broad road,
his guides are the hedges; and between these limits, the broader the
way, the worse he gets on.


§ 13. Are by the imaginative painter despised. Tests of imagination.

The advance of the imaginative artist is precisely the reverse of this.
He has no laws. He defies all restraint, and cuts down all hedges. There
is nothing within the limits of natural possibility that he dares not
do, or that he allows the necessity of doing. The laws of nature he
knows, are to him no restraint. They are his own nature. All other laws
or limits he sets at utter defiance, his journey is over an untrodden
and pathless plain. But he sees his end over the waste from the first,
and goes straight at it, never losing sight of it, nor throwing away a
step. Nothing can stop him, nothing turn him aside; falcons and lynxes
are of slow and uncertain sight compared with his. He saw his tree,
trunk, boughs, foliage and all, from the first moment; not only the tree
but the sky behind it; not only that tree or sky, but all the other
great features of his picture: by what intense power of instantaneous
selection and amalgamation cannot be explained, but by this it may be
proved and tested, that if we examine the tree of the unimaginative
painter, we shall find that on removing any part or parts of it, the
rest will indeed suffer, as being deprived of the proper development of
a tree, and as involving a blank space that wants occupation; but the
portions left are not made discordant or disagreeable. They are
absolutely and in themselves as valuable as they can be, every stem is a
perfect stem, and every twig a graceful twig, or at least as perfect and
as graceful as they were before the removal of the rest. But if we try
the same experiment on the imaginative painter's work, and break off the
merest stem or twig of it, it all goes to pieces like a Prince Rupert's
drop. There is not so much as a seed of it but it lies on the tree's
life, like the grain upon the tongue of Chaucer's sainted child. Take it
away, and the boughs will sing to us no longer. All is dead and cold.


§ 14. The monotony of unimaginative treatment.

This then is the first sign of the presence of real imagination as
opposed to composition. But here is another not less important.


§ 15. Imagination never repeats itself.

We have seen that as each part is selected and fitted by the
unimaginative painter, he renders it, in itself, as beautiful as he is
able. If it be ugly, it remains so, he is incapable of correcting it by
the addition of another ugliness, and therefore he chooses all his
features as fair as they may be (at least if his object be beauty.) But
a small proportion only of the ideas he has at his disposal will reach
his standard of absolute beauty. The others will be of no use to him,
and among those which he permits himself to use, there will be so marked
a family likeness, that he will be more and more cramped, as his picture
advances, for want of material, and tormented by multiplying
resemblances, unless disguised by some artifice of light and shade or
other forced difference, and with all the differences he can imagine,
his tree will yet show a sameness and sickening repetition in all its
parts, and all his trees will be like one another, except so far as one
leans east and another west, one is broadest at the top and another at
the bottom, while through all this insipid repetition, the means by
which he forces contrast, dark boughs opposed to light, rugged to
smooth, etc., will be painfully evident, to the utter destruction of all
dignity and repose. The imaginative work is necessarily the absolute
opposite of all this. As all its parts are imperfect, and as there is an
unlimited supply of imperfection, (for the ways in which things may be
wrong are infinite,) the imagination is never at a loss, nor ever likely
to repeat itself; nothing comes amiss to it, but whatever rude matter it
receives, it instantly so arranges that it comes right; all things fall
into their place and appear in that place perfect, useful, and evidently
not to be spared, so that of its combinations there is endless variety,
and every intractable and seemingly unavailable fragment that we give to
it, is instantly turned to some brilliant use, and made the nucleus of a
new group of glory; however poor or common the gift, it will be thankful
for it, treasure it up, and pay in gold, and it has that life in it and
fire, that wherever it passes, among the dead bones and dust of things,
behold a shaking, and the bones come together, bone to his bone.


§ 16. Relation of the imaginative faculty to the theoretic.

And now we find what noble sympathy and unity there is between the
imaginative and theoretic faculties. Both agree in this, that they
reject nothing, and are thankful for all; but the theoretic faculty
takes out of everything that which is beautiful, while the imaginative
faculty takes hold of the very imperfections which the theoretic
rejects, and by means of these angles and roughnesses, it joints and
bolts the separate stones into a mighty temple, wherein the theoretic
faculty in its turn, does deepest homage. Thus sympathetic in their
desires, harmoniously diverse in their operation, each working for the
other with what the other needs not, all things external to man are by
one or other turned to good.


§ 17. Modification of its manifestation.

Now we have hitherto, for the sake of clearness, opposed the total
absence of imagination to the perfect presence of it, in order to make
the difference between composition and imagination thoroughly
understood. But if we are to give examples of either the want or the
presence of the power, it is necessary to note the circumstances by
which both are modified. In the first place, few artists of any standing
are totally devoid of this faculty, some small measure of it most of
them possess, though of all the forms of intellect, this, and its
sister, penetrative imagination, are the rarest and most precious; but
few painters have reached eminence without some leaven of it, whether it
can be increased by practice I doubt. On the other hand, fewer still are
possessed of it in very high degree, and even with the men of most
gigantic power in this respect, of whom, I think, Tintoret stands far
the head, there are evident limits to its exercise, and portions to be
found in their works that have not been included in the original grasp
of them, but have been suggested and incorporated during their progress,
or added in decoration; and with the great mass of painters there are
frequent flaws and failures in the conception, so that, when they intend
to produce a perfect work they throw their thought into different
experimental forms, and decorate it and discipline it long before
realizing it, so that there is a certain amount of mere composition in
the most imaginative works; and a grain or two of imagination commonly
in the most artificial. And again, whatever portions of a picture are
taken honestly and without alteration from nature, have, so far as they
go, the look of imagination, because all that nature does is
imaginative, that is, perfect as a whole, and made up of imperfect
features; so that the painter of the meanest imaginative power may yet
do grand things, if he will keep to strict portraiture, and it would be
well if all artists were to endeavor to do so, for if they have
imagination, it will force its way in spite of them, and show itself in
their every stroke, and if not, they will not get it by leaving nature,
but only sink into nothingness.


§ 18. Instances of absence of imagination.--Claude, Gaspar Poussin.

Keeping these points in view, it is interesting to observe the different
degrees and relations of the imagination, as accompanied with more or
less feeling or desire of harmony, vigor of conception, or constancy of
reference to truth. Of men of name, perhaps Claude is the best instance
of a want of imagination, nearly total, borne out by painful but
untaught study of nature, and much feeling for abstract beauty of form,
with none whatever for harmony of expression. In Gaspar Poussin, we have
the same want of imagination disguised by more masculine qualities of
mind, and grander reachings after sympathy. Thus in the sacrifice of
Isaac in our own gallery, the spirit of the composition is solemn and
unbroken; it would have been a grand picture if the forms of the mass of
foliage on the right, and of the clouds in the centre, had not been
hopelessly unimaginative. The stormy wind of the picture of Dido and
Eneas blows loudly through its leaves, but the total want of invention
in the cloud forms bears it down beyond redemption. The foreground tree
of the La Riccia (compare Part II. Sec. VI. Chap. I., § 6.) is another
characteristic instance of absolute nullity of imagination.

[Illustration: THE ADORATION OF THE MAGI. From a painting by Ruskin,
after Tintoret.]


§ 19. Its presence.--Salvator, Nicolo Poussin, Titian, Tintoret.

In Salvator, the imagination is vigorous, the composition dextrous and
clever, as in the St. Jerome of the Brera Gallery, the Diogenes of the
Pitti, and the pictures of the Guadagni palace. All are rendered
valueless by coarseness of feeling and habitual non-reference to nature.

All the landscape of Nicolo Poussin is imaginative, but the development
of the power in Tintoret and Titian is so unapproachably intense that
the mind unwillingly rests elsewhere. The four landscapes which occur to
me as the most magnificently characteristic are, first, the Flight into
Egypt, of the Scuola di San Rocco (Tintoret;) secondly, the Titian of
the Camuccini collection at Rome, with the figures by John Bellini;
thirdly, Titian's St. Jerome, in the Brera Gallery at Milan; and
fourthly, the St. Pietro Martire, which I name last, in spite of its
importance, because there is something unmeaning and unworthy of Titian
about the undulation of the trunks, and the upper part of it is
destroyed by the intrusion of some dramatic clouds of that species which
I have enough described in our former examination of the central cloud
region, § 13.

I do not mean to set these four works above the rest of the landscape of
these masters; I name them only because the landscape is in them
prominent and characteristic. It would be well to compare with them the
other backgrounds of Tintoret in the Scuola, especially that of the
Temptation and the Agony in the Garden, and the landscape of the two
large pictures in the church of La Madonna dell' Orto.


§ 20. And Turner.

But for immediate and close illustration, it is perhaps best to refer to
a work more accessible, the Cephalus and Procris of Turner, in Liber
Studiorum.

I know of no landscape more purely or magnificently imaginative or
bearing more distinct evidence of the relative and simultaneous
conception of the parts. Let the reader first cover with his hand the
two trunks that rise against the sky on the right, and ask himself how
any termination of the central mass so _ugly_ as the straight trunk
which he will then painfully see, could have been conceived or admitted
without simultaneous conception of the trunks he has taken away on the
right? Let him again conceal the whole central mass, and leave these two
only, and again ask himself whether anything so ugly as that bare trunk
in the shape of a Y, could have been admitted without reference to the
central mass? Then let him remove from this trunk its two arms, and try
the effect; let him again remove the single trunk on the extreme right;
then let him try the third trunk without the excrescence at the bottom
of it; finally, let him conceal the fourth trunk from the right, with
the slender boughs at the top; he will find in each case that he has
destroyed a feature on which everything else depends, and if proof be
required of the vital power of still smaller features, let him remove
the sunbeam that comes through beneath the faint mass of trees on the
hill in the distance.[53]

It is useless to enter into farther particulars; the reader may be left
to his own close examination of this and of the other works of Turner,
in which he will always find the associative imagination developed in
the most profuse and marvellous modes, especially in the drawing of
foliage and skies, in both of which the presence or absence of the
associative power may best be tested in all artists. I have, however,
confined my present illustrations chiefly to foliage, because other
operations of the imagination besides the associative, interfere
extensively in the treatment of sky.


§ 21. The due function of Associative Imagination with respect to
        nature.

There remains but one question to be determined relating to this
faculty, what operation, namely, supposing it possessed in high degree,
it has or ought to have in the artist's treatment of natural scenery.

I have just said that nature is always imaginative, but it does not
follow that her imagination is always of high subject, or that the
imagination of all the parts is of a like and sympathetic kind; the
boughs of every bramble bush are imaginatively arranged, so are those of
every oak and cedar; but it does not follow that there is imaginative
sympathy between bramble and cedar. There are few natural scenes whose
harmonies are not conceivably improvable either by banishment of some
discordant point, or by addition of some sympathetic one; it constantly
happens that there is a profuseness too great to be comprehended, or an
inequality in the pitch, meaning, and intensity of different parts. The
imagination will banish all that is extraneous, it will seize out of the
many threads of different feeling which nature has suffered to become
entangled, one only, and where that seems thin and likely to break, it
will spin it stouter, and in doing this, it never knots, but weaves in
the new thread, so that all its work looks as pure and true as nature
itself, and cannot be guessed from it but by its exceeding simplicity,
(_known_ from it, it cannot be,) so that herein we find another test of
the imaginative work, that it looks always as if it had been gathered
straight from nature, whereas the unimaginative shows its joints and
knots, and is visibly composition.


§ 22. The sign of imaginative work is its appearance of absolute truth.

And here then we arrive at an important conclusion (though one somewhat
contrary to the positions commonly held on the subject,) namely, that if
anything looks unnatural, there can be no imagination in it (at least
not associative.) We frequently hear works that have no truth in them,
justified or elevated on the score of being imaginative. Let it be
understood once for all, that imagination never designs to touch
anything but truth, and though it does not follow that where there is
the appearance of truth, there has been imaginative operation, of this
we may be assured, that where there is appearance of falsehood, the
imagination has had no hand.[54]

For instance, the landscape above mentioned of Titian's St. Jerome may,
for aught I know, be a pure transcript of a rocky slope covered with
chestnuts among his native mountains. It has all the look of a sketch
from nature; if it be not, the imagination developed in it is of the
highest order; if it be, the imagination has only acted in the
suggestion of the dark sky, of the shape of the flakes of solemn cloud,
and of the gleam of russet light along the distant ground.[55]

Again, it is impossible to tell whether the two nearest trunks of the
Æsacus and Hesperie of the Liber Studiorum, especially the large one on
the right with the ivy, have been invented, or taken straight from
nature, they have all the look of accurate portraiture. I can hardly
imagine anything so perfect to have been obtained except from the real
thing; but we know that the imagination must have begun to operate
somewhere, we cannot tell where, since the multitudinous harmonies of
the rest of the picture could hardly in any real scene have continued so
inviolately sweet.

The final tests, therefore, of the work of associative imagination are
its intense simplicity, its perfect harmony, and its absolute truth. It
may be a harmony, majestic, or humble, abrupt, or prolonged, but it is
always a governed and perfect whole, evidencing in all its relations the
weight, prevalence, and universal dominion of an awful, inexplicable
Power; a chastising, animating, and disposing Mind.


FOOTNOTES

  [50] Compare Chapter IV. of this Section.

  [51] On the distinction rightly made by the metaphysicians between
    conception absolute and conception accompanied by reference to past
    time, (or memory,) it is of no necessity here to insist.

  [52] Elements of Chemistry, by the late Edward Turner, M.D. Part II.
    Sec. IV.

  [53] This ray of light, however, has an imaginative power of another
    kind presently to be spoken of. Compare Chap. IV. § 18.

  [54] Compare Chap. III. §30.

  [55] It is said at Venice that Titian took the trees of the St.
    Pietro Martiere out of his garden opposite Murano. I think this
    unlikely; there is something about the lower trunks that has a taint
    of composition: the thought of the whole, however, is thoroughly
    fine. The backgrounds of the frescoes at Padua are also very
    characteristic, and the well-known woodcut of St. Francis receiving
    the stigmata, one of the mightiest of existing landscape thoughts;
    and yet it is pure portraiture of pine and Spanish chestnut.




                            CHAPTER III.

                   OF IMAGINATION PENETRATIVE.


§ 1. Imagination penetrative is concerned not with the combining but
       apprehending of things.

Thus far we have been defining that combining operation of the
imagination, which appears to be in a sort mechanical, yet takes place
in the same inexplicable modes, whatever be the order of conception
submitted to it, though I chose to illustrate it by its dealings with
mere matter before taking cognizance of any nobler subjects of imagery.
We must now examine the dealing of the imagination with its separate
conceptions, and endeavor to understand not only its principles of
selection, but its modes of apprehension with respect to what it
selects.


§ 2. Milton's and Dante's description of flame.

When Milton's Satan first "rears from off the pool, his mighty stature,"
the image of Leviathan before suggested not being yet abandoned, the
effect on the fire-wave is described as of the upheaved monster on the
ocean stream.

               "On each hand the flames,
                Driven backwards, slope their pointing spires,
                       and rolled
                In billows, leave in the midst a horrid vale."

And then follows a fiercely restless piece of volcanic imagery.

                              "As when the force
                Of subterranean wind transports a hill
                Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
                Of thundering Ætna, whose combustible
                And fuell'd entrails thence conceiving fire,
                Sublimed with mineral fury, aid the winds,
                And leave a singed bottom, all involved
                With stench and smoke; such resting found the sole
                Of unblest feet."

Yet I think all this is too far detailed, and deals too much with
externals; we feel rather the form of the fire-waves than their fury, we
walk upon them too securely, and the fuel, sublimation, smoke, and
singeing, seem to me images only of partial combustion; they vary and
extend the conception, but they lower the thermometer. Look back, if you
will, and add to the description the glimmering of the livid flames; the
sulphurous hail and red lightning; yet altogether, however they
overwhelm us with horror, fail of making us thoroughly, unendurably hot.
The intense essence of flame has not been given. Now hear Dante:--

               "Feriami 'l Sole in su l'omero destro
                Che già raggiando tutto l'Occidente
                _Mutava in bianco aspetto di eilestro.
                Ed io_ facea _con l'ombra più rovente
                Parer la flamma_."

That is a slight touch; he has not gone to Ætna nor Pelorus for fuel;
but we shall not soon recover from it--he has taken our breath away and
leaves us gasping. No smoke nor cinders there. Pure, white, hurtling,
formless flame; very fire crystal, we cannot make spires nor waves of
it, nor divide it, nor walk on it, there is no question about singeing
soles of feet. It is lambent annihilation.


§ 3. The imagination seizes always by the innermost point.

Such is always the mode in which the highest imaginative faculty seizes
its materials. It never stops at crusts or ashes, or outward images of
any kind, it ploughs them all aside, and plunges into the very central
fiery heart, nothing else will content its spirituality, whatever
semblances and various outward shows and phases its subject may possess,
go for nothing, it gets within all fence, cuts down to the root, and
drinks the very vital sap of that it deals with: once there it is at
liberty to throw up what new shoots it will, so always that the true
juice and sap be in them, and to prune and twist them at its pleasure,
and bring them to fairer fruit than grew on the old tree; but all this
pruning and twisting is work that it likes not, and often does ill; its
function and gift are the getting at the root, its nature and dignity
depend on its holding things always by the heart. Take its hand from off
the beating of that, and it will prophesy no longer; it looks not in the
eyes, it judges not by the voice, it describes not by outward features,
all that it affirms, judges, or describes, it affirms from within.


§ 4. It acts intuitively and without reasoning.

It may seem to the reader that I am incorrect in calling this
penetrating, possession-taking faculty, imagination. Be it so, the name
is of little consequence; the faculty itself, called by what name we
will, I insist upon as the highest intellectual power of man. There is
no reasoning in it, it works not by algebra, nor by integral calculus,
it is a piercing, Pholas-like mind's tongue that works and tastes into
the very rock heart, no matter what be the subject submitted to it,
substance or spirit, all is alike, divided asunder, joint and marrow,
whatever utmost truth, life, principle, it has, laid bare, and that
which has no truth, life, nor principle, dissipated into its original
smoke at a touch. The whispers at men's ears it lifts into visible
angels. Vials that have lain sealed in the deep sea a thousand years it
unseals, and brings out of them Genii.

Every great conception of poet or painter is held and treated by this
faculty. Every character that is so much as touched by men like
Æschylus, Homer, Dante, or Shakspeare, is by them held by the heart; and
every circumstance or sentence of their being, speaking, or seeming, is
seized by process from within, and is referred to that inner secret
spring of which the hold is never lost for an instant; so that every
sentence, as it has been thought out from the heart, opens for us a way
down to the heart, leads us to the centre, and then leaves us to gather
what more we may; it is the open sesame of a huge, obscure, endless
cave, with inexhaustible treasure of pure gold scattered in it: the
wandering about and gathering the pieces may be left to any of us, all
can accomplish that; but the first opening of that invisible door in the
rock is of the imagination only.


§ 5. Signs of it in language.

Hence there is in every word set down by the imaginative mind an awful
under-current of meaning, and evidence and shadow upon it of the deep
places out of which it has come. It is often obscure, often half told,
for he who wrote it, in his clear seeing of the things beneath, may have
been impatient of detailed interpretation, but if we choose to dwell
upon it and trace it, it will lead us always securely back to that
metropolis of the soul's dominion from which we may follow out all the
ways and tracks to its farthest coasts.

I think the "Quel giorno più non vi leggemmo avante" of Francesca di
Rimini, and the "He has no children" of Macduff are as fine instances as
can be given, but the sign and mark of it are visible on every line of
the four great men above instanced.


§ 6. Absence of imagination, how shown.

The imaginative writer, on the other hand, as he has never pierced to
the heart, so he can never touch it: if he has to paint a passion, he
remembers the external signs of it, he collects expressions of it from
other writers, he searches for similes, he composes, exaggerates, heaps
term on term, figure on figure, till we groan beneath the cold,
disjointed heap; but it is all faggot and no fire, the life breath is
not in it, his passion has the form of the Leviathan, but it never makes
the deep boil, he fastens us all at anchor in the scaly rind of it, our
sympathies remain as idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.

And that virtue of originality that men so strain after, is not newness,
as they vainly think, (there is nothing new,) it is only genuineness; it
all depends on this single glorious faculty of getting to the spring of
things and working out from that; it is the coolness, and clearness, and
deliciousness of the water fresh from the fountain head, opposed to the
thick, hot, unrefreshing drainage from other men's meadows.


§ 7. Distinction between imagination and fancy.

This freshness, however, is not to be taken for an infallible sign of
imagination, inasmuch as it results also from a vivid operation of
fancy, whose parallel function to this division of the imaginative
faculty it is here necessary to distinguish.

I believe it will be found that the entirely unimaginative mind _sees_
nothing of the object it has to dwell upon or describe, and is therefore
utterly unable, as it is blind itself, to set anything before the eyes
of the reader.[56]

The fancy sees the outside, and is able to give a portrait of the
outside, clear, brilliant, and full of detail.[57]

The imagination sees the heart and inner nature, and makes them felt,
but is often obscure, mysterious, and interrupted, in its giving of
outer detail.

Take an instance. A writer with neither imagination nor fancy,
describing a fair lip, does not see it, but thinks about it, and about
what is said of it, and calls it well-turned, or rosy, or delicate, or
lovely, or afflicts us with some other quenching and chilling epithet.
Now hear fancy speak,--

               "Her lips were red, and one was thin,
                Compared with that was next her chin,
                Some bee had stung it newly."[58]

The real, red, bright being of the lip is there in a moment But it is
all outside; no expression yet, no mind. Let us go a step farther with
Warner, of fair Rosamond struck by Eleanor.

               "With that she dashed her on the lips
                So dyed double red;
                Hard was the heart that gave the blow,
                Soft were those lips that bled."

The tenderness of mind begins to mingle with the outside color, the
imagination is seen in its awakening. Next Shelley,--

               "Lamp of life, thy lips are burning
                Through the veil that seems to hide them,
                As the radiant lines of morning
                Through thin clouds, ere they divide them."

There dawns the entire soul in that morning; yet we may stop if we
choose at the image still external, at the crimson clouds. The
imagination is contemplative rather than penetrative. Last, hear
Hamlet,--

"Here hung those lips that I have kissed, I know not how oft. Where be
your gibes now, your gambols, your songs, your flashes of merriment that
were wont to set the table on a roar?"

There is the essence of lip, and the full power of the imagination.

Again, compare Milton's flowers in Lycidas with Perdita's. In Milton it
happens, I think, generally, and in the case before us most certainly,
that the imagination is mixed and broken with fancy, and so the strength
of the imagery is part of iron and part of clay.

     "Bring the rathe primrose, that forsaken dies      (Imagination)
      The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,          (Nugatory)
      The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet,-- (Fancy)
      The glowing violet,                               (Imagination)
      The musk rose, and the well-attired woodbine,     (Fancy, vulgar)
      With cowslips wan, that hang the pensive head,    (Imagination)
      And every flower that sad embroidery wears."      (Mixed)

Then hear Perdita:--

                                      "O, Proserpina,
               For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
               From Dis's wagon. Daffodils
               That come before the swallow dares, and take
               The winds of March with beauty. Violets, dim,
               But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
               Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
               That die unmarried, ere they can behold
               Bright Phoebus in his strength, a malady
               Most incident to maids."

Observe how the imagination in these last lines goes into the very
inmost soul of every flower, after having touched them all at first with
that heavenly timidness, the shadow of Proserpine's; and gilded them
with celestial gathering, and never stops on their spots, or their
bodily shape, while Milton sticks in the stains upon them, and puts us
off with that unhappy freak of jet in the very flower that without this
bit of paper-staining would have been the most precious to us of all.
"There is pansies, that's for thoughts."


§ 8. Fancy how involved with imagination.

So I believe it will be found throughout the operation of the fancy,
that it has to do with the outsides of things, and is content therewith:
of this there can be no doubt in such passage as that description of
Mab, so often given as an illustration of it, and many other instances
will be found in Leigh Hunt's work already referred to. Only some
embarrassment is caused by passages in which fancy is seizing the
outward signs of emotion, understanding them as such, and yet, in
pursuance of her proper function, taking for her share, and for that
which she chooses to dwell upon, the outside sign rather than the
emotion. Note in Macbeth that brilliant instance.

               "Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
                And fan our people cold."

The outward shiver and coldness of fear is seized on, and irregularly
but admirably attributed by the fancy to the drift of the banners.
Compare Solomon's Song where the imagination stays not at the outside,
but dwells on the fearful emotion itself?

  "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning; fair as the moon, clear
  as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?"


§ 9. Fancy is never serious

Now, if this be the prevailing characteristic of the two faculties, it
is evident that certain other collateral differences will result from
it. Fancy, as she stays at the externals, can never feel. She is one of
the hardest hearted of the intellectual faculties, or rather one of the
most purely and simply intellectual. She cannot be made serious,[59] no
edge-tools but she will play with; whereas the imagination is in all
things the reverse. She cannot be but serious; she sees too far, too
darkly, too solemnly, too earnestly, ever to smile. There is something
in the heart of everything, if we can reach it, that we shall not be
inclined to laugh at. The [Greek: anêrithmon gelasma] of the sea is on
its surface, not in the deep.


§ 10. Want of seriousness the bar to high art at the present time.

And thus there is reciprocal action between the intensity of moral
feeling and the power of imagination; for, on the one hand, those who
have keenest sympathy are those who look closest and pierce deepest, and
hold securest; and, on the other, those who have so pierced and seen the
melancholy deeps of things, are filled with the most intense passion and
gentleness of sympathy. Hence, I suppose that the powers of the
imagination may always be tested by accompanying tenderness of emotion,
and thus, (as Byron said,) there is no tenderness like Dante's, neither
any intensity nor seriousness like his, such seriousness that it is
incapable of perceiving that which is commonplace or ridiculous, but
fuses all down into its white-hot fire; and, on the other hand, I
suppose the chief bar to the action of imagination, and stop to all
greatness in this present age of ours, is its mean and shallow love of
jest and jeer, so that if there be in any good and lofty work a flaw or
failing, or undipped vulnerable part where sarcasm may stick or stay, it
is caught at, and pointed at, and buzzed about, and fixed upon, and
stung into, as a recent wound is by flies, and nothing is ever taken
seriously nor as it was meant, but always, if it may be, turned the
wrong way, and misunderstood; and while this is so, there is not, nor
cannot be any hope of achievement of high things; men dare not open
their hearts to us, if we are to broil them on a thorn-fire.


§ 11. Imagination is quiet; fancy, restless.

This, then, is one essential difference between imagination and fancy,
and another is like it and resultant from it, that the imagination being
at the heart of things, poises herself there, and is still, quiet, and
brooding; comprehending all around her with her fixed look, but the
fancy staying at the outside of things, cannot see them all at once, but
runs hither and thither, and round and about to see more and more,
bounding merrily from point to point, and glittering here and there, but
necessarily always settling, if she settle at all, on a point only,
never embracing the whole. And from these single points she can strike
out analogies and catch resemblances, which, so far as the point she
looks at is concerned, are true, but would be false, if she could see
through to the other side. This, however, she cares not to do, the point
of contact is enough for her, and even if there be a gap left between
the two things and they do not quite touch, she will spring from one to
the other like an electric spark, and be seen brightest in her leaping.


§ 12. The detailing operation of fancy.

Now these differences between the imagination and the fancy hold, not
only in the way they lay hold of separate conceptions, but even in the
points they occupy of time, for the fancy loves to run hither and
thither in time, and to follow long chains of circumstances from link to
link; but the imagination, if it may, gets holds of a moment or link in
the middle that implies all the rest, and fastens there. Hence Fuseli's
aphorism, "Invention never suffers the action to expire, nor the
spectator's fancy to consume itself in preparation, or stagnate into
repose. It neither begins from the egg, nor coldly gathers the remains."

In Retsch's illustrations to Schiller's Kampf mit dem Drachen, we have
an instance, miserably feeble indeed, but characteristic, and suited to
our present purpose, of the detailing, finishing action of the fancy.
The dragon is drawn from head to tail, vulture eyes, serpent teeth,
forked tongue, fiery crest, armor, claws and coils as grisly as may be;
his den is drawn, and all the dead bones in it, and all the savage
forest-country about it far and wide; we have him from the beginning of
his career to the end, devouring, rampant, victorious over whole armies,
gorged with death; we are present at all the preparations for his
attack, see him receive his death-wound, and our anxieties are finally
becalmed by seeing him lie peaceably dead on his back.


§ 13. And suggestive, of the imagination.

All the time we have never got into the dragon heart, we have never once
felt real pervading horror, nor sense of the creature's being; it is
throughout nothing but an ugly composition of claw and scale. Now take
up Turner's Jason, Liber Studiorum, and observe how the imagination can
concentrate all this, and infinitely more, into one moment. No far
forest country, no secret paths, nor cloven hills, nothing but a gleam
of pale horizontal sky, that broods over pleasant places far away, and
sends in, through the wild overgrowth of the thicket, a ray of broken
daylight into the hopeless pit. No flaunting plumes nor brandished
lances, but stern purpose in the turn of the crestless helmet, visible
victory in the drawing back of the prepared right arm behind the steady
point. No more claws, nor teeth, nor manes, nor stinging tails. We have
the dragon, like everything else, by the middle. We need see no more of
him. All his horror is in that fearful, slow, grinding upheaval of the
single coil. Spark after spark of it, ring after ring, is sliding into
the light, the slow glitter steals along him step by step, broader and
broader, a lighting of funeral lamps one by one, quicker and quicker; a
moment more, and he is out upon us, all crash and blaze among those
broken trunks;--but he will be nothing then to what he is now.


§ 14. This suggestiveness how opposed to vacancy.

Now, it is necessary here very carefully to distinguish between that
character of the work which depends on the imagination of the beholder,
and that which results from the imagination of the artist, for a work is
often called imaginative when it merely leaves room for the action of
the imagination; whereas though nearly all imaginative works do this,
yet it may be done also by works that have in them no imagination at
all. A few shapeless scratches or accidental stains on a wall; or the
forms of clouds, or any other complicated accidents, will set the
imagination to work to coin something out of them, and all paintings in
which there is much gloom or mystery, possess therein a certain
sublimity owing to the play given to the beholder's imagination,
without, necessarily, being in the slightest degree imaginative
themselves. The vacancy of a truly imaginative work results not from
absence of ideas, or incapability of grasping and detailing them, but
from the painter having told the whole pith and power of his subject and
disdaining to tell more, and the sign of this being the case is, that
the imagination of the beholder is forced to act in a certain mode, and
feels itself overpowered and borne away by that of the painter, and not
able to defend itself, nor go which way it will, and the value of the
work depends on the truth, authority, and inevitability of this
suggestiveness, and on the absolute right choice of the critical moment.
Now observe in this work of Turner's, that the whole value of it
depends on the character of curve assumed by the serpent's body; for had
it been a mere semicircle, or gone down in a series of smaller coils, it
would have been in the first case, ridiculous, as false and unlike a
serpent, and in the second, disgusting, nothing more than an exaggerated
viper, but it is that _coming straight_ at the right hand which suggests
the drawing forth of an enormous weight, and gives the bent part its
springing look, that frightens us. Again, remove the light trunk[60] on
the left, and observe how useless all the gloom of the picture would
have been, if this trunk had not given it depth and _hollowness_.
Finally and chiefly, observe that the painter is not satisfied even with
all the suggestiveness thus obtained, but to make sure of us, and force
us, whether we will or no, to walk his way, and not ours, the trunks of
the trees on the right are all cloven into yawning and writhing heads
and bodies, and alive with dragon energy all about us, note especially
the nearest with its gaping jaws and claw-like branch at the seeming
shoulder; a kind of suggestion which in itself is not imaginative, but
merely fanciful, (using the term fancy in that third sense not yet
explained, corresponding to the third office of imagination;) but it is
imaginative in its present use and application, for the painter
addresses thereby that morbid and fearful condition of mind which he has
endeavored to excite in the spectator, and which in reality would have
seen in every trunk and bough, as it penetrated into the deeper thicket,
the object of its terror.


§ 15. Imagination addresses itself to imagination.

Instances from the works of Tintoret.

It is nevertheless evident, that however suggestive the work or picture
may be, it cannot have effect unless we are ourselves both watchful of
its very hint, and capable of understanding and carrying it out, and
although I think that this power of continuing or accepting the
direction of feeling given is less a peculiar gift, like that of the
original seizing, than a faculty dependent on attention, and improvable
by cultivation; yet, to a certain extent, the imaginative work will not,
I think, be rightly esteemed except by a mind of some corresponding
power; not but that there is an intense enjoyment in minds of feeble yet
light conception in the help and food they get from those of stronger
thought; but a certain imaginative susceptibility is at any rate
necessary, and above all things, earnestness and feeling, so that
assuredly a work of high conceptive dignity will be always
incomprehensible and valueless except in those who go to it in earnest
and give it time; and this is peculiarly the case when the imagination
acts not merely on the immediate subject, nor in giving a fanciful and
peculiar character to prominent objects, as we have just seen, but
busies itself throughout in expressing occult and far-sought sympathies
in every minor detail, of which action the most sublime instances are
found in the works of Tintoret, whose intensity of imagination is such
that there is not the commonest subject to which he will not attach a
range of suggestiveness almost limitless, nor a stone, leaf, or shadow,
nor anything so small, but he will give it meaning and oracular voice.


§ 16. The Entombment.

In the centre of the gallery at Parma, there is a canvas of Tintoret's,
whose sublimity of conception and grandeur of color are seen in the
highest perfection, by their opposition to the morbid and vulgar
sentimentalism of Correggio. It is an Entombment of Christ, with a
landscape distance, of whose technical composition and details I shall
have much to say hereafter, at present I speak only of the thought it is
intended to convey. An ordinary or unimaginative painter would have made
prominent, among his objects of landscape, such as might naturally be
supposed to have been visible from the sepulchre, and shown with the
crosses of Calvary, some portion of Jerusalem, or of the Valley of
Jehoshaphat. But Tintoret has a far higher aim. Dwelling on the peculiar
force of the event before him, as the fulfilment of the final prophecy
respecting the passion, "He made his grave with the wicked and with the
_rich_ in his death," he desires to direct the mind of the spectator to
this receiving of the body of Christ, in its contrast with the houseless
birth and the desert life. And, therefore, behind the ghastly tomb-grass
that shakes its black and withered blades above the rocks of the
sepulchre, there is seen, not the actual material distance of the spot
itself, (though the crosses are shown faintly,) but that to which the
thoughtful spirit would return in vision, a desert place, where the
foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, and against the
barred twilight of the melancholy sky are seen the mouldering beams and
shattered roofing of a ruined cattle-shed, the canopy of the nativity.


§ 17. The Annunciation.

Let us take another instance. No subject has been more frequently or
exquisitely treated by the religious painters than that of the
Annunciation, though as usual, the most perfect type of its pure ideal
has been given by Angelico, and by him with the most radiant
consummation (so far as I know) in a small reliquary in the sacristy of
St^a. Maria Novella. The background there, however, is altogether
decorative; but in the fresco of the corridor of St. Mark's, the
concomitant circumstances are of exceeding loveliness. The Virgin sits
in an open loggia, resembling that of the Florentine church of
L'Annunziata. Before her is a meadow of rich herbage, covered with
daisies. Behind her is seen through the door at the end of the loggia,
her chamber with its single grated window, through which a star-like
beam of light falls into the silence. All is exquisite in feeling, but
not inventive nor imaginative. Severe would be the shock and painful the
contrast, if we could pass in an instant from that pure vision to the
wild thought of Tintoret. For not in meek reception of the adoring
messenger, but startled by the rush of his horizontal and rattling
wings, the virgin sits, not in the quiet loggia, not by the green
pasture of the restored soul, but houseless, under the shelter of a
palace vestibule ruined and abandoned, with the noise of the axe and the
hammer in her ears, and the tumult of a city round about her desolation.
The spectator turns away at first, revolted, from the central object of
the picture, forced painfully and coarsely forward, a mass of shattered
brickwork, with the plaster mildewed away from it, and the mortar
mouldering from its seams; and if he look again, either at this or at
the carpenter's tools beneath it, will perhaps see in the one and the
other, nothing more than such a study of scene as Tintoret could but too
easily obtain among the ruins of his own Venice, chosen to give a coarse
explanation of the calling and the condition of the husband of Mary. But
there is more meant than this. When he looks at the composition of the
picture, he will find the whole symmetry of it depending on a narrow
line of light, the edge of a carpenter's square, which connects these
unused tools with an object at the top of the brickwork, a white stone,
four square, the corner-stone of the old edifice, the base of its
supporting column. This, I think, sufficiently explains the typical
character of the whole. The ruined house is the Jewish dispensation,
that obscurely arising in the dawning of the sky is the Christian; but
the corner-stone of the old building remains, though the builder's tools
lie idle beside it, and the stone which the builders refused is become
the Headstone of the corner.


§ 18. The Baptism of Christ. Its treatment by various painters.

In this picture, however, the force of the thought hardly atones for the
painfulness of the scene and the turbulence of its feeling. The power of
the master is more strikingly shown in his treatment of a subject which,
however important, and however deep in its meaning, supplies not to the
ordinary painter material enough ever to form a picture of high
interest; the Baptism of Christ. From the purity of Giotto to the
intolerable, inconceivable brutality of Salvator,[61] every order of
feeling has been displayed in its treatment; but I am aware of no single
case, except this of which I am about to speak, in which it has formed
an impressive picture.

Giotto's, in the Academy of Florence, engraved in the series just
published, (Galleria delle belle Arti,) is one of the most touching I
know, especially in the reverent action of the attendant angels, and
Leonardo's angel in that of Andrea del Verrocchio is very beautiful, but
the event is one whose character and importance are ineffable upon the
features: the descending dove hardly affects us, because its constant
symbolical occurrence hardens us, and makes us look on it as a mere type
or letter, instead of the actual presence of the Spirit; and by all the
sacred painters the power that might be put into the landscape is lost,
for though their use of foliage and distant sky or mountain is usually
very admirable, as we shall see in the fifth chapter, yet they cannot
deal with near water or rock, and the hexagonal and basaltic
protuberances of their river shore are I think too painful to be endured
even by the most acceptant mind, as eminently in that of Angelico, in
the Vita di Christo, which, as far as I can judge, is a total failure in
action, expression, and all else; and in general it is in this subject
especially, that the greatest painters show their weakness. For this
reason, I suppose, and feeling the difficulty of it, Tintoret has thrown
into it his utmost strength, and it becomes noble in his hands by his
most singularly imaginative expression, not only of the immediate fact,
but of the whole train of thought of which it is suggestive; and by his
considering the baptism not only as the submission of Christ to the
fulfilment of all righteousness, but as the opening of the earthly
struggle with the prince of the powers of the air, which instantly
beginning in the temptation, ended only on the cross.


§ 19. By Tintoret.

The river flows fiercely under the shadow of a great rock. From its
opposite shore, thickets of close, gloomy foliage rise against the
rolling chasm of heaven, through which breaks the brightness of the
descending Spirit. Across these, dividing them asunder, is stretched a
horizontal floor of flaky cloud, on which stand the hosts of heaven.
Christ kneels upon the water, and does not sink; the figure of St. John
is indistinct, but close beside his raised right arm there is a spectre
in the black shade; the fiend, harpy-shaped, hardly seen, glares down
upon Christ with eyes of fire, waiting his time. Beneath this figure
there comes out of the mist a dark hand, the arm unseen, extended to a
net in the river, the spars of which are in the shape of a cross.
Behinds this the roots and under stems of the trees are cut away by the
cloud, and beneath it, and through them, is seen a vision of wild,
melancholy, boundless light, the sweep of the desert, and the figure of
Christ is seen therein alone, with his arms lifted as in supplication or
ecstacy, borne of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the
devil.

There are many circumstances which combine to give to this noble work a
more than usually imaginative character. The symbolical use of the net,
which is the cross net still used constantly in the canals of Venice,
and common throughout Italy, is of the same character as that of the
carpenter's tools in the Annunciation; but the introduction of the
spectral figure is of bolder reach, and yet more, that vision of the
after temptation which is expressly indicated as a subject of thought
rather than of sight, because it is in a part of the scene, which in
_fact_ must have been occupied by the trunks of the trees whose tops are
seen above; and another circumstance completes the mystic character of
the whole, that the flaky clouds which support the angelic hosts take on
the right, where the light first falls upon them, the shape of the head
of a fish, the well-known type both of the baptismal sacrament, and of
Christ.


§ 20. The Crucifixion.

But the most exquisite instance of this imaginative power occurs in an
incident in the background of the Crucifixion. I will not insult this
marvellous picture by an effort at a verbal account of it. I would not
whitewash it with praise, and I refer to it only for the sake of two
thoughts peculiarly illustrative of the intellectual faculty immediately
under discussion. In the common and most catholic treatment of the
subject, the mind is either painfully directed to the bodily agony,
coarsely expressed by outward anatomical signs, or else it is permitted
to rest on that countenance inconceivable by man at any time, but
chiefly so in this its consummated humiliation. In the first case, the
representation is revolting; in the second, inefficient, false, and
sometimes blasphemous. None even of the greatest religious painters have
ever, so far as I know, succeeded here; Giotto and Angelico were cramped
by the traditional treatment, and the latter especially, as before
observed, is but too apt to indulge in those points of vitiated feeling
which attained their worst development among the Byzantines: Perugino
fails in his Christ in almost every instance (of other men than these
after them we need not speak.) But Tintoret here, as in all other cases,
penetrating into the root and deep places of his subject, despising all
outward and bodily appearances of pain, and seeking for some means of
expressing, not the rack of nerve or sinew, but the fainting of the
deserted Son of God before his Eloi cry, and yet feeling himself utterly
unequal to the expression of this by the countenance, has on the one
hand filled his picture with such various and impetuous muscular
exertion that the body of the Crucified is, by comparison, in perfect
repose, and on the other has cast the countenance altogether into shade.
But the agony is told by this, and by this only, that though there yet
remains a chasm of light on the mountain horizon where the earthquake
darkness closes upon the day, the broad and sunlike glory about the head
of the Redeemer has become wan, and of the color of ashes.[62]

But the great painter felt he had something more to do yet. Not only
that agony of the Crucified, but the tumult of the people, that rage
which invoked his blood upon them and their children. Not only the
brutality of the soldier, the apathy of the centurion, nor any other
merely instrumental cause of the Divine suffering, but the fury of his
own people, the noise against him of those for whom he died, were to be
set before the eye of the understanding, if the power of the picture was
to be complete. This rage, be it remembered, was one of disappointed
pride; and the disappointment dated essentially from the time, when but
five days before, the King of Zion came, and was received with
hosannahs, riding upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. To this
time, then, it was necessary to direct the thoughts, for therein are
found both the cause and the character, the excitement of, and the
witness against, this madness of the people. In the shadow behind the
cross, a man, riding on an ass colt, looks back to the multitude, while
he points with a rod to the Christ crucified. The ass is feeding on the
_remnants_ of _withered palm-leaves_.

With this master-stroke I believe I may terminate all illustration of
the peculiar power of the imagination over the feelings of the
spectator, by the elevation into dignity and meaning of the smallest
accessory circumstances. But I have not yet sufficiently dwelt on the
fact from which this power arises, the absolute truth of statement of
the central fact as it was, or must have been. Without this truth, this
awful first moving principle, all direction of the feelings is useless.
That which we cannot excite, it is of no use to know how to govern.


§ 21. The Massacre of innocents.

I have before alluded, Sect. I. Chap. XIV., to the painfulness of
Raffaelle's treatment of the massacre of the innocents. Fuseli affirms
of it that, "in dramatic gradation he disclosed all the mother through
every image of pity and of terror." If this be so, I think the
philosophical spirit has prevailed over the imaginative. The imagination
never errs, it sees all that is, and all the relations and bearings of
it, but it would not have confused the mortal frenzy of maternal terror
with various development of maternal character. Fear, rage, and agony,
at their utmost pitch, sweep away all character: humanity itself would
be lost in maternity, the woman would become the mere personification of
animal fury or fear. For this reason all the ordinary representations of
this subject are, I think, false and cold: the artist has not heard the
shrieks, nor mingled with the fugitives, he has sat down in his study to
twist features methodically, and philosophize over insanity. Not so
Tintoret. Knowing or feeling, that the expression of the human face was
in such circumstances not to be rendered, and that the effort could only
end in an ugly falsehood, he denies himself all aid from the features,
he feels that if he is to place himself or us in the midst of that
maddened multitude, there can be no time allowed for watching
expression. Still less does he depend on details of murder or
ghastliness of death; there is no blood, no stabbing or cutting, but
there is an awful substitute for these in the chiaroscuro. The scene is
the outer vestibule of a palace, the slippery marble floor is fearfully
barred across by sanguine shadows, so that our eyes seem to become
bloodshot and strained with strange horror and deadly vision; a lake of
life before them, like the burning seen of the doomed Moabite on the
water that came by the way of Edom; a huge flight of stairs, without
parapet, descends on the left; down this rush a crowd of women mixed
with the murderers; the child in the arms of one has been seized by the
limbs, she hurls herself over the edge, and falls head downmost,
dragging the child out of the grasp by her weight;--she will be dashed
dead in a second: two others are farther in flight, they reach the edge
of a deep river,--the water is beat into a hollow by the force of their
plunge;--close to us is the great struggle, a heap of the mothers
entangled in one mortal writhe with each other and the swords, one of
the murderers dashed down and crushed beneath them, the sword of another
caught by the blade and dragged at by a woman's naked hand; the
youngest and fairest of the women, her child just torn away from a death
grasp and clasped to her breast with the grip of a steel vice, falls
backwards helplessly over the heap, right on the sword points; all knit
together and hurled down in one hopeless, frenzied, furious abandonment
of body and soul in the effort to save. Their shrieks ring in our ears
till the marble seems rending around us, but far back, at the bottom of
the stairs, there is something in the shadow like a heap of clothes. It
is a woman, sitting quiet,--quite quiet--still as any stone, she looks
down steadfastly on her dead child, laid along on the floor before her,
and her hand is pressed softly upon her brow.


§ 22. Various works in the Scuola di San Rocco.

§ 23. The Last Judgment. How treated by various painters.

This, to my mind, is the only imaginative; that is, the only true, real,
heartfelt representation of the being and actuality of the subject in
existence.[63] I should exhaust the patience of the reader if I were to
dwell at length on the various stupendous developments of the
imagination of Tintoret in the Scuola di San Rocco alone. I would fain
join a while in that solemn pause of the journey into Egypt, where the
silver boughs of the shadowy trees lace with their tremulous lines the
alternate folds of fair clouds, flushed by faint crimson light, and lie
across the streams of blue between those rosy islands, like the white
wakes of wandering ships; or watch beside the sleep of the disciples
among those massy leaves that lie so heavily on the dead of the night
beneath the descent of the angel of the agony, and toss fearfully above
the motion of the torches as the troop of the betrayer emerges out of
the hollows of the olives; or wait through the hour of accusing beside
the judgment seat of Pilate, where all is unseen, unfelt, except the one
figure that stands with its head bowed down, pale like a pillar of
moonlight, half bathed in the glory of the Godhead, half wrapt in the
whiteness of the shroud. Of these and all the other thoughts of
indescribable power that are now fading from the walls of those
neglected chambers, I may perhaps endeavor at some future time to
preserve some image and shadow more faithfully than by words; but I
shall at present terminate our series of illustrations by reference to a
work of less touching, but more tremendous appeal, the Last Judgment in
the Church of Santa Maria dell' Orto. In this subject, almost all
realizing or local statement had been carefully avoided by the most
powerful painters, they judging it better to represent its chief
circumstances as generic thoughts, and present them to the mind in a
typical or abstract form. In the judgment of Angelico the treatment is
purely typical, a long Campo santo, composed of two lines of graves,
stretches away into the distance; on the left side of it rise the
condemned; on the right the just. With Giotto and Orcagna, the
conception, though less rigid, is equally typical, no effort being made
at the suggestion of space, and only so much ground represented as is
absolutely necessary to support the near figures and allow space for a
few graves. Michael Angelo in no respect differs in his treatment,
except that his figures are less symmetrically grouped, and a greater
conception of space is given by their various perspective. No interest
is attached to his background in itself. Fra Bartolomeo, never able to
grapple with any species of sublimity except that of simple religious
feeling, fails most signally in this mighty theme.[64] His group of the
dead, including not more than ten or twelve figures, occupies the
foreground only, behind them a vacant plain extends to the foot of a
cindery volcano, about whose mouth several little black devils like
spiders are skipping and crawling. The judgment of quick and dead is
thus expressed as taking place in about a rood square, and on a dozen of
people at a time; the whole of the space and horizon of the sky and land
being left vacant, and the presence of the Judge of all the earth made
more finite than the sweep of a whirlwind or a thunder-storm.


§ 24. By Tintoret.

By Tintoret only has this unimaginable event been grappled with in its
verity; not typically nor symbolically, but as they may see it who shall
not sleep, but be changed. Only one traditional circumstance he has
received with Dante and Michael Angelo, the boat of the condemned; but
the impetuosity of his mind bursts out even in the adoption of this
image, he has not stopped at the scowling ferryman of the one, nor at
the sweeping blow and demon dragging of the other, but, seized
Hylas-like by the limbs, and tearing up the earth in his agony, the
victim is dashed into his destruction; nor is it the sluggish Lethe, nor
the fiery lake that bears the cursed vessel, but the oceans of the earth
and the waters of the firmament gathered into one white, ghastly
cataract, the river of the wrath of God, roaring down into the gulf
where the world has melted with its fervent heat, choked with the ruin
of nations, and the limbs of its corpses tossed out of its whirling,
like water-wheels. Bat like, out of the holes and caverns and shadows of
the earth, the bones gather, and the clay-heaps heave, rattling and
adhering into half-kneaded anatomies, that crawl, and startle, and
struggle up among the putrid weeds, with the clay clinging to their
clotted hair, and their heavy eyes sealed by the earth darkness yet,
like his of old who went his way unseeing to Siloam Pool; shaking off
one by one the dreams of the prison-house, hardly hearing the clangor of
the trumpets of the armies of God, blinded yet more, as they awake, by
the white light of the new Heaven, until the great vortex of the four
winds bears up their bodies to the judgment seat: the firmament is all
full of them, a very dust of human souls, that drifts, and floats, and
falls in the interminable, inevitable light; the bright clouds are
darkened with them as with thick snow, currents of atom life in the
arteries of heaven, now soaring up slowly, farther, and higher, and
higher still, till the eye and the thought can follow no farther, borne
up, wingless, by their inward faith and by the angel powers invisible,
now hurled in countless drifts of horror before the breath of their
condemnation.


§ 25. The imaginative verity, how distinguished from realism.

Now, I wish the reader particularly to observe throughout all these
works of Tintoret, the distinction of the imaginative verity from
falsehood on the one hand, and from realism on the other. The power of
every picture depends on the penetration of the imagination into the
TRUE nature of the thing represented, and on the utter scorn of the
imagination for all shackles and fetters of mere external fact that
stand in the way of its suggestiveness. In the Baptism it cuts away the
trunks of trees as if they were so much cloud or vapor, that it may
exhibit to the thought the completed sequency of the scene;[65] in the
Massacre, it covers the marble floor with visionary light, that it may
strike terror into the spectator without condescending to butchery; it
defies the bare fact, but creates in him the fearful feeling; in the
Crucifixion it annihilates locality, and brings the palm-leaves to
Calvary, so only that it may bear the mind to the mount of Olives, as in
the entombment it brings the manger to Jerusalem, that it may take the
heart to Bethlehem; and all this it does in the daring consciousness of
its higher and spiritual verity, and in the entire knowledge of the fact
and substance of all that it touches. The imaginary boat of the demon
angel expands the rush of the visible river into the descent of
irresistible condemnation; but to make that rush and roar felt by the
eye and heard by the ear, the rending of the pine branches above the
cataract is taken directly from nature; it is an abstract of Alpine
storm. Hence while we are always placed face to face with whatever is to
be told, there is in and beyond its reality a voice supernatural; and
that which is doubtful in the vision has strength, sinew, and
assuredness, built up in it by fact.


§ 26. The imagination how manifested in sculpture.

Let us, however, still advance one step farther, and observe the
imaginative power deprived of all aid from chiaroscuro, color, or any
other means of concealing the frame-work of its thoughts.

It was said by Michael Angelo that "non ha l'ottimo scultore alcun
concetto, Ch'un marmo solo in se non circoscriva," a sentence which,
though in the immediate sense intended by the writer it may remind us a
little of the indignation of Boileau's Pluto, "Il s'ensuit de la que
tout ce qui se peut dire de beau, est dans les dictionnaires,--il n'y a
que les paroles qui sont transposées," yet is valuable, because it shows
us that Michael Angelo held the imagination to be entirely expressible
in rock, and therefore altogether independent, in its own nature, of
those aids of color and shade by which it is recommended in Tintoret,
though the sphere of its operation is of course by these incalculably
extended. But the presence of the imagination may be rendered in marble
as deep, thrilling, and awful as in painting, so that the sculptor seek
for the soul and govern the body thereby.


§ 27. Bandinelli, Canova, Mino da Fiesole.

§ 28. Michael Angelo.

Of unimaginative work, Bandinelli and Canova supply us with
characteristic instances of every kind, the Hercules and Cacus of the
former, and its criticism by Cellini, will occur at once to every one;
the disgusting statue now placed so as to conceal Giotto's important
tempera picture in Santa Croce is a better instance, but a still more
impressive lesson might be received by comparing the inanity of Canova's
garland grace, and ball-room sentiment with the intense truth,
tenderness, and power of men like Mino da Fiesole, whose chisel leaves
many a hard edge, and despises down and dimple, but it seems to cut
light and carve breath, the marble burns beneath it, and becomes
transparent with very spirit. Yet Mino stopped at the human nature; he
saw the soul, but not the ghostly presences about it; it was reserved
for Michael Angelo to pierce deeper yet, and to see the indwelling
angels. No man's soul is alone: Laocoon or Tobit, the serpent has it by
the heart or the angel by the hand, the light or the fear of the
spiritual things that move beside it may be seen on the body; and that
bodily form with Buonaroti, white, solid, distinct material, though it
be, is invariably felt as the instrument or the habitation of some
infinite, invisible power. The earth of the Sistine Adam that begins to
burn; the woman embodied burst of adoration from his sleep; the twelve
great torrents of the Spirit of God that pause above us there, urned in
their vessels of clay; the waiting in the shadow of futurity of those
through whom the promise and presence of God went down from the Eve to
the Mary, each still and fixed, fixed in his expectation, silent,
foreseeing, faithful, seated each on his stony throne, the building
stones of the word of God, building on and on, tier by tier, to the
Refused one, the head of the corner; not only these, not only the troops
of terror torn up from the earth by the four quartered winds of the
Judgment, but every fragment and atom of stone that he ever touched
became instantly inhabited by what makes the hair stand up and the words
be few; the St. Matthew, not yet disengaged from his sepulchre, bound
hand and foot by his grave clothes, it is left for us to loose him; the
strange spectral wreath of the Florence Pieta, casting its pyramidal,
distorted shadow, full of pain and death, among the faint purple lights
that cross and perish under the obscure dome of St^a. Maria del Fiore,
the white lassitude of joyous limbs, panther like, yet passive, fainting
with their own delight, that gleam among the Pagan formalisms of the
Uffizii, far away, showing themselves in their lustrous lightness as the
waves of an Alpine torrent do by their dancing among the dead stones,
though the stones be as white as they:[66] and finally, and perhaps more
than all, those four ineffable types, not of darkness nor of day--not of
morning nor evening, but of the departure and the resurrection, the
twilight and the dawn of the souls of men--together with the spectre
sitting in the shadow of the niche above them;[67] all these, and all
else that I could name of his forming, have borne, and in themselves
retain and exercise the same inexplicable power--inexplicable because
proceeding from an imaginative perception almost superhuman, which goes
whither we cannot follow, and is where we cannot come; throwing naked
the final, deepest root of the being of man, whereby he grows out of the
invisible, and holds on his God home.[68]


§ 29. Recapitulation. The perfect function of the imagination is the
        intuitive perception of ultimate truth.

Now, in all these instances, let it be observed, for it is to that end
alone that I have been arguing all along, that the virtue of the
imagination is its reaching, by intuition and intensity of gaze, (not by
reasoning, but by its authoritative opening and revealing power,) a
more essential truth than is seen at the surface of things. I repeat
that it matters not whether the reader is willing call this faculty
imagination or no, I do not care about the name; but I would be
understood when I speak of imagination hereafter, to mean this, the true
foundation of all art which exercises eternal authority over men's
minds; (all other imagination than this is either secondary and
contemplative, or utterly spurious;) the base of whose authority and
being is its perpetual thirst of truth and purpose to be true. It has no
food, no delight, no care, no perception, except of truth; it is forever
looking under masks, and burning up mists; no fairness of form, no
majesty of seeming will satisfy it; the first condition of its
existence is incapability of being deceived; and though it sometimes
dwells upon and substantiates the fictions of fancy, yet its own
operation is to trace to their farthest limit the true laws and
likelihoods even of the fictitious creation. This has been well
explained by Fuseli, in his allusion to the Centaur of Zeuxis; and there
is not perhaps a greater exertion of imaginative power than may be
manifested in following out to their farthest limits the necessary
consequences of such arbitrary combination; but let not the jests of the
fancy be confounded with that after serious work of the imagination
which gives them all the nervous verity and substance of which they are
capable. Let not the monsters of Chinese earthenware be confounded with
the Faun, Satyr, or Centaur.


§ 30. Imagination now vulgarly understood.

How different this definition of the imagination may be from the idea of
it commonly entertained among us, I can hardly say, because I have a
very indistinct idea of what is usually meant by the term. I hear modern
works constantly praised as being imaginative, in which I can trace no
virtue of any kind; but simple, slavish, unpalliated falsehood and
exaggeration; I see not what merit there can be in pure, ugly, resolute
fiction; it is surely easy enough to be wrong; there are many ways of
being unlike nature. I understand not what virtue that is which entitles
one of these ways to be called imaginative, rather than another; and I
am still farther embarrassed by hearing the portions of those works
called especially imaginative in which there is the most effort at
minute and mechanical statement of contemptible details, and in which
the artist would have been as actual and absolute in imitation as an
echo, if he had known how. Against convictions which I do not
understand, I cannot argue; but I may warn the artist that imagination
of this strange kind, is not capable of bearing the time test; nothing
of its doing ever has continued its influence over men; and if he
desires to take place among the great men of older time, there is but
one way for it; and one kind of imagination that will stand the immortal
light: I know not how far it is by effort cultivable; but we have
evidence enough before us to show in what direction that effort must be
made.


§ 31. How its cultivation is dependent on the moral feelings.

We have seen (§ 10) that the imagination is in no small degree
dependent on acuteness of moral emotion; in fact, all moral truth can
only thus be apprehended--and it is observable, generally, that all true
and deep emotion is imaginative, both in conception and expression; and
that the mental sight becomes sharper with every full beat of the heart;
and, therefore, all egotism, and selfish care, or regard, are in
proportion to their constancy, destructive of imagination; whose play
and power depend altogether on our being able to forget ourselves and
enter like possessing spirits into the bodies of things about us.


§ 32. On independence of mind.

Again, as the life of imagination is in the discovering of truth, it is
clear it can have no respect for sayings or opinions: knowing in itself
when it has invented truly--restless and tormented except when it has
this knowledge, its sense of success or failure is too acute to be
affected by praise or blame. Sympathy it desires--but can do without; of
opinions it is regardless, not in pride, but because it has no vanity,
and is conscious of a rule of action and object of aim in which it
cannot be mistaken; partly, also, in pure energy of desire and longing
to do and to invent more and more, which suffer it not to suck the
sweetness of praise--unless a little, with the end of the rod in its
hand, and without pausing in its march. It goes straight forward up the
hill; no voices nor mutterings can turn it back, nor petrify it from its
purpose.[69]


§ 33. And on habitual reference to nature.

Finally, it is evident, that like the theoretic faculty, the imagination
must be fed constantly by external nature--after the illustrations we
have given, this may seem mere truism, for it is clear that to the
exercise of the penetrative faculty a subject of penetration is
necessary; but I note it because many painters of powerful mind have
been lost to the world by their suffering the restless writhing of their
imagination in its cage to take place of its healthy and exulting
activity in the fields of nature. The most imaginative men always study
the hardest, and are the most thirsty for new knowledge. Fancy plays
like a squirrel in its circular prison, and is happy; but imagination is
a pilgrim on the earth--and her home is in heaven. Shut her from the
fields of the celestial mountains--bar her from breathing their lofty,
sun-warmed air; and we may as well turn upon her the last bolt of the
tower of famine, and give the keys to the keeping of the wildest surge
that washes Capraja and Gorgona.


FOOTNOTES

  [56] Compare Arist. Rhet. III. 11.

  [57] For the distinction between fancy and simple conception; see
    Chap. IV. § 3.

  [58] I take this and the next instance from Leigh Hunt's admirable
    piece of criticism, "Imagination and Fancy," which ought to be read
    with care, and to which, though somewhat loosely arranged, I may
    refer for all the filling up and illustration that the subject
    requires. With respect to what has just been said respecting want of
    imagination, compare his criticism of Addison's Cato, p. 28. I
    cannot, however, confirm his judgment, nor admit his selection of
    instances, among painters: he has looked to their manner only and
    habitual choice of subject, without feeling their power; and has
    given work to the coarseness, mindlessness, and eclecticism of Guido
    and the Carracci, which in its poetical demand of tenderness might
    have foiled Pinturicchio; of dignity, Leonardo; and of color,
    Giorgione.

  [59] Fancy, in her third function may, however, become serious, and
    gradually rise into imagination in doing so. Compare Chap. IV. § 5.

  [60] I am describing from a proof: in bad impressions this trunk is
    darkened.

  [61] The picture is in the Guadagni palace. It is one of the most
    important landscapes Salvator ever painted. The figures are studied
    from street beggars. On the one side of the river, exactly opposite
    the point where the Baptism of Christ takes place, the painter, with
    a refinement of feeling peculiarly his own, has introduced some
    ruffians stripping off their shirts to bathe. He is fond of this
    incident. It occurs again in one of the marines of the Pitti palace,
    with the additional interest of a foreshortened figure, swimming on
    its back, feet foremost, exactly in the stream of light to which the
    eye is principally directed.

  [62] This circumstance, like most that lie not at the surface, has
    escaped Fuseli, though his remarks on the general tone of the
    picture are very good, as well as his opposition of it to the
    treatment of Rubens. (Lecture IX.)

  [63] Note the shallow and uncomprehending notice of this picture by
    Fuseli. His description of the treatment of it by other painters is
    however true, terse, and valuable.

  [64] Fresco in an out-house of the Ospedale St^a. Maria Nuova at
    Florence.

  [65] The same thing is done yet more boldly in the large composition
    of the ceiling; the plague of fiery serpents; a part of the host,
    and another sky horizon are seen through an opening in the ground.

  [66] The Bacchus. There is a small statue opposite it
    also--unfinished, but "a spirit still."

  [67] I would have insisted more on the ghostly vitality of this
    dreadful statue; but the passage referring to it in Rogers's Italy
    supersedes all further description. I suppose most lovers of art
    know it by heart.

                 "Nor then forget that chamber of the dead,
               Where the gigantic shapes of Night and Day,
               Turned into stone, rest everlastingly;
               Yet still are breathing, and shed round at noon
               A twofold influence,--only to be felt--
               A light, a darkness, mingling each with each;
               Both, and yet neither. There, from age to age,
               Two ghosts are sitting on their sepulchres.
               That is the Duke Lorenzo. Mark him well.
               He meditates, his head upon his hand.
               What from beneath his helm-like bonnet scowls?
               Is it a face, or but an eyeless skull?
               'Tis lost in shade; yet, like the basilisk,
               It fascinates, and is intolerable.
               His mien is noble, most majestical!
               Then most so, when the distant choir is heard
               At morn or eve--nor fail thou to attend
               On that thrice-hallowed day, when all are there;
               When all, propitiating with solemn songs,
               Visit the Dead. Then wilt thou feel his power!"

    It is strange that this should be the only written instance (as far
    as I recollect) of just and entire appreciation of Michael Angelo's
    spiritual power. It is perhaps owing to the very intensity of his
    imagination that he has been so little understood--for, as I before
    said, imagination can never be met by vanity, nor without
    earnestness. His Florentine followers saw in him an anatomist and
    posture-master--and art was finally destroyed by the influence over
    admiring idiocy of the greatest mind that art ever inspired.

  [68] I have not chosen to interrupt the argument respecting the
    essence of the imaginative faculty by any remarks on the execution
    of the imaginative hand; but we can hardly leave Tintoret and
    Michael Angelo without some notice of the pre-eminent power of
    execution exhibited by both of them, in consequence of their vigor
    and clearness of conception; nor without again warning the lower
    artist from confounding this velocity of decision and impatience
    with the velocity of affectation or indolence. Every result of real
    imagination we have seen to be a truth of some sort; and it is the
    characteristic of truth to be in some way tangible, seizable,
    distinguishable, and clear, as it is of falsehood to be obscure,
    confused, and confusing. Not but that many, if not most truths have
    a dark side, a side by which they are connected with mysteries too
    high for us,--nay, I think it is commonly but a poor and miserable
    truth which the human mind can walk all round, but at all events
    they have one side by which we can lay hold of them, and feel that
    they are downright adamant, and that their form, though lost in
    cloud here and there, is unalterable and real, and not less real and
    rocky because infinite, and joined on, St. Michael's mount-like to a
    far mainland. So then, whatever the real imagination lays hold of,
    as it is a truth, does not alter into anything else as the
    imaginative part works at it and feels over it and finds out more of
    it, but comes out more and more continually, all that is found out
    pointing to and indicating still more behind, and giving additional
    stability and reality to that which is discovered already. But if it
    be fancy or any other form of pseudo-imagination which is at work,
    then that which it gets hold of may not be a truth, but only an
    idea, which will keep giving way as soon as we try to take hold of
    it and turning into something else, so that as we go on copying it,
    every part will be inconsistent with all that has gone before, and
    at intervals it will vanish altogether, and leave blanks which must
    be filled up by any means at hand. And in these circumstances, the
    painter, unable to seize his thought, because it has not substance
    nor bone enough to bear grasping, is liable to catch at every line
    that he lays down, for help and suggestion, and to be led away by it
    to something else, which the first effort to realize dissipates in
    like manner, placing another phantom in its stead, until out of the
    fragments of these successive phantoms he has glued together a
    vague, mindless, involuntary whole, a mixture of all that was trite
    or common in each of the successive conceptions, for that is
    necessarily what is first caught a heap of things with the bloom off
    and the chill on, laborious, unnatural, inane, with its emptiness
    disguised by affectation, and its tastelessness salted by
    extravagance.

    Necessarily, from these modes of conception, three vices of
    execution must result; and these are necessarily found in all those
    parts of the work where any trust has been put in conception, and
    only to be avoided in portions of actual portraiture (for a
    thoroughly unimaginative painter can make no use of a study--all his
    studies are guesses and experiments, all are equally wrong, and so
    far felt to be wrong by himself, that he will not work by any of
    them, but will always endeavor to improve upon them in the picture,
    and so lose the use of them). These three vices of execution are
    then--first, feebleness of handling, owing to uncertainty of
    intention; secondly, intentional carelessness of handling, in the
    hope of getting by accident something more than was meant; and
    lastly, violence and haste of handling, in the effort to secure as
    much as possible of the obscure image of which the mind feels itself
    losing hold. (I am throughout, it will be observed, attributing
    right feeling to the unimaginative painter; if he lack this, his
    execution may be cool and determined, as he will set down falsehood
    without blushing, and ugliness without suffering.) Added to these
    various evidences of weakness, will be the various vices assumed for
    the sake of concealment; morbid refinements disguising
    feebleness--or insolence and coarseness to cover desperation. When
    the imagination is powerful, the resulting execution is of course
    the contrary of all this: its first steps will commonly be
    impetuous, in clearing its ground and getting at its first
    conception--as we know of Michael Angelo in his smiting his blocks
    into shape, (see the passage quoted by Sir Charles Clarke in the
    Essay on Expression, from Blaise de Vigenere,) and as it is visible
    in the handling of Tintoret always: as the work approaches
    completion, the stroke, while it remains certain and firm, because
    its end is always known, may frequently become slow and careful,
    both on account of the difficulty of following the pure lines of the
    conception, and because there is no fear felt of the conception's
    vanishing before it can be realized; but generally there is a
    certain degree of impetuosity visible in the works of all the men of
    high imagination, when they are not working from a study, showing
    itself in Michael Angelo by the number of blocks he left unfinished,
    and by some slight evidences in those he completed of his having
    worked painfully towards the close; so that, except the Duke
    Lorenzo, the Bacchus of the Florentine gallery, and the Pieta of
    Genoa, I know not any of his finished works in which his mind is as
    mightily expressed as in his marble sketches; only, it is always to
    be observed that impetuosity or rudeness of hand is not
    necessarily--and, if imaginative, is never--carelessness. In the two
    landscapes at the end of the Scuola di San Rocco, Tintoret has drawn
    several large tree trunks with two strokes of his brush--one for the
    dark, and another for the light side; and the large rock at the foot
    of the picture of the Temptation is painted with a few detached
    touches of gray over a flat brown ground; but the touches of the
    tree-trunks have been followed by the mind as they went down with
    the most painful intensity through their every undulation; and the
    few gray strokes on the stone are so considered that a better stone
    cone could not be painted if we took a month to it: and I suppose,
    generally, it would be utterly impossible to give an example of
    execution in which less was left to accident, or in which more care
    was concentrated in every stroke, than the seemingly regardless and
    impetuous handling of this painter.

    On the habit of both Tintoret and Michael Angelo to work straight
    forward from the block and on the canvas, without study or model, it
    is needless to insist; for though this is one of the most amazing
    proofs of their imaginative power, it is a dangerous precedent. No
    mode of execution ought ever to be taught to a young artist as
    better than another; he ought to understand the truth of what he has
    to do, felicitous execution will follow as a matter of course; and
    if he feels himself capable of getting at the right at once, he will
    naturally do so without reference to precedent. He ought to hold
    always that his duty is to attain the highest result he can,--but
    that no one has any business with the means or time he has taken. If
    it can be done quickly, let it be so done; if not, let it be done at
    any rate. For knowing his way he is answerable, and therefore must
    not walk _doubtingly_; but no one can blame him for walking
    _cautiously_, if the way be a narrow one, with a slip on each side.
    He may pause, but he must not hesitate,--and tremble, but must not
    vacillate.

  [69] That which we know of the lives of M. Angelo and Tintoret is
    eminently illustrative of this temper.




                            CHAPTER IV.

                  OF IMAGINATION CONTEMPLATIVE.


§ 1. Imagination contemplative is not part of the essence, but only a
       habit or mode of the faculty.

We have, in the two preceding chapters, arrived at definite conclusions
respecting the power and essence of the imaginative faculty. In these
two acts of penetration and combination, its separating and
characteristic attributes are entirely developed; it remains for us only
to observe a certain habit or mode of operation in which it frequently
delights, and by which it addresses itself to our perceptions more
forcibly, and asserts its presence more distinctly than in those mighty
but more secret workings wherein its life consists.

In our examination of the combining imagination, we chose to assume the
first or simple conception to be as clear in the absence as in the
presence of the object of it. This, I suppose, is in point of fact never
the case, nor is an approximation to such distinctness of conception
always a characteristic of the imaginative mind. Many persons have
thorough and felicitous power of drawing from memory, yet never
originate a thought, nor excite an emotion.


§ 2. The ambiguity of conception.

§ 3. Is not in itself capable of adding to the charm of fair things.

The form in which conception actually occurs to ordinary minds appears
to derive value and preciousness from that indefiniteness which we
alluded to in the second chapter, (§ 2,) for there is an unfailing charm
in the memory and anticipation of things beautiful, more sunny and
spiritual than attaches to their presence; for with their presence it
is possible to be sated, and even wearied, but with the imagination of
them never; in so far that it needs some self-discipline to prevent the
mind from falling into a morbid condition of dissatisfaction with all
that it immediately possesses, and continual longing for things absent;
and yet I think this charm is not justly to be attributed to the mere
vagueness and uncertainty of the conception, except thus far, that of
objects whose substantial presence was ugly or painful the sublimity and
impressiveness, if there were any, is retained in the conception, while
the sensual offensiveness is withdrawn; thus circumstances of horror may
be safely touched in verbal description, and for a time dwelt upon by
the mind, as often by Homer and Spenser, (by the latter frequently with
too much grossness, as in the description of the combat of the Red-Cross
Knight with Errour,) which could not for a moment be regarded or
tolerated in their reality, or on canvas; and besides this mellowing and
softening operation on those it retains, the conceptive faculty has the
power of letting go many of them altogether out of its groups of ideas,
and retaining only those where the meminisse juvabit will apply; and in
this way the entire group of memories becomes altogether delightful; but
of those parts of anything which are in themselves beautiful, I think
the indistinctness no benefit, but that the brighter they are the
better; and that the peculiar charm we feel in conception results from
its grasp and blending of ideas rather than from their obscurity, for we
do not usually recall, as we have seen, one part at a time only of a
pleasant scene, one moment only of a happy day; but together with each
single object we summon up a kind of crowded and involved shadowing
forth of all the other glories with which it was associated, and into
every moment we concentrate an epitome of the day; and it will happen
frequently that even when the visible objects or actual circumstances
are not in numbers remembered; yet the feeling and joy of them is
obtained we know not how or whence, and so with a kind of conceptive
burning glass we bend the sunshine of all the day, and the fulness of
all the scene upon every point that we successively seize; and this
together with more vivid action of fancy, for I think that the wilful
and playful seizure of the points that suit her purpose and help her
springing, whereby she is distinguished from simple conception, takes
place more easily and actively with the memory of things than in
presence of them. But, however this be, and I confess that there is much
that I cannot satisfactorily to myself unravel with respect to the
nature of simple conception; it is evident that this agreeableness,
whatever it be, is not by art attainable, for all art is in some sort
realization; it may be the realization of obscurity or indefiniteness,
but still it must differ from the mere conception of obscurity and
indefiniteness; so that whatever emotions depend absolutely on
imperfectness of conception, as the horror of Milton's Death, cannot be
rendered by art, for art can only lay hold of things which have shape,
and destroys by its touch the fearfulness or pleasurableness of those
which shape have none.


§ 4. But gives to the imagination its regardant power over them.

But on this indistinctness of conception, itself comparatively valueless
and unaffecting, is based the operation of the imaginative faculty with
which we are at present concerned, and in which its glory is
consummated: whereby, depriving the subject of material and bodily
shape, and regarding such of its qualities only as it chooses for
particular purpose, it forges these qualities together in such groups
and forms as it desires, and gives to their abstract being consistency
and reality, by striking them as it were with the die of an image
belonging to other matter, which stroke having once received, they pass
current at once in the peculiar conjunction and for the peculiar value
desired.

Thus, in the description of Satan quoted in the first chapter, "And like
a comet burned," the bodily shape of the angel is destroyed, the
inflaming of the formless spirit is alone regarded; and this, and his
power of evil associated in one fearful and abstract conception are
stamped to give them distinctness and permanence with the image of the
comet, "that fires the length of Ophiuchus huge." Yet this could not be
done, but that the image of the comet itself is in a measure indistinct,
capable of awful expansion, and full of threatening and fear. Again, in
his fall, the imagination binds up the thunder, the resistance, the
massy prostration, separates them from the external form, and binds them
together by the help of that image of the mountain half sunk; which
again would be unfit but for its own indistinctness, and for that
glorious addition "with all his pines," whereby a vitality and
spear-like hostility are communicated to its falling form, and the fall
is marked as not utter subversion, but sinking only, the pines remaining
in their uprightness, and unity, and threatening of darkness upon the
descended precipice: and again in that yet more noble passage at the
close of the fourth book, where almost every operation of the
contemplative imagination is concentrated; the angelic squadron first
gathered into one burning mass by the single expression "sharpening in
mooned horns," then told out in their unity and multitude and stooped
hostility, by the image of the wind upon the corn; Satan endowed with
godlike strength and endurance in that mighty line, "like Teneriffe or
Atlas, unremoved," with infinitude of size the next instant, and with
all the vagueness and terribleness of spiritual power, by the "horror
plumed," and the "_what seemed_ both spear and shield."


§ 5. The third office of fancy distinguished from imagination
       contemplative.

The third function of fancy, already spoken of as subordinate to this of
the imagination, is the highest of which she is capable; like the
imagination, she beholds in the things submitted to her treatment things
different from the actual; but the suggestions she follows are not in
their nature essential in the object contemplated; and the images
resulting, instead of illustrating, may lead the mind away from it, and
change the current of contemplative feeling; for as in her operation
parallel to imagination penetrative, we saw her dwelling upon external
features, while the nobler sister, faculty, entered within, so now, when
both, from what they see and know in their immediate object, are
conjuring up images illustrative or elevatory of it, the fancy
necessarily summons those of mere external relationship, and therefore
of unaffecting influence; while the imagination, by every ghost she
raises, tells tales about the prison-house, and therefore never loses
her power over the heart, nor her unity of emotion. On the other hand,
the regardant or contemplative action of fancy is in this different
from, and in this nobler, than that mere seizing and likeness-catching
operation we saw in her before; that when contemplative, she verily
believes in the truth of the vision she has summoned, loses sight of
actuality, and beholds the new and spiritual image faithfully and even
seriously; whereas before, she summoned no spiritual image, but merely
caught the vivid actuality, or the curious resemblance of the real
object; not that these two operations are separate, for the fancy passes
gradually from mere vivid right of reality, and witty suggestion of
likeness, to a ghostly sight of what is unreal; and through this, in
proportion as she begins to feel, she rises towards and partakes of
imagination itself, for imagination and fancy are continually united,
and it is necessary, when they are so, carefully to distinguish the
feelingless part which is fancy's, from the sentient part, which is
imagination's. Let us take a few instances. Here is fancy, first, very
beautiful, in her simple capacity of likeness-catching:--

              "To-day we purpose--aye, this hour we mount
               To spur three leagues towards the Apennine.
               Come down, we pray thee, ere the _hot sun count
               His dewy rosary_ on the eglantine."

Seizing on the outside resemblances of bead form, and on the slipping
from their threading bough one by one, the fancy is content to lose the
heart of the thing, the solemnity of prayer: or perhaps I do the
glorious poet wrong in saying this, for the sense of a sun worship and
orison in beginning its race, may have been in his mind; and so far as
it was so, the passage is imaginative and not fanciful. But that which
most readers would accept from it, is the mere flash of the external
image, in whose truth the fancy herself does not yet believe and
therefore is not yet contemplative. Here, however, is fancy believing in
the images she creates:--

             "It feeds the quick growth of the serpent-vine,
              And the dark linked ivy tangling wild
              And budding, blown, or odor faded blooms,
              Which _star the winds with points of colored light_
              As they rain through them; and _bright golden globes
              Of fruit suspended in their own green heaven_."

It is not, observe, a mere likeness that is caught here; but the flowers
and fruit are entirely deprived by the fancy of their material
existence, and contemplated by her seriously and faithfully as stars and
worlds; yet it is only external likeness that she catches; she forces
the resemblance, and lowers the dignity of the adopted image.

Next take two delicious stanzas of fancy regardant, (believing in her
creations,) followed by one of heavenly imagination, from Wordsworth's
address to the daisy:--

              "A Nun demure--of lowly port;
               Or sprightly maiden--of Love's court,
               In thy simplicity the sport
               Of all temptations.
               A Queen in crown of rubies drest,
               A starveling in a scanty vest,
               Are all as seems to suit thee best,--
               Thy appellations.

               I see thee glittering from afar,
               And then thou art a pretty star,--
               Not quite so fair as many are
               In heaven above thee.
               Yet like a star, with glittering crest,
               Self-poised in air thou seem'st to rest;--
               May peace come never to his nest
               Who shall reprove thee.

               Sweet flower--for by that name at last,
               When all my reveries are past,
               I call thee, and to that cleave fast.
               Sweet silent creature,
               That breath'st with me, in sun and air,
               Do thou, as thou art wont, repair
               My heart with gladness, and a share
               Of thy meek nature."


§ 6. Various instances.

Observe how spiritual, yet how wandering and playful the fancy is in the
first two stanzas, and how far she flies from the matter in hand, never
stopping to brood on the character of any one of the images she summons,
and yet for a moment truly seeing and believing in them all; while in
the last stanza the imagination returns with its deep feeling to the
heart of the flower, and "_cleaves fast_" to that. Compare the operation
of the imagination in Coleridge, on one of the most trifling objects
that could possibly have been submitted to its action.

                                    "The thin blue flame
               Lies on my low-burnt fire, and quivers not:
               Only that film which fluttered on the grate
               Still flutters there, the sole unquiet thing.
               Methinks its motion in this hush of nature
               Gives it dim sympathies with me, who live,
               Making it a companionable form,
               Whose puny flaps and freaks the idling spirit
               By its own moods interprets; everywhere,
               Echo or mirror seeking of itself,
               And makes a toy of thought."

Lastly, observe the sweet operation of fancy regardant, in the following
well-known passage from Scott, where both her beholding and transforming
powers are seen in their simplicity.

              "The rocky summits--split and rent,
               Formed turret, dome, or battlement.--
               Or seemed fantastically set
               With cupola or minaret.
               Nor were these earth-born castles bare,
               Nor lacked they many a banner fair,
               For from their shivered brows displayed,
               Far o'er th' unfathomable glade,
               All twinkling with the dew-drop sheen,
               The brier-rose fell, in streamers green,--
               And creeping shrubs of thousand dyes
               Waved in the west wind's summer sighs."

Let the reader refer to this passage, with its pretty tremulous
conclusion above the pine tree, "where glistening streamers waved and
danced," and then compare with it the following, where the imagination
operates on a scene nearly similar.

           "Gray rocks did peep from the spare moss, and stemm'd
            The struggling brook; tall spires of windle strae
            Threw their thin shadows down the rugged slope,
            And nought but knarled roots of ancient pines,
            Branchless and blasted, clench'd with grasping roots
            Th' unwilling soil.    .     .     .
            .    .    .    .    .    .   A gradual change was here,
            Yet ghastly. For, _as fast years flow away,
            The smooth brow gathers, and the hair grows thin
            And white; and where irradiate dewy eyes
            Had shone, gleam stony orbs; so from his steps
            Bright flowers departed, and the beautiful shade
            Of the green groves, with all their odorous winds
            And musical motions._ .    .    .    .
            .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
            .    .    .    .    .    Where the pass extends
            Its stony jaws, the abrupt mountain breaks.
            And seems with its accumulated crags
            To overhang the world; for wide expand
            Beneath the wan stars, and descending moon,
            Islanded seas, blue mountains, mighty streams,
            _Dim tracts and vast, robed in the lustrous gloom
            Of leaden-colored even_, and _fiery hills
            Mingling their flames with twilight_ on the verge
            Of the remote horizon. The near scene
            In naked, and severe simplicity
            Made contrast with the universe. A pine
            Rock-rooted, stretch'd athwart the vacancy
            Its swinging boughs, to each _inconstant blast
            Yielding one only response at each pause_,
            In most familiar cadence, with the howl,
            The thunder, and the hiss of _homeless_ streams,
            Mingling its solemn song."

[Illustration: STUDY OF STONE PINE, AT SESTRI. From a drawing by
Ruskin.]

In this last passage, the mind never departs from its solemn possession
of the solitary scene, the imagination only giving weight, meaning, and
strange human sympathies to all its sights and sounds.

In that from Scott,[70]--the fancy, led away by the outside resemblance
of floating form and hue to the banners, loses the feeling and
possession of the scene, and places herself in circumstances of
character completely opposite to the quietness and grandeur of the
natural objects; this would have been unjustifiable, but that the
resemblance occurs to the mind of the monarch, rather than to that of
the poet; and it is that, which of all others, would have been the most
likely to occur at the time; in this point of view it has high
imaginative propriety. Of the same fanciful character is that
transformation of the tree trunks into dragons noticed before in
Turner's Jason; and in the same way this becomes imaginative as it
exhibits the effect of fear in disposing to morbid perception. Compare
with it the real and high action of the imagination on the same matter
in Wordsworth's Yew trees (which I consider the most vigorous and solemn
bit of forest landscape ever painted):--

                      "Each particular trunk a growth
             Of intertwisted fibres serpentine,
             Up coiling and inveterately convolved,
             _Nor uninformed with Phantasy, and looks
             That threaten the profane_."

It is too long to quote, but the reader should refer to it: let him note
especially, if painter, that pure touch of color, "by sheddings from the
pining umbrage tinged."

In the same way, the blasted trunk on the left, in Turner's drawing of
the spot where Harold fell at the battle of Hastings, takes, where its
boughs first separate, the shape of the head of an arrow; this, which is
mere fancy in itself, is imagination as it supposes in the spectator an
excited condition of feeling dependent on the history of the spot.


§ 7. Morbid or nervous fancy.

I have been led perhaps into too great detail in illustrating these
points; but I think it is of no small importance to prove how in all
cases the imagination is based upon, and appeals to, a deep heart
feeling; and how faithful and earnest it is in contemplation of the
subject matter, never losing sight of it, or disguising it, but
depriving it of extraneous and material accidents, and regarding it in
its disembodied essence. I have not, however, sufficiently noted in
opposition to it, that diseased action of the fancy which depends more
on nervous temperament than intellectual power; and which, as in
dreaming, fever, insanity, and other morbid conditions of mind is
frequently a source of daring and inventive conception; and so the
visionary appearances resulting from various disturbances of the frame
by passion, and from the rapid tendency of the mind to invest with shape
and intelligence the active influences about it, as in the various
demons, spirits, and fairies of all imaginative nations; which, however,
I consider are no more to be ranked as right creations of fancy or
imagination than things actually seen and heard; for the action of the
nerves is I suppose the same, whether externally caused, or from within,
although very grand imagination may be shown by the intellectual
anticipation and realization of such impressions; as in that glorious
vignette of Turner's to the voyage of Columbus. "Slowly along the
evening sky they went." Note especially therein, how admirably true to
the natural form, and yet how suggestive of the battlement he has
rendered the level flake of evening cloud.


§ 8. The action of contemplative imagination is not to be expressed by
       art.

I believe that it is unnecessary for me to enter into farther detail of
illustration respecting these points; for fuller explanation of the
operations of the contemplative faculty on things verbally expressible,
the reader may be referred to Wordsworth's preface to his poems; it only
remains for us, here, to examine how far this imaginative or abstract
conception is to be conveyed by the material art of the sculptor or the
painter.

Now, it is evident that the bold action of either the fancy or the
imagination, dependent on a bodiless and spiritual image of the object,
is not to be by lines or colors represented. We cannot, in the painting
of Satan fallen, suggest any image of pines or crags,--neither can we
assimilate the brier and the banner, nor give human sympathy to the
motion of the film, nor voice to the swinging of the pines.


§ 9. Except under narrow limits.--1st. Abstract rendering of form
       without color.

Yet certain powers there are, within due limits, of marking the thing
represented with an ideal character; and it was to these powers that I
alluded in defining the meaning of the term ideal, in the thirteenth
chapter of the preceding section. For it is by this operation that the
productions of high art are separated from those of the realist.

And, first, there is evidently capability of separating color and form,
and considering either separately. Form we find abstractedly considered
by the sculptor, how far it would be possible to advantage a statue by
the addition of color, I venture not to affirm; the question is too
extensive to be here discussed. High authorities and ancient practice,
are in favor of color; so the sculpture of the middle ages: the two
statues of Mino da Fiesole in the church of St^a. Caterina at Pisa
have been colored, the irises of the eyes painted dark, and the hair
gilded, as also I think the Madonna in St^a. Maria della Spina; the
eyes have been painted in the sculptures of Orcagna in Or San Michele,
but it looks like a remnant of barbarism, (compare the pulpit of Guida
da Como, in the church of San Bartolomeo at Pistoja,) and I have never
seen color on any solid forms, that did not, to my mind, neutralize all
other power; the porcelains of Luca della Robbia are painful examples,
and in lower art, Florentine mosaic in relief; gilding is more
admissible, and tells sometimes sweetly upon figures of quaint design,
as on the pulpit of St^a. Maria Novella, while it spoils the classical
ornaments of the mouldings. But the truest grandeur of sculpture I
believe to be in the white form; something of this feeling may be owing
to the difficulty, or rather the immediately, of obtaining truly noble
color upon it, but if we could color the Elgin marbles with the flesh
tint of Giorgione, I had rather not have it done.


§ 10. Of color without form.

Color, without form, is less frequently obtainable, and it may be
doubted whether it be desirable: yet I think that to the full enjoyment
of it, a certain abandonment of form is necessary; sometimes by reducing
it to the shapeless glitter of the gem, as often Tintoret and Bassano;
sometimes by loss of outline and blending of parts, as Turner; sometimes
by flatness of mass, as often Giorgione and Titian. How far it is
possible for the painter to represent those mountains of Shelley as the
poet sees them, "mingling _their flames_ with twilight," I cannot say;
but my impression is, that there is no true abstract mode of
considering color; and that all the loss of form in the works of Titian
or Turner, is not ideal, but the representation of the natural
conditions under which bright color is seen; for form is always in a
measure lost by nature herself when color is very vivid.


§ 11. Or of both without texture.

Again, there is capability of representing the essential character,
form, and color of an object, without external texture. On this point
much has been said by Reynolds and others, and it is, indeed, perhaps
the most unfailing characteristic of great manner in painting. Compare a
dog of Edwin Landseer with a dog of Paul Veronese. In the first, the
outward texture is wrought out with exquisite dexterity of handling, and
minute attention to all the accidents of curl and gloss which can give
appearance of reality, while the hue and power of the sunshine, and the
truth of the shadow on all these forms is necessarily neglected, and the
large relations of the animal as a mass of color to the sky or ground,
or other parts of the picture, utterly lost. This is realism at the
expense of ideality, it is treatment essentially unimaginative.[71] With
Veronese, there is no curling nor crisping, no glossiness nor sparkle,
hardly even hair, a mere type of hide, laid on with a few
scene-painter's touches. But the essence of dog is there, the entire
magnificent, generic animal type, muscular and living, and with broad,
pure, sunny daylight upon him, and bearing his true and harmonious
relation of color to all color about him. This is ideal treatment.

The same treatment is found in the works of all the greatest men, they
all paint the lion more than his mane, and the horse rather than his
hide; and I think also they are more careful to obtain the right
expression of large and universal light and color, than local tints; for
the warmth of sunshine, and the force of sunlighted hue are always
sublime on whatever subject they may be exhibited; and so also are light
and shade, if grandly arranged, as may be well seen in an etching of
Rembrandt's of a spotted shell, which he has made altogether sublime by
broad truth and large ideality of light and shade; and so I have seen
frequent instances of very grand ideality in treatment of the most
commonplace still life, by our own Hunt, where the petty glosses and
delicacies, and minor forms, are all merged in a broad glow of suffused
color; so also in pieces of the same kind by Etty, where, however,
though the richness and play of color are greater, and the arrangement
grander, there is less expression of light, neither is there anything in
modern art that can be set beside some choice passages of Hunt in this
respect.


§ 12. Abstraction or typical representation of animal form.

Again, it is possible to represent objects capable of various accidents
in generic or symbolical form.


§ 13. Either when it is symbolically used.

How far this may be done with things having necessary form, as animals,
I am not prepared to say. The lions of the Egyptian room in the British
Museum, and the fish beside Michael Angelo's Jonah, are instances; and
there is imaginative power about both which we find not in the more
perfectly realized Florentine boar, nor in Raffaelle's fish of the
draught. And yet the propriety and nobility of these types depend on the
architectural use and character of the one, and on the typical meaning
of the other: we should be grieved to see the forms of the Egyptian lion
substituted for those of Raffaelle's in its struggle with Samson, nor
would the whale of Michael Angelo be tolerated in the nets of
Gennesaret. So that I think it is only when the figure of the creature
stands not for any representation of vitality, but merely for a letter
or type of certain symbolical meaning, or else is adopted as a grand
form of decoration or support in architecture, that such generalization
is allowable, and in such circumstances I think it necessary, always
provided it be based, as in the instances given I conceive it to be,
upon thorough knowledge of the creature symbolized and wrought out by a
master hand; and these conditions being observed, I believe it to be
right and necessary in architecture to modify all animal forms by a
severe architectural stamp, and in symbolical use of them, to adopt a
typical form, to which practice the contrary, and its evil consequences
are ludicrously exhibited in the St. Peter of Carlo Dolci in the Pitti
palace, which owing to the prominent, glossy-plumed and crimson-combed
cock, is liable to be taken for the portrait of a poulterer, only let it
be observed that the treatment of the animal form here is offensive, not
only from its realization, but from the pettiness and meanness of its
realization; for it might, in other hands but Carlo Dolci's, have been a
sublime cock, though a real one, but in his, it is fit for nothing but
the spit. Compare as an example partly of symbolical treatment, partly
of magnificent realization, that supernatural lion of Tintoret, in the
picture of the Doge Loredano before the Madonna, with the plumes of his
mighty wings clashed together in cloudlike repose, and the strength of
the sea winds shut within their folding. And note farther the difference
between the typical use of the animal, as in this case, and that of the
fish of Jonah, (and again the fish before mentioned whose form is
indicated in the clouds of the baptism), and the actual occurrence of
the creature itself, with concealed meaning, as the ass colt of the
crucifixion, which it was necessary to paint as such, and not as an
ideal form.


§ 14. Or in architectural decoration.

§ 15. Exception in delicate and superimposed ornament.

I cannot enter here into the question of the exact degree of severity
and abstraction necessary in the forms of living things architecturally
employed; my own feeling on the subject is, though I dare not lay it
down as a principle, (with the Parthenon pediment standing against me
like the shield of Ajax,) that no perfect representation of animal form
is right in architectural decoration. For my own part, I had much rather
see the metopes in the Elgin room of the British Museum, and the
Parthenon without them, than have them together, and I would not
surrender, in an architectural point of view, one mighty line of the
colossal, quiet, life-in-death statue mountains in Egypt with their
narrow fixed eyes and hands on their rocky limbs, nor one Romanesque
façade with its porphyry mosaic of indefinable monsters, nor one Gothic
moulding of rigid saints and grinning goblins, for ten Parthenons; and,
I believe, I could show some rational ground for this seeming barbarity
if this were the place to do so, but at present I can only ask the
reader to compare the effect of the so-called barbarous ancient mosaics
on the front of St. Mark's, as they have been recorded, happily, by the
faithfulness of the good Gentile Bellini, in one of his pictures now in
the Venice gallery, with the veritably barbarous pictorial substitutions
of the fifteenth century, (one only of the old mosaics remains, or did
remain till lately, over the northern door, but it is probably by this
time torn down by some of the Venetian committees of taste,) and also I
would have the old portions of the interior ceiling, or of the mosaics
of Murano and Torcello, and the glorious Cimabue mosaic of Pisa, and the
roof of the Baptistery at Parma, (that of the Florence Baptistery is a
bad example, owing to its crude whites and complicated mosaic of small
forms,) all of which are as barbarous as they can well be, in a certain
sense, but mighty in their barbarism, with any architectural decorations
whatsoever, consisting of professedly perfect animal forms, from the
vile frescoes of Federigo Zuccaro at Florence to the ceiling of the
Sistine, and again compare the professedly perfect sculpture of Milan
Cathedral with the statues of the porches of Chartres; only be it always
observed that it is not rudeness and ignorance of art, but
intellectually awful abstraction that I uphold, and also be it noted
that in all ornament, which takes place in the general effect merely as
so much fretted stone, in capitals and other pieces of minute detail,
the forms may be, and perhaps ought to be, elaborately imitative; and in
this respect again the capitals of St. Mark's church, and of the Doge's
palace at Venice may be an example to the architects of all the world,
in their boundless inventiveness, unfailing elegance, and elaborate
finish; there is more mind poured out in turning a single angle of that
church than would serve to build a modern cathedral;[72] and of the
careful finish of the work, this may serve for example, that one of the
capitals of the Doge's palace is formed of eight heads of different
animals, of which one is a bear's with a honeycomb in the mouth, whose
carved _cells_ are _hexagonal_.


§ 16. Abstraction necessary from imperfection of materials.

§ 17. Abstractions of things capable of varied accident are not
        imaginative.

§ 18. Yet sometimes valuable.

So far, then, of the abstraction proper to architecture, and to
symbolical uses, of which I shall have occasion to speak hereafter at
length, referring to it only at present as one of the operations of
imagination contemplative; other abstractions there are which are
necessarily consequent on the imperfection of materials, as of the hair
in sculpture, which is necessarily treated in masses that are in no sort
imitative, but only stand for hair, and have the grace, flow, and
feeling of it without the texture or division, and other abstractions
there are in which the form of one thing is fancifully indicated in the
matter of another; as in phantoms and cloud shapes, the use of which, in
mighty hands, is often most impressive, as in the cloudy charioted
Apollo of Nicolo Poussin in our own gallery, which the reader may oppose
to the substantial Apollo, in Wilson's Niobe, and again the phantom
vignette of Turner already noticed; only such operations of the
imagination are to be held of lower kind and dangerous consequence, if
frequently trusted in, for those painters only have the right
imaginative power who can set the supernatural form before us fleshed
and boned like ourselves.[73] Other abstractions occur, frequently, of
things which have much accidental variety of form, as of waves, on Greek
sculptures in successive volutes, and of clouds often in supporting
volumes in the sacred pictures; but these I do not look upon as results
of imagination at all, but mere signs and letters; and whenever a very
highly imaginative mind touches them, it always realizes as far as may
be. Even Titian is content to use at the top of his St. Pietro Martiri,
the conventional, round, opaque cloud, which cuts his trees open like a
gouge; but Tintoret, in his picture of the Golden Calf, though compelled
to represent the Sinai under conventional form, in order that the
receiving of the tables might be seen at the top of it, yet so soon as
it is possible to give more truth, he is ready with it; he takes a grand
fold of horizontal cloud straight from the flanks of the Alps, and shows
the forests of the mountains through its misty volume, like sea-weed
through deep sea.[74] Nevertheless, when the realization is impossible,
bold symbolism is of the highest value, and in religious art, as we
shall presently see, even necessary, as of the rays of light in the
Titian woodcut of St. Francis before noticed; and sometimes the
attention is directed by some such strange form to the meaning of the
image, which may be missed if it remains in its natural purity, (as, I
suppose, few in looking at the Cephalus and Procris of Turner, note the
sympathy of those faint rays that are just drawing back and dying
between the trunks of the far-off forest, with the ebbing life of the
nymph; unless, indeed, they happen to recollect the same sympathy marked
by Shelley in the Alastor;) but the imagination is not shown in any such
modifications; however, in some cases they may be valuable (in the
Cephalus they would be utterly destructive,) and I note them merely in
consequence of their peculiar use in religious art, presently to be
examined.


§ 19. Exaggeration. Its laws and limits. First, in scale of
        representation.

The last mode we have here to note in which the imagination regardant
may be expressed in art is exaggeration, of which, as it is the vice of
all bad artists, may be constantly resorted to without any warrant of
imagination, it is necessary to note strictly the admissible limits.

In the first place, a colossal statue is necessarily no more an
exaggeration of what it represents than a miniature is a diminution, it
need not be a representation of a giant, but a representation, on a
large scale, of a man; only it is to be observed, that as any plane
intersecting the cone of rays between us and the object, must receive an
image smaller than the object; a small image is rationally and
completely expressive of a larger one; but not a large of a small one.
Hence I think that all statues above the Elgin standard, or that of
Michael Angelo's Night and Morning, are, in a measure, taken by the eye
for representations of giants, and I think them always disagreeable. The
amount of exaggeration admitted by Michael Angelo is valuable because it
separates the emblematic from the human form, and gives greater freedom
to the grand lines of the frame; for notice of his scientific system of
increase of size I may refer the reader to Sir Charles Bell's remarks on
the statues of the Medici chapel; but there is one circumstance which
Sir Charles has not noticed, and in the interpretation of which,
therefore, it is likely I may be myself wrong; that the extremities are
singularly small in proportion to the limbs, by which means there is an
expression given of strength and activity greater than in the ordinary
human type, which appears to me to be an allowance for that alteration
in proportion necessitated by increase of size, of which we took note in
Chap. VI. of the first section, § 10, note; not but that Michael Angelo
always makes the extremities comparatively small, but smallest,
comparatively, in his largest works; so I think, from the size of the
head, it may be conjectured respecting the Theseus of the Elgins. Such
adaptations are not necessary when the exaggerated image is spectral;
for as the laws of matter in that case can have no operation, we may
expand the form as far as we choose, only let careful distinction be
made between the size of the thing represented, and the scale of the
representation. The canvas on which Fuseli has stretched his Satan in
the schools of the Royal Academy is a mere concession to inability. He
might have made him look more gigantic in one of a foot square.


§ 20. Secondly. Of things capable of variety of scale.

Another kind of exaggeration is of things whose size is variable to a
size or degree greater than that usual with them, as in waves and
mountains; and there are hardly any limits to this exaggeration so long
as the laws which nature observes in her increase be observed. Thus, for
instance: the form and polished surface of a breaking ripple three
inches high, are not representation of either the form or the surface of
the surf of a storm, nodding ten feet above the beach; neither would the
cutting ripple of a breeze upon a lake if simply exaggerated, represent
the forms of Atlantic surges; but as nature increases her bulk, she
diminishes the angles of ascent, and increases her divisions; and if we
would represent surges of size greater than ever existed, which it is
lawful to do, we must carry out these operations to still greater
extent. Thus, Turner, in his picture of the Slave Ship, divides the
whole sea into two masses of enormous swell, and conceals the horizon by
a gradual slope of only two or three degrees. This is intellectual
exaggeration. In the Academy exhibition of 1843, there was, in one of
the smaller rooms, a black picture of a storm, in which there appeared
on the near sea, just about to be overwhelmed by an enormous breaker,
curling right over it, an object at first sight liable to be taken for a
walnut shell, but which, on close examination, proved to be a ship with
mast and sail, with Christ and his twelve disciples in it. This is
childish exaggeration, because it is impossible, by the laws of matter
and motion, that such a breaker should ever exist. Again in mountains,
we have repeatedly observed the necessary building up and multitudinous
division of the higher peaks, and the smallness of the slopes by which
they usually rise. We may, therefore, build up the mountain as high as
we please, but we must do it in nature's way, and not in impossible
peaks and precipices; not but that a daring feature is admissible here
and there, as the Matterhorn is admitted by nature; but we must not
compose a picture out of such exceptions; we may use them, but they must
be as exceptions exhibited. I shall have much to say, when we come to
treat of the sublime, of the various modes of treating mountain form, so
that at present I shall only point to an unfortunate instance of
inexcusable and effectless exaggeration in the distance of Turner's
vignette to Milton, (the temptation on the mountain,) and desire the
reader to compare it with legitimate exaggeration, in the vignette to
the second part of Jacqueline, in Rogers's poems.


§ 21. Thirdly, necessary in expression of characteristic features on
        diminished scale.

Another kind of exaggeration is necessary to retain the characteristic
impressions of nature on reduced scale, it is not possible, for
instance, to give the leafage of trees in its proper proportion, when
the trees represented are large, without entirely losing their grace of
form and curvature; of this the best proof is found in the Calotype or
Daguerreotype, which fail in foliage, not only because the green rays
are ineffective, but because, on the small scale of the image, the
reduced leaves lose their organization, and look like moss attached to
sticks. In order to retain, therefore, the character of flexibility and
beauty of foliage, the painter is often compelled to increase the
proportionate size of the leaves, and to arrange them in generic
masses. Of this treatment compare the grand examples throughout the
Liber Studiorum. It is by such means only that the ideal character of
objects is to be preserved; as we before observed in the 13th chapter of
the first section. In all these cases exaggeration is only lawful as the
sole means of arriving at truth of impression when strict fidelity is
out of the question.

Other modes of exaggeration there are, on which I shall not at present
farther insist, the proper place for their discussion being in treating
of the sublime, and these which I have at present instanced are enough
to establish the point at issue, respecting imaginative verity, inasmuch
as we find that exaggeration itself, if imaginative, is referred to
principles of truth, and of actual being.


§ 22. Recapitulation.

We have now, I think, reviewed the various modes in which imagination
contemplative may be exhibited in art, and arrived at all necessary
certainties respecting the essence of the faculty: which we have found
in all its three functions, associative of truth, penetrative of truth,
and contemplative of truth; and having no dealings nor relations with
any kind of falsity. One task, however, remains to us, namely, to
observe the operation of the theoretic and imaginative faculties
together, in the attempt at realization to the bodily sense of beauty
supernatural and divine.


FOOTNOTES

  [70] Let it not be supposed that I mean to compare the sickly
    dreaming of Shelley over clouds and waves with the masculine and
    magnificent grasp of men and things which we find in Scott; it only
    happens that these two passages are more illustrative, by the
    likeness of the scenery they treat, than any others I could have
    opposed; and that Shelley is peculiarly distinguished by the faculty
    of contemplative imagination. Scott's healthy and truthful feeling
    would not allow him to represent the benighted hunter provoked by
    loss of game, horse, and way at once, as indulging in any more
    exalted flights of imagination than those naturally consequent on
    the contrast between the night's lodging he expected, and that which
    befitted him.

  [71] I do not mean to withdraw the praise I have given, and shall
    always be willing to give such pictures as the Old Shepherd's Chief
    Mourner, and to all in which the character and inner life of animals
    are developed. But all lovers of art must regret to find Mr.
    Landseer wasting his energies on such inanities as the "Shoeing,"
    and sacrificing color, expression, and action, to an imitation of
    glossy hide.

  [72] I have not brought forward any instances of the imaginative
    power in architecture, as my object is not at present to exhibit its
    operation in all matter, but only to define its essence; but it may
    be well to note, in our own new houses of Parliament, how far a
    building approved by a committee of Taste, may proceed without
    manifestation either of imagination or composition; it remains to be
    seen how far the towers may redeem it; and I allude to it at present
    unwillingly, and only in the desire of influencing, so far as I may,
    those who have the power to prevent the adoption of a design for a
    bridge to take place of Westminster, which was exhibited in 1844 at
    the Royal Academy, professing to be in harmony with the new
    building, but which was fit only to carry a railroad over a canal.

  [73] Comp. Ch. V. § 5.

  [74] All the clouds of Tintoret are sublime; the worst that I know
    in art are Correggio's, especially in the Madonna della Scudella,
    and Dome of Parma.




                              CHAPTER V.

                       OF THE SUPERHUMAN IDEAL.


§ 1. The subject is not to be here treated in detail.

In our investigation in the first section of the laws of beauty, we
confined ourselves to the observation of lower nature, or of humanity.
We were prevented from proceeding to deduce conclusions respecting
divine ideality by our not having then established any principles
respecting the imaginative faculty, by which, under the discipline of
the theoretic, such ideality is conceived. I had purposed to conclude
the present section by a careful examination of this subject; but as
this is evidently foreign to the matter immediately under discussion,
and involves questions of great intricacy respecting the development of
mind among those pagan nations who are supposed to have produced high
examples of spiritual ideality, I believe it will be better to delay
such inquiries until we have concluded our detailed observation of the
beauty of visible nature; and I shall therefore at present take notice
only of one or two broad principles, which were referred to, or implied,
in the chapter respecting the human ideal, and without the enunciation
of which, that chapter might lead to false conclusions.


§ 2. The conceivable modes of manifestation of Spiritual Beings are
       four.

There are four ways in which beings supernatural may be conceived as
manifesting themselves to human sense. The first, by external types,
signs, or influences; as God to Moses in the flames of the bush, and to
Elijah in the voice of Horeb.

The second, by the assuming of a form not properly belonging to them; as
the Holy Spirit of that of a Dove, the second person of the Trinity of
that of a Lamb; and so such manifestations, under angelic or other form,
of the first person of the Trinity, as seem to have been made to
Abraham, Moses, and Ezekiel.

The third, by the manifestation of a form properly belonging to them,
but not necessarily seen; as of the Risen Christ to his disciples when
the doors were shut. And the fourth, by their operation on the human
form, which they influence or inspire, as in the shining of the face of
Moses.


§ 3. And these are in or through creature forms familiar to us.

It is evident that in all these cases, wherever there is form at all, it
is the form of some creature to us known. It is no new form peculiar to
spirit nor can it be. We can conceive of none. Our inquiry is simply,
therefore, by what modifications those creature forms to us known, as of
a lamb, a bird, or a human creature, may be explained as signs or
habitations of Divinity, or of angelic essence, and not creatures such
as they seem.


§ 4. Supernatural character may be impressed on these either by
       phenomena inconsistent with their common nature, (compare chap.
       4, § 16).

This may be done in two ways. First, by effecting some change in the
appearance of the creature inconsistent with its actual nature, as by
giving it colossal size, or unnatural color, or material, as of gold, or
silver, or flame, instead of flesh, or by taking away its property of
matter altogether, and forming it of light or shade, or in an
intermediate step, of cloud, or vapor; or explaining it by terrible
concomitant circumstances, as of wounds in the body, or strange lights
and seemings round about it; or by joining of two bodies together as in
angels' wings. Of all which means of attaining supernatural character
(which though, in their nature ordinary and vulgar, are yet effective
and very glorious in mighty hands) we have already seen the limits in
speaking of the imagination.


§ 5. Or by inherent Dignity.

But the second means of obtaining supernatural character is that with
which we are now concerned, namely, retaining the actual form in its
full and material presence, and without aid from any external
interpretation whatsoever, to raise that form by mere inherent dignity
to such a pitch of power and impressiveness as cannot but assert and
stamp it for superhuman.

On the north side of the Campo Santo at Pisa, are a series of paintings
from the Old Testament History by Benozzo Gozzoli. In the earlier of
these, angelic presences, mingled with human, occur frequently,
illustrated by no awfulness of light, nor incorporeal tracing. Clear
revealed they move, in human forms, in the broad daylight and on the
open earth, side by side, and hand in hand with men. But they never miss
of the angel.

He who can do this has reached the last pinnacle and utmost power of
ideal, or any other art. He stands in no need thenceforward, of cloud,
nor lightning, nor tempest, nor terror of mystery. His sublime is
independent of the elements. It is of that which shall stand when they
shall melt with fervent heat, and light the firmament when the sun is as
sackcloth of hair.


§ 6. 1st. Of the expression of Inspiration.

Let us consider by what means this has been effected, so far as they are
by analysis traceable; and that is not far, for here, as always, we find
that the greater part of what has been rightly accomplished has been
done by faith and intense feeling, and cannot, by aid of any rules or
teaching, be either tried, estimated, or imitated.

And first, of the expression of supernatural influence on forms actually
human, as of sibyl or prophet. It is evident that not only here is it
unnecessary, but we are not altogether at liberty to trust for
expression to the utmost ennobling of the human form: for we cannot do
more than this, when that form is to be the actual representation, and
not the recipient of divine presence. Hence, in order to retain the
actual humanity definitely, we must leave upon it such signs of the
operation of sin and the liability to death as are consistent with
human ideality, and often more than these, definite signs of immediate
and active evil, when the prophetic spirit is to be expressed in men
such as were Saul and Balaam; neither may we ever, with just
discrimination, touch the utmost limits of beauty in human form when
inspiration is to be expressed, and not angelic or divine being; of
which reserve and subjection the most instructive instances are found in
the works of Angelico, who invariably uses inferior types for the
features of humanity, even glorified, (excepting always the Madonna,)
nor ever exerts his full power of beauty either in feature or
expression, except in angels or in the Madonna or in Christ. Now the
expression of spiritual influence without supreme elevation of the
bodily type we have seen to be a work of imagination penetrative, and we
found it accomplished by Michael Angelo; but I think by him only. I am
aware of no one else who, to my mind, has expressed the inspiration of
prophet or sibyl; this, however, I affirm not, but shall leave to the
determination of the reader, as the principles at present to be noted
refer entirely to that elevation of the creature form necessary when it
is actually representative of a spiritual being.

§ 7. No representation of that which is more than creature is possible.


I have affirmed in the conclusion of the first section that "of that
which is more than creature, no creature ever conceived." I think this
almost self-evident, for it is clear that the illimitableness of Divine
attributes cannot be by matter represented, (though it may be typefied,)
and I believe that all who are acquainted with the range of sacred art
will admit, not only that no representation of Christ has ever been even
partially successful, but that the greatest painters fall therein below
their accustomed level; Perugino and Fra Angelico especially; Leonardi
has I think done best, but perhaps the beauty of the fragment left at
Milan, (for in spite of all that is said of repainting and destruction,
that Cenacolo is still the finest in existence) is as much dependent on
the very untraceableness resulting from injury as on its original
perfection. Of more daring attempts at representation of Divinity we
need not speak; only this is to be noted respecting them, that though by
the ignorant Romanists many such efforts were made under the idea of
actual representation, (note the way in which Cellini speaks of the seal
made for the Pope,) by the nobler among them I suppose they were
intended, and by us at any rate they may always be received, as mere
symbols, the noblest that could be employed, but as much symbols still
as a triangle, or the Alpha and Omega; nor do I think that the most
scrupulous amongst Christians ought to desire to exchange the power
obtained by the use of this symbol in Michael Angelo's creation of Adam
and of Eve for the effect which would be produced by the substitution of
a triangle or any other sign in place of it. Of these efforts then we
need reason no farther, but may limit ourselves to considering the
purest modes of giving a conception of superhuman but still creature
form, as of angels; in equal rank with whom, perhaps, we may without
offence place the mother of Christ: at least we must so regard the type
of the Madonna in receiving it from Romanist painters.[75]


§ 8. Supernatural character expressed by modification of accessories.

And first, much is to be done by right modification of accessory
circumstances, so as to express miraculous power exercised over them by
the spiritual creature. There is a beautiful instance of this in John
Bellini's picture of St. Jerome at Venice. The saint sits upon a rock,
his grand form defined against clear green open sky; he is reading, a
noble tree springs out of a cleft in the rock, bends itself suddenly
back to form a rest for the volume, then shoots up into the sky. There
is something very beautiful in this obedient ministry of the lower
creature; but be it observed that the sweet feeling of the whole depends
upon the service being such as is consistent with its nature. It is not
animated, it does not _listen_ to the saint, nor bend itself towards him
as if in affection, this would have been mere fancy, illegitimate and
effectless. But the simple bend of the trunk to receive the book is
miraculous subjection of the true nature of the tree; it is therefore
imaginative, and very touching.


§ 9. Landscape of the religious painters. Its character is eminently
       symmetrical.

It is not often however that the religious painters even go this length;
they content themselves usually with impressing on the landscape perfect
symmetry and order, such as may seem consistent with, or induced by the
spiritual nature they would represent. All signs of decay, disturbance,
and imperfection, are also banished; and in doing this it is evident
that some unnaturalness and singularity must result, inasmuch as there
are no veritable forms of landscape but express or imply a state of
progression or of imperfection All mountain forms are seen to be
produced by convulsion and modelled by decay; the finer forms of cloud
have stories in them about storm; all forest grouping is wrought out
with varieties of strength and growth among its several members, and
bears evidences of struggle with unkind influences. All such appearances
are banished in the supernatural landscape; the trees grow straight,
equally branched on each side, and of such slight and feathery frame as
shows them never to have encountered blight or frost or tempest. The
mountains stand up in fantastic pinnacles; there is on them no trace of
torrent, no scathe of lightning; no fallen fragments encumber their
foundations, no worn ravines divide their flanks; the seas are always
waveless, the skies always calm, crossed only by fair, horizontal,
lightly wreathed, white clouds.


§ 10. Landscape of Benozzo Gozzoli.

In some cases these conditions result partly from feeling, partly from
ignorance of the facts of nature, or incapability of representing them,
as in the first type of the treatment found in Giotto and his school; in
others they are observed on principle, as by Benozzo Gozzoli, Perugino,
and Raffaelle. There is a beautiful instance by the former in the
frescoes of the Ricardi palace, where behind the adoring angel groups
the landscape is governed by the most absolute symmetry; roses and
pomegranates, their leaves drawn to the last rib and vein, twine
themselves in fair and perfect order about delicate trellises; broad
stone pines and tall cypresses overshadow them, bright birds hover here
and there in the serene sky, and groups of angels, hand joined with
hand, and wing with wing, glide and float through the glades of the
unentangled forest. But behind the human figures, behind the pomp and
turbulence of the Kingly procession descending from the distant hills
the spirit of the landscape is changed. Severer mountains rise in the
distance, ruder prominences and less flowery vary the nearer ground, and
gloomy shadows remain unbroken beneath the forest branches.


§ 11. Landscape of Perugino and Raffaelle.

The landscape of Perugino, for grace, purity and as much of nature as is
consistent with the above-named conditions, is unrivalled; and the more
interesting because in him certainly whatever limits are set to the
rendering of nature proceed not from incapability. The sea is in the
distance almost always, then some blue promontories and undulating dewy
park ground, studded with glittering trees; in the landscape of the
fresco in St^a. Maria Maddalena at Florence there is more variety than
is usual with him; a gentle river winds round the bases of rocky hills,
a river like our own Wye or Tees in their loveliest reaches; level
meadows stretch away on its opposite side; mounds set with
slender-stemmed foliage occupy the nearer ground, a small village with
its simple spire peeps from the forest at the bend of the valley, and it
is remarkable that in architecture thus employed neither Perugino nor
any other of the ideal painters ever use Italian forms but always
Transalpine, both of church and castle. The little landscape which forms
the background of his own portrait in the Uffizii is another highly
finished and characteristic example. The landscape of Raffaelle was
learned from his father, and continued for some time little modified,
though expressed with greater refinement. It became afterwards
conventional and poor, and in some cases altogether meaningless. The
haystacks and vulgar trees behind the St. Cecilia at Bologna form a
painful contrast to the pure space of mountain country in the Perugino
opposite.[76]


§ 12. Such Landscape is not to be imitated.

In all these cases, while I would uphold the landscape thus employed and
treated, as worthy of all admiration, I should be sorry to advance it
for imitation. What is right in its mannerism arose from keen feeling in
the painter: imitated without the same feeling, it would be painful; the
only safe mode of following in such steps is to attain perfect knowledge
of nature herself, and then to suffer our own feelings to guide us in
the selection of what is fitting for any particular purpose. Every
painter ought to paint what he himself loves, not what others have
loved; if his mind be pure and sweetly toned, what he loves will be
lovely; if otherwise, no example can guide his selection, no precept
govern his hand; and farther let it be distinctly observed, that all
this mannered landscape is only right under the supposition of its being
a background to some supernatural presence; behind mortal beings it
would be wrong, and by itself, as landscape, ridiculous; and farther,
the chief virtue of it results from the exquisite refinement of those
natural details consistent with its character from the botanical drawing
of the flowers and the clearness and brightness of the sky.


§ 13. Color, and Decoration. Their use in representations of the
        Supernatural.

Another mode of attaining supernatural character is by purity of color
almost shadowless, no more darkness being allowed than is absolutely
necessary for the explanation of the forms, and the vividness of the
effect enhanced as far as may be by use of gilding, enamel, and other
jewellery. I think the smaller works of Angelico are perfect models in
this respect; the glories about the heads being of beaten rays of gold,
on which the light plays and changes as the spectator moves; (and which
therefore throw the purest flesh color out in dark relief) and such
color and light being obtained by the enamelling of the angel wings as
of course is utterly unattainable by any other expedient of art; the
colors of the draperies always pure and pale; blue, rose, or tender
green, or brown, but never dark or gloomy; the faces of the most
celestial fairness, brightly flushed: the height and glow of this flush
are noticed by Constantin as reserved by the older painters for
spiritual beings, as if expressive of light seen through the body.

I cannot think it necessary while I insist on the value of all these
seemingly childish means when in the hands of a noble painter, to assert
also their futility and even absurdity if employed by no exalted power.
I think the error has commonly been on the side of scorn, and that we
reject much in our foolish vanity, which if wiser and more earnest we
should delight in. But two points it is very necessary to note in the
use of such accessories.


§ 14. Decoration so used must be generic.

The first that the ornaments used by Angelico, Giotto, and Perugino, but
especially by Angelico, are always of a generic and abstract character.
They are not diamonds, nor brocades, nor velvets, nor gold embroideries;
they are mere spots of gold or of color, simple patterns upon
_textureless_ draperies; the angel wings burn with transparent crimson
and purple and amber, but they are not set forth with peacock's plumes;
the golden circlets gleam with changeful light, but they are not beaded
with elaborate pearls nor set with studied sapphires.

In the works of Filippino Lippi, Mantegna, and many other painters
following, interesting examples may be found of the opposite treatment;
and as in Lippi the heads are usually very sweet, and the composition
severe, the degrading effect of the realized decorations and imitated
dress may be seen in him simply, and without any addition of painfulness
from other deficiencies of feeling. The larger of the two pictures in
the Tuscan room of the Uffizii, but for this defect, would have been a
very noble ideal work.


§ 15. And color pure.

The second point to be observed is that brightness of color is
altogether inadmissible without purity and harmony; and that the sacred
painters must not be followed in their frankness of unshadowed color
unless we can also follow them in its clearness. As far as I am
acquainted with the modern schools of Germany, they seem to be entirely
ignorant of the value of color as an assistant of feeling, and to think
that hardness, dryness, and opacity are its virtues as employed in
religious art; whereas I hesitate not to affirm that in such art more
than in any other, clearness, luminousness and intensity of hue are
essential to right impression; and from the walls of the Arena chapel in
their rainbow play of brilliant harmonies, to the solemn purple tones of
Perugino's fresco in the Albizzi palace, I know not any great work of
sacred art which is not as precious in color as in all other qualities
(unless indeed it be a Crucifixion of Fra Angelico in the Florence
Academy, which has just been glazed and pumiced and painted and
varnished by the picture-cleaners until it glares from one end of the
picture gallery to the other;) only the pure white light and delicate
hue of the idealists, whose colors are by preference such as we have
seen to be the most beautiful in the chapter on Purity are carefully to
be distinguished from the golden light and deep pitched hue of the
school of Titian whose virtue is the grandeur of earthly solemnity, not
the glory of heavenly rejoicing.


§ 16. Ideal form of the body itself, of what variety susceptible.

But leaving these accessory circumstances and touching the treatment of
the bodily form, it is evident in the first place that whatever typical
beauty the human body is capable of possessing must be bestowed upon it
when it is understood as spiritual. And therefore those general
proportions and types which are deducible from comparison of the nobler
individuals of the race, must be adopted and adhered to; admitting among
them not, as in the human ideal, such varieties as result from past
suffering, or contest with sin, but such only as are consistent with
sinless nature or are the signs of instantly or continually operative
affections; for though it is conceivable that spirit should suffer, it
is inconceivable that spiritual frame should retain like the stamped
inelastic human clay, the brand of sorrow past, unless fallen.

                                "His face,
               Deep scars of thunder had entrenched, and care
               Sat on his faded cheek."

Yet so far forth the angelic ideal is diminished, nor could this be
suffered in pictorial representation.


§ 17. Anatomical development how far admissible.

Again, such muscular development as is necessary to the perfect beauty
of the body, is to be rendered. But that which is necessary to strength,
or which appears to have been the result of laborious exercise, is
inadmissible. No herculean form is spiritual, for it is degrading the
spiritual creature to suppose it operative through impulse of bone and
sinew; its power is immaterial and constant, neither dependent on, nor
developed by exertion. Generally, it is well to conceal anatomical
development as far as may be; even Michael Angelo's anatomy interferes
with his divinity; in the hands of lower men the angel becomes a
preparation. How far it is possible to subdue or generalize the naked
form I venture not to affirm, but I believe that it is best to conceal
it as far as may be, not with draperies light and undulating, that fall
in with, and exhibit its principal lines, but with draperies severe and
linear, such as were constantly employed before the time of Raffaelle. I
recollect no single instance of a naked angel that does not look boylike
or child-like, and unspiritualized; even Fra Bartolomeo's might with
advantage be spared from the pictures at Lucca, and, in the hands of
inferior men, the sky is merely encumbered with sprawling infants; those
of Domenichino in the Madonna del Rosario, and Martyrdom of St. Agnes,
are peculiarly offensive, studies of bare-legged children howling and
kicking in volumes of smoke. Confusion seems to exist in the minds of
subsequent painters between Angels and Cupids.


§ 18. Symmetry. How valuable.

Farther, the qualities of symmetry and repose are of peculiar value in
spiritual form. We find the former most earnestly sought by all the
great painters in the arrangement of the hair, wherein no loosely
flowing nor varied form is admitted, but all restrained in undisturbed
and equal ringlets; often, as in the infant Christ of Fra Angelico,
supported on the forehead in forms of sculpturesque severity. The Angel
of Masaccio, in the Deliverance of Peter, grand both in countenance and
motion, loses much of his spirituality because the painter has put a
little too much of his own character into the hair, and left it
disordered.


§ 19. The influence of Greek art, how dangerous.

§ 20. Its scope, how limited.

Of repose, and its exalting power, I have already said enough for our
present purpose, though I have not insisted on the peculiar
manifestation of it in the Christian ideal as opposed to the pagan. But
this, as well as other questions relating to the particular development
of the Greek mind, is foreign to the immediate inquiry, which therefore
I shall here conclude in the hope of resuming it in detail after
examining the laws of beauty in the inanimate creation; always, however,
holding this for certain, that of whatever kind or degree the short
coming may be, it is not possible but that short coming should be
visible in every pagan conception, when set beside Christian; and
believing, for my own part, that there is not only deficiency, but such
difference in kind as must make all Greek conception full of danger to
the student in proportion to his admiration of it; as I think has been
fatally seen in its effect on the Italian schools, when its pernicious
element first mingled with their solemn purity, and recently in its
influence on the French historical painters: neither can I from my
present knowledge fix upon an ancient statue which expresses by the
countenance any one elevated character of soul, or any single
enthusiastic self-abandoning affection, much less any such majesty of
feeling as might mark the features for supernatural. The Greek could not
conceive a spirit; he could do nothing without limbs; his god is a
finite god, talking, pursuing, and going journeys;[77] if at any time he
was touched with a true feeling of the unseen powers around him, it was
in the field of poised battle, for there is something in the near coming
of the shadow of death, something in the devoted fulfilment of mortal
duty, that reveals the real God, though darkly; that pause on the field
of Platæa was not one of vain superstition; the two white figures that
blazed along the Delphic plain, when the earthquake and the fire led the
charge from Olympus, were more than sunbeams on the battle dust; the
sacred cloud, with its lance light and triumph singing, that went down
to brood over the masts of Salamis, was more than morning mist among the
olives; and yet what were the Greek's thoughts of his god of battle? No
spirit power was in the vision; it was a being of clay strength and
human passion, foul, fierce, and changeful; of penetrable arms and
vulnerable flesh. Gather what we may of great, from pagan chisel or
pagan dream, and set it beside the orderer of Christian warfare, Michael
the Archangel: not Milton's "with hostile brow and visage all inflamed,"
not even Milton's in kingly treading of the hills of Paradise, not
Raffaelle's with the expanded wings and brandished spear, but Perugino's
with his triple crest of traceless plume unshaken in heaven, his hand
fallen on his crossleted sword, the truth girdle binding his undinted
armor; God has put his power upon him, resistless radiance is on his
limbs, no lines are there of earthly strength, no trace on the divine
features of earthly anger; trustful and thoughtful, fearless, but full
of love, incapable except of the repose of eternal conquest, vessel and
instrument of Omnipotence, filled like a cloud with the victor light,
the dust of principalities and powers beneath his feet, the murmur of
hell against him heard by his spiritual ear like the winding of a shell
on the far-off sea-shore.


§ 21. Conclusion.

It is vain to attempt to pursue the comparison; the two orders of art
have in them nothing common, and the field of sacred history, the intent
and scope of Christian feeling, are too wide and exalted to admit of the
juxtaposition of any other sphere or order of conception; they embrace
all other fields like the dome of heaven. With what comparison shall we
compare the types of the martyr saints, the St. Stephen of Fra
Bartolomeo, with his calm forehead crowned by the stony diadem, or the
St. Catherine of Raffaelle looking up to heaven in the dawn of the
eternal day, with her lips parted in the resting from her pain? or with
what the Madonnas of Francia and Pinturicchio, in whom the hues of the
morning and the solemnity of the eve, the gladness in accomplished
promise, and sorrow of the sword-pierced heart, are gathered into one
human lamp of ineffable love? or with what the angel choirs of Angelico,
with the flames on their white foreheads waving brighter as they move,
and the sparkles streaming from their purple wings like the glitter of
many suns upon a sounding sea, listening, in the pauses of alternate
song, for the prolonging of the trumpet blast, and the answering of
psaltery and cymbal, throughout the endless deep and from all the star
shores of heaven?


FOOTNOTES

  [75] I take no note of the representation of evil spirits, since
    throughout we have been occupied in the pursuit of beauty; but it
    may be observed generally that there is great difficulty to be
    overcome in attempts of this kind, because the elevation of the form
    necessary to give it spirituality destroys the appearance of evil;
    hence even the greatest painters have been reduced to receive aid
    from the fancy, and to eke out all they could conceive of malignity
    by help of horns, hoofs, and claws. Giotto's Satan in the Campo
    Santo, with the serpent gnawing the heart, is fine; so many of the
    fiends of Orcagna, and always those of Michael Angelo. Tintoret in
    the Temptation, with his usual truth of invention, has represented
    the evil spirit under the form of a fair angel, the wings burning
    with crimson and silver, the face sensual and treacherous. It is
    instructive to compare the results of imagination associated with
    powerful fancy in the demons of these great painters, or even in
    such nightmares as that of Salvator already spoken of, Sect. I.
    Chap. V. § 12 (note,) with the simple ugliness of idiotic distortion
    in the meaningless terrorless monsters of Bronzino in the large
    picture of the Uffizii, where the painter, utterly uninventive,
    having assembled all that is abominable of hanging flesh, bony
    limbs, crane necks, staring eyes, and straggling hair, cannot yet by
    the sum and substance of all obtain as much real fearfulness as an
    imaginative painter could throw into the turn of a lip or the
    knitting of a brow.

  [76] I have not thought it necessary to give farther instances at
    present, since I purpose hereafter to give numerous examples of this
    kind of ideal landscape. Of true and noble landscape, as such, I am
    aware of no instances except where least they might have been
    expected, among the sea-bred Venetians. Ghirlandajo shows keen,
    though prosaic, sense of nature in that view of Venice behind an
    Adoration of Magi in the Uffizii, but he at last walled himself up
    among gilded entablatures. Masaccio indeed has given one grand
    example in the fresco of the Tribute Money, but its color is now
    nearly lost.

  [77] I know not anything in the range of art more unspiritual than
    the Apollo Belvidere; the raising of the fingers of the right hand
    in surprise at the truth of the arrow is altogether human, and would
    be vulgar in a prince, much more in a deity. The sandals destroy the
    divinity of the foot, and the lip is curled with mortal passion.




                               ADDENDA.


Although the plan of the present portion of this work does not admit of
particular criticism, it will neither be useless nor irrelevant to refer
to one or two works, lately before the public, in the Exhibitions of the
Royal Academy, which either illustrate, or present exceptions to, any of
the preceding statements. I would first mention, with reference to what
has been advanced respecting the functions of Associative Imagination,
the very important work of Mr. Linnell, the "Eve of the Deluge;" a
picture upheld by its admirers (and these were some of the most
intelligent judges of the day) for a work of consummate imaginative
power; while it was pronounced by the public journals to be "a chaos of
unconcocted color." If the writers for the press had been aware of the
kind of study pursued by Mr. Linnell through many laborious years,
characterized by an observance of nature scrupulously and minutely
patient, directed by the deepest sensibility, and aided by a power of
drawing almost too refined for landscape subjects, and only to be
understood by reference to his engravings after Michael Angelo, they
would have felt it to be unlikely that the work of such a man should be
entirely undeserving of respect. On the other hand, the grounds of its
praise were unfortunately chosen; for, though possessing many merits, it
had no claim whatever to be ranked among productions of Creative art. It
would perhaps be difficult to point to a work so exalted in feeling, and
so deficient in invention. The sky had been strictly taken from nature,
this was evident at a glance; and as a study of sky it was every way
noble. To the purpose of the picture it hardly contributed; its
sublimity was that of splendor, not of terror; and its darkness that of
retreating, not of gathering, storm. The features of the landscape were
devoid alike of variety and probability; the division of the scene by
the central valley and winding river at once theatrical and commonplace;
and the foreground, on which the light was intense, alike devoid of
dignity in arrangement, and of interest in detail.

The falseness or deficiency of color in the works of Mr. Landseer has
been remarked above. The writer has much pleasure in noticing a very
beautiful exception in the picture of the "Random Shot," certainly the
most successful rendering he has ever seen of the hue of snow under warm
but subdued light. The subtlety of gradation from the portions of the
wreath fully illumined, to those which, feebly tinged by the horizontal
rays, swelled into a dome of dim purple, dark against the green evening
sky; the truth of the blue shadows, with which this dome was barred, and
the depth of delicate color out of which the lights upon the footprints
were raised, deserved the most earnest and serious admiration; proving,
at the same time, that the errors in color, so frequently to be
regretted in the works of the painter, are the result rather of
inattention than of feeble perception. A curious proof of this
inattention occurs in the disposition of the shadows in the background
of the "Old Cover Hack," No. 229. One of its points of light is on the
rusty iron handle of a pump, in the shape of an S. The sun strikes the
greater part of its length, illuminating the perpendicular portion of
the curve; yet shadow is only cast on the wall behind by the returning
portion of the lower extremity. A smile may be excited by the notice of
so trivial a circumstance; but the simplicity of the error renders it
the more remarkable, and the great masters of chiaroscuro are accurate
in all such minor points; a vague sense of greater truth results from
this correctness, even when it is not in particulars analyzed or noted
by the observer. In the small but very valuable Paul Potter in Lord
Westminster's collection, the body of one of the sheep under the hedge
is for the most part in shadow, but the sunlight touches the extremity
of the back. The sun is low, and the shadows feeble and distorted; yet
that of the sunlighted fleece is cast exactly in its true place and
proportion beyond that of the hedge. The spectator may not observe this;
yet, unobserved, it is one of the circumstances which make him feel the
picture to be full of sunshine.

As an example of perfect color, and of the most refined handling ever
perhaps exhibited in animal painting, the Butcher's Dog in the corner of
Mr. Mulready's "Butt," No. 160, deserved a whole room of the Academy to
himself. This, with the spaniel in the "Choosing the Wedding Gown," and
the two dogs in the hayfield subject (Burchell and Sophia), displays
perhaps the most wonderful, because the most dignified, finish in the
expression of anatomy and covering--of muscle and hide at once, and
assuredly the most perfect unity of drawing and color, which the entire
range of ancient and modern art can exhibit. Albert Durer is indeed the
only rival who might be suggested; and, though greater far in
imagination, and equal in draughtsmanship, Albert Durer was less true
and less delicate in hue. In sculpturesque arrangement both masters show
the same degree of feeling: any of these dogs of Mulready might be taken
out of the canvas and cut in alabaster, or, perhaps better, struck upon
a coin. Every lock and line of the hair has been grouped as it is on a
Greek die; and if this not always without some loss of ease and of
action, yet this very loss is ennobling, in a period when all is
generally sacrificed to the great coxcombry of art, the affectation of
ease.

Yet Mr. Mulready himself is not always free from affectation of some
kind; mannerism, at least, there is in his treatment of tree trunks.
There is a ghastliness about his labored anatomies of them, as well as a
want of specific character. Why need they be always flayed? The hide of
a beech tree, or of a birch or fir, is nearly as fair a thing as an
animal's; glossy as a dove's neck barred with black like a zebra, or
glowing in purple grey and velvet brown like furry cattle in sunset. Why
not paint these as Mr. Mulready paints other things, as they are? That
simplest, that deepest of all secrets, which gives such majesty to the
ragged leaves about the edges of the pond in the "Gravel-pit." (No.
125.), and imparts a strange interest to the grey ragged urchins
disappearing behind the bank, that bank so low, so familiar, so sublime!
What a contrast between the deep sentiment of that commonest of all
common, homeliest of all homely, subjects, and the lost sentiment of Mr.
Stanfield's "Amalfi" the chief landscape of the year, full of exalted
material, and mighty crags, and massy seas, grottoes, precipices, and
convents, fortress-towers and cloud-capped mountains, and all in vain,
merely because that same simple secret has been despised; because
nothing there is painted as it is! The picture was a most singular
example of the scenic assemblage of contradictory theme which is
characteristic of Picturesque, as opposed to Poetical, composition. The
lines chosen from Rogers for a titular legend were full of summer,
glowing with golden light, and toned with quiet melancholy:

                       "To him who sails
            Under the shore, a few white villages,
            Scattered above, below, some in the clouds,
            Some on the margin of the dark blue sea,
            And glittering thro' their lemon groves, announce
            The region of Amalfi. Then, half-fallen,
            A lonely watch-tower on the precipice,
            Their ancient landmark, comes--long may it last!
            And to the seaman, in a distant age,
            Though now he little thinks how large his debt,
            Serve for their monument."

Prepared by these lines for a dream upon deep, calm waters, under the
shadow and scent of the close lemon leaves, the spectator found himself
placed by the painter, wet through, in a noisy fishing boat, on a
splashing sea, with just as much on his hands as he could manage to keep
her gunwale from being stove in against a black rock; and with a heavy
grey squall to windward. (This squall, by the by, was the very same
which appeared in the picture of the Magra of 1847, and so were the
snowy mountains above; only the squall at Amalfi entered on the left,
and at the Magra on the right.) Now the scenery of Amalfi is impressive
alike in storm or calm, and the writer has seen the Mediterranean as
majestic and as southern-looking in its rage as in its rest. But it is
treating both the green water and woods unfairly to destroy their peace
without expressing their power; and withdraw from them their sadness and
their sun, without the substitution of any effect more terrific than
that of a squall at the Nore. The snow on the distant mountains chilled
what it could not elevate, and was untrue to the scene besides; there is
no snow on the Monte St. Angelo in summer except what is kept for the
Neapolitan confectioners. The great merit of the picture was its
rock-painting; too good to have required the aid of the exaggeration of
forms which satiated the eye throughout the composition.

Mr. F. R. Pickersgill's "Contest of Beauty" (No. 515.), and Mr. Uwins's
"Vineyard Scene in the South of France," were, after Mr. Mulready's
works, among the most interesting pieces of color in the Exhibition. The
former, very rich and sweet in its harmonies, and especially happy in
its contrasts of light and dark armor; nor less in the fancy of the
little Love who, losing his hold of the orange boughs, was falling
ignominiously without having time to open his wings. The latter was a
curious example of what I have described as abstraction of color.
Strictly true or possible it was not; a vintage is usually a dusty and
dim-looking procedure; but there were poetry and feeling in Mr. Uwins's
idealization of the sombre black of the veritable grape into a luscious
ultramarine purple, glowing among the green leaves like so much painted
glass. The figures were bright and graceful in the extreme and most
happily grouped. Little else that could be called color was to be seen
upon the walls of the Exhibition, with the exception of the smaller
works of Mr. Etty. Of these, the single head, "Morning Prayer," (No.
25.), and the "Still Life" (No. 73.), deserved, allowing for their
peculiar aim, the highest praise. The larger subjects, more especially
the St. John, were wanting in the merits peculiar to the painter; and in
other respects it is alike painful and useless to allude to them. A very
important and valuable work of Mr. Harding was placed, as usual, where
its merits could be but ill seen, and where its chief fault, a
feebleness of color in the principal light on the distant hills, was
apparent. It was one of the very few views of the year which were
transcripts, nearly without exaggeration, of the features of the
localities.

Among the less conspicuous landscapes, Mr. W. E. Dighton's "Hay Meadow
Corner" deserved especial notice; it was at once vigorous, fresh,
faithful, and unpretending, the management of the distance most
ingenious, and the painting of the foreground, with the single exception
of Mr. Mulready's above noticed, unquestionably the best in the room. I
have before had occasion to notice a picture by this artist, "A Hayfield
in a Shower," exhibited in the British Institution in 1847, and this
year (1848) in the Scottish Academy, whose sky, in qualities of rainy,
shattered, transparent grey, I have seldom seen equalled; nor the mist
of its distance, expressive alike of previous heat and present heat of
rain. I look with much interest for other works by this painter.

A hurried visit to Scotland in the spring of this year, while it
enables the writer to acknowledge the ardor and genius manifested in
very many of the works exhibited in the Scottish Academy, cannot be
considered as furnishing him with sufficient grounds for specific
criticism. He cannot, however, err in testifying his concurrence in the
opinion expressed to him by several of the most distinguished members of
that Academy, respecting the singular merit of the works of Mr. H.
Drummond. A cabinet picture of "Banditti on the Watch," appeared to him
one of the most masterly, unaffected, and sterling pieces of quiet
painting he has ever seen from the hand of a living artist; and the
other works of Mr. Drummond were alike remarkable for their manly and
earnest finish, and their sweetness of feeling.

       *       *       *       *       *




                          Library Edition

                         THE COMPLETE WORKS
                                 OF
                             JOHN RUSKIN


                           MODERN PAINTERS

             VOLUME II--OF TRUTH AND THEORETIC FACULTIES
                      VOLUME III--OF MANY THINGS


                    NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
                    NEW YORK             CHICAGO




                           MODERN PAINTERS.

                              VOL. III.,

                              CONTAINING

                               PART IV.,

                           OF MANY THINGS.




                          TABLE OF CONTENTS.

                       PART IV. OF MANY THINGS.

                                                                    PAGE
  CHAPTER  I.--Of the received Opinions touching the "Grand Style"     1
     "    II.--Of Realization                                         16
     "   III.--Of the Real Nature of Greatness of Style               23
     "    IV.--Of the False Ideal:--First, Religious                  44
     "     V.--Of the False Ideal:--Secondly, Profane                 61
     "    VI.--Of the True Ideal:--First, Purist                      70
     "   VII.--Of the True Ideal:--Secondly, Naturalist               77
     "  VIII.--Of the True Ideal:--Thirdly, Grotesque                 92
     "    IX.--Of Finish                                             108
     "     X.--Of the Use of Pictures                                124
     "    XI.--Of the Novelty of Landscape                           144
     "   XII.--Of the Pathetic Fallacy                               152
     "  XIII.--Of Classical Landscape                                168
     "   XIV.--Of Mediæval Landscape:--First, the Fields             191
     "    XV.--Of Mediæval Landscape:--Secondly, the Rocks           229
     "   XVI.--Of Modern Landscape                                   248
     "  XVII.--The Moral of Landscape                                280
     " XVIII.--Of the Teachers of Turner                             308


                              APPENDIX.


    I.--Claude's Tree-drawing                                        333
   II.--German Philosophy                                            336
  III.--Plagiarism                                                   338




                     LIST OF PLATES TO VOL. III.


                                  Drawn by            Engraved by
  Frontispiece. Lake, Land,     _The Author_        J. C. ARMYTAGE.
    and Cloud.
                                                                  Facing
   Plate                                                            page

   1. True and False Griffins    _The Author_       R. P. CUFF       106

   2. Drawing of Tree-bark       _Various_          J. H. LE KEUX    114

   3. Strength of old Pine       _The Author_       J. H. LE KEUX    116

   4. Ramification according     _Claude_           J. H. LE KEUX    117
      to Claude

   5. Good and Bad               _Turner and        J. COUSEN        118
      Tree-drawing               Constable_

   6. Foreground Leafage         _The Author_       J. C. ARMYTAGE   121

   7. Botany of the Thirteenth   _Missal-Painters_  HENRY SHAW       203
      Century

   8. The Growth of Leaves       _The Author_       R. P. CUFF       204

   9. Botany of the Fourteenth   _Missal-Painters_  CUFF; H. SWAN    207
      Century

  10. Geology of the Middle      _Leonardo, etc._   R. P. CUFF       238
      Ages

  11. Latest Purism              _Raphael_          J. C. ARMYTAGE   313

  12. The Shores of Wharfe       _J. W. M. Turner_  THE AUTHOR       314

  13. First Mountain-Naturalism  _Masaccio_         J. H. LE KEUX    315

  14. The Lombard Apennine       _The Author_       THOS. LUPTON     315

  15. St. George of the Seaweed  _The Author_       THOS. LUPTON     315

  16. Early Naturalism           _Titian_           J. C. ARMYTAGE   316

  17. Advanced Naturalism        _Tintoret_         J. C. ARMYTAGE   316




PREFACE.


As this preface is nearly all about myself, no one need take the trouble
of reading it, unless he happens to be desirous of knowing-- what I, at
least, am bound to state,--the circumstances which have caused the long
delay of the work, as well as the alterations which will be noticed in
its form.

The first and second volumes were written to check, as far as I
could, the attacks upon Turner which prevented the public from
honoring his genius, at the time when his power was greatest. The
check was partially given, but too late; Turner was seized by
painful illness not long after the second volume appeared; his
works, towards the close of the year 1845, showed a conclusive
failure of power; and I saw that nothing remained for me to write,
but his epitaph.

The critics had done their proper and appointed work; they had
embittered, more than those who did not know Turner intimately could
have believed possible, the closing years of his life; and had
blinded the world in general (as it appears ordained by Fate that
the world always _shall_ be blinded) to the presence of a great
spirit among them, till the hour of its departure. With them, and
their successful work, I had nothing more to do; the account of gain
and loss, of gifts and gratitude, between Turner and his countrymen,
was for ever closed. _He_ could only be left to his quiet death at
Chelsea,--the sun upon his face; _they_ to dispose a length of
funeral through Ludgate, and bury, with threefold honor, his body in
St. Paul's, his pictures at Charing Cross, and his purposes in
Chancery. But with respect to the illustration and preservation of
those of his works which remained unburied, I felt that much might
yet be done, if I could at all succeed in proving that these works
had some nobleness in them, and were worth preservation. I pursued
my task, therefore, as I had at first proposed, with this only
difference in method,--that instead of writing in continued haste,
such as I had been forced into at first by the urgency of the
occasion, I set myself to do the work as well as I could, and to
collect materials for the complete examination of the canons of art
received among us.

I have now given ten years of my life to the single purpose of
enabling myself to judge rightly of art, and spent them in labor as
earnest and continuous as men usually undertake to gain position, or
accumulate fortune. It is true, that the public still call me an
"amateur;" nor have I ever been able to persuade them that it was
possible to work steadily and hard with any other motive than that
of gaining bread, or to give up a fixed number of hours every day to
the furtherance of an object unconnected with personal interests. I
have, however, given up so much of life to this object; earnestly
desiring to ascertain, and be able to teach, the truth respecting
art; and also knowing that this truth was, by time and labor,
definitely ascertainable.

It is an idea too frequently entertained, by persons who are not much
interested in art, that there are no laws of right or wrong concerning
it; and that the best art is that which pleases most widely. Hence the
constant allegation of "dogmatism" against any one who states
unhesitatingly either preference or principle, respecting pictures.
There are, however, laws of truth and right in painting, just as fixed
as those of harmony in music, or of affinity in chemistry. Those laws
are perfectly ascertainable by labor, and ascertainable no other way.
It is as ridiculous for any one to speak positively about painting who
has not given a great part of his life to its study, as it would be for
a person who had never studied chemistry to give a lecture on
affinities of elements; but it is also as ridiculous for a person to
speak hesitatingly about laws of painting who has conscientiously given
his time to their ascertainment, as it would be for Mr. Faraday to
announce in a dubious manner that iron had an affinity for oxygen, and
to put the question to the vote of his audience whether it had or not.
Of course there are many things, in all stages of knowledge, which
cannot be dogmatically stated; and it will be found, by any candid
reader, either of what I have before written, or of this book, that in
many cases, I am _not_ dogmatic. The phrase, "I think so," or, "it
seems so to me," will be met with continually; and I pray the reader to
believe that I use such expression always in seriousness, never as
matter of form.

It may perhaps be thought that, considering the not very elaborate
structure of the following volumes, they might have been finished
sooner. But it will be found, on reflection, that the ranges of
inquiry engaged in demanded, even for their slight investigation,
time and pains which are quite unrepresented in the result. It often
required a week or two's hard walking to determine some geological
problem, now dismissed in an unnoticed sentence; and it constantly
needed examination and thought, prolonged during many days in the
picture gallery, to form opinions which the reader may suppose to be
dictated by caprice, and will hear only to dispute.

A more serious disadvantage, resulting from the necessary breadth of
subject, was the chance of making mistakes in minor and accessory
points. For the labor of a critic who sincerely desires to be just,
extends into more fields than it is possible for any single hand to
furrow straightly. He has to take _some_ note of many physical
sciences; of optics, geometry, geology, botany, and anatomy; he must
acquaint himself with the works of all great artists, and with the
temper and history of the times in which they lived; he must be a fair
metaphysician, and a careful observer of the phenomena of natural
scenery. It is not possible to extend the range of work thus widely,
without running the chance of occasionally making mistakes; and if I
carefully guarded against that chance, I should be compelled both to
shorten my powers of usefulness in many directions, and to lose much
time over what work I undertook. All that I can secure, therefore, is
rightness in main points and main tendencies; for it is perfectly
possible to protect oneself against small errors, and yet to make
great and final error in the sum of work: on the other hand, it is
equally possible to fall into many small errors, and yet be right in
tendency all the while, and entirely right in the end. In this
respect, some men may be compared to careful travellers, who neither
stumble at stones, nor slip in sloughs, but have, from the beginning
of their journey to its close, chosen the wrong road; and others to
those who, however slipping or stumbling at the wayside, have yet
their eyes fixed on the true gate and goal (stumbling, perhaps, even
the more because they have), and will not fail of reaching them. Such
are assuredly the safer guides: he who follows them may avoid their
slips, and be their companion in attainment.

Although, therefore, it is not possible but that, in the discussion
of so many subjects as are necessarily introduced in the following
pages, here and there a chance should arise of minor mistake or
misconception, the reader need not be disturbed by the detection of
any such. He will find always that they do not affect the matter
mainly in hand.

I refer especially in these remarks to the chapters on Classical and
Mediæval Landscape. It is certain, that in many respects, the views
there stated must be inaccurate or incomplete; for how should it be
otherwise when the subject is one whose proper discussion would
require knowledge of the entire history of two great ages of the
world? But I am well assured that the suggestions in those chapters
are useful; and that even if, after farther study of the subject,
the reader should find cause to differ with me in this or the other
speciality, he will yet thank me for helping him to a certain length
in the investigation, and confess, perhaps, that he could not at
last have been right, if I had not first ventured to be wrong.

And of one thing he may be certified, that any error I fall into will
not be in an illogical deduction: I may mistake the meaning of a
symbol, or the angle of a rock-cleavage, but not draw an inconsequent
conclusion. I state this, because it has often been said that I am not
logical, by persons who do not so much as know what logic means. Next
to imagination, the power of perceiving logical relation is one of the
rarest among men; certainly, of those with whom I have conversed, I
have found always ten who had deep feeling, quick wit, or extended
knowledge, for one who could set down a syllogism without a flaw; and
for ten who could set down a syllogism, only one who could _entirely_
understand that a square has four sides. Even as I am sending these
sheets to press, a work is put into my hand, written to prove (I would,
from the depth of my heart, it could prove) that there was no ground
for what I said in the Stones of Venice respecting the logical
probability of the continuity of evil. It seems learned, temperate,
thoughtful, everything in feeling and aim that a book should be, and
yet it begins with this sentence:

    "The question cited in our preface, 'Why not infinite good out
    of infinite evil?' must be taken to imply--for it else can
    have no weight,--that in order to the production of infinite
    good, the existence of infinite evil is indispensable."

So, if I had said that there was no reason why honey should not be
sucked out of a rock, and oil out of a flinty rock, the writer would
have told me this sentence must be taken to imply--for it else could
have no weight,--that in order to the production of honey, the
existence of rocks is indispensable. No less intense and marvellous are
the logical errors into which our best writers are continually falling,
owing to the notion that laws of logic will help them better than
common sense. Whereas any man who can reason at all, does it
instinctively, and takes leaps over intermediate syllogisms by the
score, yet never misses his footing at the end of the leap; but he who
cannot instinctively argue, might as well, with the gout in both feet,
try to follow a chamois hunter by the help of crutches, as to follow,
by the help of syllogism, a person who has the right use of his reason.
I should not, however, have thought it necessary to allude to this
common charge against my writings, but that it happens to confirm some
views I have long entertained, and which the reader will find glanced
at in their proper place, respecting the necessity of a more
_practically_ logical education for our youth. Of other various charges
I need take no note, because they are always answered the one by the
other. The complaint made against me to-day for being narrow and
exclusive, is met to-morrow by indignation that I should admire schools
whose characters cannot be reconciled; and the assertion of one critic,
that I am always contradicting myself, is balanced by the vexation of
another, at my ten years' obstinacies in error.

I once intended the illustrations to these volumes to be more numerous
and elaborate, but the art of photography now enables any reader to
obtain as many memoranda of the facts of nature as he needs; and, in
the course of my ten years' pause, I have formed plans for the
representation of some of the works of Turner on their own scale; so
that it would have been quite useless to spend time in reducing
drawings to the size of this page, which were afterwards to be
engraved of their own size.[1] I have therefore here only given
illustrations enough to enable the reader, who has not access to the
works of Turner, to understand the principles laid down in the text,
and apply them to such art as may be within his reach. And I owe
sincere thanks to the various engravers who have worked with me, for
the zeal and care with which they have carried out the requirements in
each case, and overcome difficulties of a nature often widely
differing from those involved by their habitual practice. I would not
make invidious distinction, where all have done well; but may perhaps
be permitted to point, as examples of what I mean, to the 3rd and 6th
Plates in this volume (the 6th being left unlettered in order not to
injure the effect of its ground), in which Mr. Le Keux and Mr.
Armytage have exactly facsimiled, in line engraving, drawings of mine
made on a grey ground touched with white, and have given even the
_loaded_ look of the body color. The power of thus imitating actual
touches of color with pure lines will be, I believe, of great future
importance in rendering Turner's work on a large scale. As for the
merit or demerit of these or other drawings of my own, which I am
obliged now for the sake of illustration often to engrave, I believe I
could speak of it impartially, and should unreluctantly do so; but I
leave, as most readers will think I ought, such judgment to them,
merely begging them to remember that there are two general principles
to be kept in mind in examining the drawings of any writer on art: the
first, that they ought at least to show such ordinary skill in
draughtsmanship, as to prove that the writer knows _what_ the good
qualities of drawing _are_; the second, that they are never to be
expected to equal, in either execution or conception, the work of
accomplished artists,--for the simple reason, that in order to do
_any_thing thoroughly well, the whole mind, and the whole available
time, must be given to that single art. It is probable, for reasons
which will be noted in the following pages, that the critical and
executive faculties are in great part independent of each other; so
that it is nearly as great an absurdity to require of any critic that
he should equal in execution even the work which he condemns, as to
require of the audience which hisses a piece of vocal music that they
should instantly chant it in truer harmony themselves. But whether
this be true or not (it is at least untrue to this extent, that a
certain power of drawing is _indispensable_ to the critic of art), and
supposing that the executive and critical powers always exist in some
correspondent degree in the same person, still they cannot be
cultivated to the same extent. The attention required for the
development of a theory is necessarily withdrawn from the design of a
drawing, and the time devoted to the realization of a form is lost to
the solution of a problem. Choice _must_ at last be made between one
and the other power, as the principal aim of life; and if the painter
should find it necessary sometimes to explain one of his pictures in
words, or the writer to illustrate his meaning with a drawing, the
skill of the one need not be doubted because his logic is feeble, nor
the sense of the other because his pencil is listless.

As, however, it is sometimes alleged by the opponents of my
principles, that I have never _done_ _any_thing, it is proper that the
reader should know exactly the amount of work for which I am
answerable in these illustrations. When an example is given from any
of the works of Turner, it is either etched by myself from the
original drawing, or engraved from a drawing of mine, translating
Turner's work out of color into black and white, as for instance, the
frontispiece to the fourth volume. When a plate is inscribed as
"_after_" such and such a master, I have always myself made the
drawing, in black and white, from the original picture; as, for
instance, Plate 11, in this volume. If it has been made from a
previously existing engraving, it is inscribed with the name of the
first engraver at the left-hand lowest corner; as, for instance, Plate
18, in Vol. IV. Outline etchings are either by my own hand on the
steel, as Plate 12, here, and 20, 21, in Vol. IV.; or copies from my
pen drawings, etched by Mr. Boys, with a fidelity for which I
sincerely thank him; one, Plate 22, Vol. IV., is both drawn and etched
by Mr. Boys from an old engraving. Most of the other illustrations are
engraved from my own studies from nature. The colored Plate (7, in
this volume) is from a drawing executed with great skill by my
assistant, Mr. J. J. Laing, from MSS. in the British Museum; and the
lithography of it has been kindly superintended by Mr. Henry Shaw,
whose renderings of mediæval ornaments stand, as far as I know, quite
unrivalled in modern art. The two woodcuts of mediæval design, Figs. 1
and 3, are also from drawings by Mr. Laing, admirably cut by Miss
Byfield. I use this word "admirably," not with reference to mere
delicacy of execution, which can usually be had for money, but to the
perfect fidelity of facsimile, which is in general _not_ to be had for
money, and by which Miss Byfield has saved me all trouble with respect
to the numerous woodcuts in the fourth volume; first, by her excellent
renderings of various portions of Albert Durer's woodcuts; and,
secondly, by reproducing, to their last dot or scratch, my own pen
diagrams, drawn in general so roughly that few wood-engravers would
have condescended to cut them with care, and yet always involving some
points in which care was indispensable. One or two changes have been
permitted in the arrangement of the book, which make the text in
these volumes not altogether a symmetrical continuation of that in
former ones. Thus, I thought it better to put the numbers of
paragraphs always at the left-hand side of the page; and as the
summaries, in small type, appeared to me for the most part cumbrous
and useless, I have banished them, except where there were complicated
divisions of subject which it seemed convenient to indicate at the
margin. I am not sorry thus to carry out my own principle of the
sacrifice of architectural or constructive symmetry to practical
service. The plates are, in a somewhat unusual way, numbered
consecutively through the two volumes, as I intend them to be also
through the fifth. This plan saves much trouble in references.

I have only to express, in conclusion, my regret that it has been
impossible to finish the work within the limits first proposed.
Having, of late, found my designs always requiring enlargement in
process of execution, I will take care, in future, to set no limits
whatsoever to any good intentions. In the present instance I trust
the reader will pardon me, as the later efforts of our schools of
art have necessarily introduced many new topics of discussion.

And so I wish him heartily a happy New Year.

Denmark Hill, Jan. 1856.

  [1] I should be very grateful to the proprietors of pictures or
      drawings by Turner, if they would send me lists of the works
      in their possession; as I am desirous of forming a systematic
      catalogue of all his works.




[Illustration: Lake, Land, and Cloud. (near Como.)]






                           MODERN PAINTERS.

                               PART IV.

                           OF MANY THINGS.




CHAPTER I.

OF THE RECEIVED OPINIONS TOUCHING THE "GRAND STYLE."


§ 1. In taking up the clue of an inquiry, now intermitted for nearly
ten years, it may be well to do as a traveller would, who had to
recommence an interrupted journey in a guideless country; and,
ascending, as it were, some little hill beside our road, note how
far we have already advanced, and what pleasantest ways we may
choose for farther progress.

I endeavored, in the beginning of the first volume, to divide the
sources of pleasure open to us in Art into certain groups, which
might conveniently be studied in succession. After some preliminary
discussion, it was concluded (Part I. Chap. III. § 86), that these
groups were, in the main, three; consisting, first, of the pleasures
taken in perceiving simple resemblance to Nature (Ideas of Truth);
secondly, of the pleasures taken in the beauty of the things chosen
to be painted (Ideas of Beauty); and, lastly, of pleasures taken in
the meanings and relations of these things (Ideas of Relation).

The first volume, treating of the ideas of Truth, was chiefly occupied
with an inquiry into the various success with which different artists
had represented the facts of Nature,--an inquiry necessarily conducted
very imperfectly, owing to the want of pictorial illustration.

The second volume nearly opened the inquiry into the nature of ideas
of Beauty and Relation, by analysing (as far as I was able to do so)
the two faculties of the human mind which mainly seized such ideas;
namely, the contemplative and imaginative faculties.

It remains for us to examine the various success of artists, especially
of the great landscape-painter whose works have been throughout our
principal subject, in addressing these faculties of the human mind, and
to consider who among them has conveyed the noblest ideas of beauty,
and touched the deepest sources of thought.

§ 2. I do not intend, however, now to pursue the inquiry in a method
so laboriously systematic; for the subject may, it seems to me, be
more usefully treated by pursuing the different questions which rise
out of it just as they occur to us, without too great scrupulousness
in marking connections, or insisting on sequences. Much time is
wasted by human beings, in general, on establishment of systems; and
it often takes more labor to master the intricacies of an artificial
connection, than to remember the separate facts which are so
carefully connected. I suspect that system-makers, in general, are
not of much more use, each in his own domain, than, in that of
Pomona, the old women who tie cherries upon sticks, for the more
convenient portableness of the same. To cultivate well, and choose
well, your cherries, is of some importance; but if they can be had
in their own wild way of clustering about their crabbed stalk, it is
a better connection for them than any other; and, if they cannot,
then, so that they be not bruised, it makes to a boy of a practical
disposition, not much difference whether he gets them by handfuls,
or in beaded symmetry on the exalting stick. I purpose, therefore,
henceforward to trouble myself little with sticks or twine, but to
arrange my chapters with a view to convenient reference, rather than
to any careful division of subjects, and to follow out, in any
by-ways that may open, on right hand or left, whatever question it
seems useful at any moment to settle.

§ 3. And, in the outset, I find myself met by one which I ought to
have touched upon before--one of especial interest in the present
state of the Arts. I have said that the art is greatest which
includes the greatest ideas; but I have not endeavored to define the
nature of this greatness in the ideas themselves. We speak of great
truths, of great beauties, great thoughts. What is it which makes
one truth greater than another, one thought greater than another?
This question is, I repeat, of peculiar importance at the present
time; for, during a period now of some hundred and fifty years, all
writers on Art who have pretended to eminence, have insisted much on
a supposed distinction between what they call the Great and the Low
Schools; using the terms "High Art," "Great or Ideal Style," and
other such, as descriptive of a certain noble manner of painting,
which it was desirable that all students of Art should be early led
to reverence and adopt; and characterising as "vulgar," or "low," or
"realist," another manner of painting and conceiving, which it was
equally necessary that all students should be taught to avoid.

But lately this established teaching, never very intelligible, has
been gravely called in question. The advocates and self-supposed
practisers of "High Art" are beginning to be looked upon with doubt,
and their peculiar phraseology to be treated with even a certain
degree of ridicule. And other forms of Art are partly developed
among us, which do not pretend to be high, but rather to be strong,
healthy, and humble. This matter of "highness" in Art, therefore
deserves our most careful consideration. Has it been, or is it, a
true highness, a true princeliness, or only a show of it, consisting
in courtly manners and robes of state? Is it rocky height or cloudy
height, adamant or vapor, on which the sun of praise so long has
risen and set? It will be well at once to consider this.

§ 4. And first, let us get, as quickly as may be, at the exact
meaning with which the advocates of "High Art" use that somewhat
obscure and figurative term.

I do not know that the principles in question are anywhere more
distinctly expressed than in two papers in the Idler, written by Sir
Joshua Reynolds, of course under the immediate sanction of Johnson;
and which may thus be considered as the utterance of the views then
held upon the subject by the artists of chief skill, and critics of
most sense, arranged in a form so brief and clear, as to admit of
their being brought before the public for a morning's entertainment.
I cannot, therefore, it seems to me, do better than quote these two
letters, or at least the important parts of them, examining the exact
meaning of each passage as it occurs. There are, in all, in the Idler
three letters on painting, Nos. 76, 79, and 82; of these, the first is
directed only against the impertinences of pretended connoisseurs, and
is as notable for its faithfulness, as for its wit, in the description
of the several modes of criticism in an artificial and ignorant state
of society; it is only, therefore, in the two last papers that we find
the expression of the doctrines which it is our business to examine.

No. 79 (Saturday, Oct. 20th, 1759) begins, after a short preamble,
with the following passage:--

    "Amongst the painters, and the writers on painting, there is one
    maxim universally admitted and continually inculcated. Imitate
    nature is the invariable rule; but I know none who have
    explained in what manner this rule is to be understood; the
    sequence of which is, that every one takes it in the most
    obvious sense, that objects are represented naturally when they
    have such relief that they seem real. It may appear strange,
    perhaps, to hear this sense of the rule disputed; but it must be
    considered, that, if the excellency of a painter consisted only
    in this kind of imitation, Painting must lose its rank, and be
    no longer considered as a liberal art, and sister to Poetry,
    this imitation being nearly mechanical, in which the slowest
    intellect is always sure to succeed best; for the painter of
    genius cannot stoop to drudgery, in which the understanding has
    no part; and what pretence has the art to claim kindred with
    poetry but by its power over the imagination? To this power the
    painter of genius directs him; in this sense he studies nature,
    and often arrives at his end, even by being unnatural in the
    confined sense of the word."

    "The grand style of painting requires this minute attention to be
    carefully avoided, and must be kept as separate from it as the
    style of poetry from that of history. (Poetical ornaments destroy
    that air of truth and plainness which ought to characterise
    history; but the very being of poetry consists in departing from
    this plain narrative, and adopting every ornament that will warm
    the imagination.[2]) To desire to see the excellencies of each
    style united--to mingle the Dutch with the Italian school, is to
    join contrarieties, which cannot subsist together, and which
    destroy the efficacy of each other."

§ 5. We find, first, from this interesting passage, that the writer
considers the Dutch and Italian masters as severally representative
of the low and high schools; next, that he considers the Dutch
painters as excelling in a mechanical imitation, "in which the
slowest intellect is always sure to succeed best;" and, thirdly,
that he considers the Italian painters as excelling in a style which
corresponds to that of imaginative poetry in literature, and which
has an exclusive right to be called the grand style.

I wish that it were in my power entirely to concur with the writer,
and to enforce this opinion thus distinctly stated. I have never
been a zealous partisan of the Dutch School, and should rejoice in
claiming Reynolds's authority for the assertion, that their manner
was one "in which the slowest intellect was always sure to succeed
best." But before his authority can be so claimed, we must observe
exactly the meaning of the assertion itself, and separate it from
the company of some others not perhaps so admissible. First, I say,
we must observe Reynolds's exact meaning, for (though the assertion
may at first appear singular) a man who uses accurate language is
always more liable to misinterpretation than one who is careless in
his expressions. We may assume that the latter means very nearly
what we at first suppose him to mean, for words which have been
uttered without thought may be received without examination. But
when a writer or speaker may be fairly supposed to have considered
his expressions carefully, and, after having revolved a number of
terms in his mind, to have chosen the one which _exactly_ means the
thing he intends to say, we may be assured that what costs him time
to select, will require from us time to understand, and that we
shall do him wrong, unless we pause to reflect how the word which he
has actually employed differs from other words which it seems he
_might_ have employed. It thus constantly happens that persons
themselves unaccustomed to think clearly, or speak correctly,
misunderstand a logical and careful writer, and are actually in more
danger of being misled by language which is measured and precise,
than by that which is loose and inaccurate.

§ 6. Now, in the instance before us, a person not accustomed to good
writing might very rashly conclude, that when Reynolds spoke of the
Dutch School as one "in which the slowest intellect was sure to succeed
best," he meant to say that every successful Dutch painter was a fool.
We have no right to take his assertion in that sense. He says, the
_slowest_ intellect. We have no right to assume that he meant the
_weakest_. For it is true, that in order to succeed in the Dutch style,
a man has need of qualities of mind eminently deliberate and sustained.
He must be possessed of patience rather than of power; and must feel no
weariness in contemplating the expression of a single thought for
several months together. As opposed to the changeful energies of the
imagination, these mental characters may be properly spoken of as under
the general term--slowness of intellect. But it by no means follows
that they are necessarily those of weak or foolish men.

We observe however, farther, that the imitation which Reynolds
supposes to be characteristic of the Dutch School is that which
gives to objects such relief that they seem real, and that he then
speaks of this art of realistic imitation as corresponding to
_history_ in literature.

§ 7. Reynolds, therefore, seems to class these dull works of the
Dutch School under a general head, to which they are not commonly
referred--that of _Historical_ painting; while he speaks of the
works of the Italian School not as historical, but as _poetical_
painting. His next sentence will farther manifest his meaning.

    "The Italian attends only to the invariable, the great and
    general ideas which are fixed and inherent in universal
    nature; the Dutch, on the contrary, to literal truth and
    minute exactness in the detail, as I may say, of nature
    modified by accident. The attention to these petty
    peculiarities is the very cause of this naturalness so much
    admired in the Dutch pictures, which, if we suppose it to be a
    beauty, is certainly of a lower order, which ought to give
    place to a beauty of a superior kind, since one cannot be
    obtained but by departing from the other.

    "If my opinion was asked concerning the works of Michael
    Angelo, whether they would receive any advantage from
    possessing this mechanical merit, I should not scruple to say,
    they would not only receive no advantage, but would lose, in a
    great measure, the effect which they now have on every mind
    susceptible of great and noble ideas. His works may be said to
    be all genius and soul; and why should they be loaded with
    heavy matter, which can only counteract his purpose by
    retarding the progress of the imagination?"

Examining carefully this and the preceding passage, we find the
author's unmistakable meaning to be, that Dutch painting is _history_;
attending to literal truth and "minute exactness in the details of
nature modified by accident." That Italian painting is _poetry_,
attending only to the invariable; and that works which attend only to
the invariable are full of genius and soul; but that literal truth and
exact detail are "heavy matter which retards the progress of the
imagination."

§ 8. This being then indisputably what Reynolds means to tell us,
let us think a little whether he is in all respects right. And
first, as he compares his two kinds of painting to history and
poetry, let us see how poetry and history themselves differ, in
their use of _variable_ and _invariable_ details. I am writing at a
window which commands a view of the head of the Lake of Geneva; and
as I look up from my paper, to consider this point, I see, beyond
it, a blue breadth of softly moving water, and the outline of the
mountains above Chillon, bathed in morning mist. The first verses
which naturally come into my mind are--

      "A thousand feet in depth below
      The massy waters meet and flow;
      So far the fathom line was sent
      From Chillon's snow-white battlement."

Let us see in what manner this poetical statement is distinguished
from a historical one.

It is distinguished from a truly historical statement, first, in being
simply false. The water under the castle of Chillon is not a thousand
feet deep, nor anything like it.[3] Herein, certainly, these lines
fulfil Reynolds's first requirement in poetry, "that it should be
inattentive to literal truth and minute exactness in detail." In
order, however, to make our comparison more closely in other points,
let us assume that what is stated is indeed a fact, and that it was to
be recorded, first historically, and then poetically.

Historically stating it, then, we should say: "The lake was sounded
from the walls of the castle of Chillon, and found to be a thousand
feet deep."

Now, if Reynolds be right in his idea of the difference between
history and poetry, we shall find that Byron leaves out of this
statement certain _un_necessary details, and retains only the
invariable,--that is to say, the points which the Lake of Geneva and
castle of Chillon have in common with all other lakes and castles.

Let us hear, therefore.

      "A thousand feet in depth below."

"Below?" Here is, at all events, a word added (instead of anything
being taken away); invariable, certainly in the case of lakes, but
not absolutely necessary.

      "The massy waters meet and flow."

"Massy!" why massy? Because deep water is heavy. The word is a good
word, but it is assuredly an added detail, and expresses a character,
not which the Lake of Geneva has in common with all other lakes, but
which it has in distinction from those which are narrow or shallow.

§ 9. "Meet and flow." Why meet and flow? Partly to make up a rhyme;
partly to tell us that the waters are forceful as well as massy, and
changeful as well as deep. Observe, a farther addition of details,
and of details more or less peculiar to the spot, or, according to
Reynolds's definition, of "heavy matter, retarding the progress of
the imagination."

      "So far the fathom line was sent."

Why fathom line? All lines for sounding are not fathom lines. If the
lake was ever sounded from Chillon, it was probably sounded in
metres, not fathoms. This is an addition of another particular
detail, in which the only compliance with Reynolds's requirement is,
that there is some chance of its being an inaccurate one.

      "From Chillon's snow-white battlement."

Why snow-white? Because castle battlements are not usually
snow-white. This is another added detail, and a detail quite
peculiar to Chillon, and therefore exactly the most striking word in
the whole passage.

"Battlement!" why battlement? Because all walls have not
battlements, and the addition of the term marks the castle to be not
merely a prison, but a fortress.

This is a curious result. Instead of finding, as we expected, the
poetry distinguished from the history by the omission of details, we
find it consist entirely in the _addition_ of details; and instead
of being characterized by regard only of the invariable, we find its
whole power to consist in the clear expression of what is singular
and particular!

§ 10. The reader may pursue the investigation for himself in other
instances. He will find in every case that a poetical is distinguished
from a merely historical statement, not by being more vague, but more
specific, and it might, therefore, at first appear that our author's
comparison should be simply reversed, and that the Dutch School should
be called poetical, and the Italian historical. But the term poetical
does not appear very applicable to the generality of Dutch painting;
and a little reflection will show us, that if the Italians represent
only the invariable, they cannot be properly compared even to
historians. For that which is incapable of change has no history, and
records which state only the invariable need not be written, and could
not be read.

§ 11. It is evident, therefore, that our author has entangled himself
in some grave fallacy, by introducing this idea of invariableness as
forming a distinction between poetical and historical art. What the
fallacy is, we shall discover as we proceed; but as an invading army
should not leave an untaken fortress in its rear, we must not go on
with our inquiry into the views of Reynolds until we have settled
satisfactorily the question already suggested to us, in what the
essence of poetical treatment really consists. For though, as we have
seen, it certainly involves the addition of specific details, it
cannot be simply that addition which turns the history into poetry.
For it is perfectly possible to add any number of details to a
historical statement, and to make it more prosaic with every added
word. As, for instance, "The lake was sounded out of a flat-bottomed
boat, near the crab tree at the corner of the kitchen-garden, and was
found to be a thousand feet nine inches deep, with a muddy bottom." It
thus appears that it is not the multiplication of details which
constitutes poetry; nor their subtraction which constitutes history;
but that there must be something either in the nature of the details
themselves, or the method of using them, which invests them with
poetical power or historical propriety.

§ 12. It seems to me, and may seem to the reader, strange that we
should need to ask the question, "What is poetry?" Here is a word we
have been using all our lives, and, I suppose, with a very distinct
idea attached to it; and when I am now called upon to give a
definition of this idea, I find myself at a pause. What is more
singular, I do not at present recollect hearing the question often
asked, though surely it is a very natural one; and I never recollect
hearing it answered, or even attempted to be answered. In general,
people shelter themselves under metaphors, and while we hear poetry
described as an utterance of the soul, an effusion of Divinity, or
voice of nature, or in other terms equally elevated and obscure, we
never attain anything like a definite explanation of the character
which actually distinguishes it from prose.

§ 13. I come, after some embarrassment, to the conclusion, that poetry
is "the suggestion, by the imagination, of noble grounds for the noble
emotions." I mean, by the noble emotions, those four principal sacred
passions--Love, Veneration, Admiration, and Joy (this latter
especially, if unselfish); and their opposites--Hatred, Indignation (or
Scorn), Horror, and Grief,--this last, when unselfish, becoming
Compassion. These passions in their various combinations constitute
what is called "poetical feeling," when they are felt on noble grounds,
that is, on great and true grounds. Indignation, for instance, is a
poetical feeling, if excited by serious injury; but it is not a
poetical feeling if entertained on being cheated out of a small sum of
money. It is very possible the manner of the cheat may have been such
as to justify considerable indignation; but the feeling is nevertheless
not poetical unless the grounds of it be large as well as just. In like
manner, energetic admiration may be excited in certain minds by a
display of fireworks, or a street of handsome shops; but the feeling is
not poetical, because the grounds of it are false, and therefore
ignoble. There is in reality nothing to deserve admiration either in
the firing of packets of gunpowder, or in the display of the stocks of
ware-houses. But admiration excited by the budding of a flower is a
poetical feeling, because it is impossible that this manifestation of
spiritual power and vital beauty can ever be enough admired.

§ 14. Farther, it is necessary to the existence of poetry that the
grounds of these feelings should be _furnished by the imagination_.
Poetical feeling, that is to say, mere noble emotion, is not poetry.
It is happily inherent in all human nature deserving the name, and
is found often to be purest in the least sophisticated. But the
power of assembling, by the _help of the imagination_, such images
as will excite these feelings, is the power of the poet or literally
of the "Maker."[4]

Now this power of exciting the emotions depends of course on the
richness of the imagination, and on its choice of those images which,
in combination, will be most effective, or, for the particular work to
be done, most fit. And it is altogether impossible for a writer not
endowed with invention to conceive what tools a true poet will make
use of, or in what way he will apply them, or what unexpected results
he will bring out by them; so that it is vain to say that the details
of poetry ought to possess, or ever do possess, any _definite_
character. Generally speaking, poetry runs into finer and more
delicate details than prose; but the details are not poetical because
they are more delicate, but because they are employed so as to bring
out an affecting result. For instance, no one but a true poet would
have thought of exciting our pity for a bereaved father by describing
his way of locking the door of his house:

      "Perhaps to himself, at that moment he said,
      The key I must take, for my Ellen is dead;
      But of this in my ears not a word did he speak,
      And he went to the chase with a tear on his cheek."

In like manner, in painting, it is altogether impossible to say
beforehand what details a great painter may make poetical by his use
of them to excite noble emotions: and we shall, therefore, find
presently that a painting is to be classed in the great or inferior
schools, not according to the kind of details which it represents,
but according to the uses for which it employs them.

§ 15. It is only farther to be noticed, that infinite confusion has
been introduced into this subject by the careless and illogical
custom of opposing painting to poetry, instead of regarding poetry
as consisting in a noble use, whether of colors or words. Painting
is properly to be opposed to _speaking_ or _writing_, but not to
_poetry_. Both painting and speaking are methods of expression.
Poetry is the employment of either for the noblest purposes.

§ 16. This question being thus far determined, we may proceed with
our paper in the Idler.

    "It is very difficult to determine the exact degree of
    enthusiasm that the arts of painting and poetry may admit.
    There may, perhaps, be too great indulgence as well as too
    great a restraint of imagination; if the one produces
    incoherent monsters, the other produces what is full as bad,
    lifeless insipidity. An intimate knowledge of the passions,
    and good sense, but not common sense, must at last determine
    its limits. It has been thought, and I believe with reason,
    that Michael Angelo sometimes transgressed those limits; and,
    I think, I have seen figures of him of which it was very
    difficult to determine whether they were in the highest degree
    sublime or extremely ridiculous. Such faults may be said to be
    the ebullitions of genius; but at least he had this merit,
    that he never was insipid, and whatever passion his works may
    excite, they will always escape contempt.

    "What I have had under consideration is the sublimest style,
    particularly that of Michael Angelo, the Homer of painting.
    Other kinds may admit of this naturalness, which of the lowest
    kind is the chief merit; but in painting, as in poetry, the
    highest style has the least of common nature."

From this passage we gather three important indications of the
supposed nature of the Great Style. That it is the work of men in a
state of enthusiasm. That it is like the writing of Homer; and that
it has as little as possible of "common nature" in it.

§ 17. First, it is produced by men in a state of enthusiasm. That
is, by men who feel _strongly_ and _nobly_; for we do not call a
strong feeling of envy, jealousy, or ambition, enthusiasm. That is,
therefore, by men who feel poetically. This much we may admit, I
think, with perfect safety. Great art is produced by men who feel
acutely and nobly; and it is in some sort an expression of this
personal feeling. We can easily conceive that there may be a
sufficiently marked distinction between such art, and that which is
produced by men who do not feel at all, but who reproduce, though
ever so accurately, yet coldly, like human mirrors, the scenes which
pass before their eyes.

§ 18. Secondly, Great Art is like the writing of Homer, and this
chiefly because it has little of "common nature" in it. We are not
clearly informed what is meant by common nature in this passage. Homer
seems to describe a great deal of what is common;--cookery, for
instance, very carefully in all its processes. I suppose the passage
in the Iliad which, on the whole, has excited most admiration, is that
which describes a wife's sorrow at parting from her husband, and a
child's fright at its father's helmet; and I hope, at least, the
former feeling may be considered "common nature." But the true
greatness of Homer's style is, doubtless, held by our author to
consist in his imaginations of things not only uncommon but impossible
(such as spirits in brazen armor, or monsters with heads of men and
bodies of beasts), and in his occasional delineations of the human
character and form in their utmost, or heroic, strength and beauty. We
gather then on the whole, that a painter in the Great Style must be
enthusiastic, or full of emotion, and must paint the human form in its
utmost strength and beauty, and perhaps certain impossible forms
besides, liable by persons not in an equally enthusiastic state of
mind to be looked upon as in some degree absurd. This I presume to be
Reynolds's meaning, and to be all that he intends us to gather from
his comparison of the Great Style with the writings of Homer. But if
that comparison be a just one in all respects, surely two other
corollaries ought to be drawn from it, namely,--first, that these
Heroic or Impossible images are to be mingled with others very
unheroic and very possible; and, secondly, that in the representation
of the Heroic or Impossible forms, the greatest care must be taken in
_finishing the details_, so that a painter must not be satisfied with
painting well the countenance and the body of his hero, but ought to
spend the greatest part of his time (as Homer the greatest number of
verses) in elaborating the sculptured pattern on his shield.

§ 19. Let us, however, proceed with our paper.

    "One may very safely recommend a little more enthusiasm to the
    modern painters; too much is certainly not the vice of the
    present age. The Italians seem to have been continually
    declining in this respect, from the time of Michael Angelo to
    that of Carlo Maratti, and from thence to the very bathos of
    insipidity to which they are now sunk, so that there is no
    need of remarking, that where I mentioned the Italian painters
    in opposition to the Dutch, I mean not the moderns, but the
    heads of the old Roman and Bolognian schools; nor did I mean
    to include, in my idea of an Italian painter, the Venetian
    school, _which may be said to be the Dutch part of the Italian
    genius_. I have only to add a word of advice to the painters,
    that, however excellent they may be in painting naturally,
    they would not flatter themselves very much upon it; and to
    the connoisseurs, that when they see a cat or a fiddle painted
    so finely, that, as the phrase is, it looks as if you could
    take it up, they would not for that reason immediately compare
    the painter to Raffaelle and Michael Angelo."

In this passage there are four points chiefly to be remarked. The
first, that in the year 1759, the Italian painters were, in our
author's opinion, sunk in the very bathos of insipidity. The second,
that the Venetian painters, i.e. Titian, Tintoret, and Veronese,
are, in our author's opinion, to be classed with the Dutch; that is
to say, are painters in a style "in which the slowest intellect is
always sure to succeed best." Thirdly, that painting naturally is
not a difficult thing, nor one on which a painter should pride
himself. And, finally, that connoisseurs, seeing a cat or a fiddle
successfully painted, ought not therefore immediately to compare the
painter to Raphael or Michael Angelo.

Yet Raphael painted fiddles very carefully in the foreground of his
St. Cecilia,--so carefully, that they quite look as if they might be
taken up. So carefully, that I never yet looked at the picture
without wishing that somebody _would_ take them up, and out of the
way. And I am under a very strong persuasion that Raphael did not
think painting "naturally" an easy thing. It will be well to examine
into this point a little; and for the present, with the reader's
permission, we will pass over the first two statements in this
passage (touching the character of Italian art in 1759, and of
Venetian art in general), and immediately examine some of the
evidence existing as to the real dignity of "natural" painting--that
is to say, of painting carried to the point at which it reaches a
deceptive appearance of reality.

  [2] I have put this sentence in a parenthesis, because it is
      inconsistent with the rest of the statement, and with the
      general teaching of the paper; since that which "attends only
      to the invariable" cannot certainly adopt "every ornament that
      will warm the imagination."

  [3] "MM. Mallet et Pictet, se trouvant sur le lac auprès du
      château de Chillon, le 6 Août, 1774, plongèrent à la
      profondeur de 312 pieds de un thermomètre," &c.--SAUSSURE,
      _Voyages dans les Alpes_, chap. ii. § 33. It appears from the
      next paragraph, that the thermometer was "au fond du lac."

  [4] Take, for instance, the beautiful stanza in the "Affliction of
      Margaret:"

          "I look for ghosts, but none will force
            Their way to me. 'Tis falsely said
          That ever there was intercourse
            Between the living and the dead;
          For, surely then, I should have sight
          Of him I wait for, day and night,
          With love and longing infinite."

      This we call Poetry, because it is invented _or made_ by the
      writer, entering into the mind of a supposed person. Next,
      take an instance of the actual feeling truly experienced and
      simply expressed by a real person.

      "Nothing surprised me more than a woman of Argentière, whose
      cottage I went into to ask for milk, as I came down from the
      glacier of Argentière, in the month of March, 1764. An epidemic
      dysentery had prevailed in the village, and, a few months
      before, had taken away from her, her father, her husband, and
      her brothers, so that she was left alone, with three children in
      the cradle. Her face had something noble in it, and its
      expression bore the seal of a calm and profound sorrow. After
      having given me milk, she asked me whence I came, and what I
      came there to do, so early in the year. When she knew that I was
      of Geneva, she said to me, 'she could not believe that all
      Protestants were lost souls; that there were many honest people
      among us, and that God was too good and too great to condemn all
      without distinction.' Then, after a moment of reflection, she
      added, in shaking her head, 'But, that which is very strange, is
      that of so many who have gone away, none have ever returned. I,'
      she added, with an expression of grief, 'who have so mourned my
      husband and my brothers, who have never ceased to think of them,
      who every night conjure them with beseechings to tell me where
      they are, and in what state they are! Ah, surely, if they lived
      anywhere, they would not leave me thus! But, perhaps,' she
      added, 'I am not worthy of this kindness, perhaps the pure and
      innocent spirits of these children,' and she looked at the
      cradle, 'may have their presence, and the joy which is denied to
      _me_.'"--SAUSSURE, _Voyages dans les Alpes_, chap. xxiv.

      This we do not call Poetry, merely because it is not invented,
      but the true utterance of a real person.




CHAPTER II.

OF REALIZATION.


§ 1. In the outset of this inquiry, the reader must thoroughly
understand that we are not now considering _what_ is to be painted,
but _how far_ it is to be painted. Not whether Raphael does right in
representing angels playing upon violins, or whether Veronese does
right in allowing cats and monkeys to join the company of kings: but
whether, supposing the subjects rightly chosen, they ought on the
canvas to look like real angels with real violins, and substantial
cats looking at veritable kings; or only like imaginary angels with
soundless violins, ideal cats, and unsubstantial kings.

Now, from the first moment when painting began to be a subject of
literary inquiry and general criticism, I cannot remember any
writer, not professedly artistical, who has not, more or less, in
one part of his book or another, countenanced the idea that the
great end of art is to produce a deceptive resemblance of reality.
It may be, indeed, that we shall find the writers, through many
pages, explaining principles of ideal beauty, and professing great
delight in the evidences of imagination. But whenever a picture is
to be definitely described,--whenever the writer desires to convey
to others some impression of an extraordinary excellence, all praise
is wound up with some such statements as these: "It was so
exquisitely painted that you expected the figures to move and speak;
you approached the flowers to enjoy their smell, and stretched your
hand towards the fruit which had fallen from the branches. You
shrunk back lest the sword of the warrior should indeed descend, and
turned away your head that you might not witness the agonies of the
expiring martyr!"

§ 2. In a large number of instances, language such as this will be
found to be merely a clumsy effort to convey to others a sense of the
admiration, of which the writer does not understand the real cause in
himself. A person is attracted to a picture by the beauty of its color,
interested by the liveliness of its story, and touched by certain
countenances or details which remind him of friends whom he loved, for
scenes in which he delighted. He naturally supposes that what gives him
so much pleasure must be a notable example of the painter's skill; but
he is ashamed to confess, or perhaps does not know, that he is so much
a child as to be fond of bright colors and amusing incidents; and he is
quite unconscious of the associations which have so secret and
inevitable a power over his heart. He casts about for the cause of his
delight, and can discover no other than that he thought the picture
like reality.

§ 3. In another, perhaps a still larger number of cases, such
language will be found to be that of simple ignorance--the ignorance
of persons whose position in life compels them to speak of art,
without having any real enjoyment of it. It is inexcusably required
from people of the world, that they should see merit in Claudes and
Titians; and the only merit which many persons can either see or
conceive in them is, that they must be "like nature."

§ 4. In other cases, the deceptive power of the art is really felt
to be a source of interest and amusement. This is the case with a
large number of the collectors of Dutch pictures. They enjoy seeing
what is flat made to look round, exactly as a child enjoys a trick
of legerdemain; they rejoice in flies which the spectator vainly
attempts to brush away, and in dew which he endeavors to dry by
putting the picture in the sun. They take it for the greatest
compliment to their treasures that they should be mistaken for
windows; and think the parting of Abraham and Hagar adequately
represented, if Hagar seems to be really crying.

It is against critics and connoisseurs of this latter stamp (of
whom, in the year 1759, the juries of art were for the most part
composed) that the essay of Reynolds, which we have been examining,
was justly directed. But Reynolds had not sufficiently considered
that neither the men of this class, nor of the two other classes
above described, constitute the entire body of those who praise Art
for its realization; and that the holding of this apparently
shallow and vulgar opinion cannot, in all cases, be attributed to
the want either of penetration, sincerity, or sense. The collectors
of Gerard Dows and Hobbimas may be passed by with a smile; and the
affectations of Walpole and simplicities of Vasari dismissed with
contempt or with compassion. But very different men from these have
held precisely the same language; and, one amongst the rest, whose
authority is absolutely, and in all points, overwhelming.

§ 5. There was probably never a period in which the influence of art
over the minds of men seemed to depend less on its merely _imitative_
power, than the close of the thirteenth century. No painting or
sculpture at that time reached more than a rude resemblance of reality.
Its despised perspective, imperfect chiaroscuro, and unrestrained
flights of fantastic imagination, separated the artist's work from
nature by an interval which there was no attempt to disguise, and
little to diminish. And yet, at this very period, the greatest poet of
that, or perhaps of any other age, and the attached friend of its
greatest painter, who must over and over again have held full and free
conversation with him respecting the objects of his art, speaks in the
following terms of painting, supposed to be carried to its highest
perfection:--

      "Qual di pennel fu maestro, e di stile
        Che ritraesse l' ombre, e i tratti, ch' ivi
        Mirar farieno uno ingegno sottile.
      Morti li morti, e i vivi parean vivi:
        Non vide me' di me, chi vide il vero,
        Quant' io calcai, fin che chinato givi."
                                 DANTE, _Purgatorio_, canto xii. 1. 64

      'What master of the pencil, or the style,
      Had traced the shades and lines that might have made
      The subtlest workman wonder? _Dead, the dead,
      The living seemed alive; with clearer view
      His eye beheld not, who beheld the truth._
      Than mine what I did tread on, while I went,
      Low bending.'                            CAREY.

Dante has here clearly no other idea of the highest art than that it
should bring back, as in a mirror or vision, the aspect of things
passed or absent. The scenes of which he speaks are, on the pavement,
for ever represented by angelic power, so that the souls which traverse
this circle of the rock may see them, as if the years of the world had
been rolled back, and they again stood beside the actors in the moment
of action. Nor do I think that Dante's authority is absolutely
necessary to compel us to admit that such art as this _might_ indeed be
the highest possible. Whatever delight we may have been in the habit of
taking in pictures, if it were but truly offered to us, to remove at
our will the canvas from the frame, and in lieu of it to behold, fixed
for ever, the image of some of those mighty scenes which it has been
our way to make mere themes for the artist's fancy; if, for instance,
we could again behold the Magdalene receiving her pardon at Christ's
feet, or the disciples sitting with Him at the table of Emmaus; and
this not feebly nor fancifully, but as if some silver mirror, that had
leaned against the wall of the chamber, had been miraculously commanded
to retain for ever the colors that had flashed upon it for an
instant,--would we not part with our picture--Titian's or Veronese's
though it might be?

§ 6. Yes, the reader answers, in the instance of such scenes as
these, but not if the scene represented were uninteresting. Not,
indeed, if it were utterly vulgar or painful; but we are not yet
certain that the art which represents what is vulgar or painful is
itself of much value; and with respect to the art whose aim is
beauty, even of an inferior order, it seems that Dante's idea of its
perfection has still much evidence in its favor. For among persons
of native good sense, and courage enough to speak their minds, we
shall often find a considerable degree of doubt as to the use of
art, in consequence of their habitual comparison of it with reality.
"What is the use, to me, of the painted landscape?" they will ask:
"I see more beautiful and perfect landscapes every day of my life in
my forenoon walk." "What is the use, to me, of the painted effigy of
hero or beauty? I can see a stamp of higher heroism, and light of
purer beauty, on the faces around me, utterly inexpressible by the
highest human skill." Now, it is evident that to persons of this
temper the only valuable pictures would indeed be _mirrors_,
reflecting permanently the images of the things in which they took
delight, and of the faces that they loved. "Nay," but the reader
interrupts, (if he is of the Idealist school) "I deny that more
beautiful things are to be seen in nature than in art; on the
contrary, everything in nature is faulty, and art represents nature
as perfected." Be it so. Must, therefore, this perfected nature be
imperfectly represented? Is it absolutely required of the painter,
who has conceived perfection, that he should so paint it as to look
only like a picture? Or is not Dante's view of the matter right even
here, and would it not be well that the perfect conception of Pallas
should be so given as to look like Pallas herself, rather than
merely like the picture of Pallas?

§ 7. It is not easy for us to answer this question rightly, owing to
the difficulty of imagining any art which should reach the perfection
supposed. Our actual powers of imitation are so feeble that wherever
deception is attempted, a subject of a comparatively low or confined
order must be chosen. I do not enter at present into the inquiry how
far the powers of imitation extend; but assuredly up to the present
period they have been so limited that it is hardly possible for us to
conceive a deceptive art embracing a high range of subject. But let
the reader make the effort, and consider seriously what he would give
at any moment to have the power of arresting the fairest scenes, those
which so often rise before him only to vanish; to stay the cloud in
its fading, the leaf in its trembling, and the shadows in their
changing; to bid the fitful foam be fixed upon the river, and the
ripples be everlasting upon the lake; and then to bear away with him
no darkened or feeble sun-stain (though even that is beautiful), but a
counterfeit which should seem no counterfeit--the true and perfect
image of life indeed. Or rather (for the full majesty of such a power
is not thus sufficiently expressed) let him consider that it would be
in effect nothing else than a capacity of transporting himself at any
moment into any scene--a gift as great as can be possessed by a
disembodied spirit': and suppose, also, this necromancy embracing not
only the present but the past, and enabling us seemingly to enter into
the very bodily presence of men long since gathered to the dust; to
behold them in act as they lived, but--with greater privilege than
ever was granted to the companions of those transient acts of
life,--to see them fastened at our will in the gesture and expression
of an instant, and stayed, on the eve of some great deed, in
immortality of burning purpose. Conceive, so far as it is possible,
such power as this, and then say whether the art which conferred it is
to be spoken lightly of, or whether we should not rather reverence, as
half divine, a gift which would go so far as to raise us into the
rank, and invest us with the felicities, of angels?

Yet such would imitative art be in its perfection. Not by any means
an easy thing, as Reynolds supposes it. Far from being easy, it is
so utterly beyond all human power that we have difficulty even in
conceiving its nature or results--the best art we as yet possess
comes so far short of it.

§ 8. But we must not rashly come to the conclusion that such art would,
indeed, be the highest possible. There is much to be considered
hereafter on the other side; the only conclusion we are as yet
warranted in forming is, that Reynolds had no right to speak lightly or
contemptuously of imitative art; that in fact, when he did so, he had
not conceived its entire nature, but was thinking of some vulgar
conditions of it, which were the only ones known to him, and that,
therefore, his whole endeavor to explain the difference between great
and mean art has been disappointed; that he has involved himself in a
crowd of theories, whose issue he had not foreseen, and committed
himself to conclusions which he never intended. There is an instinctive
consciousness in his own mind of the difference between high and low
art; but he is utterly incapable of explaining it, and every effort
which he makes to do so involves him in unexpected fallacy and
absurdity. It is _not_ true that Poetry does not concern herself with
minute details. It is _not_ true that high art seeks only the
Invariable. It is _not_ true that imitative art is an easy thing. It is
_not_ true that the faithful rendering of nature is an employment in
which "the slowest intellect is likely to succeed best." All these
successive assertions are utterly false and untenable, while the plain
truth, a truth lying at the very door, has all the while escaped
him,--that which was incidentally stated in the preceding
chapter,--namely, that the difference between great and mean art lies,
not in definable methods of handling, or styles of representation, or
choices of subjects, but wholly in the nobleness of the end to which
the effort of the painter is addressed. We cannot say that a painter is
great because he paints boldly, or paints delicately; because he
generalizes or particularizes; because he loves detail, or because he
disdains it. He is great if, by any of these means, he has laid open
noble truths, or aroused noble emotions. It does not matter whether he
paint the petal of a rose, or the chasms of a precipice, so that Love
and Admiration attend him as he labors, and wait for ever upon his
work. It does not matter whether he toil for months upon a few inches
of his canvas, or cover a palace front with color in a day, so only
that it be with a solemn purpose that he has filled his heart with
patience, or urged his hand to haste. And it does not matter whether he
seek for his subjects among peasants or nobles, among the heroic or the
simple, in courts or in fields, so only that he behold all things with
a thirst for beauty, and a hatred of meanness and vice. There are,
indeed, certain methods of representation which are usually adopted by
the most active minds, and certain characters of subject usually
delighted in by the noblest hearts; but it is quite possible, quite
easy, to adopt the manner of painting without sharing the activity of
mind, and to imitate the choice of subject without possessing the
nobility of spirit; while, on the other hand, it is altogether
impossible to foretell on what strange objects the strength of a great
man will sometimes be concentrated, or by what strange means he will
sometimes express himself. So that true criticism of art never can
consist in the mere application of rules; it can be just only when it
is founded on quick sympathy with the innumerable instincts and
changeful efforts of human nature, chastened and guided by unchanging
love of all things that God has created to be beautiful, and pronounced
to be good.




CHAPTER III.

OF THE REAL NATURE OF GREATNESS OF STYLE.


§ 1. I doubt not that the reader was ill-satisfied with the conclusion
arrived at in the last chapter. That "great art" is art which
represents what is beautiful and good, may not seem a very profound
discovery; and the main question may be thought to have been all the
time lost sight of, namely, "What is beautiful, and what is good?" No;
those are not the main, at least not the first questions; on the
contrary, our subject becomes at once opened and simplified as soon as
we have left those the _only_ questions. For observe, our present task,
according to our old plan, is merely to investigate the relative
degrees of the _beautiful_ in the art of different masters; and it is
an encouragement to be convinced, first of all, that what is lovely
will also be great, and what is pleasing, noble. Nor is the conclusion
so much a matter of course as it at first appears, for, surprising as
the statement may seem, all the confusion into which Reynolds has
plunged both himself and his readers, in the essay we have been
examining, results primarily from a doubt in his own mind _as to the
existence of beauty at all_. In the next paper I alluded to, No. 82
(which needs not, however, to be examined at so great length), he
calmly attributes the whole influence of beauty to custom, saying, that
"he has no doubt, if we were more used to deformity than to beauty,
deformity would then lose the idea now annexed to it, and take that of
beauty; as if the whole world shall agree that Yes and No should change
their meanings. Yes would then deny, and No would affirm!"

§ 2. The world does, indeed, succeed--oftener than is, perhaps,
altogether well for the world--in making Yes mean No, and No mean
Yes.[5] But the world has never succeeded, nor ever will, in making
itself delight in black clouds more than in blue sky, or love the dark
earth better than the rose that grows from it. Happily for mankind,
beauty and ugliness are as positive in their nature as physical pain
and pleasure, as light and darkness, or as life and death; and, though
they may be denied or misunderstood in many fantastic ways, the most
subtle reasoner will at last find that color and sweetness are still
attractive to him, and that no logic will enable him to think the
rainbow sombre, or the violet scentless. But the theory that beauty was
merely a result of custom was very common in Johnson's time. Goldsmith
has, I think, expressed it with more force and wit than any other
writer, in various passages of the Citizen of the World. And it was,
indeed, a curious retribution of the folly of the world of art, which
for some three centuries had given itself recklessly to the pursuit of
beauty, that at last it should be led to deny the very existence of
what it had so morbidly and passionately sought. It was as if a child
should leave its home to pursue the rainbow, and then, breathless and
hopeless, declare that it did not exist. Nor is the lesson less useful
which may be gained in observing the adoption of such a theory by
Reynolds himself. It shows how completely an artist may be unconscious
of the principles of his own work, and how he may be led by instinct to
_do_ all that is right, while he is misled by false logic to _say_ all
that is wrong. For nearly every word that Reynolds wrote was contrary
to his own practice; he seems to have been born to teach all error by
his precept, and all excellence by his example; he enforced with his
lips generalization and idealism, while with his pencil he was tracing
the patterns of the dresses of the belles of his day; he exhorted his
pupils to attend only to the invariable, while he himself was occupied
in distinguishing every variation of womanly temper; and he denied the
existence of the beautiful, at the same instant that he arrested it as
it passed, and perpetuated it for ever.

§ 3. But we must not quit the subject here. However inconsistently or
dimly expressed, there is, indeed, some truth in that commonly
accepted distinction between high and low art. That a thing should be
beautiful is not enough; there is, as we said in the outset, a higher
and lower range of beauty, and some ground for separating into various
and unequal ranks painters who have, nevertheless, each in his
several way, represented something that was beautiful or good.

Nor, if we would, can we get rid of this conviction. We have at all
times some instinctive sense that the function of one painter is
greater than that of another, even supposing each equally successful
in his own way; and we feel that, if it were possible to conquer
prejudice, and do away with the iniquities of personal feeling, and
the insufficiencies of limited knowledge, we should all agree in this
estimate, and be able to place each painter in his right rank,
measuring them by a true scale of nobleness. We feel that the men in
the higher classes of the scale would be, in the full sense of the
word, Great--men whom one would give much to see the faces of but for
an instant; and that those in the lower classes of the scale (though
none were admitted but who had true merit of some kind) would be very
small men, not greatly exciting either reverence or curiosity. And
with this fixed instinct in our minds, we permit our teachers daily to
exhort their pupils to the cultivation of "great art"--neither they
nor we having any very clear notion as to what the greatness consists
in: but sometimes inclining to think it must depend on the space of
the canvas, and that art on a scale of 6 feet by 10 is something
spiritually separated from that on a scale of 3 feet by 5;--sometimes
holding it to consist in painting the nude body, rather than the body
decently clothed;--sometimes being convinced that it is connected with
the study of past history, and that the art is only great which
represents what the painter never saw, and about which he knows
nothing;-and sometimes being firmly persuaded that it consists in
generally finding fault with, and endeavoring to mend, whatsoever the
Divine Wisdom has made. All which various errors, having yet some
motes and atoms of truth in the make of each of them, deserve some
attentive analysis, for they come under that general law,--that "the
corruption of the best is the worst." There are not _worse_ errors
going than these four; and yet the truth they contain, and the
instinct which urges many to preach them, are at the root of all
healthy growth in art. We ruin one young painter after another by
telling him to follow great art, without knowing, ourselves, what
greatness is; and yet the feeling that it verily _is_ something, and
that there are depths and breadths, shallows and narrows, in the
matter, is all that we have to look to, if we would ever make our art
serviceable to ourselves or others. To follow art for the sake of
being a great man, and therefore to cast about continually for some
means of achieving position or attracting admiration, is the surest
way of ending in total extinction. And yet it is only by honest
reverence for art itself, and by great self-respect in the practice of
it, that it can be rescued from dilettantism, raised to approved
honorableness, and brought to the proper work it has to accomplish in
the service of man.

§ 4. Let us therefore look into the facts of the thing, not with any
metaphysical, or otherwise vain and troublesome effort at acuteness,
but in a plain way; for the facts themselves are plain enough, and
may be plainly stated, only the difficulty is that out of these
facts, right and left, the different forms of misapprehension branch
into grievous complexity, and branch so far and wide, that if once
we try to follow them, they will lead us quite from our mark into
other separate, though not less interesting discussions. The best
way will be, therefore, I think, to sketch out at once in this
chapter, the different characters which really constitute
"greatness" of style, and to indicate the principal directions of
the outbranching misapprehensions of them; then, in the succeeding
chapters, to take up in succession those which need more talk about
them, and follow out at leisure whatever inquiries they may suggest.

§ 5. I. CHOICE OF NOBLE SUBJECT.--Greatness of style consists, then:
first, in the habitual choice of subjects of thought which involve wide
interests and profound passions, as opposed to those which involve
narrow interests and slight passions. The style is greater or less in
exact proportion to the nobleness of the interests and passions
involved in the subject. The habitual choice of sacred subjects, such
as the Nativity, Transfiguration, Crucifixion (if the choice be
sincere), implies that the painter has a natural disposition to dwell
on the highest thoughts of which humanity is capable; it constitutes
him so far forth a painter of the highest order, as, for instance,
Leonardo, in his painting of the Last Supper: he who delights in
representing the acts or meditations of great men, as, for instance,
Raphael painting the School of Athens, is, so far forth, a painter of
the second order: he who represents the passions and events of ordinary
life, of the third. And in this ordinary life, he who represents deep
thoughts and sorrows, as, for instance, Hunt, in his Claudio and
Isabella, and such other works, is of the highest rank in his sphere;
and he who represents the slight malignities and passions of the
drawingroom, as, for instance, Leslie, of the second rank: he who
represents the sports of boys or simplicities of clowns, as Webster or
Teniers, of the third rank; and he who represents brutalities and vices
(for delight in them, and not for rebuke of them), of no rank at all,
or rather of a negative rank, holding a certain order in the abyss.

§ 6. The reader will, I hope, understand how much importance is to be
attached to the sentence in the first parenthesis, "if the choice be
sincere;" for choice of subject is, of course, only available as a
criterion of the rank of the painter, when it is made from the heart.
Indeed, in the lower orders of painting, the choice is always made
from such heart as the painter has; for his selection of the brawls of
peasants or sports of children can, of course, proceed only from the
fact that he has more sympathy with such brawls or pastimes than with
nobler subjects. But the choice of the higher kind of subjects is
often insincere; and may, therefore, afford no real criterion of the
painter's rank. The greater number of men who have lately painted
religious or heroic subjects have done so in mere ambition, because
they had been taught that it was a good thing to be a "high art"
painter; and the fact is that, in nine cases out of ten, the so-called
historical or "high-art" painter is a person infinitely inferior to
the painter of flowers or still life. He is, in modern times, nearly
always a man who has great vanity without pictorial capacity, and
differs from the landscape or fruit painter merely in misunderstanding
and over-estimating his own powers. He mistakes his vanity for
inspiration, his ambition for greatness of soul, and takes pleasure in
what he calls "the ideal," merely because he has neither humility nor
capacity enough to comprehend the real.

§ 7. But also observe, it is not enough even that the choice be
sincere. It must also be wise. It happens very often that a man of weak
intellect, sincerely desiring to do what is good and useful, will
devote himself to high art subjects because he thinks them the only
ones on which time and toil can be usefully spent, or, sometimes,
because they are really the only ones he has pleasure in contemplating.
But not having intellect enough to enter into the minds of truly great
men, or to imagine great events as they really happened, he cannot
become a great painter; he degrades the subjects he intended to honor,
and his work is more utterly thrown away, and his rank as an artist in
reality lower, than if he had devoted himself to the imitation of the
simplest objects of natural history. The works of Overbeck are a most
notable instance of this form of error.

§ 8. It must also be remembered, that in nearly all the great periods
of art the choice of subject has not been left to the painter. His
employer,--abbot, baron, or monarch,--determined for him whether he
should earn his bread by making cloisters bright with choirs of
saints, painting coats of arms on leaves of romances, or decorating
presence-chambers with complimentary mythology; and his own personal
feelings are ascertainable only by watching, in the themes assigned to
him, what are the points in which he seems to take most pleasure.
Thus, in the prolonged ranges of varied subjects with which Benozzo
Gozzoli decorated the cloisters of Pisa, it is easy to see that love
of simple domestic incident, sweet landscape, and glittering ornament,
prevails slightly over the solemn elements of religious feeling,
which, nevertheless, the spirit of the age instilled into him in such
measure as to form a very lovely and noble mind, though still one of
the second order. In the work of Orcagna, an intense solemnity and
energy in the sublimest groups of his figures, fading away as he
touches inferior subjects, indicates that his home was among the
archangels, and his rank among the first of the sons of men: while
Correggio, in the sidelong grace, artificial smiles, and purple
languors of his saints, indicates the inferior instinct which would
have guided his choice in quite other directions, had it not been for
the fashion of the age, and the need of the day.

§ 9. It will follow, of course, from the above considerations, that
the choice which characterises the school of high art is seen as
much in the treatment of a subject as in its selection, and that the
expression of the thoughts of the persons represented will always
be the first thing considered by the painter who worthily enters
that highest school. For the artist who sincerely chooses the
noblest subject will also choose chiefly to represent what makes
that subject noble, namely, the various heroism or other noble
emotions of the persons represented. If, instead of this, the artist
seeks only to make his picture agreeable by the composition of its
masses and colors, or by any other merely pictorial merit, as fine
drawing of limbs, it is evident, not only that any other subject
would have answered his purpose as well, but that he is unfit to
approach the subject he has chosen, because he cannot enter into its
deepest meaning, and therefore cannot in reality have chosen it for
that meaning. Nevertheless, while the expression is always to be the
first thing considered, all other merits must be added to the utmost
of the painter's power: for until he can both color and draw
beautifully he has no business to consider himself a painter at all,
far less to attempt the noblest subjects of painting; and, when he
has once possessed himself of these powers, he will naturally and
fitly employ them to deepen and perfect the impression made by the
sentiment of his subject.

The perfect unison of expression, as the painter's main purpose,
with the full and natural exertion of his pictorial power in the
details of the work, is found only in the old Pre-Raphaelite
periods, and in the modern Pre-Raphaelite school. In the works of
Giotto, Angelico, Orcagna, John Bellini, and one or two more, these
two conditions of high art are entirely fulfilled, so far as the
knowledge of those days enabled them to be fulfilled; and in the
modern Pre-Raphaelite school they are fulfilled nearly to the
uttermost. Hunt's Light of the World is, I believe, the most perfect
instance of expressional purpose with technical power, which the
world has yet produced.

§ 10. Now in the Post Raphaelite period of ancient art, and in the
spurious high art of modern times, two broad forms of error divide
the schools; the one consisting in (A) the superseding of expression
by technical excellence, and the other in (B) the superseding of
technical excellence by expression.

(A). Superseding expression by technical excellence.--This takes place
most frankly, and therefore most innocently, in the work of the
Venetians. They very nearly ignore expression altogether, directing
their aim exclusively to the rendering of external truths of color and
form. Paul Veronese will make the Magdalene wash the feet of Christ
with a countenance as absolutely unmoved as that of any ordinary
servant bringing a ewer to her master, and will introduce the supper
at Emmaus as a background to the portraits of two children playing
with a dog. Of the wrongness or rightness of such a proceeding we
shall reason in another place; at present we have to note it merely as
displacing the Venetian work from the highest or expressional rank of
art. But the error is generally made in a more subtle and dangerous
way. The artist deceives himself into the idea that he is doing all he
can to elevate his subject by treating it under rules of art,
introducing into it accurate science, and collecting for it the
beauties of (so-called) ideal form; whereas he may, in reality, be all
the while sacrificing his subject to his own vanity or pleasure, and
losing truth, nobleness, and impressiveness for the sake of delightful
lines or creditable pedantries.

§ 11. (B). Superseding technical excellence by expression.--This is
usually done under the influence of another kind of vanity. The
artist desires that men should think he has an elevated soul,
affects to despise the ordinary excellence of art, contemplates with
separated egotism the course of his own imaginations or sensations,
and refuses to look at the real facts round about him, in order that
he may adore at leisure the shadow of himself. He lives in an
element of what he calls tender emotions and lofty aspirations;
which are, in fact, nothing more than very ordinary weaknesses or
instincts, contemplated through a mist of pride. A large range of
modern German art comes under this head.

A more interesting and respectable form of this error is fallen into by
some truly earnest men, who, finding their powers not adequate to the
attainment of great artistical excellence, but adequate to rendering,
up to a certain point, the expression of the human countenance, devote
themselves to that object alone, abandoning effort in other directions,
and executing the accessaries of their pictures feebly or carelessly.
With these are associated another group of philosophical painters, who
suppose the artistical merits of other parts _adverse_ to the
expression, as drawing the spectator's attention away from it, and who
paint in grey color, and imperfect light and shade, by way of enforcing
the purity of their conceptions. Both these classes of conscientious
but narrow-minded artists labor under the same grievous mistake of
imagining that wilful fallacy can ever be either pardonable or helpful.
They forget that color, if used at all, must be either true or false,
and that what _they_ call chastity, dignity, and reserve, is, to the
eye of any person accustomed to nature, pure, bold, and impertinent
falsehood. It does not, in the eyes of any soundly minded man, exalt
the expression of a female face that the cheeks should be painted of
the color of clay, nor does it in the least enhance his reverence for a
saint to find the scenery around him deprived, by his presence, of
sunshine. It is an important consolation, however, to reflect that no
artist ever fell into any of these last three errors (under head B.)
who had really the capacity of becoming a great painter. No man ever
despised color who could produce it; and the error of these
sentimentalists and philosophers is not so much in the choice of their
manner of painting, as in supposing themselves capable of painting at
all. Some of them might have made efficient sculptors, but the greater
number had their mission in some other sphere than that of art, and
would have found, in works of practical charity, better employment for
their gentleness and sentimentalism, than in denying to human beauty
its color, and to natural scenery its light; in depriving heaven of its
blue, and earth of its bloom, valor of its glow, and modesty of its
blush.

§ 12. II. LOVE OF BEAUTY.--The second characteristic of the great
school of art is, that it introduces in the conception of its
subject as much beauty as is possible, consistently with truth.[6]

For instance, in any subject consisting of a number of figures, it
will make as many of those figures beautiful as the faithful
representation of humanity will admit. It will not deny the facts of
ugliness or decrepitude, or relative inferiority and superiority of
feature as necessarily manifested in a crowd, but it will, so far as
it is in its power, seek for and dwell upon the fairest forms, and
in all things insist on the beauty that is in them, not on the
ugliness. In this respect, schools of art become higher in exact
proportion to the degree in which they apprehend and love the
beautiful. Thus, Angelico, intensely loving all spiritual beauty,
will be of the highest rank; and Paul Veronese and Correggio,
intensely loving physical and corporeal beauty, of the second rank;
and Albert Durer, Rubens, and in general the Northern artists,
apparently insensible to beauty, and caring only for truth, whether
shapely or not, of the third rank; and Teniers and Salvator,
Caravaggio, and other such worshippers of the depraved, of no rank,
or, as we said before, of a certain order in the abyss.

§ 13. The corruption of the schools of high art, so far as this
particular quality is concerned, consists in the sacrifice of truth
to beauty. Great art dwells on all that is beautiful; but false art
omits or changes all that is ugly. Great art accepts Nature as she
is, but directs the eyes and thoughts to what is most perfect in
her; false art saves itself the trouble of direction by removing or
altering whatever it thinks objectionable. The evil results of which
proceeding are twofold.

[Sidenote: § 14. Evil first,--that we lose the true _force_ of beauty.]

First. That beauty deprived of its proper foils and adjuncts ceases
to be enjoyed as beauty, just as light deprived of all shadow ceases
to be enjoyed as light. A white canvas cannot produce an effect of
sunshine; the painter must darken it in some places before he can
make it look luminous in others; nor can an uninterrupted succession
of beauty produce the true effect of beauty; it must be foiled by
inferiority before its own power can be developed. Nature has for
the most part mingled her inferior and nobler elements as she
mingles sunshine with shade, giving due use and influence to both,
and the painter who chooses to remove the shadow, perishes in the
burning desert he has created. The truly high and beautiful art of
Angelico is continually refreshed and strengthened by his frank
portraiture of the most ordinary features of his brother monks, and
of the recorded peculiarities of ungainly sanctity; but the modern
German and Raphaelesque schools lose all honor and nobleness in
barber-like admiration of handsome faces, and have, in fact, no real
faith except in straight noses and curled hair. Paul Veronese
opposes the dwarf to the soldier, and the negress to the queen;
Shakspere places Caliban beside Miranda, and Autolycus beside
Perdita; but the vulgar idealist withdraws his beauty to the safety
of the saloon, and his innocence to the seclusion of the cloister;
he pretends that he does this in delicacy of choice and purity of
sentiment, while in truth he has neither courage to front the
monster, nor wit enough to furnish the knave.

[Sidenote: § 15. Evil second,--we lose the true _quantity_ of beauty.]

It is only by the habit of representing faithfully all things, that
we can truly learn what is beautiful and what is not. The ugliest
objects contain some element of beauty; and in all, it is an element
peculiar to themselves, which cannot be separated from their
ugliness, but must either be enjoyed together with it, or not at
all. The more a painter accepts nature as he finds it, the more
unexpected beauty he discovers in what he at first despised; but
once let him arrogate the right of rejection, and he will gradually
contract his circle of enjoyment, until what he supposed to be
nobleness of selection ends in narrowness of perception. Dwelling
perpetually upon one class of ideas, his art becomes at once
monstrous and morbid; until at last he cannot faithfully represent
even what he chooses to retain; his discrimination contracts into
darkness, and his fastidiousness fades into fatuity.

High art, therefore, consists neither in altering, nor in improving
nature; but in seeking throughout nature for "whatsoever things are
lovely, and whatsoever things are pure;" in loving these, in
displaying to the utmost of the painter's power such loveliness as
is in them, and directing the thoughts of others to them by winning
art, or gentle emphasis. Of the degree in which this can be done,
and in which it may be permitted to gather together, without
falsifying, the finest forms or thoughts, so as to create a sort of
perfect vision, we shall have to speak hereafter: at present, it is
enough to remember that art (_cæteris paribus_) is great in exact
proportion to the love of beauty shown by the painter, provided that
love of beauty forfeit no atom of truth.

§ 16. III. SINCERITY.--The next[7] characteristic of great art is that
it includes the largest possible quantity of Truth in the most perfect
possible harmony. If it were possible for art to give all the truths of
nature, it ought to do it. But this is not possible. Choice must always
be made of some facts which _can_ be represented, from among others
which must be passed by in silence, or even, in some respects,
misrepresented. The inferior artist chooses unimportant and scattered
truths; the great artist chooses the most necessary first, and
afterwards the most consistent with these, so as to obtain the greatest
possible and most harmonious _sum_. For instance, Rembrandt always
chooses to represent the exact force with which the light on the most
illumined part of an object is opposed to its obscurer portions. In
order to obtain this, in most cases, not very important truth, he
sacrifices the light and color of five sixths of his picture; and the
expression of every character of objects which depends on tenderness of
shape or tint. But he obtains his single truth, and what picturesque
and forcible expression is dependent upon it, with magnificent skill
and subtlety. Veronese, on the contrary, chooses to represent the great
relations of visible things to each other, to the heaven above, and to
the earth beneath them. He holds it more important to show how a figure
stands relieved from delicate air, or marble wall; how as a red, or
purple, or white figure, it separates itself, in clear discernibility,
from things not red, nor purple, nor white; how infinite daylight
shines round it; how innumerable veils of faint shadow invest it; how
its blackness and darkness are, in the excess of their nature, just as
limited and local as its intensity of light: all this, I say, he feels
to be more important than showing merely the exact _measure_ of the
spark of sunshine that gleams on a dagger-hilt, or glows on a jewel.
All this, moreover, he feels to be harmonious,--capable of being joined
in one great system of spacious truth. And with inevitable
watchfulness, inestimable subtlety, he unites all this in tenderest
balance, noting in each hair's-breadth of color, not merely what its
rightness or wrongness is in itself, but what its relation is to every
other on his canvas; restraining, for truth's sake, his exhaustless
energy, reining back, for truth's sake, his fiery strength; veiling,
before truth, the vanity of brightness; penetrating, for truth, the
discouragement of gloom; ruling his restless invention with a rod of
iron; pardoning no error, no thoughtlessness, no forgetfulness; and
subduing all his powers, impulses, and imaginations, to the arbitrament
of a merciless justice, and the obedience of an incorruptible verity.

[Sidenote: § 17. Corollary 1st: great art is generally distinct.]

I give this instance with respect to color and shade; but, in the whole
field of art, the difference between the great and inferior artists is
of the same kind, and may be determined at once by the question, which
of them conveys the largest sum of truth? It follows from this
principle, that in general all _great_ drawing is _distinct_ drawing;
for truths which are rendered indistinctly might, for the most part, as
well not be rendered at all. There are, indeed, certain facts of
mystery, and facts of indistinctness, in all objects, which must have
their proper place in the general harmony, and the reader will
presently find me, when we come to that part of our investigation,
telling him that all good drawing must in some sort be _in_distinct. We
may, however, understand this apparent contradiction, by reflecting
that the highest knowledge always involves a more advanced perception
of the fields of the unknown; and, therefore, it may most truly be
said, that to know anything well involves a profound sensation of
ignorance, while yet it is equally true that good and noble knowledge
is distinguished from vain and useless knowledge chiefly by its
clearness and distinctness, and by the vigorous consciousness of what
is known and what is not.

So in art. The best drawing involves a wonderful perception and
expression of indistinctness; and yet all noble drawing is separated
from the ignoble by its distinctness, by its fine expression and
firm assertion of _Something_; whereas the bad drawing, without
either firmness or fineness, expresses and asserts _Nothing_. The
first thing, therefore, to be looked for as a sign of noble art, is
a clear consciousness of what is drawn and what is not; the bold
statement, and frank confession--"_This_ I know," "_that_ I know
not;" and, generally speaking, all haste, slurring, obscurity,
indecision, are signs of low art, and all calmness, distinctness,
luminousness, and positiveness, of high art.

[Sidenote: § 18. Corollary 2d: Great art is generally large in masses
and in scale.]

It follows, secondly, from this principle, that as the great painter
is always attending to the sum and harmony of his truths rather than
to one or the other of any group, a quality of Grasp is visible in his
work, like the power of a great reasoner over his subject, or a great
poet over his conception, manifesting itself very often in missing out
certain details or less truths (which, though good in themselves, he
finds are in the way of others), and in a sweeping manner of getting
the beginnings and ends of things shown at once, and the squares and
depths rather than the surfaces: hence, on the whole, a habit of
looking at large masses rather than small ones; and even a physical
largeness of handling, and love of working, if possible, on a large
scale; and various other qualities, more or less imperfectly expressed
by such technical terms as breadth, massing, unity, boldness, &c., all
of which are, indeed, great qualities when they mean breadth of truth,
weight of truth, unity of truth, and courageous assertion of truth;
but which have all their correlative errors and mockeries, almost
universally mistaken for them,--the breadth which has no contents, the
weight which has no value, the unity which plots deception, and the
boldness which faces out fallacy.

§ 19. And it is to be noted especially respecting largeness of
scale, that though for the most part it is characteristic of the
more powerful masters, they having both more invention wherewith to
fill space (as Ghirlandajo wished that he might paint all the walls
of Florence), and, often, an impetuosity of mind which makes them
like free play for hand and arm (besides that they usually desire to
paint everything in the foreground of their picture of the natural
size), yet, as this largeness of scale involves the placing of the
picture at a considerable distance from the eye, and this distance
involves the loss of many delicate details, and especially of the
subtle lines of expression in features, it follows that the masters
of refined detail and human expression are apt to prefer a small
scale to work upon; so that the chief masterpieces of expression
which the world possesses are small pictures by Angelico, in which
the figures are rarely more than six or seven inches high; in the
best works of Raphael and Leonardo the figures are almost always
less than life, and the best works of Turner do not exceed the size
of 18 inches by 12.

[Sidenote: § 20. Corollary 3d: Great art is always delicate.]

As its greatness depends on the sum of truth, and this sum of truth
can always be increased by delicacy of handling, it follows that all
great art must have this delicacy to the utmost possible degree.
This rule is infallible and inflexible. All coarse work is the sign
of low art. Only, it is to be remembered, that coarseness must be
estimated by the distance from the eye; it being necessary to
consult this distance, when great, by laying on touches which appear
coarse when seen near; but which, so far from being coarse, are, in
reality, more delicate in a master's work than the finest close
handling, for they involve a calculation of result, and are laid on
with a subtlety of sense precisely correspondent to that with which
a good archer draws his bow; the spectator seeing in the action
nothing but the strain of the strong arm, while there is, in
reality, in the finger and eye, an ineffably delicate estimate of
distance, and touch on the arrow plume. And, indeed, this delicacy
is generally quite perceptible to those who know what the truth is,
for strokes by Tintoret or Paul Veronese, which were done in an
instant, and look to an ignorant spectator merely like a violent
dash of loaded color, (and are, as such, imitated by blundering
artists,) are, in fact, modulated by the brush and finger to that
degree of delicacy that no single grain of the color could be taken
from the touch without injury; and little golden particles of it,
not the size of a gnat's head, have important share and function in
the balances of light in a picture perhaps fifty feet long. Nearly
_every_ other rule applicable to art has some exception but this.
This has absolutely none. All great art is delicate art, and all
coarse art is bad art. Nay, even to a certain extent, all _bold_ art
is bad art; for boldness is not the proper word to apply to the
courage and swiftness of a great master, based on knowledge, and
coupled with fear and love. There is as much difference between the
boldness of the true and the false masters, as there is between the
courage of a pure woman and the shamelessness of a lost one.

§ 21. IV. INVENTION.--The last characteristic of great art is that
it must be inventive, that is, be produced by the imagination. In
this respect, it must precisely fulfil the definition already given
of poetry; and not only present grounds for noble emotion, but
furnish these grounds by _imaginative power_. Hence there is at once
a great bar fixed between the two schools of Lower and Higher Art.
The lower merely copies what is set before it, whether in portrait,
landscape, or still-life; the higher either entirely imagines its
subject, or arranges the materials presented to it, so as to
manifest the imaginative power in all the three phases which have
been already explained in the second volume.

And this was the truth which was confusedly present in Reynolds's
mind when he spoke, as above quoted, of the difference between
Historical and Poetical Painting. _Every relation of the plain facts
which the painter saw_ is proper _historical_ painting.[8] If those
facts are unimportant (as that he saw a gambler quarrel with another
gambler, or a sot enjoying himself with another sot), then the
history is trivial; if the facts are important (as that he saw such
and such a great man look thus, or act thus, at such a time), then
the history is noble: in each case perfect truth of narrative being
supposed, otherwise the whole thing is worthless, being neither
history nor poetry, but plain falsehood. And farther, as greater or
less elegance and precision are manifested in the relation or
painting of the incidents, the merit of the work varies; so that,
what with difference of subject, and what with difference of
treatment, historical painting falls or rises in changeful eminence,
from Dutch trivialities to a Velasquez portrait, just as historical
talking or writing varies in eminence, from an old woman's
story-telling up to Herodotus. Besides which, certain operations of
the imagination come into play inevitably, here and there, so as to
touch the history with some light of poetry, that is, with some
light shot forth of the narrator's mind, or brought out by the way
he has put the accidents together; and wherever the imagination has
thus had anything to do with the matter at all (and it must be
somewhat cold work where it has not), then, the confines of the
lower and higher schools touching each other, the work is colored by
both; but there is no reason why, therefore, we should in the least
confuse the historical and poetical characters, any more than that
we should confuse blue with crimson, because they may overlap each
other, and produce purple.

§ 22. Now, historical or simply narrative art is very precious in its
proper place and way, but it is never _great_ art until the poetical
or imaginative power touches it; and in proportion to the stronger
manifestation of this power, it becomes greater and greater, while the
highest art is purely imaginative, all its materials being wrought
into their form by invention; and it differs, therefore, from the
simple historical painting, exactly as Wordsworth's stanza, above
quoted, differs from Saussure's plain narrative of the parallel fact;
and the imaginative painter differs from the historical painter in the
manner that Wordsworth differs from Saussure.

§ 23. Farther, imaginative art always _includes_ historical art; so
that, strictly speaking, according to the analogy above used, we meet
with the pure blue, and with the crimson ruling the blue and changing
it into kingly purple, but not with the pure crimson: for all
imagination must deal with the knowledge it has before accumulated; it
never produces anything but by combination or contemplation. Creation,
in the full sense, is impossible to it. And the mode in which the
historical faculties are included by it is often quite simple, and
easily seen. Thus, in Hunt's great poetical picture of the Light of the
World, the whole thought and arrangement of the picture being
imaginative, the several details of it are wrought out with simple
portraiture; the ivy, the jewels, the creeping plants, and the
moonlight being calmly studied or remembered from the things
themselves. But of all these special ways in which the invention works
with plain facts, we shall have to treat farther afterwards.

§ 24. And now, finally, since this poetical power includes the
historical, if we glance back to the other qualities required in great
art, and put all together, we find that the sum of them is simply the
sum of all the powers of man. For as (1) the choice of the high subject
involves all conditions of right moral choice, and as (2) the love of
beauty involves all conditions of right admiration, and as (3) the
grasp of truth involves all strength of sense, evenness of judgment,
and honesty of purpose, and as (4) the poetical power involves all
swiftness of invention, and accuracy of historical memory, the sum of
all these powers is the sum of the human soul. Hence we see why the
word "Great" is used of this art. It is literally great. It compasses
and calls forth the entire human spirit, whereas any other kind of art,
being more or less small or narrow, compasses and calls forth only
_part_ of the human spirit. Hence the idea of its magnitude is a
literal and just one, the art being simply less or greater in
proportion to the number of faculties it exercises and addresses.[9]
And this is the ultimate meaning of the definition I gave of it long
ago, as containing the "greatest number of the greatest ideas."

§ 25. Such, then, being the characters required in order to
constitute high art, if the reader will think over them a little,
and over the various ways in which they may be falsely assumed, he
will easily perceive how spacious and dangerous a field of
discussion they open to the ambitious critic, and of error to the
ambitious artist; he will see how difficult it must be, either to
distinguish what is truly great art from the mockeries of it, or to
rank the real artists in any thing like a progressive system of
greater and less. For it will have been observed that the various
qualities which form greatness are partly inconsistent with each
other (as some virtues are, docility and firmness for instance), and
partly independent of each other; and the fact is, that artists
differ not more by mere capacity, than by the component _elements_
of their capacity, each possessing in very different proportions the
several attributes of greatness; so that, classed by one kind of
merit, as, for instance, purity of expression, Angelico will stand
highest; classed by another, sincerity of manner, Veronese will
stand highest; classed by another, love of beauty, Leonardo will
stand highest; and so on; hence arise continual disputes and
misunderstandings among those who think that high art must always be
one and the same, and that great artists ought to unite all great
attributes in an equal degree.

§ 26. In one of the exquisitely finished tales of Marmontel, a
company of critics are received at dinner by the hero of the story,
an old gentleman, somewhat vain of his _acquired_ taste, and his
niece, by whose incorrigible _natural_ taste, he is seriously
disturbed and tormented. During the entertainment, "On parcourut
tous les genres de littérature, et pour donner plus d'essor a
l'érudition et à la critique, on mit sur le tapis cette question
toute neuve, sçavoir, lequel méritoit le préference de Corneille ou
de Racine. L'on disoit même là-dessus les plus belles choses du
monde, lorsque la petite nièce, qui n'avoit pas dit un mot, s'avisa
de demander naïvement lequel des deux fruits, de l'orange ou de la
pêche, avoit le gout les plus exquis et méritoit le plus d'éloges.
Son oncle rougit de sa simplicité, et les convives baissèrent tous
les yeux sans daigner répondre à cette bêtise. Ma nièce, dit Fintac,
a votre âge, il faut sçavoir écouter, et se taire."

I cannot close this chapter with shorter or better advice to the
reader, than merely, whenever he hears discussions about the
relative merits of great masters, to remember the young lady's
question. It is, indeed, true that there _is_ a relative merit, that
a peach is nobler than a hawthorn berry, and still more a hawthorn
berry than a bead of the nightshade; but in each rank of fruits, as
in each rank of masters, one is endowed with one virtue, and another
with another; their glory is their dissimilarity, and they who
propose to themselves in the training of an artist that he should
unite the coloring of Tintoret, the finish of Albert Durer, and the
tenderness of Correggio, are no wiser than a horticulturist would
be, who made it the object of his labor to produce a fruit which
should unite in itself the lusciousness of the grape, the crispness
of the nut, and the fragrance of the pine.

§ 27. And from these considerations one most important practical
corollary is to be deduced, with the good help of Mademoiselle's
Agathe's simile, namely, that the greatness or smallness of a man is,
in the most conclusive sense, determined for him at his birth, as
strictly as it is determined for a fruit whether it is to be a currant
or an apricot. Education, favorable circumstances, resolution, and
industry can do much; in a certain sense they do _everything_; that is
to say, they determine whether the poor apricot shall fall in the form
of a green bead, blighted by an east wind, shall be trodden under foot,
or whether it shall expand into tender pride, and sweet brightness of
golden velvet. But apricot out of currant,--great man out of
small,--did never yet art or effort make; and, in a general way, men
have their excellence nearly fixed for them when they are born; a
little cramped and frost-bitten on one side, a little sun-burnt and
fortune-spotted on the other, they reach, between good and evil
chances, such size and taste as generally belong to the men of their
calibre, and the small in their serviceable bunches, the great in their
golden isolation, have, these no cause for regret, nor those for
disdain.

§ 28. Therefore it is, that every system of teaching is false which
holds forth "great art" as in any wise to be taught to students, or
even to be aimed at by them. Great art is precisely that which never
was, nor will be taught, it is preeminently and finally the
expression of the spirits of great men; so that the only wholesome
teaching is that which simply endeavors to fix those characters of
nobleness in the pupil's mind, of which it seems easily susceptible;
and without holding out to him, as a possible or even probable
result, that he should ever paint like Titian, or carve like Michael
Angelo, enforces upon him the manifest possibility, and assured
duty, of endeavoring to draw in a manner at least honest and
intelligible; and cultivates in him those general charities of
heart, sincerities of thought, and graces of habit which are likely
to lead him, throughout life, to prefer openness to affectation,
realities to shadows, and beauty to corruption.

  [5] Del "nò," per lì danar, vi "sì" far ita.

  [6] As here, for the first time, I am obliged to use the terms
      Truth and Beauty in a kind of opposition, I must therefore
      stop for a moment to state clearly the relation of these two
      qualities of art; and to protest against the vulgar and
      foolish habit of confusing truth and beauty with each other.
      People with shallow powers of thought, desiring to flatter
      themselves with the sensation of having attained profundity,
      are continually doing the most serious mischief by introducing
      confusion into plain matters, and then valuing themselves on
      being confounded. Nothing is more common than to hear people
      who desire to be thought philosophical, declare that "beauty
      is truth," and "truth is beauty." I would most earnestly beg
      every sensible person who hears such an assertion made, to nip
      the germinating philosopher in his ambiguous bud; and beg him,
      if he really believes his own assertion, never thenceforward
      to use two words for the same thing. The fact is, truth and
      beauty are entirely distinct, though often related, things.
      One is a property of statements, the other of objects. The
      statement that "two and two make four" is true, but it is
      neither beautiful nor ugly, for it is invisible; a rose is
      lovely, but it is neither true nor false, for it is silent.
      That which shows nothing cannot be fair, and that which
      asserts nothing cannot be false. Even the ordinary use of the
      words false and true as applied to artificial and real things,
      is inaccurate. An artificial rose is not a "false" rose, it is
      not a rose at all. The falseness is in the person who states,
      or induces the belief, that it is a rose.

      Now, therefore, in things concerning art, the words true and
      false are only to be rightly used while the picture is
      considered as a statement of facts. The painter asserts that
      this which he has painted is the form of a dog, a man, or a
      tree. If it be _not_ the form of a dog, a man, or a tree, the
      painter's statement is false; and therefore we justly speak of
      a false line, or false color; not that any line or color can
      in themselves be false, but they become so when they convey a
      statement that they resemble something which they do _not_
      resemble. But the beauty of the lines or colors is wholly
      independent of any such statement. They may be beautiful
      lines, though quite inaccurate, and ugly lines though quite
      faithful. A picture may be frightfully ugly, which represents
      with fidelity some base circumstance of daily life; and a
      painted window may be exquisitely beautiful, which represents
      men with eagles' faces, and dogs with blue heads and crimson
      tails (though, by the way, this is not in the strict sense
      _false_ art, as we shall see hereafter, inasmuch as it means
      no assertion that men ever _had_ eagles' faces). If this were
      not so, it would be impossible to sacrifice truth to beauty;
      for to attain the one would always be to attain the other.
      But, unfortunately, this sacrifice is exceedingly possible,
      and it is chiefly this which characterizes the false schools
      of high art, so far as high art consists in the pursuit of
      beauty. For although truth and beauty are independent of each
      other, it does not follow that we are at liberty to pursue
      whichever we please. They are indeed separable, but it is
      wrong to separate them; they are to be sought together in the
      order of their worthiness; that is to say, truth first, and
      beauty afterwards. High art differs from low art in possessing
      an excess of beauty in addition to its truth, not in
      possessing an excess of beauty inconsistent with truth.

  [7] I name them in order of _in_creasing not decreasing
      importance.

  [8] Compare my Edinburgh Lectures, lecture iv. p. 218, et seq.
      (2nd edition)

  [9] Compare Stones of Venice, vol. iii. chap. iv. § 7, and § 21.




CHAPTER IV.

OF THE FALSE IDEAL:--FIRST, RELIGIOUS.


§ 1. Having now gained some general notion of the meaning of "great
art," we may, without risk of confusing ourselves, take up the
questions suggested incidentally in the preceding chapter, and pursue
them at leisure. Of these, two principal ones are closely connected
with each other, to wit, that put in the 12th paragraph--How may beauty
be sought in defiance of truth? and that in the 23rd paragraph--How
does the imagination show itself in dealing with truth? These two,
therefore, which are, besides, the most important of all, and, if well
answered, will answer many others inclusively, we shall find it most
convenient to deal with at once.

§ 2. The pursuit, by the imagination, of beautiful and strange
thoughts or subjects, to the exclusion of painful or common ones, is
called among us, in these modern days, the pursuit of "_the ideal_;"
nor does any subject deserve more attentive examination than the
manner in which this pursuit is entered upon by the modern mind. The
reader must pardon me for making in the outset one or two statements
which may appear to him somewhat wide of the matter, but which, (if
he admits their truth,) he will, I think, presently perceive to
reach to the root of it. Namely,

That men's proper business in this world falls mainly into three
divisions:

First, to know themselves, and the existing state of the things they
have to do with.

Secondly, to be happy in themselves, and in the existing state of
things.

Thirdly, to mend themselves, and the existing state of things, as
far as either are marred or mendable.

These, I say, are the three plain divisions of proper human
business on this earth. For these three, the following are usually
substituted and adopted by human creatures:

First, to be totally ignorant of themselves, and the existing state
of things.

Secondly, to be miserable in themselves, and in the existing state
of things.

Thirdly, to let themselves, and the existing state of things, alone
(at least in the way of correction).

§ 3. The dispositions which induce us to manage, thus wisely, the
affairs of this life seem to be:

First, a fear of disagreeable facts, and conscious shrinking from
clearness of light, which keep us from examining ourselves, and
increase gradually into a species of instinctive terror at all truth,
and love of glosses, veils, and decorative lies of every sort.

Secondly, a general readiness to take delight in anything past, future,
far off, or somewhere else, rather than in things now, near, and here;
leading us gradually to place our pleasure principally in the exercise
of the imagination, and to build all our satisfaction on things as they
are _not_. Which power being one not accorded to the lower animals, and
having indeed, when disciplined, a very noble use, we pride ourselves
upon it, whether disciplined or not, and pass our lives complacently,
in substantial discontent, and visionary satisfaction.

§ 4. Now _nearly_ all artistical and poetical seeking after the
ideal is only one branch of this base habit--the abuse of the
imagination, in allowing it to find its whole delight in the
impossible and untrue; while the faithful pursuit of the ideal is an
honest use of the imagination, giving full power and presence to the
possible and true.

It is the difference between these two uses of it which we have to
examine.

§ 5. And, first, consider what are the legitimate uses of the
imagination, that is to say, of the power of perceiving, or
conceiving with the mind, things which cannot be perceived by the
senses.

Its first and noblest use is, to enable us to bring sensibly to our
sight the things which are recorded as belonging to our future
state, or as invisibly surrounding us in this. It is given us, that
we may imagine the cloud of witnesses in heaven and earth, and see,
as if they were now present, the souls of the righteous waiting for
us; that we may conceive the great army of the inhabitants of
heaven, and discover among them those whom we most desire to be with
for ever; that we may be able to vision forth the ministry of angels
beside us, and see the chariots of fire on the mountains that gird
us round; but above all, to call up the scenes and facts in which we
are commanded to believe, and be present, as if in the body, at
every recorded event of the history of the Redeemer. Its second and
ordinary use is to empower us to traverse the scenes of all other
history, and force the facts to become again visible, so as to make
upon us the same impression which they would have made if we had
witnessed them; and in the minor necessities of life, to enable us,
out of any present good, to gather the utmost measure of enjoyment
by investing it with happy associations, and, in any present evil,
to lighten it, by summoning back the images of other hours; and,
also, to give to all mental truths some visible type in allegory,
simile, or personification, which shall more deeply enforce them;
and, finally, when the mind is utterly outwearied, to refresh it
with such innocent play as shall be most in harmony with the
suggestive voices of natural things, permitting it to possess living
companionship instead of silent beauty, and create for itself
fairies in the grass and naiads in the wave.

§ 6. These being the uses of imagination, its abuses are either in
creating, for mere pleasure, false images, where it is its _duty_ to
create true ones; or in turning what was intended for the mere
refreshment of the heart into its daily food, and changing the innocent
pastimes of an hour into the guilty occupation of a life.

Let us examine the principal forms of this misuse, one by one.

§ 7. First, then, the imagination is chiefly warped and dishonored
by being allowed to create false images, where it is its duty to
create true ones. And this most dangerously in matters of religion.
For a long time, when art was in its infancy, it remained unexposed
to this danger, because it could not, with any power, realize or
create _any_ thing. It consisted merely in simple outlines and
pleasant colors; which were understood to be nothing more than
signs of the thing thought of, a sort of pictorial letter for it, no
more pretending to represent it than the written characters of its
name. Such art excited the imagination, while it pleased the eye.
But it _asserted_ nothing, for it could realize nothing. The reader
glanced at it as a glittering symbol, and went on to form truer
images for himself. This act of the mind may be still seen in daily
operation in children, as they look at brightly colored pictures in
their story-books. Such pictures neither deceive them nor satisfy
them; they only set their own inventive powers to work in the
directions required.

§ 8. But as soon as art obtained the power of realization, it
obtained also that of _assertion_. As fast as the painter advanced
in skill he gained also in credibility, and that which he perfectly
represented was perfectly believed, or could be disbelieved only by
an actual effort of the beholder to escape from the fascinating
deception. What had been faintly declared, might be painlessly
denied; but it was difficult to discredit things forcibly alleged;
and representations, which had been innocent in discrepancy, became
guilty in consistency.

§ 9. For instance, when in the thirteenth century, the nativity was
habitually represented by such a symbol as that on the next page,
fig. 1, there was not the smallest possibility that such a picture
could disturb, in the mind of the reader of the New Testament, the
simple meaning of the words "wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in a manger." That this manger was typified by a trefoiled arch[10]
would no more prevent his distinct understanding of the narrative, than
the grotesque heads introduced above it would interfere with his firm
comprehension of the words "ox" or "ass;" while if there were anything
in the action of the principal figures suggestive of real feeling, that
suggestion he would accept, together with the general pleasantness of
the lines and colors in the decorative letter; but without having his
faith in the unrepresented and actual scene obscured for a moment. But
it was far otherwise, when Francia or Perugino, with exquisite power of
representing the human form, and high knowledge of the mysteries of
art, devoted all their skill to the delineation of an impossible scene;
and painted, for their subjects of the Nativity, a beautiful and
queenly lady, her dress embroidered with gold, and with a crown of
jewels upon her hair, kneeling, on a floor of inlaid and precious
marble, before a crowned child, laid under a portico of Lombardic[11]
architecture; with a sweet, verdurous, and vivid landscape in the
distance, full of winding rivers, village spires, and baronial
towers.[12] It is quite true that the frank absurdity of the thought
prevented its being received as a deliberate contradiction of the
truths of Scripture; but it is no less certain, that the continual
presentment to the mind of this beautiful and fully realized imagery
more and more chilled its power of apprehending the real truth; and
that when pictures of this description met the eye in every corner of
every chapel, it was physically impossible to dwell distinctly upon
facts the direct reverse of those represented. The word "Virgin" or
"Madonna," instead of calling up the vision of a simple Jewish girl,
bearing the calamities of poverty, and the dishonors of inferior
station, summoned instantly the idea of a graceful princess, crowned
with gems, and surrounded by obsequious ministry of kings and saints.
The fallacy which was presented to the imagination was indeed
discredited, but also the fact which was _not_ presented to the
imagination was forgotten; all true grounds of faith were gradually
undermined, and the beholder was either enticed into mere luxury of
fanciful enjoyment, believing nothing; or left, in his confusion of
mind, the prey of vain tales and traditions; while in his best feelings
he was unconsciously subject to the power of the fallacious picture,
and with no sense of the real cause of his error, bowed himself, in
prayer or adoration, to the lovely lady on her golden throne, when he
would never have dreamed of doing so to the Jewish girl in her outcast
poverty, or, in her simple household, to the carpenter's wife.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

§ 10. But a shadow of increasing darkness fell upon the human mind as
art proceeded to still more perfect realization. These fantasies of
the earlier painters, though they darkened faith, never hardened
_feeling_; on the contrary, the frankness of their unlikelihood
proceeded mainly from the endeavor on the part of the painter to
express, not the actual fact, but the enthusiastic state of his own
feelings about the fact; he covers the Virgin's dress with gold, not
with any idea of representing the Virgin as she ever was, or ever will
be seen, but with a burning desire to show what his love and reverence
would think fittest for her. He erects for the stable a Lombardic
portico, not because he supposes the Lombardi to have built stables in
Palestine in the days of Tiberius, but to show that the manger in
which Christ was laid is, in his eyes, nobler than the greatest
architecture in the world. He fills his landscape with church spires
and silver streams, not because he supposes that either were in sight
of Bethlehem, but to remind the beholder of the peaceful course and
succeeding power of Christianity. And, regarded with due sympathy and
clear understanding of these thoughts of the artist, such pictures
remain most impressive and touching, even to this day. I shall refer
to them in future, in general terms, as the pictures of the "Angelican
Ideal"--Angelico being the central master of the school.

§ 11. It was far otherwise in the next step of the Realistic progress.
The greater his powers became, the more the mind of the painter was
absorbed in their attainment, and complacent in their display. The
early arts of laying on bright colors smoothly, of burnishing golden
ornaments, or tracing, leaf by leaf, the outlines of flowers, were not
so difficult as that they should materially occupy the thoughts of the
artist, or furnish foundation for his conceit; he learned these
rudiments of his work without pain, and employed them without pride,
his spirit being left free to express, so far as it was capable of
them, the reaches of higher thought. But when accurate shade, and
subtle color, and perfect anatomy, and complicated perspective, became
necessary to the work, the artist's whole energy was employed in
learning the laws of these, and his whole pleasure consisted in
exhibiting them. His life was devoted, not to the objects of art, but
to the cunning of it; and the sciences of composition and light and
shade were pursued as if there were abstract good in them;--as if,
like astronomy or mathematics, they were ends in themselves,
irrespective of anything to be effected by them. And without
perception, on the part of any one, of the abyss to which all were
hastening, a fatal change of aim took place throughout the whole world
of art. In early times _art was employed for the display of religious
facts_; now, _religious facts were employed for the display of art_.
The transition, though imperceptible, was consummate; it involved the
entire destiny of painting. It was passing from the paths of life to
the paths of death.

§ 12. And this change was all the more fatal, because at first veiled
by an appearance of greater dignity and sincerity than were possessed
by the older art. One of the earliest results of the new knowledge was
the putting away the greater part of the _unlikelihoods_ and fineries
of the ancient pictures, and an apparently closer following of nature
and probability. All the fantasy which I have just been blaming as
disturbant of the simplicity of faith, was first subdued,--then
despised and cast aside. The appearances of nature were more closely
followed in everything; and the crowned Queen-Virgin of Perugino sank
into a simple Italian mother in Raphael's Madonna of the Chair.

§ 13. Was not this, then, a healthy change? No. It _would_ have been
healthy if it had been effected with a pure motive, and the new
truths would have been precious if they had been sought for truth's
sake. But they were not sought for truth's sake, but for pride's;
and truth which is sought for display may be just as harmful as
truth which is spoken in malice. The glittering childishness of the
old art was rejected, not because it was false, but because it was
easy; and, still more, because the painter had no longer any
religious passion to express. He could think of the Madonna now very
calmly, with no desire to pour out the treasures of earth at her
feet, or crown her brows with the golden shafts of heaven. He could
think of her as an available subject for the display of transparent
shadows, skilful tints, and scientific foreshortenings,--as a fair
woman, forming, if well painted, a pleasant piece of furniture for
the corner of a boudoir, and best imagined by combination of the
beauties of the prettiest contadinas. He could think of her, in her
last maternal agony, with academical discrimination; sketch in first
her skeleton, invest her, in serene science, with the muscles of
misery and the fibres of sorrow; then cast the grace of antique
drapery over the nakedness of her desolation, and fulfil, with
studious lustre of tears and delicately painted pallor, the perfect
type of the "Mater Dolorosa."

§ 14. It was thus that Raphael thought of the Madonna.[13]

Now observe, when the subject was thus scientifically completed, it
became necessary, as we have just said, to the full display of all the
power of the artist, that it should in many respects be more faithfully
imagined than it had been hitherto, "Keeping," "Expression,"
"Historical Unity," and such other requirements, were enforced on the
painter, in the same tone, and with the same purpose, as the purity of
his oil and the accuracy of his perspective. He was told that the
figure of Christ should be "dignified," those of the Apostles
"expressive," that of the Virgin "modest," and those of children
"innocent." All this was perfectly true; and in obedience to such
directions, the painter proceeded to manufacture certain arrangements
of apostolic sublimity, virginal mildness, and infantine innocence,
which, being free from the quaint imperfection and contradictoriness of
the early art, were looked upon by the European public as true things,
and trustworthy representations of the events of religious history. The
pictures of Francia and Bellini had been received as pleasant visions.
But the cartoons of Raphael were received as representations of
historical fact.

§ 15. Now, neither they, nor any other work of the period, were
representations either of historical or possible fact. They were, in
the strictest sense of the word, "compositions"--cold arrangements
of propriety and agreeableness, according to academical formulas;
the painter never in any case making the slightest effort to
conceive the thing as it must have happened, but only to gather
together graceful lines and beautiful faces, in such compliance with
commonplace ideas of the subject as might obtain for the whole an
"epic unity," or some such other form of scholastic perfectness.

§ 16. Take a very important instance.

I suppose there is no event in the whole life of Christ to which, in
hours of doubt or fear, men turn with more anxious thirst to knew the
close facts of it, or with more earnest and passionate dwelling upon
every syllable of its recorded narrative, than Christ's showing Himself
to his disciples at the lake of Galilee. There is something
preeminently open, natural, full fronting our disbelief in this
manifestation. The others, recorded after the resurrection, were
sudden, phantom-like, occurring to men in profound sorrow and wearied
agitation of heart; not, it might seem, safe judges of what they saw.
But the agitation was now over. They had gone back to their daily work,
thinking still their business lay net-wards, unmeshed from the literal
rope and drag. "Simon Peter saith unto them, 'I go a fishing,' They say
unto him, 'We also go with thee,'" True words enough, and having far
echo beyond those Galilean hills. That night they caught nothing; but
when the morning came, in the clear light of it, behold a figure stood
on the shore. They were not thinking of anything but their fruitless
hauls. They had no guess who it was. It asked them simply if they had
caught anything. They said no. And it tells them to cast yet again. And
John shades his eyes from the morning sun with his hand, to look who it
is; and though the glinting of the sea, too, dazzles him, he makes out
who it is, at last; and poor Simon, not to be outrun this time,
tightens, his fisher's coat about him, and dashes in, over the nets.
One would have liked to see him swim those hundred yards, and stagger
to his knees on the beach.

Well, the others get to the beach, too, in time, in such slow way as
men in general do get, in this world, to its true shore, much
impeded by that wonderful "dragging the net with fishes;" but they
get there--seven of them in all;--first the Denier, and then the
slowest believer, and then the quickest believer, and then the two
throne-seekers, and two more, we know not who.

They sit down on the shore face to face with Him, and eat their
broiled fish as He bids. And then, to Peter, all dripping still,
shivering, and amazed, staring at Christ in the sun, on the other
side of the coal fire,--thinking a little, perhaps, of what happened
by another coal fire, when it was colder, and having had no word
once changed with him by his Master since that look of His,--to him,
so amazed, comes the question, "Simon, lovest thou me?" Try to feel
that a little, and think of it till it is true to you; and then,
take up that infinite monstrosity and hypocrisy--Raphael's cartoon
of the Charge to Peter. Note, first, the bold fallacy--the putting
_all_ the Apostles there, a mere lie to serve the Papal heresy of
the Petric supremacy, by putting them all in the background while
Peter receives the charge, and making them all witnesses to it. Note
the handsomely curled hair and neatly tied sandals of the men who
had been out all night in the sea-mists and on the slimy decks. Note
their convenient dresses for going a-fishing, with trains that lie a
yard along the ground, and goodly fringes,--all made to match, an
apostolic fishing costume.[14] Note how Peter especially (whose
chief glory was in his wet coat _girt_ about him and naked limbs)
is enveloped in folds and fringes, so as to kneel and hold his keys
with grace. No fire of coals at all, nor lonely mountain shore, but
a pleasant Italian landscape, full of villas and churches, and a
flock of sheep to be pointed at; and the whole group of Apostles,
not round Christ, as they would have been naturally, but straggling
away in a line, that they may all be shown.

The simple truth is, that the moment we look at the picture we feel
our belief of the whole thing taken away. There is, visibly, no
possibility of that group ever having existed, in any place, or on any
occasion. It is all a mere mythic absurdity, and faded concoction of
fringes, muscular arms, and curly heads of Greek philosophers.

§ 17. Now, the evil consequences of the acceptance of this kind of
religious idealism for true, were instant and manifold. So far as it
was received and trusted in by thoughtful persons, it only served to
chill all the conceptions of sacred history which they might otherwise
have obtained. Whatever they could have fancied for themselves about
the wild, strange, infinitely stern, infinitely tender, infinitely
varied veracities of the life of Christ, was blotted out by the vapid
fineries of Raphael; the rough Galilean pilot, the orderly custom
receiver, and all the questioning wonder and fire of uneducated
apostleship, were obscured under an antique mask of philosophical
faces and long robes. The feeble, subtle, suffering, ceaseless energy
and humiliation of St. Paul were confused with an idea of a meditative
Hercules leaning on a sweeping sword;[15] and the mighty presences of
Moses and Elias were softened by introductions of delicate grace,
adopted from dancing nymphs and rising Auroras,[16]

Now, no vigorously minded religious person could possibly receive
pleasure or help from such art as this; and the necessary result was
the instant rejection of it by the healthy religion of the world.
Raphael ministered, with applause, to the impious luxury of the
Vatican, but was trampled under foot at once by every believing and
advancing Christian of his own and subsequent times; and
thenceforward pure Christianity and "high art" took separate roads,
and fared on, as best they might, independently of each other.

§ 18. But although Calvin, and Knox, and Luther, and their flocks,
with all the hardest-headed and truest-hearted faithful left in
Christendom, thus spurned away the spurious art, and all art with it,
(not without harm to themselves, such as a man must needs sustain in
cutting off a decayed limb[17]) certain conditions of weaker
Christianity suffered the false system to retain influence over them;
and to this day, the clear and tasteless poison of the art of Raphael
infects with sleep of infidelity the hearts of millions of Christians.
It is the first cause of all that pre-eminent _dulness_ which
characterizes what Protestants call sacred art; a dulness not merely
baneful in making religion distasteful to the young, but in sickening,
as we have seen, all vital belief of religion in the old. A dim sense
of impossibility attaches itself always to the graceful emptiness of
the representation; we feel instinctively that the painted Christ and
painted apostle are not beings that ever did or could exist; and this
fatal sense of fair fabulousness, and well-composed impossibility,
steals gradually from the picture into the history, until we find
ourselves reading St. Mark or St. Luke with the same admiring, but
uninterested, incredulity, with which we contemplate Raphael.

§ 19. On a certain class of minds, however, these Raphaelesque and
other sacred paintings of high order, have had, of late years,
another kind of influence, much resembling that which they had at
first on the most pious Romanists. They are used to excite certain
conditions of religious dream or reverie; being again, as in
earliest times, regarded not as representations of fact, but as
expressions of sentiment respecting the fact. In this way the best
of them have unquestionably much purifying and enchanting power; and
they are helpful opponents to sinful passion and weakness of every
kind. A fit of unjust anger, petty malice, unreasonable vexation, or
dark passion, cannot certainly, in a mind of ordinary sensibility,
hold its own in the presence of a good engraving from any work of
Angelico, Memling, or Perugino. But I nevertheless believe, that he
who trusts much to such helps will find them fail him at his need;
and that the dependence, in any great degree, on the presence or
power of a picture, indicates a wonderfully feeble sense of the
presence and power of God. I do not think that any man, who is
thoroughly certain that Christ is in the room, will care what sort
of pictures of Christ he has on its walls; and, in the plurality of
cases, the delight taken in art of this kind is, in reality, nothing
more than a form of graceful indulgence of those sensibilities which
the habits of a disciplined life restrain in other directions. Such
art is, in a word, the opera and drama of the monk. Sometimes it is
worse than this, and the love of it is the mask under which a
general thirst for morbid excitement will pass itself for religion.
The young lady who rises in the middle of the day, jaded by her last
night's ball, and utterly incapable of any simple or wholesome
religious exercise, can still gaze into the dark eyes of the Madonna
di San Sisto, or dream over the whiteness of an ivory crucifix, and
returns to the course of her daily life in full persuasion that her
morning's feverishness has atoned for her evening's folly. And all
the while, the art which possesses these very doubtful advantages is
acting for undoubtful detriment, in the various ways above examined,
on the inmost fastnesses of faith; it is throwing subtle endearments
round foolish traditions, confusing sweet fancies with sound
doctrines, obscuring real events with unlikely semblances, and
enforcing false assertions with pleasant circumstantiality, until,
to the usual, and assuredly sufficient, difficulties standing in the
way of belief, its votaries have added a habit of sentimentally
changing what they know to be true, and of dearly loving what they
confess to be false.

§ 20. Has there, then (the reader asks emphatically), been _no_ true
religious ideal? Has religious art never been of any service to
mankind? I fear, on the whole, not. Of true religious ideal,
representing events historically recorded, with solemn effort at a
sincere and unartificial conception, there exist, as yet, hardly any
examples. Nearly all good religious pictures fall into one or other
branch of the false ideal already examined, either into the Angelican
(passionate ideal) or the Raphaelesque (philosophical ideal). But there
is one true form of religious art, nevertheless, in the pictures of the
passionate ideal which represent imaginary beings of another world.
Since it is evidently right that we should try to imagine the glories
of the next world, and as this imagination must be, in each separate
mind, more or less different, and unconfined by any laws of material
fact, the passionate ideal has not only full scope here, but it becomes
our duty to urge its powers to its utmost, so that every condition of
beautiful form and color may be employed to invest these scenes with
greater delightfulness (the whole being, of course, received as an
assertion of possibility, not of absolute fact). All the paradises
imagined by the religious painters--the choirs of glorified saints,
angels, and spiritual powers, when painted with full belief in this
possibility of their existence, are true ideals; and so far from our
having dwelt on these too much, I believe, rather, we have not trusted
them enough, nor accepted them enough, as possible statements of most
precious truth. Nothing but unmixed good can accrue to any mind from
the contemplation of Orcagna's Last Judgment or his triumph of death,
of Angelico's Last Judgment and Paradise, or any of the scenes laid in
heaven by the other faithful religious masters; and the more they are
considered, not as works of art, but as real visions of real things,
more or less imperfectly set down, the more good will be got by
dwelling upon them. The same is true of all representations of Christ
as a living presence among us now, as in Hunt's Light of the World.

§ 21. For the rest, there is a reality of conception in some of the
works of Benozzo Gozzoli, Ghirlandajo, and Giotto, which approaches
to a true ideal, even of recorded facts. But the examination of the
various degrees in which sacred art has reached its proper power is
not to our present purpose; still less, to investigate the
infinitely difficult question of its past operation on the Christian
mind. I hope to prosecute my inquiry into this subject in another
work; it being enough here to mark the forms of ideal error,
without historically tracing their extent, and to state generally
that my impression is, up to the present moment, that the best
religious art has been _hitherto_ rather a fruit, and attendant
sign, of sincere Christianity than a promoter of or help to it.
More, I think, has always been done for God by few words than many
pictures, and more by few acts than many words.

§ 22. I must not, however, quit the subject without insisting on the
chief practical consequence of what we have observed, namely, that
sacred art, so far from being exhausted, has yet to attain the
development of its highest branches; and the task, or privilege, yet
remains for mankind, to produce an art which shall be at once entirely
skilful and entirely _sincere_. All the histories of the Bible are, in
my judgment, yet waiting to be painted. Moses has never been painted;
Elijah never; David never (except as a mere ruddy stripling); Deborah
never; Gideon never; Isaiah never. What single example does the reader
remember of painting which suggested so much as the faintest shadow of
these people, or of their deeds? Strong men in armor, or aged men with
flowing beards, he _may_ remember, who, when he looked at his Louvre
or Uffizii catalogue, he found were intended to stand for David or for
Moses. But does he suppose that, if these pictures had suggested to
him the feeblest image of the presence of such men, he would have
passed on, as he assuredly did, to the next picture,--representing,
doubtless, Diana and Actaeon, or Cupid and the Graces, or a gambling
quarrel in a pothouse,--with no sense of pain, or surprise? Let him
meditate over the matter, and he will find ultimately that what I say
is true, and that religious art, at once complete and sincere, never
yet has existed.

§ 23. It will exist: nay, I believe the era of its birth has come,
and that those bright Turnerian imageries, which the European public
declared to be "dotage," and those calm Pre-Raphaelite studies
which, in like manner, it pronounced "puerility," form the first
foundation that has been ever laid for true sacred art. Of this we
shall presently reason farther. But, be it as it may, if we would
cherish the hope that sacred art may, indeed, arise for _us_, two
separate cautions are to be addressed to the two opposed classes of
religionists whose influence will chiefly retard that hope's
accomplishment. The group calling themselves Evangelical ought no
longer to render their religion an offence to men of the world by
associating it only with the most vulgar forms of art. It is not
necessary that they should admit either music or painting into
religious service; but, if they admit either the one or the other,
let it not be bad music nor bad painting: it is certainly in nowise
more for Christ's honor that His praise should be sung discordantly,
or His miracles painted discreditably, than that His word should be
preached ungrammatically. Some Evangelicals, however, seem to take a
morbid pride in the triple degradation.[18]

§ 24. The opposite class of men, whose natural instincts lead them to
mingle the refinements of art with all the offices and practices of
religion, are to be warned, on the contrary, how they mistake their
enjoyments for their duties, or confound poetry with faith. I admit
that it is impossible for one man to judge another in this matter, and
that it can never be said with certainty how far what seems frivolity
may be force, and what seems the indulgence of the heart may be,
indeed, its dedication. I am ready to believe that Metastasio, expiring
in a canzonet, may have died better than if his prayer had been in
unmeasured syllables.[19] But, for the most part, it is assuredly much
to be feared lest we mistake a surrender to the charms of art for one
to the service of God; and, in the art which we permit, lest we
substitute sentiment for sense, grace for utility. And for us all there
is in this matter even a deeper danger than that of indulgence. There
is the danger of Artistical Pharisaism. Of all the forms of pride and
vanity, as there are none more subtle, so I believe there are none more
sinful, than those which are manifested by the Pharisees of art. To be
proud of birth, of place, of wit, of bodily beauty, is comparatively
innocent, just because such pride is more natural, and more easily
detected. But to be proud of our sanctities; to pour contempt upon our
fellows, because, forsooth, we like to look at Madonnas in bowers of
roses, better than at plain pictures of plain things; and to make this
religious art of ours the expression of our own perpetual
self-complacency,--congratulating ourselves, day by day, on our
purities, proprieties, elevations, and inspirations, as above the reach
of common mortals,--this I believe to be one of the wickedest and
foolishest forms of human egotism; and, truly, I had rather, with
great, thoughtless, humble Paul Veronese, make the Supper at Emmaus a
background for two children playing with a dog (as, God knows, men do
usually put it in the background to everything, if not out of sight
altogether), than join that school of modern Germanism which wears its
pieties for decoration as women wear their diamonds, and flaunts the
dry fleeces of its phylacteries between its dust and the dew of heaven.

  [10] The curious inequality of this little trefoil is not a
       mistake; it is faithfully copied by the draughtsman from the
       MS. Perhaps the actual date of the illumination may be a year
       or two past the thirteenth century, i.e., 1300--1310: but it
       is quite characteristic of the thirteenth century treatment in
       the figures.

  [11] Lombardic, i.e. in the style of Pietro and Tullio Lombardo,
       in the fifteenth century (not _Lombard_).

  [12] All this, it will be observed, is that seeking for beauty at
       the cost of truth which we have generally noted in the last
       chapter.

  [13] This is one form of the sacrifice of expression to technical
       merit, generally noted at the end of the 10th paragraph of the
       last chapter.

  [14] I suppose Raphael intended a reference to Numbers xv. 38; but
       if he did, the _blue_ riband, or "vitta," as it is in the
       Vulgate, should have been on the borders too.

  [15] In the St. Cecilia of Bologna.

  [16] In the Transfiguration. Do but try to believe that Moses and
       Elias are really there talking with Christ. Moses in the
       loveliest heart and midst of the land which once it had been
       denied him to behold,--Elijah treading the earth again, from
       which he had been swept to heaven in fire; both now with a
       mightier message than ever they had given in life,--mightier,
       in closing their own mission,--mightier, in speaking to
       Christ "of His decease, which He should accomplish at
       Jerusalem." They, men of like passions once with us,
       appointed to speak to the Redeemer of His death.

       And, then, look at Raphael's kicking gracefulnesses.

  [17] Luther had no dislike of religious art on principle. Even the
       stove in his chamber was wrought with sacred subjects. See
       Mrs. Stowe's Sunny Memories.

  [18] I do not know anything more humiliating to a man of common
       sense, than to open what is called an "illustrated Bible" of
       modern days. See, for instance, the plates in Brown's Bible
       (octavo: Edinburgh, 1840), a standard evangelical edition.
       Our habit of reducing the psalms to doggerel before we will
       condescend to sing them, is a parallel abuse. It is
       marvellous to think that human creatures with tongues and
       souls should refuse to chant the verse: "Before Ephraim,
       Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come and
       help us;" preferring this:--

           "Behold, how Benjamin expects,
             With Ephraim and Manasseh joined,
           In their deliverance, the effects
             Of thy resistless strength to find!"

  [19] "En 1780, âgé de quatre-vingt-deux ans, au moment de recevoir
       le viatique, il rassembla ses forces, et chanta, à son Créateur:

           'Eterno Genitor
           Io t' offro il proprio figlio
           Che in pegno del tuo amor
           Si vuole a me donar.

           A lui rivolgi il ciglio,
           Mira chi t' offro; e poi,
           Niega, Signor, se puoi,
           Niega di perdonar.'"--
                      --DE STENDHAL, _Via de Metastasio_.




CHAPTER V.

OF THE FALSE IDEAL:--SECONDLY, PROFANE.


§ 1. Such having been the effects of the pursuit of ideal beauty on
the religious mind of Europe, we might be tempted next to consider
in what way the same movement affected the art which concerned
itself with profane subject, and, through that art, the whole temper
of modern civilization.

I shall, however, merely glance at this question. It is a very
painful and a very wide one. Its discussion cannot come properly
within the limits, or even within the aim, of a work like this; it
ought to be made the subject of a separate essay, and that essay
should be written by some one who had passed less of his life than I
have among the mountains, and more of it among men. But one or two
points may be suggested for the reader to reflect upon at his
leisure.

§ 2. I said just now that we might be tempted to consider how this
pursuit of the ideal _affected_ profane art. Strictly speaking, it
brought that art into existence. As long as men sought for truth
first, and beauty secondarily, they cared chiefly, of course, for
the _chief_ truth, and all art was instinctively religious. But as
soon as they sought for beauty first, and truth secondarily, they
were punished by losing sight of spiritual truth altogether, and the
profane (properly so called) schools of art were instantly
developed.

The perfect human beauty, which, to a large part of the community,
was by far the most interesting feature in the work of the rising
school, might indeed be in some degree consistent with the agony of
Madonnas, and the repentance of Magdalenes; but could not be
exhibited in fulness, when the subjects, however irreverently
treated, nevertheless demanded some decency in the artist, and some
gravity in the spectator. The newly acquired powers of rounding
limbs, and tinting lips, had too little scope in the sanctities
even of the softest womanhood; and the newly acquired conceptions of
the nobility of nakedness could in no wise be expressed beneath the
robes of the prelate or the sackcloth of the recluse. But the source
from which these ideas had been received afforded also full field
for their expression; the heathen mythology, which had furnished the
examples of these heights of art, might again become the subject of
the inspirations it had kindled;--with the additional advantage that
it could now be delighted in, without being believed; that its
errors might be indulged, unrepressed by its awe; and those of its
deities whose function was temptation might be worshipped, in scorn
of those whose hands were charged with chastisement.

So, at least, men dreamed in their foolishness,--to find, as the
ages wore on, that the returning Apollo bore not only his lyre, but
his arrows; and that at the instant of Cytherea's resurrection to
the sunshine, Persephone had reascended her throne in the deep.

§ 3. Little thinking this, they gave themselves up fearlessly to the
chase of the new delight, and exhausted themselves in the pursuit of
an ideal now doubly false. Formerly, though they attempted to reach
an unnatural beauty, it was yet in representing historical facts and
real persons; _now_ they sought for the same unnatural beauty in
representing tales which they knew to be fictitious, and personages
who they knew had never existed. Such a state of things had never
before been found in any nation. Every people till then had painted
the acts of their kings, the triumphs of their armies, the beauty of
their race, or the glory of their gods. They showed the things they
had seen or done; the beings they truly loved or faithfully adored.
But the ideal art of modern Europe was the shadow of a shadow; and
with mechanism substituted for perception, and bodily beauty for
spiritual life, it set itself to represent men it had never seen,
customs it had never practised, and gods in whom it had never
believed.

§ 4. Such art could of course have no help from the virtues, nor
claim on the energies of men. It necessarily rooted itself in their
vices and their idleness; and of their vices principally in two,
pride and sensuality. To the pride, was attached eminently the art
of architecture; to the sensuality, those of painting and sculpture.
Of the fall of architecture, as resultant from the formalist pride
of its patrons and designers, I have spoken elsewhere. The
sensualist ideal, as seen in painting and sculpture, remains to be
examined here. But one interesting circumstance is to be observed
with respect to the manner of the separation of these arts. Pride,
being wholly a vice, and in every phase inexcusable, wholly betrayed
and destroyed the art which was founded on it. But passion, having
some root and use in healthy nature, and only becoming guilty in
excess, did not altogether destroy the art founded upon it. The
architecture of Palladio is wholly virtueless and despicable. Not so
the Venus of Titian, nor the Antiope of Correggio.

§ 5. We find, then, at the close of the sixteenth century, the arts
of painting and sculpture wholly devoted to entertain the indolent
and satiate the luxurious. To effect these noble ends, they took a
thousand different forms; painting, however, of course being the
most complying, aiming sometimes at mere amusement by deception in
landscapes, or minute imitation of natural objects; sometimes giving
more piquant excitement in battle-pieces full of slaughter, or
revels deep in drunkenness; sometimes entering upon serious
subjects, for the sake of grotesque fiends and picturesque infernos,
or that it might introduce pretty children as cherubs, and handsome
women as Magdalenes and Maries of Egypt, or portraits of patrons in
the character of the more decorous saints: but more frequently, for
direct flatteries of this kind, recurring to Pagan mythology, and
painting frail ladies as goddesses or graces, and foolish kings in
radiant apotheosis; while, for the earthly delight of the persons
whom it honored as divine, it ransacked the records of luscious
fable, and brought back, in fullest depth of dye and flame of fancy,
the impurest dreams of the un-Christian ages.

§ 6. Meanwhile, the art of sculpture, less capable of ministering to
mere amusement, was more or less reserved for the affectations of
taste; and the study of the classical statues introduced various ideas
on the subjects of "purity," "chastity," and "dignity," such as it was
possible for people to entertain who were themselves impure, luxurious,
and ridiculous. It is a matter of extreme difficulty to explain the
exact character of this modern sculpturesque ideal; but its relation
to the true ideal may be best understood by considering it as in exact
parallelism with the relation of the word "taste" to the word "love."
Wherever the word "taste" is used with respect to matters of art, it
indicates either that the thing spoken of belongs to some inferior
class of objects, or that the person speaking has a false conception of
its nature. For, consider the exact sense in which a work of art is
said to be "in good or bad taste." It does not mean that it is true, or
false; that it is beautiful, or ugly; but that it does or does not
comply either with the laws of choice, which are enforced by certain
modes of life; or the habits of mind produced by a particular sort of
education. It does not mean merely fashionable, that is, complying with
a momentary caprice of the upper classes; but it means agreeing with
the habitual sense which the most refined education, common to those
upper classes at the period, gives to their whole mind. Now, therefore,
so far as that education does indeed tend to make the senses delicate,
and the perceptions accurate, and thus enables people to be pleased
with quiet instead of gaudy color, and with graceful instead of coarse
form; and, by long acquaintance with the best things, to discern
quickly what is fine from what is common;--so far, acquired taste is an
honorable faculty, and it is true praise of anything to say it is "in
good taste." But so far as this higher education has a tendency to
narrow the sympathies and harden the heart, diminishing the interest of
all beautiful things by familiarity, until even what is best can hardly
please, and what is brightest hardly entertain;--so far as it fosters
pride, and leads men to found the pleasure they take in anything, not
on the worthiness of the thing, but on the degree in which it indicates
some greatness of their own (as people build marble porticos, and inlay
marble floors, not so much because they like the colors of marble, or
find it pleasant to the foot, as because such porches and floors are
costly, and separated in all human eyes from plain entrances of stone
and timber);--so far as it leads people to prefer gracefulness of
dress, manner, and aspect, to value of substance and heart, liking a
well said thing better than a true thing, and a well trained manner
better than a sincere one, and a delicately formed face better than a
good-natured one, and in all other ways and things setting custom and
semblance above everlasting truth;--so far, finally, as it induces a
sense of inherent distinction between class and class, and causes
everything to be more or less despised which has no social rank, so
that the affection, pleasure, or grief of a clown are looked upon as of
no interest compared with the affection and grief of a well-bred
man;--just so far, in all these several ways, the feeling induced by
what is called a "liberal education" is utterly adverse to the
understanding of noble art; and the name which is given to the
feeling,--Taste, Goût, Gusto,--in all languages, indicates the baseness
of it, for it implies that art gives only a kind of pleasure analogous
to that derived from eating by the palate.

§ 7. Modern education, not in art only, but in all other things
referable to the same standard, has invariably given taste in this bad
sense; it has given fastidiousness of choice without judgment,
superciliousness of manner without dignity, refinement of habit without
purity, grace of expression without sincerity, and desire of loveliness
without love; and the modern "Ideal" of high art is a curious mingling
of the gracefulness and reserve of the drawingroom with a certain
measure of classical sensuality. Of this last element, and the singular
artifices by which vice succeeds in combining it with what appears to
be pure and severe, it would take us long to reason fully; I would
rather leave the reader to follow out for himself the consideration of
the influence, in this direction, of statues, bronzes, and paintings,
as at present employed by the upper circles of London, and (especially)
Paris; and this not so much in the works which are really fine, as in
the multiplied coarse copies of them; taking the widest range, from
Dannaeker's Ariadne down to the amorous shepherd and shepherdess in
china on the drawingroom time-piece, rigidly questioning, in each case,
how far the charm of the art does indeed depend on some appeal to the
inferior passions. Let it be considered, for instance, exactly how far
the value of a picture of a girl's head by Greuze would be lowered in
the market, if the dress, which now leaves the bosom bare, were raised
to the neck; and how far, in the commonest lithograph of some utterly
popular subject,--for instance, the teaching of Uncle Tom by Eva,--the
sentiment which is supposed to be excited by the exhibition of
Christianity in youth is complicated with that which depends upon Eva's
having a dainty foot and a well-made satin slipper;--and then, having
completely determined for himself how far the element exists, consider
farther, whether, when art is thus frequent (for frequent he will
assuredly find it to be) in its appeal to the lower passions, it is
likely to attain the highest order of merit, or be judged by the truest
standards of judgment. For, of all the causes which have combined, in
modern times, to lower the rank of art, I believe this to be one of the
most fatal; while, reciprocally, it may be questioned how far society
suffers, in its turn, from the influences possessed over it by the arts
it has degraded. It seems to me a subject of the very deepest interest
to determine what has been the effect upon the European nations of the
great change by which art became again capable of ministering
delicately to the lower passions, as it had in the worst days of Rome;
how far, indeed, in all ages, the fall of nations may be attributed to
art's arriving at this particular stage among them. I do not mean that,
in any of its stages, it is incapable of being employed for evil, but
that assuredly an Egyptian, Spartan, or Norman was unexposed to the
kind of temptation which is continually offered by the delicate
painting and sculpture of modern days; and, although the diseased
imagination might complete the imperfect image of beauty from the
colored image on the wall,[20] or the most revolting thoughts be
suggested by the mocking barbarism of the Gothic sculpture, their hard
outline and rude execution were free from all the subtle treachery
which now fills the flushed canvas and the rounded marble.

§ 8. I cannot, however, pursue this inquiry here. For our present
purpose it is enough to note that the feeling, in itself so debased,
branches upwards into that of which, while no one has cause to be
ashamed, no one, on the other hand, has cause to be proud, namely, the
admiration of physical beauty in the human form, as distinguished from
expression of character. Every one can easily appreciate the merit of
regular features and well-formed limbs, but it requires some attention,
sympathy, and sense, to detect the charm of passing expression, or
life-disciplined character. The beauty of the Apollo Belvidere, or
Venus de Medicis, is perfectly palpable to any shallow fine lady or
fine gentleman, though they would have perceived none in the face of an
old weather-beaten St. Peter, or a grey-haired "Grandmother Lois." The
knowledge that long study is necessary to produce these regular types
of the human form renders the facile admiration matter of eager
self-complacency; the shallow spectator, delighted that he can really,
and without hypocrisy, admire what required much thought to produce,
supposes himself endowed with the highest critical faculties, and
easily lets himself be carried into rhapsodies about the "ideal,"
which, when all is said, if they be accurately examined, will be found
literally to mean nothing more than that the figure has got handsome
calves to its legs, and a straight nose.

§ 9. That they do mean, in reality, nothing more than this may be
easily ascertained by watching the taste of the same persons in other
things. The fashionable lady who will write five or six pages in her
diary respecting the effect upon her mind of such and such an "ideal"
in marble, will have her drawing room table covered with Books of
Beauty, in which the engravings represent the human form in every
possible aspect of distortion and affectation; and the connoisseur who,
in the morning, pretends to the most exquisite taste in the antique,
will be seen, in the evening, in his opera-stall, applauding the least
graceful gestures of the least modest figurante.

§ 10. But even this vulgar pursuit of physical beauty (vulgar in the
profoundest sense, for there is no vulgarity like the vulgarity of
education) would be less contemptible if it really succeeded in its
object; but, like all pursuits carried to inordinate length, it
defeats itself. Physical beauty _is_ a noble thing when it is seen
in perfectness; but the manner in which the moderns pursue their
ideal prevents their ever really seeing what they are always
seeking; for, requiring that all forms should be regular and
faultless, they permit, or even compel, their painters and sculptors
to work chiefly by rule, altering their models to fit their
preconceived notions of what is right. When such artists look at a
face, they do not give it the attention necessary to discern what
beauty is already in its peculiar features; but only to see how
best it may be altered into something for which they have themselves
laid down the laws. Nature never unveils her beauty to such a gaze.
She keeps whatever she has done best, close sealed, until it is
regarded with reverence. To the painter who honors her, she will
open a revelation in the face of a street mendicant; but in the work
of the painter who alters her, she will make Portia become ignoble
and Perdita graceless.

§ 11. Nor is the effect less for evil on the mind of the general
observer. The lover of ideal beauty, with all his conceptions
narrowed by rule, never looks carefully enough upon the features
which do not come under his law (or any others), to discern the
inner beauty in them. The strange intricacies about the lines of the
lips, and marvellous shadows and watch-fires of the eye, and
wavering traceries of the eyelash, and infinite modulations of the
brow, wherein high humanity is embodied, are all invisible to him.
He finds himself driven back at last, with all his idealism, to the
lionne of the ball-room, whom youth and passion can as easily
distinguish as his utmost critical science; whereas, the observer
who has accustomed himself to take human faces as God made them,
will often find as much beauty on a village green as in the proudest
room of state, and as much in the free seats of a church aisle, as
in all the sacred paintings of the Vatican or the Pitti.

§ 12. Then, farther, the habit of disdaining ordinary truth, and
seeking to alter it so as to fit the fancy of the beholder,
gradually infects the mind in all its other operation; so that it
begins to propose to itself an ideal in history, an ideal in general
narration, an ideal in portraiture and description, and in every
thing else where truth may be painful or uninteresting; with the
necessary result of more or less weakness, wickedness, and
uselessness in all that is done or said, with the desire of
concealing this painful truth. And, finally, even when truth is not
intentionally concealed, the pursuer of idealism will pass his days
in false and useless trains of thought, pluming himself, all the
while, upon his superiority therein to the rest of mankind. A modern
German, without either invention or sense, seeing a rapid in a
river, will immediately devote the remainder of the day to the
composition of dialogues between amorous water nymphs and unhappy
mariners; while the man of true invention, power, and sense will,
instead, set himself to consider whether the rocks in the river
could have their points knocked off, or the boats upon it be made
with stronger bottoms.

§ 13. Of this final baseness of the false ideal, its miserable waste of
time, strength, and available intellect of man, by turning, as I have
said above, innocence of pastime into seriousness of occupation, it is,
of course, hardly possible to sketch out even so much as the leading
manifestations. The vain and haughty projects of youth for future life;
the giddy reveries of insatiable self exaltation; the discontented
dreams of what might have been or should be, instead of the thankful
understanding of what is; the casting about for sources of interest in
senseless fiction, instead of the real human histories of the people
round us; the prolongation from age to age of romantic historical
deceptions instead of sifted truth; the pleasures taken in fanciful
portraits of rural or romantic life in poetry and on the stage, without
the smallest effort to rescue the living rural population of the world
from its ignorance or misery; the excitement of the feelings by labored
imagination of spirits, fairies, monsters, and demons, issuing in total
blindness of heart and sight to the true presences of beneficent or
destructive spiritual powers around us; in fine, the constant
abandonment of all the straightforward paths of sense and duty, for
fear of losing some of the enticement of ghostly joys, or trampling
somewhat "sopra lor vanità, che par persona;" all these various forms
of false idealism have so entangled the modern mind, often called, I
suppose ironically, practical, that truly I believe there never yet was
idolatry of stock or staff so utterly unholy as this our idolatry of
shadows; nor can I think that, of those who burnt incense under oaks,
and poplars, and elms, because "the shadow thereof was good," it could
in any wise be more justly or sternly declared than of us--"The wind
hath bound them up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of
their sacrifices."[21]

  [20] Ezek. xxiii. 14.

  [21] Hosea, chap. iv. 12, 13, and 19.




CHAPTER VI.

OF THE TRUE IDEAL:--FIRST, PURIST.


§ 1. Having thus glanced at the principal modes in which the
imagination works for evil, we must rapidly note also the principal
directions in which its operation is admissible, even in changing or
strangely combining what is brought within its sphere.

For hitherto we have spoken as if every change wilfully wrought by
the imagination was an error; apparently implying that its only
proper work was to summon up the memories of past events, and the
anticipations of future ones, under aspects which would bear the
sternest tests of historical investigation, or abstract reasoning.
And in general this is, indeed, its noblest work. Nevertheless, it
has also permissible functions peculiarly its own, and certain
rights of feigning, and adorning, and fancifully arranging,
inalienable from its nature. Everything that is natural is, within
certain limits, right; and we must take care not, in over-severity,
to deprive ourselves of any refreshing or animating power ordained
to be in us for our help.

§ 2. (A). It was noted in speaking above of the Angelican or
passionate ideal, that there was a certain virtue in it dependent on
the expression of its loving enthusiasm. (Chap. IV. § 10.)

(B). In speaking of the pursuit of beauty as one of the
characteristics of the highest art, it was also said that there were
certain ways of showing this beauty by gathering together, without
altering, the finest forms, and marking them by gentle emphasis.
(Chap. III. § 15.)

(C). And in speaking of the true uses of imagination it was said, that
we might be allowed to create for ourselves, in innocent play, fairies
and naiads, and other such fictitious creatures. (Chap. IV. § 5.)

Now this loving enthusiasm, which seeks for a beauty fit to be the
object of eternal love; this inventive skill, which kindly displays
what exists around us in the world; and this playful energy of
thought which delights in various conditions of the impossible, are
three forms of idealism more or less connected with the three
tendencies of the artistical mind which I had occasion to explain in
the chapter on the Nature of Gothic, in the Stones of Venice. It was
there pointed out, that, the things around us containing mixed good
and evil, certain men chose the good and left the evil (thence
properly called Purists); others received both good and evil
together (thence properly called Naturalists); and others had a
tendency to choose the evil and leave the good, whom, for
convenience' sake, I termed Sensualists. I do not mean to say that
painters of fairies and naiads must belong to this last and lowest
class, or habitually choose the evil and leave the good; but there
is, nevertheless, a strange connection between the reinless play of
the imagination, and a sense of the presence of evil, which is
usually more or less developed in those creations of the imagination
to which we properly attach the word _Grotesque_.

For this reason, we shall find it convenient to arrange what we have
to note respecting true idealism under the three heads--

  A. Purist Idealism.
  B. Naturalist Idealism.
  C. Grotesque Idealism.

§ 3. A. Purist Idealism.--It results from the unwillingness of men
whose dispositions are more than ordinarily tender and holy, to
contemplate the various forms of definite evil which necessarily
occur in the daily aspects of the world around them. They shrink
from them as from pollution, and endeavor to create for themselves
an imaginary state, in which pain and imperfection either do not
exist, or exist in some edgeless and enfeebled condition.

As, however, pain and imperfection are, by eternal laws, bound up
with existence, so far as it is visible to us, the endeavor to cast
them away invariably indicates a comparative childishness of mind,
and produces a childish form of art. In general, the effort is most
successful when it is most naïve, and when the ignorance of the
draughtsman is in some frank proportion to his innocence. For
instance, one of the modes of treatment, the most conducive to this
ideal expression, is simply drawing everything without shadows, as
if the sun were everywhere at once. This, in the present state of
our knowledge, we could not do with grace, because we could not do
it without fear or shame. But an artist of the thirteenth century
did it with no disturbance of conscience,--knowing no better, or
rather, in some sense, we might say, knowing no worse. It is,
however, evident, at first thought, that all representations of
nature without evil must either be ideals of a future world, or be
false ideals, if they are understood to be representations of facts.
They can only be classed among the branches of the true ideal, in so
far as they are understood to be nothing more than expressions of
the painter's personal affections or hopes.

§ 4. Let us take one or two instances in order clearly to explain
our meaning.

The life of Angelico was almost entirely spent in the endeavor to
imagine the beings belonging to another world. By purity of life,
habitual elevation of thought, and natural sweetness of disposition,
he was enabled to express the sacred affections upon the human
countenance as no one ever did before or since. In order to effect
clearer distinction between heavenly beings and those of this world,
he represents the former as clothed in draperies of the purest
color, crowned with glories of burnished gold, and entirely
shadowless. With exquisite choice of gesture, and disposition of
folds of drapery, this mode of treatment gives perhaps the best idea
of spiritual beings which the human mind is capable of forming. It
is, therefore, a true ideal;[22] but the mode in which it is arrived
at (being so far mechanical and contradictory of the appearances of
nature) necessarily precludes those who practise it from being
complete masters of their art. It is always childish, but beautiful
in its childishness.

§ 5. The works of our own Stothard are examples of the operation of
another mind, singular in gentleness and purity, upon mere worldly
subject. It seems as if Stothard could not conceive wickedness,
coarseness, or baseness; every one of his figures looks as if it had
been copied from some creature who had never harbored an unkind
thought, or permitted itself in an ignoble action. With this immense
love of mental purity is joined, in Stothard, a love of mere
physical smoothness and softness, so that he lived in a universe of
soft grass and stainless fountains, tender trees, and stones at
which no foot could stumble.

All this is very beautiful, and may sometimes urge us to an endeavor
to make the world itself more like the conception of the painter. At
least, in the midst of its malice, misery, and baseness, it is often a
relief to glance at the graceful shadows, and take, for momentary
companionship, creatures full only of love, gladness, and honor. But
the perfect truth will at last vindicate itself against the partial
truth; the help which we can gain from the unsubstantial vision will
be only like that which we may sometimes receive, in weariness, from
the scent of a flower or the passing of a breeze. For all firm aid and
steady use, we must look to harder realities; and, as far as the
painter himself is regarded, we can only receive such work as the sign
of an amiable imbecility. It is indeed ideal; but ideal as a fair
dream is in the dawn of morning, before the faculties are astir. The
apparent completeness of grace can never be attained without much
definite falsification as well as omission; stones, over which we
cannot stumble, must be ill-drawn stones; trees, which are all
gentleness and softness, cannot be trees of wood; nor companies
without evil in them, companies of flesh and blood. The habit of
falsification (with whatever aim) begins always in dulness and ends
always in incapacity; nothing can be more pitiable than any endeavor
by Stothard to express facts beyond his own sphere of soft pathos or
graceful mirth, and nothing more unwise than the aim at a similar
ideality by any painter who has power to render a sincerer truth.

§ 6. I remember another interesting example of ideality on this same
root, but belonging to another branch of it, in the works of a young
German painter, which I saw some time ago in a London drawingroom.
He had been travelling in Italy, and had brought home a portfolio of
sketches remarkable alike for their fidelity and purity. Every one
was a laborious and accurate study of some particular spot. Every
cottage, every cliff, every tree, at the site chosen, had been
drawn; and drawn with palpable sincerity of portraiture, and yet in
such a spirit that it was impossible to conceive that any sin or
misery had ever entered into one of the scenes he had represented;
and the volcanic horrors of Radicofani, the pestilent gloom of the
Pontines, and the boundless despondency of the Campagna became under
his hand, only various appearances of Paradise.

It was very interesting to observe the minute emendations or
omissions by which this was effected. To set the tiles the slightest
degree more in order upon a cottage roof; to insist upon the
vine-leaves at the window, and let the shadow which fell from them
naturally conceal the rent in the wall; to draw all the flowers in
the foreground, and miss the weeds; to draw all the folds of the
white clouds, and miss those of the black ones; to mark the graceful
branches of the trees, and, in one way or another, beguile the eye
from those which were ungainly; to give every peasant-girl whose
face was visible the expression of an angel, and every one whose
back was turned the bearing of a princess; finally, to give a
general look of light, clear organization, and serene vitality to
every feature in the landscape;--such were his artifices, and such
his delights. It was impossible not to sympathize deeply with the
spirit of such a painter; and it was just cause for gratitude to be
permitted to travel, as it were, through Italy with such a friend.
But his work had, nevertheless, its stern limitations and marks of
everlasting inferiority. Always soothing and pathetic, it could
never be sublime, never perfectly nor entrancingly beautiful; for
the narrow spirit of correction could not cast itself fully into any
scene; the calm cheerfulness which shrank from the shadow of the
cypress, and the distortion of the olive, could not enter into the
brightness of the sky that they pierced, nor the softness of the
bloom that they bore: for every sorrow that his heart turned from,
he lost a consolation; for every fear which he dared not confront,
he lost a portion of his hardiness; the unsceptred sweep of the
storm-clouds, the fair freedom of glancing shower and flickering
sunbeam, sank into sweet rectitudes and decent formalisms; and,
before eyes that refused to be dazzled or darkened, the hours of
sunset wreathed their rays unheeded, and the mists of the Apennines
spread their blue veils in vain.

§ 7. To this inherent shortcoming and narrowness of reach the farther
defect was added, that this work gave no useful representation of the
state of facts in the country which it pretended to contemplate. It was
not only wanting in all the higher elements of beauty, but wholly
unavailable for instruction of any kind beyond that which exists in
pleasurableness of pure emotion. And considering what cost of labor was
devoted to the series of drawings, it could not but be matter for grave
blame, as well as for partial contempt, that a man of amiable feeling
and considerable intellectual power should thus expend his life in the
declaration of his own petty pieties and pleasant reveries, leaving the
burden of human sorrow unwitnessed; and the power of God's judgments
unconfessed; and, while poor Italy lay wounded and moaning at his feet,
pass by, in priestly calm, lest the whiteness of his decent vesture
should be spotted with unhallowed blood.

§ 8. Of several other forms of Purism I shall have to speak
hereafter, more especially of that exhibited in the landscapes of
the early religious painters; but these examples are enough, for the
present, to show the general principle that the purest ideal, though
in some measure true, in so far as it springs from the true longings
of an earnest mind, is yet necessarily in many things deficient or
blamable, and _always_ an indication of some degree of weakness in
the mind pursuing it. But, on the other hand, it is to be noted that
entire scorn of this purist ideal is the sign of a far greater
weakness. Multitudes of petty artists, incapable of any noble
sensation whatever, but acquainted, in a dim way, with the
technicalities of the schools, mock at the art whose depths they
cannot fathom, and whose motives they cannot comprehend, but of
which they can easily detect the imperfections, and deride the
simplicities. Thus poor fumigatory Fuseli, with an art composed of
the tinsel of the stage and the panics of the nursery, speaks
contemptuously of the name of Angelico as "dearer to sanctity than
to art." And a large portion of the resistance to the noble
Pre-Raphaelite movement of our own days has been offered by men who
suppose the entire function of the artist in this world to consist
in laying on color with a large brush, and surrounding dashes of
flake white with bituminous brown; men whose entire capacities of
brain, soul, and sympathy, applied industriously to the end of their
lives, would not enable them, at last, to paint so much as one of
the leaves of the nettles at the bottom of Hunt's picture of the
Light of the World.[23]

§ 9. It is finally to be remembered, therefore, that Purism is always
noble when it is _instinctive_. It is not the greatest thing that can
be done, but it is probably the greatest thing that the man who does
it can do, provided it comes from his heart. True, it is a sign of
weakness, but it is not in our choice whether we will be weak or
strong; and there is a certain strength which can only be made perfect
in weakness. If he is working in humility, fear of evil, desire of
beauty, and sincere purity of purpose and thought, he will produce
good and helpful things; but he must be much on his guard against
supposing himself to be greater than his fellows, because he has shut
himself into this calm and cloistered sphere. His only safety lies in
knowing himself to be, on the contrary, _less_ than his fellows, and
in always striving, so far as he can find it in his heart, to extend
his delicate narrowness towards the great naturalist ideal. The whole
group of modern German purists have lost themselves, because they
founded their work not on humility, nor on religion, but on small
self-conceit. Incapable of understanding the great Venetians, or any
other masters of true imaginative power, and having fed what mind they
had with weak poetry and false philosophy, they thought themselves the
best and greatest of artistic mankind, and expected to found a new
school of painting in pious plagiarism and delicate pride. It is
difficult at first to decide which is the more worthless, the
spiritual affectation of the petty German, or the composition and
chiaroscuro of the petty Englishman; on the whole, however, the latter
have lightest weight, for the pseudo-religious painter must, at all
events, pass much of his time in meditation upon solemn subjects, and
in examining venerable models; and may sometimes even cast a little
useful reflected light, or touch the heart with a pleasant echo.

  [22] As noted above in Chap. IV § 20.

  [23] Not that the Pre-Raphaelite is a purist movement, it is stern
       naturalist; but its unfortunate opposers, who neither know
       what nature is, nor what purism is, have mistaken the simple
       nature for morbid purism, and therefore cried out against it.




CHAPTER VII.

OF THE TRUE IDEAL:--SECONDLY, NATURALIST.


§ 1. We now enter on the consideration of that central and highest
branch of ideal art which concerns itself simply with things as they
ARE, and accepts, in all of them, alike the evil and the good. The
question is, therefore, how the art which represents things simply as
they are, can be called ideal at all. How does it meet that
requirement stated in Chap. III. § 4, as imperative on all great art,
that it shall be inventive, and a product of the imagination? It meets
it preeminently by that power of arrangement which I have endeavored,
at great length and with great pains, to define accurately in the
chapter on Imagination associative in the second volume. That is to
say, accepting the weaknesses, faults, and wrongnesses in all things
that it sees, it so places and harmonizes them that they form a noble
whole, in which the imperfection of each several part is not only
harmless, but absolutely essential, and yet in which whatever is good
in each several part shall be completely displayed.

§ 2. This operation of true idealism holds, from the least things to
the greatest. For instance, in the arrangement of the smallest masses
of color, the false idealist, or even the purist, depends upon
perfecting each separate hue, and raises them all, as far as he can,
into costly brilliancy; but the naturalist takes the coarsest and
feeblest colors of the things around him, and so interweaves and
opposes them that they become more lovely than if they had all been
bright. So in the treatment of the human form. The naturalist will
take it as he finds it; but, with such examples as his picture may
rationally admit of more or less exalted beauty, he will associate
inferior forms, so as not only to set off those which are most
beautiful, but to bring out clearly what good there is in the inferior
forms themselves; finally using such measure of absolute evil as
there is commonly in nature, both for teaching and for contrast.

In Tintoret's Adoration of the Magi, the Madonna is not an enthroned
queen, but a fair girl, full of simplicity and almost childish
sweetness. To her are opposed (as Magi) two of the noblest and most
thoughtful of the Venetian senators in extreme old age,--the utmost
manly dignity, in its decline, being set beside the utmost feminine
simplicity, in its dawn. The steep foreheads and refined features of
the nobles are, again, opposed to the head of a negro servant, and
of an Indian, both, however, noble of their kind. On the other side
of the picture, the delicacy of the Madonna is farther enhanced by
contrast with a largely made farm-servant, leaning on a basket. All
these figures are in repose: outside, the troop of the attendants of
the Magi is seen coming up at the gallop.

§ 3. I bring forward this picture, observe, not as an example of the
ideal in conception of religious subject, but of the general ideal
treatment of the human form; in which the peculiarity is, that the
beauty of each figure is displayed to the utmost, while yet, taken
separately the Madonna is an unaltered portrait of a Venetian girl,
the Magi are unaltered Venetian Senators, and the figure with the
basket, an unaltered market-woman of Mestre.

And the greater the master of the ideal, the more perfectly true in
_portraiture_ will his individual figures be always found, the more
subtle and bold his arts of harmony and contrast. This is a universal
principle, common to all great art. Consider, in Shakspere, how Prince
Henry is opposed to Falstaff, Falstaff to Shallow, Titania to Bottom,
Cordelia to Regan, Imogen to Cloten, and so on; while all the meaner
idealists disdain the naturalism, and are shocked at the contrasts.
The fact is, a man who can see truth at all, sees it wholly, and
neither desires nor dares to mutilate it.

§ 4. It is evident that _within_ this faithful idealism, and as one
branch of it only, will arrange itself the representation of the
human form and mind in perfection, when this perfection is
rationally to be supposed or introduced,--that is to say, in the
highest personages of the story. The careless habit of confining the
term "ideal" to such representations, and not understanding the
imperfect ones to be _equally_ ideal in their place, has greatly
added to the embarrassment and multiplied the errors of artists.[24]
Thersites is just as ideal as Achilles, and Alecto as Helen; and,
what is more, all the nobleness of the beautiful ideal depends upon
its being just as probable and natural as the ugly one, and having
in itself, occasionally or partially, both faults and familiarities.
If the next painter who desires to illustrate the character of
Homer's Achilles, would represent him cutting pork chops for
Ulysses,[25] he would enable the public to understand the Homeric
ideal better than they have done for several centuries. For it is to
be kept in mind that the _naturalist ideal_ has always in it, to the
full, the power expressed by those two words. It is naturalist,
because studied from nature, and ideal, because it is mentally
arranged in a certain manner. Achilles must be represented cutting
pork chops, because that was one of the things which the nature of
Achilles involved his doing: he could not be shown wholly as
Achilles, if he were not shown doing that. But he shall do it at
such time and place as Homer chooses.

§ 5. Now, therefore, observe the main conclusions which follow from
these two conditions, attached always to art of this kind. First, it
is to be taken straight from nature; it is to be the plain narration
of something the painter or writer saw. Herein is the chief practical
difference between the higher and lower artists; a difference which I
feel more and more every day that I give to the study of art. All the
great men see what they paint before they paint it,--see it in a
perfectly passive manner,--cannot help seeing it if they would;
whether in their mind's eye, or in bodily fact, does not matter; very
often the mental vision is, I believe, in men of imagination, clearer
than the bodily one; but vision it is, of one kind or another,--the
whole scene, character, or incident passing before them as in second
sight, whether they will or no, and requiring them to paint it as they
see it; they not daring, under the might of its presence, to
alter[26] one jot or tittle of it as they write it down or paint it
down; it being to them in its own kind and degree always a true vision
or Apocalypse, and invariably accompanied in their hearts by a feeling
correspondent to the words,--"Write the things _which thou hast seen_,
and the things which _are_."

And the whole power, whether of painter or poet, to describe rightly
what we call an ideal thing, depends upon its being thus, to him, not
an ideal, but a _real_ thing. No man ever did or ever will work well,
but either from actual sight or sight of faith; and all that we call
ideal in Greek or any other art, because to us it is false and
visionary, was, to the makers of it, true and existent. The heroes of
Phidias are simply representations of such noble human persons as he
every day saw, and the gods of Phidias simply representations of such
noble divine persons as he thoroughly believed to exist, and did in
mental vision truly behold. Hence I said in the second preface to the
Seven Lamps of Architecture: "All great art represents something that
it sees or believes in; nothing unseen or uncredited."

§ 6. And just because it is always something that it sees or
believes in, there is the peculiar character above noted, almost
unmistakable, in all high and true ideals, of having been as it were
studied from the life, and involving pieces of sudden familiarity,
and close _specific_ painting which never would have been admitted
or even thought of, had not the painter drawn either from the bodily
life or from the life of faith. For instance, Dante's centaur,
Chiron, dividing his beard with his arrow before he can speak, is a
thing that no mortal would ever have thought of, if he had not
actually seen the centaur do it. They might have composed handsome
bodies of men and horses in all possible ways, through a whole life
of pseudo-idealism, and yet never dreamed of any such thing. But the
real living centaur actually trotted across Dante's brain, and he
saw him do it.

§ 7. And on account of this reality it is, that the great idealists
venture into all kinds of what, to the pseudo-idealists, are
"vulgarities." Nay, _venturing_ is the wrong word; the great men
have no choice in the matter; they do not know or care whether the
things they describe are vulgarities or not. They _saw_ them: they
are the facts of the case. If they had merely composed what they
describe, they would have had it at their will to refuse this
circumstance or add that. But they did not compose it. It came to
them ready fashioned; they were too much impressed by it to think
what was vulgar or not vulgar in it. It might be a very wrong thing
in a centaur to have so much beard; but so it was. And, therefore,
among the various ready tests of true greatness there is not any
more certain than this daring reference to, or use of, mean and
little things--mean and little, that is, to mean and little minds;
but, when used by the great men, evidently part of the noble whole
which is authoritatively present before them. Thus, in the highest
poetry, as partly above noted in the first chapter, there is no word
so familiar but a great man will bring good out of it, or rather, it
will bring good to him, and answer some end for which no other word
would have done equally well.

§ 8. A common person, for instance, would be mightily puzzled to apply
the word "whelp" to any one with a view of flattering him. There is a
certain freshness and energy in the term, which gives it
agreeableness; but it seems difficult, at first hearing, to use it
complimentarily. If the person spoken of be a prince, the difficulty
seems increased; and when, farther, he is at one and the same moment
to be called a "whelp" and contemplated as a hero, it seems that a
common idealist might well be brought to a pause. But hear Shakspere
do it:--

                           "Invoke his warlike spirit,
      And your great uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
      Who on the French ground play'd a tragedy,
      Making defeat on the full power of France,
      While his most mighty father on a hill
      Stood smiling, to behold his lion's whelp
      Forage in blood of French nobility."

So a common idealist would have been rather alarmed at the thought
of introducing the name of a street in Paris--Straw Street--Rue de
Fouarre--into the midst of a description of the highest heavens. Not
so Dante,--

      "Beyond, thou mayst the flaming lustre scan
        Of Isidore, of Bede, and that Richart
      Who was in contemplation more than man.
      And he, from whom thy looks returning are
        To me, a spirit was, that in austere
      Deep musings often thought death kept too far.
      That is the light eternal of Sigier,
        Who while in Rue de Fouarre his days he wore,
      Has argued hateful truths in haughtiest ear."    CAYLEY.

What did it matter to Dante, up in heaven there, whether the mob
below thought him vulgar or not! Sigier _had_ read in Straw Street;
that was the fact, and he had to say so, and there an end.

§ 9. There is, indeed, perhaps, no greater sign of innate and _real_
vulgarity of mind or defective education than the want of power to
understand the universality of the ideal truth; the absence of
sympathy with the colossal grasp of those intellects, which have in
them so much of divine, that nothing is small to them, and nothing
large; but with equal and unoffended vision they take in the sum of
the world,--Straw Street and the seventh heavens,--in the same
instant. A certain portion of this divine spirit is visible even in
the lower examples of all the true men; it is, indeed, perhaps, the
clearest test of their belonging to the true and great group, that
they are continually touching what to the multitude appear
vulgarities. The higher a man stands, the more the word "vulgar"
becomes unintelligible to him. Vulgar? what, that poor farmer's girl
of William Hunt's, bred in the stable, putting on her Sunday gown,
and pinning her best cap out of the green and red pin-cushion! Not
so; she may be straight on the road to those high heavens, and may
shine hereafter as one of the stars in the firmament for ever. Nay,
even that lady in the satin bodice with her arm laid over a
balustrade to show it, and her eyes turned up to heaven to show
them; and the sportsman waving his rifle for the terror of beasts,
and displaying his perfect dress for the delight of men, are kept,
by the very misery and vanity of them, in the thoughts of a great
painter, at a sorrowful level, somewhat above vulgarity. It is only
when the minor painter takes them on his easel, that they become
things for the universe to be ashamed of.

We may dismiss this matter of vulgarity in plain and few words, at
least as far as regards art. There is never vulgarity in a _whole_
truth, however commonplace. It may be unimportant or painful. It
cannot be vulgar. Vulgarity is only in concealment of truth, or in
affectation.

§ 10. "Well, but," (at this point the reader asks doubtfully,) "if
then your great central idealist is to show all truth, low as well
as lovely, receiving it in this passive way, what becomes of all
your principles of selection, and of setting in the right place,
which you were talking about up to the end of your fourth paragraph?
How is Homer to enforce upon Achilles the cutting of the pork chops
'only at such time as Homer chooses,' if Homer is to have _no_
choice, but merely to see the thing done, and sing it as he sees
it?" Why, the choice, as well as the vision, is _manifested_ to
Homer. The vision comes to him in its chosen order. Chosen _for_
him, not _by_ him, but yet full of visible and exquisite choice,
just as a sweet and perfect dream will come to a sweet and perfect
person, so that, in some sense, they may be said to have chosen
their dream, or composed it; and yet they could not help dreaming it
so, and in no other wise. Thus, exactly thus, in all results of true
inventive power, the whole harmony of the thing done seems as if it
had been wrought by the most exquisite rules. But to him who did it,
it presented itself so, and his will, and knowledge, and
personality, for the moment went for nothing; he became simply a
scribe, and wrote what he heard and saw.

And all efforts to do things of a similar kind by rule or by
thought, and all efforts to mend or rearrange the first order of the
vision, are not inventive; on the contrary, they ignore and deny
invention. If any man, seeing certain forms laid on the canvas, does
by his reasoning power determine that certain changes wrought in
them would mend or enforce them, that is not only uninventive, but
contrary to invention, which must be the involuntary occurrence of
certain forms or fancies to the mind in the order they are to be
portrayed. Thus the knowing of rules and the exertion of judgment
have a tendency to check and confuse the fancy in its flow; so that
it will follow, that, in exact proportion as a master knows anything
about rules of right and wrong, he is likely to be uninventive; and
in exact proportion as he holds higher rank and has nobler
inventive power, he will know less of rules; not despising them, but
simply feeling that between him and them there is nothing in
common,--that dreams cannot be ruled--that as they come, so they
must be caught, and they cannot be caught in any other shape than
that they come in; and that he might as well attempt to rule a
rainbow into rectitude, or cut notches in a moth's wings to hold it
by, as in any wise attempt to modify, by rule, the forms of the
involuntary vision.

§ 11. And this, which by reason we have thus anticipated, is in
reality universally so. There is no exception. The great men never
know how or why they do things. They have no rules; cannot
comprehend the nature of rules;--do not, usually, even know, in what
they do, what is best or what is worst: to them it is all the same;
something they cannot help saying or doing,--one piece of it as good
as another, and none of it (it seems to _them_) worth much. The
moment any man begins to talk about rules, in whatsoever art, you
may know him for a second-rate man; and, if he talks about them
_much_, he is a third-rate, or not an artist at all. To _this_ rule
there is no exception in any art; but it is perhaps better to be
illustrated in the art of music than in that of painting. I fell by
chance the other day upon a work of De Stendhal's, "Vies de Haydn,
de Mozart, et de Metastase," fuller of common sense than any book I
ever read on the arts; though I see, by the slight references made
occasionally to painting, that the author's knowledge therein is
warped and limited by the elements of general teaching in the
schools around him; and I have not yet, therefore, looked at what he
has separately written on painting. But one or two passages out of
this book on music are closely to our present purpose.

"Counterpoint is related to mathematics: a fool, with patience,
becomes a respectable savant in that; but for the part of genius,
melody, it has no rules. No art is so utterly deprived of precepts
for the production of the beautiful. So much the better for it and
for us. Cimarosa, when first at Prague his air was executed, Pria
che spunti in ciel l'Aurora, never heard the pedants say to him,
'Your air is fine, because you have followed such and such a rule
established by Pergolese in such an one of his airs; but it would
be finer still if you had conformed yourself to such another rule
from which Galluppi never deviated.'"

Yes: "so much the better for it, and for us;" but I trust the time
will soon come when melody in painting will be understood, no less
than in music, and when people will find that, there also, the great
melodists have no rules, and cannot have any, and that there are in
this, as in sound, "no precepts for the production of the beautiful."

§ 12. Again. "Behold, my friend, an example of that simple way of
answering which embarrasses much. One asked him (Haydn) the _reason_
for a harmony--for a passage's being assigned to one instrument
rather than another; but all he ever answered was, 'I have done it,
because it does well.'" Farther on, De Stendhal relates an anecdote
of Haydn; I believe one well known, but so much to our purpose that
I repeat it. Haydn had agreed to give some lessons in counterpoint
to an English nobleman. "'For our first lesson,' said the pupil,
already learned in the art--drawing at the same time a quatuor of
Haydn's from his pocket, 'for our first lesson may we examine this
quatuor; and will you tell me the reasons of certain modulations,
which I cannot entirely approve because they are contrary to the
principles?' Haydn, a little surprised, declared himself ready to
answer. The nobleman began; and at the very first measures found
matter for objection. Haydn, _who invented habitually_, and who was
the contrary of a pedant, found himself much embarrassed, and
answered always, 'I have done that because it has a good effect. I
have put that passage there because it does well.' The Englishman,
who judged that these answers proved nothing, recommenced his
proofs, and demonstrated to him, by very good reasons, that his
quatuor was good for nothing. 'But, my lord, arrange this quatuor
then to your fancy,--play it so, and you will see which of the two
ways is the best.' 'But why is yours the best which is contrary to
the rules?' 'Because it is the pleasantest.' The nobleman replied.
Haydn at last lost patience, and said, 'I see, my lord, it is you
who have the goodness to give lessons to me, and truly I am forced
to confess to you that I do not deserve the honor.' The partizan of
the rules departed, still astonished that in following the rules to
the letter one cannot infallibly produce a 'Matrimonio Segreto.'"

This anecdote, whether in all points true or not, is in its tendency
most instructive, except only in that it makes _one_ false inference
or admission, namely, that a good composition can be _contrary_ to
the rules. It may be contrary to certain principles, supposed in
ignorance to be general; but every great composition is in perfect
harmony with all true rules, and involves thousands too delicate for
ear, or eye, or thought, to trace; still it is possible to reason,
with infinite pleasure and profit, about these principles, when the
thing is once done; only, all our reasoning will not enable any one
to do another thing like it, because all reasoning falls infinitely
short of the divine instinct. Thus we may reason wisely over the way
a bee builds its comb, and be profited by finding out certain things
about the angles of it. But the bee knows nothing about those
matters. It builds its comb in a far more inevitable way. And, from
a bee to Paul Veronese, all master-workers work with this awful,
this inspired unconsciousness.

§ 13. I said just now that there was no exception to _this_ law,
that the great men never knew how or why they did things. It is, of
course, only with caution that such a broad statement should be
made; but I have seen much of different kinds of artists, and I have
always found the knowledge of, and attention to, rules so
_accurately_ in the inverse ratio to the power of the painter, that
I have myself no doubt that the law is constant, and that men's
smallness may be trigonometrically estimated by the attention which,
in their work, they pay to principles, especially principles of
composition. The general way in which the great men speak is of
"_trying_ to do" this or that, just as a child would tell of
something he had seen and could not utter. Thus, in speaking of the
drawing of which I have given an etching farther on (a scene on the
St. Gothard[27]), Turner asked if I had been to see "that litter of
stones which I _endeavored_ to represent;" and William Hunt, when I
asked him one day as he was painting, why he put on such and such a
color, answered, "I don't know; I am just _aiming_ at it;" and
Turner, and he, and all the other men I have known who could paint,
always spoke and speak in the same way; not in any selfish restraint
of their knowledge, but in pure simplicity. While all the men whom I
know, who _cannot_ paint, are ready with admirable reasons for
everything they have done; and can show, in the most conclusive way,
that Turner is wrong, and how he might be improved.

§ 14. And this is the reason for the somewhat singular, but very
palpable truth that the Chinese, and Indians, and other semi-civilized
nations, can color better than we do, and that an Indian shawl or
Chinese vase are still, in invention of color, inimitable by us. It is
their glorious ignorance of all rules that does it; the pure and true
instincts have play, and do their work,--instincts so subtle, that the
least warping or compression breaks or blunts them; and the moment we
begin teaching people any rules about color, and make them do this or
that, we crush the instinct generally for ever. Hence, hitherto, it has
been an actual necessity, in order to obtain power of coloring, that a
nation should be half-savage: everybody could color in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries; but we were ruled and legalized into grey in the
fifteenth;--only a little salt simplicity of their sea natures at
Venice still keeping their precious, shellfishy purpleness and power;
and now that is gone; and nobody can color anywhere, except the Hindoos
and Chinese; but that need not be so, and will not be so long; for, in
a little while, people will find out their mistake, and give up talking
about rules of color, and then everybody will color again, as easily as
they now talk.

§ 15. Such, then, being the generally passive or instinctive character
of right invention, it may be asked how these unmanageable instincts
are to be rendered practically serviceable in historical or poetical
painting,--especially historical, in which given facts are to be
represented. Simply by the sense and self-control of the whole man;
not by control of the particular fancy or vision. He who habituates
himself, in his daily life, to seek for the stern facts in whatever he
hears or sees, will have these facts again brought before him by the
involuntary imaginative power in their noblest associations; and he
who seeks for frivolities and fallacies, will have frivolities and
fallacies again presented to him in his dreams. Thus if, in reading
history for the purpose of painting from it, the painter severely
seeks for the accurate circumstances of every event; as, for instance,
determining the exact spot of ground on which his hero fell, the way
he must have been looking at the moment, the height the sun was at (by
the hour of the day), and the way in which the light must have fallen
upon his face, the actual number and individuality of the persons by
him at the moment, and such other veritable details, ascertaining and
dwelling upon them without the slightest care for any desirableness or
poetic propriety in them, but for their own truth's sake; then these
truths will afterwards rise up and form the body of his imaginative
vision, perfected and united as his inspiration may teach. But if, in
reading the history, he does not regard these facts, but thinks only
how it might all most prettily, and properly, and impressively have
happened, then there is nothing but prettiness and propriety to form
the body of his future imagination, and his whole ideal becomes false.
So, in the higher or expressive part of the work, the whole virtue of
it depends on his being able to quit his own personality, and enter
successively into the hearts and thoughts of each person; and in all
this he is still passive: in gathering the truth he is passive, not
determining what the truth to be gathered shall be; and in the after
vision he is passive, not determining, but as his dreams will have it,
what the truth to be represented shall be; only according to his own
nobleness is his power of entering into the hearts of noble persons,
and the general character of his dream of them.[28]

§ 16. It follows from all this, evidently, that a great idealist
never can be egotistic. The whole of his power depends upon his
losing sight and feeling of his own existence, and becoming a mere
witness and mirror of truth, and a scribe of visions,--always
passive in sight, passive in utterance,--lamenting continually that
he cannot completely reflect nor clearly utter all he has seen. Not
by any means a proud state for a man to be in. But the man who has
no invention is always setting things in order, and putting the
world to rights, and mending, and beautifying, and pluming himself
on his doings as supreme in all ways.

§ 17. There is still the question open, What are the principal
directions in which this ideal faculty is to exercise itself most
usefully for mankind?

This question, however, is not to the purpose of our present work,
which respects landscape-painting only; it must be one of those left
open to the reader's thoughts, and for future inquiry in another
place. One or two essential points I briefly notice.

In Chap. IV. § 5. it was said, that one of the first functions of
imagination was traversing the scenes of history, and forcing the
facts to become again visible. But there is so little of such force
in written history, that it is no marvel there should be none
hitherto in painting. There does not exist, as far as I know, in the
world a single example of a good historical picture (that is to say,
of one which, allowing for necessary dimness in art as compared with
nature, yet answers nearly the same ends in our minds as the sight
of the real event would have answered); the reason being, the
universal endeavor to get _effects_ instead of facts, already shown
as the root of false idealism. True historical ideal, founded on
sense, correctness of knowledge, and purpose of usefulness, does not
yet exist; the production of it is a task which the closing
nineteenth century may propose to itself.

§ 18. Another point is to be observed. I do not, as the reader may
have lately perceived, insist on the distinction between historical
and poetical painting, because, as noted in the 22nd paragraph of
the third chapter, all great painting must be both.

Nevertheless, a certain distinction must generally exist between men
who, like Horace Vernet, David, or Domenico Tintoret, would employ
themselves in painting, more or less graphically, the outward
verities of passing events--battles, councils, &c.--of their day
(who, supposing them to work worthily of their mission, would
become, properly so called, historical or narrative painters); and
men who sought, in scenes of perhaps less outward importance, "noble
grounds for noble emotion;"--who would be, in a certain separate
sense, _poetical_ painters, some of them taking for subjects events
which had actually happened, and others themes from the poets; or,
better still, becoming poets themselves in the entire sense, and
inventing the story as they painted it. Painting seems to me only
just to be beginning, in this sense also, to take its proper
position beside literature, and the pictures of the "Awakening
Conscience," "Huguenot," and such others, to be the first fruits of
its new effort.

§ 19. Finally, as far as I can observe, it is a constant law that
the greatest men, whether poets or historians, live entirely in
their own age, and that the greatest fruits of their work are
gathered out of their own age. Dante paints Italy in the thirteenth
century; Chaucer, England in the fourteenth; Masaccio, Florence in
the fifteenth; Tintoret, Venice in the sixteenth;--all of them
utterly regardless of anachronism and minor error of every kind, but
getting always vital truth out of the vital present.

§ 20. If it be said that Shakspere wrote perfect historical plays on
subjects belonging to the preceding centuries, I answer, that they
_are_ perfect plays just because there is no care about centuries in
them, but a life which all men recognise for the human life of all
time; and this it is, not because Shakspere sought to give universal
truth, but because, painting honestly and completely from the men
about him, he painted that human nature which is, indeed, constant
enough,--a rogue in the fifteenth century being, _at heart_, what a
rogue is in the nineteenth and was in the twelfth; and an honest or
a knightly man being, in like manner, very similar to other such at
any other time. And the work of these great idealists is, therefore,
always universal; not because it is _not portrait_, but because it
is _complete_ portrait down to the heart, which is the same in all
ages: and the work of the mean idealists is _not_ universal, not
because it is portrait, but because it is _half_ portrait,--of the
outside, the manners and the dress, not of the heart. Thus Tintoret
and Shakspere paint, both of them, simply Venetian and English
nature as they saw it in their time, down to the root; and it does
for _all_ time; but as for any care to cast themselves into the
particular ways and tones of thought, or custom, of past time in
their historical work, you will find it in neither of them, nor in
any other perfectly great man that I know of.

§ 21. If there had been no vital truth in their present, it is hard to
say what these men could have done. I suppose, primarily, they would
not have existed; that they, and the matter they have to treat of, are
given together, and that the strength of the nation and its historians
correlatively rise and fall--Herodotus springing out of the dust of
Marathon. It is also hard to say how far our better general
acquaintance with minor details of past history may make us able to
turn the shadow on the imaginative dial backwards, and naturally to
live, and even live strongly if we choose, in past periods; but this
main truth will always be unshaken, that the only historical painting
deserving the name is portraiture of our own living men and our own
passing times,[29] and that all efforts to summon up the events of
bygone periods, though often useful and touching, must come under an
inferior class of poetical painting; nor will it, I believe, ever be
much followed as their main work by the strongest men, but only by the
weaker and comparatively sentimental (rather than imaginative) groups.
This marvellous first half of the nineteenth century has in this
matter, as in nearly all others, been making a double blunder. It has,
under the name of improvement, done all it could to EFFACE THE RECORDS
which departed ages have left of themselves, while it has declared the
FORGERY OF FALSE RECORDS of these same ages to be the great work of
its historical painters! I trust that in a few years more we shall
come somewhat to our senses in the matter, and begin to perceive that
our duty is to preserve what the past has had to say for itself, and
to say for ourselves also what shall be true for the future. Let us
strive, with just veneration for that future, first to do what is
worthy to be spoken, and then to speak it faithfully; and, with
veneration for the past, recognize that it is indeed in the power of
love to preserve the monument, but not of incantation to raise the
dead.

  [24] The word "ideal" is used in this limited sense in the chapter
       on Generic Beauty in the second volume, but under protest.
       See § 4 in that chapter.

  [25] II. ix. 209.

  [26] "And yet you have just said it shall be at such time and
       place as Homer chooses. Is not this _altering_?" No; wait a
       little, and read on.

  [27] See Plate XXI. in Chap. III. Vol. IV.

  [28] The reader should, of course, refer for further details on
       this subject to the chapters on Imagination in Vol. II., of
       which I am only glancing now at the practical results.

  [29] See Edinburgh Lectures, p. 217.




CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE TRUE IDEAL: THIRDLY, GROTESQUE.


§ 1. I have already, in the Stones of Venice, had occasion to
analyze, as far as I was able, the noble nature and power of
grotesque conception; I am not sorry occasionally to refer the
reader to that work, the fact being that it and this are parts of
one whole, divided merely as I had occasion to follow out one or
other of its branches; for I have always considered architecture as
an essential part of landscape; and I think the study of its best
styles and real meaning one of the necessary functions of the
landscape-painter; as, in like manner, the architect cannot be a
master-workman until all his designs are guided by understanding of
the wilder beauty of pure nature. But, be this as it may, the
discussion of the grotesque element belonged most properly to the
essay on architecture, in which that element must always find its
fullest development.

§ 2. The Grotesque is in that chapter[30] divided principally into
three kinds:

(A). Art arising from healthful but irrational play of the
imagination in times of rest.

(B). Art arising from irregular and accidental contemplation of
terrible things; or evil in general.

(C). Art arising from the confusion of the imagination by the
presence of truths which it cannot wholly grasp.

It is the central form of this art, arising from contemplation of
evil, which forms the link of connection between it and the
sensualist ideals, as pointed out above in the second paragraph of
the sixth chapter, the fact being that the imagination, when at
play, is curiously like bad children, and likes to play with fire;
in its entirely serious moods it dwells by preference on beautiful
and sacred images, but in its mocking or playful moods it is apt to
jest, sometimes bitterly, with undercurrent of sternest pathos,
sometimes waywardly, sometimes slightly and wickedly, with death and
sin; hence an enormous mass of grotesque art, some most noble and
useful, as Holbein's Dance of Death, and Albert Durer's Knight and
Death,[31] going down gradually through various conditions of less
and less seriousness into an art whose only end is that of mere
excitement, or amusement by terror, like a child making mouths at
another, more or less redeemed by the degree of wit or fancy in the
grimace it makes, as in the demons of Teniers and such others; and,
lower still, in the demonology of the stage.

§ 3. The form arising from an entirely healthful and open play of
the imagination, as in Shakspere's Ariel and Titania, and in Scott's
White Lady, is comparatively rare. It hardly ever is free from some
slight taint of the inclination to evil; still more rarely is it,
when so free, natural to the mind; for the moment we begin to
contemplate sinless beauty we are apt to get serious; and moral
fairy tales, and such other innocent work, are hardly ever truly,
that is to say, naturally imaginative; but for the most part
laborious inductions and compositions. The moment any real vitality
enters them, they are nearly sure to become satirical, or slightly
gloomy, and so connect themselves with the evil-enjoying branch.

§ 4. The third form of the Grotesque is a thoroughly noble one. It
is that which arises out of the use or fancy of tangible signs to
set forth an otherwise less expressible truth; including nearly the
whole range of symbolical and allegorical art and poetry. Its
nobleness has been sufficiently insisted upon in the place before
referred to. (Chapter on Grotesque Renaissance, §§ LXIII. LXIV. &c.)
Of its practical use, especially in painting, deeply despised among
us, because grossly misunderstood, a few words must be added here.

A fine grotesque is the expression, in a moment, by a series of
symbols thrown together in bold and fearless connection, of truths
which it would have taken a long time to express in any verbal way,
and of which the connection is left for the beholder to work out
for himself; the gaps, left or overleaped by the haste of the
imagination, forming the grotesque character.

§ 5. For instance, Spenser desires to tell us, (1.) that envy is the
most untamable and unappeasable of the passions, not to be soothed
by any kindness; (2.) that with continual labor it invents evil
thoughts out of its own heart; (3.) that even in this, its power of
doing harm is partly hindered by the decaying and corrupting nature
of the evil it lives in; (4.) that it looks every way, and that
whatever it sees is altered and discolored by its own nature; (5.)
which discoloring, however, is to it a veil, or disgraceful dress,
in the sight of others; (6.) and that it never is free from the most
bitter suffering, (7.) which cramps all its acts and movements,
enfolding and crushing it while it torments. All this it has
required a somewhat long and languid sentence for me to say in
unsymbolical terms,--not, by the way, that they _are_ unsymbolical
altogether, for I have been forced, whether I would or not, to use
_some_ figurative words; but even with this help the sentence is
long and tiresome, and does not with any vigor represent the truth.
It would take some prolonged enforcement of each sentence to make it
felt, in ordinary ways of talking. But Spenser puts it all into a
grotesque, and it is done shortly and at once, so that we feel it
fully, and see it, and never forget it. I have numbered above the
statements which had to be made. I now number them with the same
numbers, as they occur in the several pieces of the grotesque:--

              "And next to him malicious Envy rode
         (1.) Upon a ravenous wolfe, and (2. 3.) still did chaw
              Between his cankred[32] teeth a venemous tode
              That all the poison ran about his jaw.
      (4. 5.) All in a kirtle of discolourd say
              He clothed was, y-paynted full of eies;
         (6.) And in his bosome secretly there lay
              An hatefull snake, the which his tail uptyes
         (7.) In many folds, and mortall sting implyes."

There is the whole thing in nine lines; or, rather, in one image,
which will hardly occupy any room at all on the mind's shelves, but
can be lifted out, whole, whenever we want it. All noble grotesques
are concentrations of this kind, and the noblest convey truths
which nothing else could convey; and not only so, but convey them,
in minor cases with a delightfulness,--in the higher instances with
an awfulness,--which no mere utterance of the symbolised truth would
have possessed, but which belongs to the effort of the mind to
unweave the riddle, or to the sense it has of there being an
infinite power and meaning in the thing seen, beyond all that is
apparent therein, giving the highest sublimity even to the most
trivial object so presented and so contemplated.

      "'Jeremiah, what seest thou?'
      'I see a seething pot, and the face thereof is toward the north,
      'Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the
         inhabitants of the land.'"

And thus in all ages and among all nations, grotesque idealism has
been the element through which the most appalling and eventful truth
has been wisely conveyed, from the most sublime words of true
Revelation, to the [Greek: "all' hot' an Hêmionos basileus,"] &c., of
the oracles, and the more or less doubtful teaching of dreams; and so
down to ordinary poetry. No element of imagination has a wider range,
a more magnificent use, or so colossal a grasp of sacred truth.

§ 6. How, then, is this noble power best to be employed in the art
of painting?

We hear it not unfrequently asserted that symbolism or
personification should not be introduced in painting at all. Such
assertions are in their grounds unintelligible, and in their
substance absurd. Whatever is in words described as visible, may
with all logical fitness[33] be rendered so by colors, and not only
is this a legitimate branch of ideal art, but I believe there is
hardly any other so widely useful and instructive; and I heartily
wish that every great allegory which the poets ever invented were
powerfully put on canvas, and easily accessible by all men, and that
our artists were perpetually exciting themselves to invent more. And
as far as authority bears on the question, the simple fact is that
allegorical painting has been the delight of the greatest men and of
the wisest multitudes, from the beginning of art, and will be till
art expires. Orcagua's Triumph of Death; Simon Memmi's frescoes in
the Spanish Chapel; Giotto's principal works at Assisi, and partly
at the Arena; Michael Angelo's two best statues, the Night and Day;
Albert Durer's noble Melancholy, and hundreds more of his best
works; a full third, I should think, of the works of Tintoret and
Veronese, and nearly as large a portion of those of Raphael and
Rubens, are entirely symbolical or personifiant; and, except in the
case of the last-named painter, are always among the most
interesting works the painters executed. The greater and more
thoughtful the artists, the more they delight in symbolism, and the
more fearlessly they employ it. Dead symbolism, second-hand
symbolism, pointless symbolism, are indeed objectionable enough; but
so are most other things that are dead, second-hand, and pointless.
It is also true that both symbolism and personification are somewhat
more apt than most things to have their edges taken off by too much
handling; and what with our modern Fames, Justices, and various
metaphorical ideals, largely used for signs and other such purposes,
there is some excuse for our not well knowing what the real power of
personification is. But that power is gigantic and inexhaustible,
and ever to be grasped with peculiar joy by the painter, because it
permits him to introduce picturesque elements and flights of fancy
into his work, which otherwise would be utterly inadmissible; to
bring the wild beasts of the desert into the room of state, fill the
air with inhabitants as well as the earth, and render the least
(visibly) interesting incidents themes for the most thrilling drama.
Even Tintoret might sometimes have been hard put to it, when he had
to fill a large panel in the Ducal Palace with the portrait of a
nowise interesting Doge, unless he had been able to lay a winged
lion beside him, ten feet long from the nose to the tail, asleep
upon the Turkey carpet; and Rubens could certainly have made his
flatteries of Mary of Medicis palatable to no one but herself,
without the help of rosy-cheeked goddesses of abundance, and
seven-headed hydras of rebellion.

§ 7. For observe, not only does the introduction of these imaginary
beings permit greater fantasticism of _incident_, but also infinite
fantasticism of _treatment_; and, I believe, so far from the pursuit
of the false ideal having in any wise exhausted the realms of
fantastic imagination, those realms have hardly yet been entered, and
that a universe of noble dream-land lies before us, yet to be
conquered. For, hitherto, when fantastic creatures have been
introduced, either the masters have been so realistic in temper that
they made the spirits as substantial as their figures of flesh and
blood,--as Rubens, and, for the most part, Tintoret; or else they have
been weak and unpractised in realization, and have painted transparent
or cloudy spirits because they had no power of painting grand ones.
But if a really great painter, thoroughly capable of giving
substantial truth, and master of the elements of pictorial effect
which have been developed by modern art, would solemnly, and yet
fearlessly, cast his fancy free in the spiritual world, and faithfully
follow out such masters of that world as Dante and Spenser, there
seems no limit to the splendor of thought which painting might
express. Consider, for instance, how the ordinary personifications of
Charity oscillate between the mere nurse of many children, of
Reynolds, and the somewhat painfully conceived figure with flames
issuing from the heart, of Giotto; and how much more significance
might be given to the representation of Love, by amplifying with
tenderness the thought of Dante, "Tanta rossa, che a pena fora dentro
al foco nota,"[34] that is to say, by representing the loveliness of
her face and form as all flushed with glow of crimson light, and, as
she descended through heaven, all its clouds colored by her presence
as they are by sunset. In the hands of a feeble painter, such an
attempt would end in mere caricature; but suppose it taken up by
Correggio, adding to his power of flesh-painting the (not
inconsistent) feeling of Angelico in design, and a portion of Turner's
knowledge of the clouds. There is nothing impossible in such a
conjunction as this. Correggio, trained in another school, might have
even himself shown some such extent of grasp; and in Turner's picture
of the dragon of the Hesperides, Jason, vignette to Voyage of Columbus
("Slowly along the evening sky they went"), and such others, as well
as in many of the works of Watts and Rosetti, is already visible, as I
trust, the dawn of a new era of art, in a true unison of the grotesque
with the realistic power.

§ 8. There is, however, unquestionably, a severe limit, in the case
of all inferior masters, to the degree in which they may venture to
realize grotesque conception, and partly, also, a limit in the
nature of the thing itself, there being many grotesque ideas which
may be with safety suggested dimly by words or slight lines, but
which will hardly bear being painted into perfect definiteness. It
is very difficult, in reasoning on this matter, to divest ourselves
of the prejudices which have been forced upon us by the base
grotesque of men like Bronzino, who, having no true imagination, are
apt, more than others, to try by startling realism to enforce the
monstrosity that has no terror in itself. But it is nevertheless
true, that, unless in the hands of the very greatest men, the
grotesque seems better to be expressed merely in line, or light and
shade, or mere abstract color, so as to mark it for a thought rather
than a substantial fact. Even if Albert Durer had perfectly painted
his Knight and Death, I question if we should feel it so great a
thought as we do in the dark engraving. Blake, perfectly powerful in
the etched grotesque of the book of Job, fails always more or less
as soon as he adds color; not merely for want of power (his eye for
color being naturally good), but because his subjects seem, in a
sort, insusceptible of completion; and the two inexpressibly noble
and pathetic woodcut grotesques of Alfred Rethel's, Death the
Avenger, and Death the Friend, could not, I think, but with
disadvantage, be advanced into pictorial color.

And what is thus doubtfully true of the pathetic grotesque, is
assuredly and always true of the jesting grotesque. So far as it
expresses any transient flash of wit or satire, the less labor of
line, or color, given to its expression the better; elaborate
jesting being always intensely painful.

§ 9. For these several reasons, it seems not only permissible, but
even desirable, that the art by which the grotesque is expressed
should be more or less imperfect, and this seems a most beneficial
ordinance as respects the human race in general. For the grotesque
being not only a most forceful instrument of teaching, but a most
natural manner of expression, springing as it does at once from any
tendency to playfulness in minds highly comprehensive of truth; and
being also one of the readiest ways in which such satire or wit as
may be possessed by men of any inferior rank of mind can be for
perpetuity expressed, it becomes on all grounds desirable that what
is suggested in times of play should be rightly sayable without
toil; and what occurs to men of inferior power or knowledge, sayable
without any high degree of skill. Hence it is an infinite good to
mankind when there is full acceptance of the grotesque, slightly
sketched or expressed; and, if field for such expression be frankly
granted, an enormous mass of intellectual power is turned to
everlasting use, which, in this present century of ours, evaporates
in street gibing or vain revelling; all the good wit and satire
expiring in daily talk, (like foam on wine,) which in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries had a permitted and useful expression in
the arts of sculpture and illumination, like foam fixed into
chalcedony. It is with a view (not the least important among many
others bearing upon art) to the reopening of this great field of
human intelligence, long entirely closed, that I am striving to
introduce Gothic architecture into daily domestic use; and to revive
the art of illumination, properly so called; not the art of
miniature-painting in books, or on vellum, which has ridiculously
been confused with it; but of making _writing_, simple writing,
beautiful to the eye, by investing it with the great chord of
perfect color, blue, purple, scarlet, white, and gold, and in that
chord of color, permitting the continual play of the fancy of the
writer in every species of grotesque imagination, carefully
excluding shadow; the distinctive difference between illumination
and painting proper, being, that illumination admits _no_ shadows,
but only gradations of pure color. And it is in this respect that
illumination is specially fitted for grotesque expression; for, when
I used the term "_pictorial_ color," just now, in speaking of the
completion of the grotesque of Death the Avenger, I meant to
distinguish such color from the abstract, shadeless hues which are
eminently fitted for grotesque thought. The requirement, respecting
the slighter grotesque, is only that it shall be _incompletely_
expressed. It may have light and shade without color (as in etching
and sculpture), or color without light and shade (illumination), but
must not, except in the hands of the greatest masters, have both.
And for some conditions of the playful grotesque, the abstract
color is a much more delightful element of expression than the
abstract light and shade.

§ 10. Such being the manifold and precious uses of the true
grotesque, it only remains for us to note carefully how it is to be
distinguished from the false and vicious grotesque which results
from idleness, instead of noble rest; from malice, instead of the
solemn contemplation of necessary evil; and from general degradation
of the human spirit, instead of its subjection, or confusion, by
thoughts too high for it. It is easy for the reader to conceive how
different the fruits of two such different states of mind _must_ be;
and yet how like in many respects, and apt to be mistaken, one for
the other;--how the jest which springs from mere fatuity, and vacant
want of penetration or purpose, is everlastingly, infinitely,
separated from, and yet may sometimes be mistaken for, the bright,
playful, fond, far-sighted jest of Plato, or the bitter, purposeful,
sorrowing jest of Aristophanes; how, again, the horror which springs
from guilty love of foulness and sin, may be often mistaken for the
inevitable horror which a great mind must sometimes feel in the full
and penetrative sense of their presence;--how, finally, the vague
and foolish inconsistencies of undisciplined dream or reverie may be
mistaken for the compelled inconsistencies of thoughts too great to
be well sustained, or clearly uttered. It is easy, I say, to
understand what a difference there must indeed be between these; and
yet how difficult it may be always to define it, or lay down laws
for the discovery of it, except by the just instinct of minds set
habitually in all things to discern right from wrong.

§ 11. Nevertheless, one good and characteristic instance may be of
service in marking the leading directions in which the contrast is
discernible. On the opposite page, Plate I., I have put, beside each
other, a piece of true grotesque, from the Lombard-Gothic, and of
false grotesque from classical (Roman) architecture. They are both
griffins; the one on the left carries on his back one of the main
pillars of the porch of the cathedral of Verona; the one on the
right is on the frieze of the temple of Antoninus and Faustina at
Rome, much celebrated by Renaissance and bad modern architects.

In some respects, however, this classical griffin deserves its
reputation. It is exceedingly fine in lines of composition, and, I
believe (I have not examined the original closely), very exquisite
in execution. For these reasons, it is all the better for our
purpose. I do not want to compare the worst false grotesque with the
best true, but rather, on the contrary, the best false with the
simplest true, in order to see how the delicately wrought lie fails
in the presence of the rough truth; for rough truth in the present
case it is, the Lombard sculpture being altogether untoward and
imperfect in execution.[35]

§ 12. "Well, but," the reader says, "what do you mean by calling
_either_ of them true? There never were such beasts in the world as
either of these?"

No, never: but the difference is, that the Lombard workman did
really see a griffin in his imagination, and carved it from the
life, meaning to declare to all ages that he had verily seen with
his immortal eyes such a griffin as that; but the classical workman
never saw a griffin at all, nor anything else; but put the whole
thing together by line and rule.

§ 13. "How do you know that?"

Very easily. Look at the two, and think over them. You know a
griffin is a beast composed of lion and eagle. The classical workman
set himself to fit these together in the most ornamental way
possible. He accordingly carves a sufficiently satisfactory lion's
body, then attaches very gracefully cut wings to the sides: then,
because he cannot get the eagle's head on the broad lion's
shoulders, fits the two together by something like a horse's neck
(some griffins being wholly composed of a horse and eagle), then,
finding the horse's neck look weak and unformidable, he strengthens
it by a series of bosses, like vertebrae, in front, and by a series
of spiny cusps, instead of a mane, on the ridge; next, not to lose
the whole leonine character about the neck, he gives a remnant of
the lion's beard, turned into a sort of griffin's whisker, and
nicely curled and pointed; then an eye, probably meant to look grand
and abstracted, and therefore neither lion's nor eagle's; and,
finally, an eagle's beak, very sufficiently studied from a real
one. The whole head being, it seems to him, still somewhat wanting
in weight and power, he brings forward the right wing behind it, so
as to enclose it with a broad line. This is the finest thing in the
composition, and very masterly, both in thought, and in choice of
the exactly right point where the lines of wing and beak should
intersect (and it may be noticed in passing, that all men, who can
compose at all, have this habit of encompassing or governing broken
lines with broad ones, wherever it is possible, of which we shall
see many instances hereafter). The whole griffin, thus gracefully
composed, being, nevertheless, when all is done, a very composed
griffin, is set to very quiet work, and raising his left foot, to
balance his right wing, sets it on the tendril of a flower so
lightly as not even to bend it down, though, in order to reach it,
his left leg is made half as long again as his right.

§ 14. We may be pretty sure, if the carver had ever seen a griffin,
he would have reported of him as doing something else than _that_
with his feet. Let us see what the Lombardic workman saw him doing.

Remember, first, the griffin, though part lion and part eagle, has
the united _power of both_. He is not merely a bit of lion and a bit
of eagle, but whole lion, incorporate with whole eagle. So when we
really see one, we may be quite sure we shall not find him wanting
in anything necessary to the might either of beast or bird.

Well, among things essential to the might of a lion, perhaps, on the
whole, the most essential are his _teeth_. He could get on pretty
well even without his claws, usually striking his prey down with a
blow, woundless; but he could by no means get on without his teeth.
Accordingly, we see that the real or Lombardic griffin has the
carnivorous teeth bare to the root, and the peculiar hanging of the
jaw at the back, which marks the flexible and gaping mouth of the
devouring tribes.

Again; among things essential to the might of an eagle, next to his
wings (which are of course prominent in both examples), are his
_claws_. It is no use his being able to tear anything with his beak,
if he cannot first hold it in his claws; he has comparatively no
leonine power of striking with his feet, but a magnificent power of
grip with them. Accordingly, we see that the real griffin, while his
feet are heavy enough to strike like a lion's, has them also
extended far enough to give them the eagle's grip with the back
claw; and has, moreover, some of the bird-like wrinkled skin over
the whole foot, marking this binding power the more; and that he has
besides verily got something to hold with his feet, other than a
flower, of which more presently.

§ 15. Now observe, the Lombardic workman did not do all this because
he had thought it out, as you and I are doing together; he never
thought a bit about it. He simply saw the beast; saw it as plainly
as you see the writing on this page, and of course could not be
wrong in anything he told us of it.

Well, what more does he tell us? Another thing, remember, essential
to an eagle is that it should fly _fast_. It is no use its having
wings at all if it is to be impeded in the use of them. Now it would
be difficult to impede him more thoroughly than by giving him two
cocked ears to catch the wind.

Look, again, at the two beasts. You see the false griffin _has_ them
so set, and, consequently, as he flew, there would be a continual
humming of the wind on each side of his head, and he would have an
infallible earache when he got home. But the real griffin has his
ears flat to his head, and all the hair of them blown back, even to
a point, by his fast flying, and the aperture is downwards, that he
may hear anything going on upon the earth, where his prey is. In the
false griffin the aperture is upwards.

§ 16. Well, what more? As he is made up of the natures of lion and
eagle, we may be very certain that a real griffin is, on the whole,
fond of eating, and that his throat will look as if he occasionally
took rather large pieces, besides being flexible enough to let him
bend and stretch his head in every direction as he flies.

Look, again, at the two beasts. You see the false one has got those
bosses upon his neck like vertebrae, which must be infinitely in his
way when he is swallowing, and which are evidently inseparable, so
that he cannot _stretch_ his neck any more than a horse. But the
real griffin is all loose about the neck, evidently being able to
make it almost as much longer as he likes; to stretch and bend it
anywhere, and swallow anything, besides having some of the grand
strength of the bull's dewlap in it when at rest.

§ 17. What more? Having both lion and eagle in him, it is probable
that the real griffin will have an infinite look of repose as well
as power of activity. One of the notablest things about a lion is
his magnificent _indolence_, his look of utter disdain of trouble
when there is no occasion for it; as, also, one of the notablest
things about an eagle is his look of inevitable vigilance, even when
quietest. Look, again, at the two beasts. You see the false griffin
is quite sleepy and dead in the eye, thus contradicting his eagle's
nature, but is putting himself to a great deal of unnecessary
trouble with his paws, holding one in a most painful position merely
to touch a flower, and bearing the whole weight of his body on the
other, thus contradicting his lion's nature.

But the real griffin is primarily, with his eagle's nature, wide
awake; evidently quite ready for whatever may happen; and with his
lion's nature, laid all his length on his belly, prone and
ponderous; his two paws as simply put out before him as a drowsy
puppy's on a drawingroom hearth-rug; not but that he has got
something to do with them, worthy of such paws; but he takes not one
whit more trouble about it than is absolutely necessary. He has
merely got a poisonous winged dragon to hold, and for such a little
matter as that, he may as well do it lying down and at his ease,
looking out at the same time for any other piece of work in his way.
He takes the dragon by the middle, one paw under the wing, another
above, gathers him up into a knot, puts two or three of his claws
well into his back, crashing through the scales of it and wrinkling
all the flesh up from the wound, flattens him down against the
ground, and so lets him do what he likes. The dragon tries to bite
him, but can only bring his head round far enough to get hold of his
own wing, which he bites in agony instead; flapping the griffin's
dewlap with it, and wriggling his tail up against the griffin's
throat; the griffin being, as to these minor proceedings, entirely
indifferent, sure that the dragon's body cannot drag itself one
hair's breadth off those ghastly claws, and that its head can do no
harm but to itself.

§ 18. Now observe how in all this, through every separate part and
action of the creature, the imagination is _always_ right. It
evidently _cannot_ err; it meets every one of our requirements
respecting the griffin as simply as if it were gathering up the
bones of the real creature out of some ancient rock. It does not
itself know or care, any more than the peasant laboring with his
spade and axe, what is wanted to meet our theories or fancies. It
knows simply what is there, and brings out the positive creature,
errorless, unquestionable. So it is throughout art, and in all that
the imagination does; if anything be wrong it is not the
imagination's fault, but some inferior faculty's, which would have
its foolish say in the matter, and meddled with the imagination, and
said, the bones ought to be put together tail first, or upside down.

§ 19. This, however, we need not be amazed at, because the very
essence of the imagination is already defined to be the seeing to
the heart; and it is not therefore wonderful that it should never
err; but it is wonderful, on the other hand, how the composing
legalism does _nothing else_ than err. One would have thought that,
by mere chance, in this or the other element of griffin, the
griffin-composer might have struck out a truth; that he might have
had the luck to set the ears back, or to give some grasp to the
claw. But, no; from beginning to end it is evidently impossible for
him to be anything but wrong; his whole soul is instinct with lies;
no veracity can come within hail of him; to him, all regions of
right and life are for ever closed.

§ 20. And another notable point is, that while the imagination
receives truth in this simple way, it is all the while receiving
statutes of composition also, far more noble than those for the sake
of which the truth was lost by the legalist. The ornamental lines in
the classical griffin appear at first finer than in the other; but
they only appear so because they are more commonplace and more
palpable. The subtlety of the sweeping and rolling curves in the
real griffin, the way they waver and change and fold, down the neck,
and along the wing, and in and out among the serpent coils, is
incomparably grander, merely as grouping of ornamental line, than
anything in the other; nor is it fine as ornamental only, but as
massively useful, giving weight of stone enough to answer the
entire purpose of pedestal sculpture. Note, especially, the
insertion of the three plumes of the dragon's broken wing in the
outer angle, just under the large coil of his body; this filling of
the gap being one of the necessities, not of the pedestal block
merely, but a means of getting mass and breadth, which all composers
desire more or less, but which they seldom so perfectly accomplish.

So that taking the truth first, the honest imagination gains
everything; it has its griffinism, and grace, and usefulness, all at
once: but the false composer, caring for nothing but himself and his
rules, loses everything,--griffinism, grace, and all.

§ 21. I believe the reader will now sufficiently see how the terms
"true" and "false" are in the most accurate sense attachable to the
opposite branches of what might appear at first, in both cases, the
merest wildness of inconsistent reverie. But they are even to be
attached, in a deeper sense than that in which we have hitherto used
them, to these two compositions. For the imagination hardly ever
works in this intense way, unencumbered by the inferior faculties,
unless it be under the influence of some solemn purpose or
sentiment. And to all the falseness and all the verity of these two
ideal creatures this farther falsehood and verity have yet to be
added, that the classical griffin has, at least in this place, no
other intent than that of covering a level surface with entertaining
form; but the Lombardic griffin is a profound expression of the most
passionate symbolism. Under its eagle's wings are two wheels,[36]
which mark it as connected, in the mind of him who wrought it, with
the living creatures of the vision of Ezekiel: "When they went, the
wheels went by them, and whithersoever the spirit was to go, they
went, and the wheels were lifted up over against them, for the
spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels." Thus signed, the
winged shape becomes at once one of the acknowledged symbols of the
Divine power; and, in its unity of lion and eagle, the workman of
the middle ages always means to set forth the unity of the human and
divine natures,[37] In this unity it bears up the pillars of the
Church, set for ever as the corner stone. And the faithful and
true imagination beholds it, in this unity, with everlasting
vigilance and calm omnipotence, restrain the seed of the serpent
crushed upon the earth; leaving the head of it free, only for a
time, that it may inflict in its fury profounder destruction upon
itself,--in this also full of deep meaning. The Divine power does
not slay the evil creature. It wounds and restrains it only. Its
final and _deadly_ wound is inflicted by itself.

[Illustration: 1. True and False Griffins. Mediæval. Classical.]

  [30] On the Grotesque Renaissance, vol. iii.

  [31] See Appendix I. Vol. IV. "Modern Grotesque."

  [32] Cankred--because he cannot then bite hard.

  [33] Though, perhaps, only in a subordinate degree. See farther
       on, § 8.

  [34] "So red, that in the midst of the fire she could hardly have
       been seen."

  [35] If there be any inaccuracy in the right-hand griffin, I am
       sorry, but am not answerable for it, as the plate has been
       faithfully reduced from a large French lithograph, the best I
       could find. The other is from a sketch of my own.

  [36] At the extremities of the wings,--not seen in the plate.

  [37] Compare the Purgatorio, canto xxix. &c.




CHAPTER IX.

OF FINISH.


§ 1. I am afraid the reader must be, by this time, almost tired of
hearing about truth. But I cannot help this; the more I have
examined the various forms of art, and exercised myself in receiving
their differently intended impressions, the more I have found this
truthfulness a final test, the only test of lasting power; and,
although our concern in this part of our inquiry is, professedly,
with the beauty which blossoms out of truth, still I find myself
compelled always to gather it by the stalk, not by the petals. I
cannot hold the beauty, nor be sure of it for a moment, but by
feeling for that strong stem.

We have, in the preceding chapters, glanced through the various
operations of the imaginative power of man; with this almost
painfully monotonous result, that its greatness and honor were
always simply in proportion to the quantity of truth it grasped. And
now the question, left undetermined some hundred pages back (Chap.
II. § 6), recurs to us in a simpler form than it could before. How
far is this true imagination to be truly represented? How far should
the perfect conception of Pallas be so given as to look like Pallas
herself, rather than like the picture of Pallas?

§ 2. A question, this, at present of notable interest, and demanding
instant attention. For it seemed to us, in reasoning about Dante's
views of art, that he was, or might be, right in desiring realistic
completeness; and yet, in what we have just seen of the grotesque
ideal, it seemed there was a certain desirableness in incompleteness.
And the schools of art in Europe are, at this moment, set in two
hostile ranks,--not nobly hostile, but spitefully and scornfully,
having for one of the main grounds of their dispute the apparently
simple question, how far a picture may be carried forward in detail,
or how soon it may be considered as finished.

I propose, therefore, in the present chapter, to examine, as
thoroughly as I can, the real signification of this word, Finish, as
applied to art, and to see if in this, as in other matters, our
almost tiresome test is not the only right one; whether there be not
a _fallacious_ finish and a _faithful_ finish, and whether the
dispute, which seems to be only about completion and incompletion,
has not therefore, at the bottom of it, the old and deep grounds of
fallacy and fidelity.

§ 3. Observe, first, there are two great and separate senses in
which we call a thing finished, or well finished. One, which refers
to the mere neatness and completeness of the actual work, as we
speak of a well-finished knife-handle or ivory toy (as opposed to
ill-cut ones); and, secondly, a sense which refers to the effect
produced by the thing done, as we call a picture well-finished if it
is so full in its details, as to produce the effect of reality on
the spectator. And, in England, we seem at present to value highly
the first sort of finish which belongs to work_manship_, in our
manufactures and general doings of any kind, but to despise totally
the impressive finish which belongs to the _work_; and therefore we
like smooth ivories better than rough ones,--but careless scrawls or
daubs better than the most complete paintings. Now, I believe that
we exactly reverse the fitness of judgment in this matter, and that
we ought, on the contrary, to despise the finish of work_manship_,
which is done for vanity's sake, and to love the finish of _work_,
which is done for truth's sake,--that we ought, in a word, to finish
our ivory toys more roughly, and our pictures more delicately.

Let us think over this matter.

§ 4. Perhaps one of the most remarkable points of difference between
the English and Continental nations is in the degree of finish given to
their ordinary work. It is enough to cross from Dover to Calais to feel
this difference; and to travel farther only increases the sense of it.
English windows for the most part fit their sashes, and their woodwork
is neatly planed and smoothed; French windows are larger, heavier, and
framed with wood that looks as if it had been cut to its shape with a
hatchet; they have curious and cumbrous fastenings, and can only be
forced asunder or together by some ingenuity and effort, and even then
not properly. So with everything else--French, Italian, and German,
and, as far as I know, Continental. Foreign drawers do not slide as
well as ours: foreign knives do not cut so well; foreign wheels do not
turn so well, and we commonly plume ourselves much upon this, believing
that generally the English people do their work better and more
thoroughly, or as they say, "turn it out of their hands in better
style," than foreigners. I do not know how far this is really the case.
There may be a flimsy neatness, as well as a substantial roughness; it
does not necessarily follow that the window which shuts easiest will
last the longest, or that the harness which glitters the most is
assuredly made of the toughest leather. I am afraid, that if this
peculiar character of finish in our workmanship ever arose from a
greater heartiness and thoroughness in our ways of doing things, it
does so only now in the case of our best manufacturers; and that a
great deal of the work done in England, however good in appearance, is
but treacherous and rotten in substance. Still, I think that there is
really in the English mind, for the most part, a stronger desire to do
things as well as they can be done, and less inclination to put up with
inferiorities or insufficiencies, than in general characterise the
temper of foreigners. There is in this conclusion no ground for
national vanity; for though the desire to do things as well as they can
be done at first appears like a virtue, it is certainly not so in all
its forms. On the contrary, it proceeds in nine cases out of ten more
from vanity than conscientiousness; and that, moreover, often a weak
vanity. I suppose that as much finish is displayed in the fittings of
the private carriages of our young rich men as in any other department
of English manufacture; and that our St. James's Street cabs, dogcarts,
and liveries are singularly perfect in their way. But the feeling with
which this perfection is insisted upon (however desirable as a sign of
energy of purpose) is not in itself a peculiarly amiable or noble
feeling; neither is it an ignoble disposition which would induce a
country gentleman to put up with certain deficiencies in the appearance
of his country-made carriage. It is true that such philosophy may
degenerate into negligence, and that much thought and long discussion
would be needed before we could determine satisfactorily the limiting
lines between virtuous contentment and faultful carelessness; but at
all events we have no right at once to pronounce ourselves the wisest
people because we like to do all things in the best way. There are many
little things which to do admirably is to waste both time and cost; and
the real question is not so much whether we have done a given thing as
well as possible, as whether we have turned a given quantity of labor
to the best account.

§ 5. Now, so far from the labor's being turned to good account which is
given to our English "finishing," I believe it to be usually
destructive of the best powers of our workmen's minds. For it is
evident, in the first place, that there is almost always a useful and a
useless finish; the hammering and welding which are necessary to
produce a sword plate of the best quality, are useful finishing; the
polishing of its surface, useless.[38] In nearly all work this
distinction will, more or less, take place between substantial finish
and apparent finish, or what may be briefly characterized as "Make" and
"Polish." And so far as finish is bestowed for purposes of "make," I
have nothing to say against it. Even the vanity which displays itself
in giving strength to our work is rather a virtue than a vice. But so
far as finish is bestowed for purposes of "polish," there is much to be
said against it; this first, and very strongly, that the qualities
aimed at in common finishing, namely, smoothness, delicacy, or
fineness, _cannot_ in reality _exist_, in a degree worth admiring, in
anything done by human hands. Our best finishing is but coarse and
blundering work after all We may smooth, and soften, and sharpen till
we are sick at heart; but take a good magnifying glass to our miracle
of skill, and the invisible edge is a jagged saw, and the silky thread
a rugged cable, and the soft surface a granite desert. Let all the
ingenuity and all the art of the human race be brought to bear upon the
attainment of the utmost possible finish, and they could not do what is
done in the foot of a fly, or the film of a bubble. God alone can
finish; and the more intelligent the human mind becomes, the more the
infiniteness of interval is felt between human and divine work in this
respect. So then it is not a little absurd to weary ourselves in
struggling towards a point which we never can reach, and to exhaust our
strength in vain endeavors to produce qualities which exist inimitably
and inexhaustibly in the commonest things around us.

§ 6. But more than this: the fact is that in multitudes of instances,
instead of gaining greater fineness of finish by our work, we are only
destroying the fine finish of nature, and substituting coarseness and
imperfection. For instance, when a rock of any kind has lain for some
time exposed to the weather, Nature finishes it in her own way; first,
she takes wonderful pains about its forms, sculpturing it into
exquisite variety of dint and dimple, and rounding or hollowing it
into contours, which for fineness no human hand can follow; then she
colors it; and every one of her touches of color, instead of being a
powder mixed with oil, is a minute forest of living trees, glorious in
strength and beauty, and concealing wonders of structure, which in all
probability are mysteries even to the eyes of angels. Man comes and
digs up this finished and marvellous piece of work, which in his
ignorance he calls a "rough stone." He proceeds to finish it in _his_
fashion, that is, to split it in two, rend it into ragged blocks, and,
finally, to chisel its surface into a large number of lumps and knobs,
all equally shapeless, colorless, deathful, and frightful.[39] And the
block, thus disfigured, he calls "finished," and proceeds to build
therewith, and thinks himself great, forsooth, and an intelligent
animal. Whereas, all that he has really done is, to destroy with utter
ravage a piece of divine art, which, under the laws appointed by the
Deity to regulate his work in this world, it must take good twenty
years to produce the like of again. This he has destroyed, and has
himself given in its place a piece of work which needs no more
intelligence to do than a pholas has, or a worm, or the spirit which
throughout the world has authority over rending, rottenness, and
decay. I do not say that stone must not be cut; it needs to be cut for
certain uses; only I say that the cutting it is not "finishing," but
_un_finishing it; and that so far as the mere fact of chiselling goes,
the stone is ruined by the human touch. It is with it as with the
stones of the Jewish altar: "If thou lift up thy tool upon it thou
hast polluted it." In like manner a tree is a finished thing. But a
plank, though ever so polished, is not. We need stones and planks, as
we need food; but we no more bestow an additional admirableness upon
stone in hewing it, or upon a tree in sawing it, than upon an animal
in killing it.

§ 7. Well, but it will be said, there is certainly a kind of finish in
stone-cutting, and in every other art, which is meritorious, and which
consists in smoothing and refining as much as possible. Yes, assuredly
there is a meritorious finish. First, as it has just been said, that
which fits a thing for its uses,--as a stone to lie well in its place,
or the cog of an engine wheel to play well on another; and, secondly,
a finish belonging properly to the arts; but _that_ finish does not
consist in smoothing or polishing, but in the _completeness of the
expression of ideas_. For in painting, there is precisely the same
difference between the ends proposed in finishing that there is in
manufacture. Some artists finish for the finish' sake; dot their
pictures all over, as in some kinds of miniature-painting (when a wash
of color would have produced as good an effect); or polish their
pictures all over, making the execution so delicate that the touch of
the brush cannot be seen, for the sake of the smoothness merely, and
of the credit they may thus get for great labor; which kind of
execution, seen in great perfection in many works of the Dutch school,
and in those of Carlo Dolce, is that polished "language" against which
I have spoken at length in various portions of the first volume; nor
is it possible to speak of it with too great severity or contempt,
where it has been made an ultimate end.

But other artists finish for the impression's sake, not to show
their skill, nor to produce a smooth piece of work, but that they
may, with each stroke, render clearer the expression of knowledge.
And this sort of finish is not, properly speaking, so much
_completing_ the picture as _adding_ to it. It is not that what is
painted is more delicately done, but that infinitely _more_ is
painted. This finish is always noble, and, like all other noblest
things, hardly ever understood or appreciated. I must here endeavor,
more especially with respect to the state of quarrel between the
schools of living painters, to illustrate it thoroughly.

§ 8. In sketching the outline, suppose of the trunk of a tree, as in
Plate 2. (opposite) fig. 1., it matters comparatively little whether
the outline be given with a bold, or delicate line, so long as it is
_outline only_. The work is not more "finished" in one case than in
the other; it is only prepared for being seen at a greater or less
distance. The real refinement or finish of the line depends, not on
its thinness, but on its truly following the contours of the tree,
which it conventionally represents; conventionally, I say, because
there is no such line round the tree, in reality; and it is set down
not as an _imit_ation, but a _limit_ation of the form. But if we are
to add shade to it as in fig. 2., the outline must instantly be made
proportionally delicate, not for the sake of delicacy as such, but
because the outline will now, in many parts, stand not for
limitation of form merely, but for a portion of the _shadow_ within
that form. Now, as a limitation it was true, but as a shadow it
would be false, for there is no line of black shadow at the edge of
the stem. It must, therefore, be made so delicate as not to detach
itself from the rest of the shadow where shadow exists, and only to
be seen in the light where limitation is still necessary.

Observe, then, the "finish" of fig. 2. as compared with fig. 1.
consists, not in its greater delicacy, but in the addition of a
truth (shadow), a removal, in a great degree, of a conventionalism
(outline). All true finish consists in one or other of these things.
Now, therefore, if we are to "finish" farther we must _know_ more or
_see_ more about the tree. And as the plurality of persons who draw
trees know nothing of them, and will not look at them, it results
necessarily that the effort to finish is not only vain, but
unfinishes--does mischief. In the lower part of the plate, figs. 3,
4, 5, and 6. are facsimiles of pieces of line engraving, meant to
represent trunks of trees; 3. and 4. are the commonly accredited
types of tree-drawing among engravers in the eighteenth century; 5.
and 6. are quite modern; 3. is from a large and important plate by
Boydell, from Claude's Molten Calf, dated 1781; 4. by Boydell in
1776, from Rubens's Waggoner; 5. from a bombastic engraving,
published about twenty years ago by Meulemeester of Brussels, from
Raphael's Moses at the Burning Bush; and 6. from the foreground
of Miller's Modern Italy, after Turner.[40]

[Illustration: 2. Drawing of Tree-Stems.]

All these represent, as far as the engraving goes, simply _nothing_.
They are not "finished" in any sense but this,--that the paper has
been covered with lines. 4. is the best, because, in the original work
of Rubens, the lines of the boughs, and their manner of insertion in
the trunk, have been so strongly marked, that no engraving could quite
efface them; and, inasmuch as it represents these facts in the boughs,
that piece of engraving is more finished than the other examples,
while its own networked texture is still false and absurd; for there
is no texture of this knitted-stocking-like description on boughs; and
if there were, it would not be seen in the shadow, but in the light.
Miller's is spirited, and looks lustrous, but has no resemblance to
the original bough of Turner's, which is pale, and does not glitter.
The Netherlands work is, on the whole, the worst; because, in its
ridiculous double lines, it adds affectation and conceit to its
incapacity. But in all these cases the engravers have worked in total
ignorance both of what is meant by "drawing," and of the form of a
tree, covering their paper with certain lines, which they have been
taught to plough in copper, as a husbandman ploughs in clay.

§ 9. In the next three examples we have instances of endeavors at
finish by the hands of artists themselves, marking three stages of
knowledge or insight, and three relative stages of finish. Fig. 7.
is Claude's (Liber Veritatis, No. 140., facsimile by Boydell). It
still displays an appalling ignorance of the forms of trees, but yet
is, in mode of execution, better--that is, more finished--than the
engravings, because not _altogether_ mechanical, and showing some
dim, far-away, blundering memory of a few facts in stems, such as
their variations of texture and roundness, and bits of young shoots
of leaves. 8. is Salvator's, facsimiled from part of his original
etching of the Finding of Oedipus. It displays considerable power
of handling--not mechanical, but free and firm, and is just so much
more finished than any of the others as it displays more
intelligence about the way in which boughs gather themselves out of
the stem, and about the varying character of their curves. Finally,
fig. 9. is good work. It is the root of the apple-tree in Albert
Durer's Adam and Eve, and fairly represents the wrinkles of the
bark, the smooth portions emergent beneath, and the general anatomy
of growth. All the lines used conduce to the representation of these
facts; and the work is therefore highly finished. It still, however,
leaves out, as not to be represented by such kind of lines, the more
delicate gradations of light and shade. I shall now "finish" a
little farther, in the next plate (3.), the mere _insertion of the
two boughs_ outlined in fig. 1. I do this simply by adding
assertions of more facts. First, I say that the whole trunk is dark,
as compared with the distant sky. Secondly, I say that it is rounded
by gradations of shadow, in the various forms shown. And, lastly, I
say that (this being a bit of old pine stripped by storm of its
bark) the wood is fissured in certain directions, showing its grain,
or _muscle_, seen in complicated contortions at the insertion of the
arm and elsewhere.

§ 10. Now this piece of work, though yet far from complete (we will
better it presently), is yet more finished than any of the others,
not because it is more delicate or more skilful, but simply because
it tells more truth, and admits fewer fallacies. That which conveys
most information, with least inaccuracy, is always the highest
finish; and the question whether we prefer art so finished, to art
unfinished, is not one of taste at all. It is simply a question
whether we like to know much or little; to see accurately or see
falsely; and those whose _taste_ in art (if they choose so to call
it) leads them to like blindness better than sight, and fallacy
better than fact, would do well to set themselves to some other
pursuit than that of art.

§ 11. In the above plate we have examined chiefly the grain and
surface of the boughs; we have not yet noticed the finish of their
curvature. If the reader will look back to the No. 7. (Plate 2.),
which, in this respect, is the worst of all the set, he will
immediately observe the exemplification it gives of Claude's principal
theory about trees; namely, that the boughs always parted from each
other, two at a time, in the manner of the prongs of an ill-made
table-fork. It may, perhaps, not be at once believed that this is
indeed Claude's theory respecting tree-structure, without some
farther examples of his practice. I have, therefore, assembled on the
next page, Plate 4., some of the most characteristic passages of
ramification in the Liber Veritatis; the plates themselves are
sufficiently cheap (as they should be) and accessible to nearly every
one, so that the accuracy of the facsimiles may be easily tested. I
have given in Appendix I. the numbers of the plates from which the
examples are taken, and it will be found that they have been rather
improved than libelled, only omitting, of course, the surrounding
leafage, in order to show accurately the branch-outlines, with which
alone we are at present concerned. And it would be difficult to bring
together a series more totally futile and foolish, more singularly
wrong (as the false griffin was), every way at once; they are stiff,
and yet have no strength; curved, and yet have no flexibility;
monotonous, and yet disorderly; unnatural, and yet uninventive. They
are, in fact, of that commonest kind of tree bough which a child or
beginner first draws experimentally; nay, I am well assured, that if
this set of branches had been drawn by a schoolboy, "out of his own
head," his master would hardly have cared to show them as signs of any
promise in him.

[Illustration: 3. Strength of Old Pine.]

[Illustration: 4. Ramification, according to Claude.]

§ 12. "Well, but do not the trunks of trees fork, and fork mostly
into two arms at a time?"

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Yes; but under as stern anatomical law as the limbs of an animal;
and those hooked junctions in Plate 4. are just as accurately
representative of the branching of wood as this (fig. 2.) is of a
neck and shoulders. We should object to such a representation of
shoulders, because we have some interest in, and knowledge of, human
form; we do not object to Claude's trees, because we have no
interest in, nor knowledge of, trees. And if it be still alleged
that such work is nevertheless enough to give any one an "idea" of a
tree, I answer that it never gave, nor ever will give, an idea of a
tree to any one who loves trees; and that, moreover, no idea,
whatever its pleasantness, is of the smallest value, which is not
founded on simple facts. What pleasantness may be in _wrong_ ideas
we do not here inquire; the only question for us has always been,
and must always be, What are the facts?

§ 13. And assuredly those boughs of Claude's are not facts: and
every one of their contours is, in the worst sense, unfinished,
without even the expectation or faint hope of possible refinement
ever coming into them. I do not mean to enter here into the
discussion of the characters of ramification; that must be in our
separate inquiry into tree-structure generally; but I will merely
give one piece of Turner's tree-drawing as an example of what
finished work really is, even in outline. In plate 5. opposite,
fig. 1. is the contour (stripped, like Claude's, of its foliage) of
one of the distant tree-stems in the drawing of Bolton Abbey. In
order to show its perfectness better by contrast with bad work (as
we have had, I imagine, enough of Claude), I will take a bit of
Constable; fig. 2. is the principal tree out of the engraving of the
Lock on the Stour (Leslie's Life of Constable). It differs from the
Claude outlines merely in being the kind of work which is produced
by an uninventive person dashing about idly, with a brush, instead
of drawing determinately wrong, with a pen: on the one hand worse
than Claude's, in being lazier; on the other a little better in
being more free, but, as representative of tree-form, of course
still wholly barbarous. It is worth while to turn back to the
description of the uninventive painter at work on a tree (Vol. II.
chapter on Imaginative Association, § 11), for this trunk of
Constable's is curiously illustrative of it. One can almost see him,
first bending it to the right; then, having gone long enough to the
right, turning to the left; then, having gone long enough to the
left, away to the right again; then dividing it; and "because there
is another tree in the picture with two long branches (in this case
there really is), he knows that this ought to have three or four,
which must undulate or go backwards and forwards," &c., &c.

§ 14. Then study the bit of Turner work: note first its quietness,
unattractiveness, apparent carelessness whether you look at it or
not; next note the subtle curvatures within the narrowest limits,
and, when it branches, the unexpected, out of the way things it
does, just what nobody could have thought of its doing; shooting out
like a letter Y, with a nearly straight branch, and then
correcting its stiffness with a zigzag behind, so that the boughs,
ugly individually, are beautiful in unison. (In what I have
hereafter to say about trees, I shall need to dwell much on this
character of _unexpectedness_. A bough is never drawn rightly if it
is not wayward, so that although, as just now said, quiet at first,
not caring to be looked at, the moment it is looked at, it seems
bent on astonishing you, and doing the last things you expect it to
do.) But our present purpose is only to note the _finish_ of the
Turner _curves_, which, though they seem straight and stiff at
first, are, when you look long, seen to be all tremulous,
perpetually wavering along every edge into endless melody of change.
This is finish in line, in exactly the same sense that a fine melody
is finished in the association of its notes.

[Illustration: 5. Good and Bad Tree-Drawing.]

§ 15. And now, farther, let us take a little bit of the Turnerian tree
in light and shade. I said above I would better the drawing of that
pine trunk, which, though it has incipient shade, and muscular action,
has no texture, nor local color. Now, I take about an inch and a half
of Turner's ash trunks (one of the nearer ones) in this same drawing
of Bolton Abbey (fig. 3. Plate 5.), and _this_ I cannot better; this
is perfectly finished; it is not possible to add more truth to it on
that scale. Texture of bark, anatomy of muscle beneath, reflected
lights in recessed hollows, stains of dark moss, and flickering
shadows from the foliage above, all are there, as clearly as the human
hand can mark them. I place a bit of trunk by Constable (fig. 5.),[41]
from another plate in Leslie's Life of him (a dell in Helmingham Park,
Suffolk), for the sake of the same comparison in shade that we have
above in contour. You see Constable does not know whether he is
drawing moss or shadow: those dark touches in the middle are confused
in his mind between the dark stains on the trunk and its dark side;
there is no anatomy, no cast shadow, nothing but idle sweeps of the
brush, vaguely circular. The thing is much darker than Turner's, but
it is not, therefore, finished; it is only blackened. And "to blacken"
is indeed the proper word for all attempts at finish without
knowledge. All true finish is _added fact_; and Turner's word for
finishing a picture was always this significant one, "carry forward."
But labor without added knowledge can only blacken or stain a picture,
it cannot finish it.

§ 16. And this is especially to be remembered as we pass from
comparatively large and distant objects, such as this single trunk, to
the more divided and nearer features of foreground. Some degree of
ignorance may be hidden, in completing what is far away; but there is
no concealment possible in close work, and darkening instead of
finishing becomes then the engraver's only possible resource. It has
always been a wonderful thing to me to hear people talk of making
foregrounds "vigorous," "marked," "forcible," and so on. If you will
lie down on your breast on the next bank you come to (which is
bringing it _close_ enough, I should think, to give it all the force
it is capable of), you will see, in the cluster of leaves and grass
close to your face, something as delicate as this, which I have
actually so drawn, on the opposite page, a mystery of soft shadow in
the depths of the grass, with indefinite forms of leaves, which you
cannot trace or count, within it, and out of that, the nearer leaves
coming in every subtle gradation of tender light and flickering form,
quite beyond all delicacy of pencilling to follow; and yet you will
rise up from that bank (certainly not making it appear coarser by
drawing a little back from it), and profess to represent it by a few
blots of "forcible" foreground color. "Well, but I cannot draw every
leaf that I see on the bank." No, for as we saw, at the beginning of
this chapter, that no human work could be finished so as to express
the _delicacy_ of nature, so neither can it be finished so as to
express the _redundance_ of nature. Accept that necessity; but do not
deny it; do not call your work finished, when you have, in engraving,
substituted a confusion of coarse black scratches, or in water-color a
few edgy blots, for ineffable organic beauty. Follow that beauty as
far as you can, remembering that just as far as you see, know, and
represent it, just so far your work is finished; as far as you fall
short of it, your work is _un_finished; and as far as you substitute
any other thing for it, your work is spoiled.

[Illustration: 6. Foreground Leafage.]

§ 17. How far Turner followed it, is not easily shown; for his
finish is so delicate as to be nearly uncopiable. I have just said
it was not possible to finish that ash trunk of his, farther, on
such a scale.[42] By using a magnifying-glass, and giving the same
help to the spectator, it might perhaps be possible to add and
exhibit a few more details; but even as it is, I cannot by line
engraving express all that there is in that piece of tree-trunk, on
the same scale. I _have_ therefore magnified the upper part of it in
fig 4. (Plate 5.), so that the reader may better see the beautiful
lines of curvature into which even its slightest shades and spots
are cast. Every quarter of an inch in Turner's drawings will bear
magnifying in the same way; much of the finer work in them can
hardly be traced, except by the keenest sight, until it is
magnified. In his painting of Ivy Bridge,[43] the veins are drawn on
the wings of a butterfly, not above three lines in diameter; and in
one of his smaller drawings of Scarborough, in my own possession,
the muscle-shells on the beach are rounded, and some shown as shut,
some as open, though none are as large as one of the letters of this
type; and yet this is the man who was thought to belong to the
"dashing" school, literally because most people had not patience or
delicacy of sight enough to trace his endless detail.

§ 18. "Suppose it was so," perhaps the reader replies; "still I do
not like detail so delicate that it can hardly be seen." Then you
like nothing in Nature (for you will find she always carries her
detail too far to be traced). This point, however, we shall examine
hereafter; it is not the question now whether we _like_ finish or
not; our only inquiry here is, what finish _means_; and I trust the
reader is beginning to be satisfied that it does indeed mean nothing
but consummate and accumulated truth, and that our old monotonous
test must still serve us here as elsewhere. And it will become us to
consider seriously why (if indeed it be so) we dislike this kind of
finish--dislike an accumulation of truth. For assuredly all
authority is against us, and _no truly great man can be named in the
arts--but it is that of one who finished to his utmost_. Take
Leonardo, Michael Angelo, and Raphael for a triad, to begin with.
_They_ all completed their detail with such subtlety of touch and
gradation, that, in a careful drawing by any of the three, you
cannot see where the pencil ceased to touch the paper; the stroke of
it is so tender, that, when you look close to the drawing you can
see nothing; you only see the effect of it a little way back! Thus
tender in execution,--and so complete in detail, that Leonardo must
needs draw _every several vein in the little agates_ and pebbles of
the gravel under the feet of the St. Anne in the Louvre. Take a
quartett after the triad--Titian, Tintoret, Bellini, and Veronese.
Examine the vine-leaves of the Bacchus and Ariadne, (Titian's) in
the National Gallery; examine the borage blossoms, painted petal by
petal, though lying loose on the table, in Titian's Supper at
Emmaus, in the Louvre, or the snail-shells on the ground in his
Entombment;[44] examine the separately designed patterns on every
drapery of Veronese, in his Marriage in Cana; go to Venice and see
how Tintoret paints the strips of black bark on the birch trunk that
sustains the platform in his Adoration of the Magi: how Bellini
fills the rents of his ruined walls with the most exquisite clusters
of the erba della Madonna.[45] You will find them all in a tale.
Take a quintett after the quartett--Francia, Angelico, Durer,
Hemling, Perugino,--and still the witness is one, still the same
striving in all to such utmost perfection as their knowledge and
hand could reach.

Who shall gainsay these men? Above all, who shall gainsay them when
they and Nature say precisely the same thing? For where does Nature
pause in _her_ finishing--that finishing which consists not in the
smoothing of surface, but the filling of space, and the
multiplication of life and thought?

Who shall gainsay them? I, for one, dare not; but accept their
teaching, with Nature's, in all humbleness.

"But is there, then, no good in any work which does not pretend to
perfectness? Is there no saving clause from this terrible
requirement of completion? And if there be none, what is the meaning
of all you have said elsewhere about rudeness as the glory of Gothic
work, and, even a few pages back, about the danger of finishing, for
our modern workmen?"

Indeed there are many saving clauses, and there is much good in
imperfect work. But we had better cast the consideration of these
drawbacks and exceptions into another chapter, and close this one,
without obscuring, in any wise, our broad conclusion that "finishing"
means in art simply "telling more truth;" and that whatever we have in
any sort begun wisely, it is good to finish thoroughly.

  [38] "With his Yemen sword for aid;
         Ornament it carried none,
       But the notches on the blade."

  [39] See the base of the new Army and Navy Clubhouse.

  [40] I take this example from Miller, because, on the whole, he is
       the best engraver of Turner whom we have.

  [41] Fig. 5. is not, however, so _lustrous_ as Constable's; I
       cannot help this, having given the original plate to my good
       friend Mr. Cousen, with strict charge to facsimile it
       faithfully: but the figure is all the fairer, as a
       representation of Constable's art, for those mezzotints in
       Leslie's life of him have many qualities of drawing which are
       quite wanting in Constable's blots of color. The comparison
       shall be made elaborately, between picture and picture, in
       the section on Vegetation.

  [42] It is of the exact size of the original, the whole drawing
       being about 15-1/2 inches by 11 in.

  [43] An oil painting (about 3 ft. by 4 ft. 6 in.), and very broad
       in its masses. In the possession of E. Bicknell, Esq.

  [44] These snail-shells are very notable, occurring as they do in,
       perhaps, the very grandest and broadest of all Titian's
       compositions.

  [45] Linaria Cymbalaria, the ivy-leaved toadflax of English
       gardens.




CHAPTER X.

OF THE USE OF PICTURES.


§ 1. I am afraid this will be a difficult chapter; one of drawbacks,
qualifications, and exceptions. But the more I see of useful truths,
the more I find that, like human beings, they are eminently biped;
and, although, as far as apprehended by human intelligence, they are
usually seen in a crane-like posture, standing on one leg, whenever
they are to be stated so as to maintain themselves against all
attack it is quite necessary they should stand on two, and have
their complete balance on opposite fulcra.

§ 2. I doubt not that one objection, with which as well as with
another we may begin, has struck the reader very forcibly, after
comparing the illustrations above given from Turner, Constable, and
Claude. He will wonder how it was that Turner, finishing in this
exquisite way, and giving truths by the thousand, where other
painters gave only one or two, yet, of all painters, seemed to
obtain least acknowledgeable resemblance to nature, so that the
world cried out upon him for a madman, at the moment when he was
giving exactly the highest and most consummate truth that had ever
been seen in landscape.

And he will wonder why still there seems reason for this outcry.
Still, after what analysis and proof of his being right have as yet
been given, the reader may perhaps be saying to himself: "All this
reasoning is of no use to me. Turner does _not_ give me the idea of
nature; I do not feel before one of his pictures as I should in the
real scene. Constable takes me out into the shower, and Claude into
the sun; and De Wint makes me feel as if I were walking in the
fields; but Turner keeps me in the house, and I know always that I
am looking at a picture."

I might answer to this; Well, what else _should_ he do? If you want
to feel as if you were in a shower, cannot you go and get wet without
help from Constable? If you want to feel as if you were walking in the
fields, cannot you go and walk in them without help from De Wint? But
if you want to sit in your room and look at a beautiful picture, why
should you blame the artist for giving you one? This _was_ the answer
actually made to me by various journalists, when first I showed that
Turner was truer than other painters: "Nay," said they, "we do not
want truth, we want something else than truth; we would not have
nature, but something better than nature."

§ 3. I do not mean to accept that answer, although it seems at this
moment to make for me: I have never accepted it. As I raise my eyes
from the paper, to think over the curious mingling in it, of direct
error, and far away truth, I see upon the room-walls, first,
Turner's drawing of the chain of the Alps from the Superga above
Turin; then a study of a block of gneiss at Chamouni, with the
purple Aiguilles-Rouges behind it; another, of the towers of the
Swiss Fribourg, with a cluster of pine forest behind them; then
another Turner, Isola Bella, with the blue opening of the St.
Gothard in the distance; and then a fair bit of thirteenth century
illumination, depicting, at the top of the page, the Salutation; and
beneath, the painter who painted it, sitting in his little convent
cell, with a legend above him to this effect--

      "ego jah{ann}es sc{ri}psi hunc librum."
             I, John, wrote this book.

None of these things are bad pieces of art; and yet,--if it were
offered to me to have, instead of them, so many windows, out of
which I should see, first, the real chain of the Alps from the
Superga; then the real block of gneiss, and Aiguilles-Rouges; then
the real towers of Fribourg, and pine forest; the real Isola Bella;
and, finally, the true Mary and Elizabeth; and beneath them, the
actual old monk at work in his cell,--I would very unhesitatingly
change my five pictures for the five windows; and so, I apprehend,
would most people, not, it seems to me, unwisely.

"Well, then," the reader goes on to question me, "the more closely
the picture resembles such a window the better it must be?"

Yes.

"Then if Turner does not give me the impression of such a window,
that is of Nature, there must be something wrong in Turner?"

Yes.

"And if Constable and De Wint give me the impression of such a
window, there must be something right in Constable and De Wint?"

Yes.

"And something more right than in Turner?"

No.

"Will you explain yourself?"

I _have_ explained myself, long ago, and that fully; perhaps too
fully for the simple sum of the explanation to be remembered. If the
reader will glance back to, and in the present state of our inquiry,
reconsider in the first volume, Part I. Sec. I. Chap. V., and Part
II. Sec. _I._ Chap. VII., he will find our present difficulties
anticipated. There are some truths, easily obtained, which give a
deceptive resemblance to Nature; others only to be obtained with
difficulty, which cause no deception, but give inner and deep
resemblance. These two classes of truths cannot be obtained
together; choice must be made between them. The bad painter gives
the cheap deceptive resemblance. The good painter gives the precious
non-deceptive resemblance. Constable perceives in a landscape that
the grass is wet, the meadows flat, and the boughs shady; that is to
say, about as much as, I suppose, might in general be apprehended,
between them, by an intelligent fawn and a skylark. Turner perceives
at a glance the whole sum of visible truth open to human
intelligence. So Berghem perceives nothing in a figure, beyond the
flashes of light on the folds of its dress; but Michael Angelo
perceives every flash of thought that is passing through its spirit;
and Constable and Berghem may imitate windows; Turner and Michael
Angelo can by no means imitate windows. But Turner and Michael
Angelo are nevertheless the best.

§ 4. "Well but," the reader persists, "you admitted just now that
because Turner did not get his work to look like a window there was
something wrong in him."

I did so; if he were quite right he would have _all_ truth, low as
well as high; that is, he would be Nature and not Turner; but that
is impossible to man. There is much that is wrong in him; much that
is infinitely wrong in all human effort. But, nevertheless, in some
an infinity of Betterness above other human effort.

"Well, but you said you would change your Turners for windows, why
not, therefore, for Constables?"

Nay, I did not say that I would change them for windows _merely_,
but for windows which commanded the chain of the Alps and Isola
Bella. That is to say, for all the truth that there is in Turner,
and all the truth besides which is not in him; but I would not
change them for Constables, to have a small piece of truth which is
not in Turner, and none of the mighty truth which there is.

§ 5. Thus far, then, though the subject is one requiring somewhat
lengthy explanation, it involves no real difficulty. There is not
the slightest inconsistency in the mode in which throughout this
work I have desired the relative merits of painters to be judged. I
have always said, he who is closest to Nature is best. All rules are
useless, all genius is useless, all labor is useless, if you do not
give facts; the more facts you give the greater you are; and there
is no fact so unimportant as to be prudently despised, if it be
possible to represent it. Nor, but that I have long known the truth
of Herbert's lines,

                                "Some men are
      Full of themselves, and answer their own notion,"

would it have been without intense surprise that I heard querulous
readers asking, "how it was possible" that I could praise
Pre-Raphaelitism and Turner also. For, from the beginning of this
book to this page of it, I have never praised Turner highly for any
other cause than that he _gave facts_ more _delicately_, more
Pre-Raphaelitically, than other men. Careless readers, who dashed at
the descriptions and missed the arguments, took up their own
conceptions of the cause of my liking Turner, and said to
themselves: "Turner cannot draw, Turner is generalizing, vague,
visionary; and the Pre-Raphaelites are hard and distinct. How can
any one like both?"[46] But _I_ never said that Turner could not
draw. _I_ never said that he was vague or visionary. What _I_ said
was, that nobody had ever drawn so well: that nobody was so certain,
so _un_-visionary; that nobody had ever given so many hard and
downright facts. Glance back to the first volume, and note the
expressions now. "He is the only painter who ever drew a mountain or
a stone;[47] the only painter who can draw the stem of a tree; the
only painter who has ever drawn the sky, previous artists having
only drawn it typically or partially, but he absolutely and
universally." Note how he is praised in his rock drawing for "not
selecting a pretty or interesting morsel here or there, but giving
the whole truth, with all the relations of its parts."[48] Observe
how the _great virtue_ of the landscape of Cima da Conegliano and
the early sacred painters is said to be giving "entire, exquisite,
humble, realization--a strawberry-plant in the foreground with a
blossom, _and a berry just set_, _and one half ripe, and one ripe_,
all patiently and innocently painted from the _real thing, and_
_therefore most divine_." Then re-read the following paragraph (§
10.), carefully, and note its conclusion, that the thoroughly great
men are those who have done everything thoroughly, and who have
never despised anything, however small, of God's making; with the
instance given of Wordsworth's daisy casting its shadow on a stone;
and the following sentence, "Our painters must come to this before
they have done their duty." And yet, when our painters _did_ come to
this, did do their duty, and did paint the daisy with its shadow
(this passage having been written years before Pre-Raphaelitism was
thought of), people wondered how I could possibly like what was
neither more nor less than the precise fulfilment of my own most
earnest exhortations and highest hopes.

§ 6. Thus far, then, all I have been saying is absolutely
consistent, and tending to one simple end. Turner is praised for his
truth and finish; that truth of which I am beginning to give
examples. Pre-Raphaelitism is praised for its truth and finish; and
the whole duty inculcated upon the artist is that of being in all
respects as like Nature as possible.

And yet this is not all I have to do. There is more than this to be
inculcated upon the student, more than this to be admitted or
established before the foundations of just judgment can be laid.

For, observe, although I believe any sensible person would exchange
his pictures, however good, for windows, he would not feel, and
ought not to feel, that the arrangement was _entirely_ gainful to
him. He would feel it was an exchange of a less good of one kind,
for a greater of another kind, but that it was definitely
_exchange_, not pure gain, not merely getting more truth instead of
less. The picture would be a serious loss; something gone which the
actual landscape could never restore, though it might give something
better in its place, as age may give to the heart something better
than its youthful delusion, but cannot give again the sweetness of
that delusion.

§ 7. What is this in the picture which is precious to us, and yet is
not natural? Hitherto our arguments have tended, on the whole,
somewhat to the depreciation of art; and the reader may every now and
then, so far as he has been convinced by them, have been inclined to
say, "Why not give up this whole science of Mockery at once, since
its only virtue is in representing facts, and it cannot, at best,
represent them completely, besides being liable to all manner of
shortcomings and dishonesties,--why not keep to the facts, to real
fields, and hills, and men, and let this dangerous painting alone?"

No, it would not be well to do this. Painting has its peculiar
virtues, not only consistent with but even resulting from, its
shortcomings and weaknesses. Let us see what these virtues are.

§ 8. I must ask permission, as I have sometimes done before, to
begin apparently a long way from the point.

Not long ago, as I was leaving one of the towns of Switzerland early
in the morning, I saw in the clouds behind the houses an Alp which I
did not know, a grander Alp than any I knew, nobler than the
Schreckhorn or the Mönch; terminated, as it seemed, on one side by a
precipice of almost unimaginable height; on the other, sloping away
for leagues in one field of lustrous ice, clear and fair and blue,
flashing here and there into silver under the morning sun. For a
moment I received a sensation of as much sublimity as any natural
object could possibly excite; the next moment, I saw that my unknown
Alp was the glass roof of one of the workshops of the town, rising
above its nearer houses, and rendered aerial and indistinct by some
pure blue wood smoke which rose from intervening chimneys.

It is evident, that so far as the mere delight of the eye was
concerned, the glass roof was here equal, or at least equal for a
moment, to the Alp. Whether the power of the object over the heart
was to be small or great, depended altogether upon what it was
understood for, upon its being taken possession of and apprehended
in its full nature, either as a granite mountain or a group of panes
of glass; and thus, always, the real majesty of the appearance of
the thing to us, depends upon the degree in which we ourselves
possess the power of understanding it,--that penetrating, possession
taking power of the imagination, which has been long ago defined[49]
as the very life of the man, considered as a _seeing_ creature. For
though the casement had indeed been an Alp, there are many persons
on whose minds it would have produced no more effect than the glass
roof. It would have been to them a glittering object of a certain
apparent length and breadth, and whether of glass or ice, whether
twenty feet in length, or twenty leagues, would have made no
difference to them; or, rather, would not have been in any wise
conceived or considered by them. Examine the nature of your own
emotion (if you feel it) at the sight of the Alp, and you find all
the brightness of that emotion hanging, like dew on gossamer, on a
curious web of subtle fancy and imperfect knowledge. First, you have
a vague idea of its size, coupled with wonder at the work of the
great Builder of its walls and foundations, then an apprehension of
its eternity, a pathetic sense of its perpetualness, and your own
transientness, as of the grass upon its sides; then, and in this
very sadness, a sense of strange companionship with past generations
in seeing what they saw. They did not see the clouds that are
floating over your head; nor the cottage wall on the other side of
the field; nor the road by which you are travelling. But they saw
_that_. The wall of granite in the heavens was the same to them as
to you. They have ceased to look upon it; you will soon cease to
look also, and the granite wall will be for others. Then, mingled
with these more solemn imaginations, come the understandings of the
gifts and glories of the Alps, the fancying forth of all the
fountains that well from its rocky walls, and strong rivers that are
born out of its ice, and of all the pleasant valleys that wind
between its cliffs, and all the châlets that gleam among its clouds,
and happy farmsteads couched upon its pastures; while together with
the thoughts of these, rise strange sympathies with all the unknown
of human life, and happiness, and death, signified by that narrow
white flame of the everlasting snow, seen so far in the morning sky.

These images, and far more than these, lie at the root of the emotion
which you feel at the sight of the Alp. You may not trace them in your
heart, for there is a great deal more in your heart, of evil and good,
than you ever can trace; but they stir you and quicken you for all
that. Assuredly, so far as you feel more at beholding the snowy
mountain than any other object of the same sweet silvery grey, these
are the kind of images which cause you to do so; and, observe, these
are nothing more than a greater apprehension of the _facts_ of the
thing. We call the power "Imagination," because it imagines or
conceives; but it is only noble imagination if it imagines or
conceives _the truth_. And, according to the degree of knowledge
possessed, and of sensibility to the pathetic or impressive character
of the things known, will be the degree of this imaginative delight.

§ 9. But the main point to be noted at present is, that if the
imagination can be excited to this its peculiar work, it matters
comparatively little what it is excited by. If the smoke had not
cleared partially away, the glass roof might have pleased me as well
as an alp, until I had quite lost sight of it; and if, in a picture,
the imagination can be once caught, and, without absolute affront
from some glaring fallacy, set to work in its own field, the
imperfection of the historical details themselves is, to the
spectator's enjoyment, of small consequence.

Hence it is, that poets and men of strong feeling in general, are
apt to be among the very worst judges of painting. The slightest
hint is enough for them. Tell them that a white stroke means a ship,
and a black stain, a thunderstorm, and they will be perfectly
satisfied with both, and immediately proceed to remember all that
they ever felt about ships and thunderstorms, attributing the whole
current and fulness of their own feelings to the painter's work;
while probably, if the picture be really good, and full of stern
fact, the poet, or man of feeling, will find some of its fact _in
his way_, out of the particular course of his own thoughts,--be
offended at it, take to criticising and wondering at it, detect, at
last, some imperfection in it,--such as must be inherent in all
human work,--and so finally quarrel with, and reject the whole
thing. Thus, Wordsworth writes many sonnets to Sir George Beaumont
and Haydon, none to Sir Joshua or to Turner.

§ 10. Hence also the error into which many superficial artists fall,
in speaking of "addressing the imagination" as the only end of art.
It is quite true that the imagination must be addressed; but it may
be very sufficiently addressed by the stain left by an ink-bottle
thrown at the wall. The thrower has little credit, though an
imaginative observer may find, perhaps, more to amuse him in the
erratic nigrescence than in many a labored picture. And thus, in a
slovenly or ill-finished picture, it is no credit to the artist that
he has "addressed the imagination;" nor is the success of such an
appeal any criterion whatever of the merit of the work. The duty of
an artist is not only to address and awaken, but to _guide_ the
imagination; and there is no safe guidance but that of simple
concurrence with fact. It is no matter that the picture takes the
fancy of A. or B., that C. writes sonnets to it, and D. feels it to
be divine. This is still the only question for the artist, or for
us:--"Is it a fact? Are things really so? Is the picture an Alp
among pictures, full, firm, eternal; or only a glass house, frail,
hollow, contemptible, demolishable; calling, at all honest hands,
for detection and demolition?"

§ 11. Hence it is also that so much grievous difficulty stands in
the way of obtaining _real opinion_ about pictures at all. Tell any
man, of the slightest imaginative power, that such and such a
picture is good, and means this or that: tell him, for instance,
that a Claude is good, and that it means trees, and grass, and
water; and forthwith, whatever faith, virtue, humility, and
imagination there are in the man, rise up to help Claude, and to
declare that indeed it is all "excellent good, i'faith;" and
whatever in the course of his life he has felt of pleasure in trees
and grass, he will begin to reflect upon and enjoy anew, supposing
all the while it is the picture he is enjoying. Hence, when once a
painter's reputation is accredited, it must be a stubborn kind of
person indeed whom he will not please, or seem to please; for all
the vain and weak people pretend to be pleased with him, for their
own credit's sake, and all the humble and imaginative people
seriously and honestly fancy they _are_ pleased with him, deriving
indeed, very certainly, delight from his work, but a delight which,
if they were kept in the same temper, they would equally derive
(and, indeed, constantly do derive) from the grossest daub that can
be manufactured in imitation by the pawnbroker. Is, therefore, the
pawnbroker's imitation as good as the original? Not so. There is the
certain test of goodness and badness, which I am always striving to
get people to use. As long as they are satisfied if they find their
feelings pleasantly stirred and their fancy gaily occupied, so long
there is for them no good, no bad. Anything may please, or anything
displease, them; and their entire manner of thought and talking
about art is mockery, and all their judgments are laborious
injustices. But let them, in the teeth of their pleasure or
displeasure, simply put the calm question,--Is it so? Is that the
way a stone is shaped, the way a cloud is wreathed, the way a leaf
is veined? and they are safe. They will do no more injustice to
themselves nor to other men; they will learn to whose guidance they
may trust their imagination, and from whom they must for ever
withhold its reins.

§ 12. "Well, but why have you dragged in this poor spectator's
imagination at all, if you have nothing more to say for it than
this; if you are merely going to abuse it, and go back to your
tiresome facts?"

Nay; I am not going to abuse it. On the contrary, I have to assert,
in a temper profoundly venerant of it, that though we must not
suppose everything is right when this is aroused, we may be sure
that something is wrong when this is _not_ aroused. The something
wrong may be in the spectator or in the picture; and if the picture
be demonstrably in accordance with truth, the odds are, that it is
in the spectator; but there is wrong somewhere; for the work of the
picture is indeed eminently to get at this imaginative power in the
beholder, and all its facts are of no use whatever if it does not.
No matter how much truth it tells if the hearer be asleep. Its first
work is to wake him, then to teach him.

§ 13. Now, observe, while, as it penetrates into the nature of
things, the imagination is preeminently a beholder of things _as_
they _are_, it is, in its creative function, an eminent beholder of
things _when_ and _where_ they are NOT; a seer, that is, in the
prophetic sense, calling "the things that are not as though they
were," and for ever delighting to dwell on that which is not
tangibly present. And its great function being the calling forth, or
back, that which is not visible to bodily sense, it has of course
been made to take delight in the fulfilment of its proper function,
and preeminently to enjoy, and spend its energy, on things past and
future, or out of sight, rather than things present, or in sight. So
that if the imagination is to be called to take delight in any
object, it will not be always well, if we can help it, to put the
_real_ object there, before it. The imagination would on the whole
rather have it _not_ there;--the reality and substance are rather in
the imagination's way; it would think a good deal more of the thing
if it could not see it. Hence, that strange and sometimes fatal
charm, which there is in all things as long as we wait for them, and
the moment we have lost them; but which fades while we possess
them;--that sweet bloom of all that is far away, which perishes
under our touch. Yet the feeling of this is not a weakness; it is
one of the most glorious gifts of the human mind, making the whole
infinite future, and imperishable past, a richer inheritance, if
faithfully inherited, than the changeful, frail, fleeting present;
it is also one of the many witnesses in us to the truth that these
present and tangible things are not meant to satisfy us. The
instinct becomes a weakness only when it is weakly indulged, and
when the faculty which was intended by God to give back to us what
we have lost, and gild for us what is to come, is so perverted as
only to darken what we possess. But, perverted or pure, the instinct
itself is everlasting, and the substantial presence even of the
things which we love the best, will inevitably and for ever be found
wanting in _one_ strange and tender charm, which belonged to the
dreams of them.

§ 14. Another character of the imagination is equally constant, and,
to our present inquiry, of yet greater importance. It is eminently a
_weariable_ faculty, eminently delicate, and incapable of bearing
fatigue; so that if we give it too many objects at a time to employ
itself upon, or very grand ones for a long time together, it fails
under the effort, becomes jaded, exactly as the limbs do by bodily
fatigue, and incapable of answering any farther appeal till it has
had rest. And this is the real nature of the weariness which is so
often felt in travelling, from seeing too much. It is not that the
monotony and number of the beautiful things seen have made them
valueless, but that the imaginative power has been overtaxed; and,
instead of letting it rest, the traveller, wondering to find himself
dull, and incapable of admiration, seeks for something more
admirable, excites, and torments, and drags the poor fainting
imagination up by the shoulders: "Look at this, and look at that,
and this more wonderful still!"--until the imaginative faculty
faints utterly away, beyond all farther torment or pleasure, dead
for many a day to come; and the despairing prodigal takes to
horse-racing in the Campagna, good now for nothing else than that;
whereas, if the imagination had only been laid down on the grass,
among simple things, and left quiet for a little while, it would
have come to itself gradually, recovered its strength and color, and
soon been fit for work again. So that, whenever the imagination is
tired, it is necessary to find for it something, not _more_
admirable but _less_ admirable; such as in that weak state it can
deal with; then give it peace, and it will recover.

§ 15. I well recollect the walk on which I first found out this; it
was on the winding road from Sallenche, sloping up the hills towards
St. Gervais, one cloudless Sunday afternoon. The road circles softly
between bits of rocky bank and mounded pasture; little cottages and
chapels gleaming out from among the trees at every turn. Behind me,
some leagues in length, rose the jagged range of the mountains of the
Réposoir; on the other side of the valley, the mass of the Aiguille de
Varens, heaving its seven thousand feet of cliff into the air at a
single effort, its gentle gift of waterfall, the Nant d'Arpenaz, like
a pillar of cloud at its feet; Mont Blanc and all its aiguilles, one
silver flame, in front of me; marvellous blocks of mossy granite and
dark glades of pine around me; but I could enjoy nothing, and could
not for a long while make out what was the matter with me, until at
last I discovered that if I confined myself to one thing,--and that a
little thing,--a tuft of moss, or a single crag at the top of the
Varens, or a wreath or two of foam at the bottom of the Nant
d'Arpenaz, I began to enjoy it directly, because then I had mind
enough to put into the thing, and the enjoyment arose from the
quantity of the imaginative energy I could bring to bear upon it; but
when I looked at or thought of all together, moss, stones, Varens,
Nant d'Arpenaz, and Mont Blanc, I had not mind enough to give to all,
and none were of any value. The conclusion which would have been
formed, upon this, by a German philosopher, would have been that the
Mont Blanc _was_ of no value; that he and his imagination only were of
value; that the Mont Blanc, in fact, except so far as he was able to
look at it, could not be considered as having any existence. But the
only conclusion which occurred to me as reasonable under the
circumstances (I have seen no ground for altering it since) was, that
I was an exceedingly small creature, much tired, and, at the moment,
not a little stupid, for whom a blade of grass, or a wreath of foam,
was quite food enough and to spare, and that if I tried to take any
more, I should make myself ill. Whereupon, associating myself
fraternally with some ants, who were deeply interested in the
conveyance of some small sticks over the road, and rather, as I think
they generally are, in too great a hurry about it, I returned home in
a little while with great contentment, thinking how well it was
ordered that, as Mont Blanc and his pine forests could not be
everywhere, nor all the world come to see them, the human mind, on the
whole, should enjoy itself most surely in an ant-like manner, and be
happy and busy with the bits of stick and grains of crystal that fall
in its way to be handled, in daily duty.

§ 16. It follows evidently from the first of these characters of the
imagination, its dislike of substance and presence, that a picture has
in some measure even an advantage with us in not being real. The
imagination rejoices in having something to do, springs up with all
its willing power, flattered and happy; and ready with its fairest
colors and most tender pencilling, to prove itself worthy of the
trust, and exalt into sweet supremacy the shadow that has been
confided to its fondness. And thus, so far from its being at all an
object to the painter to make his work look real, he ought to dread
such a consummation as the loss of one of its most precious claims
upon the heart. So far from striving to convince the beholder that
what he sees is substance, his mind should be to what he paints as the
fire to the body on the pile, burning away the ashes, leaving the
unconquerable shade--an immortal dream. So certain is this, that the
slightest local success in giving the deceptive appearance of
reality--the imitation, for instance, of the texture of a bit of wood,
with its grain in relief--will instantly destroy the charm of a whole
picture; the imagination feels itself insulted and injured, and passes
by with cold contempt; nay, however beautiful the whole scene may be,
as of late in much of our highly wrought painting for the stage, the
mere fact of its being deceptively real is enough to make us tire of
it; we may be surprised and pleased for a moment, but the imagination
will not on those terms be persuaded to give any of its help, and, in
a quarter of an hour, we wish the scene would change.

§ 17. "Well, but then, what becomes of all these long dogmatic
chapters of yours about giving nothing but the truth, and as much
truth as possible?"

The chapters are all quite right. "Nothing but the Truth," I say
still. "As much Truth as possible," I say still. But truth so
presented, that it will need the help of the imagination to make it
real. Between the painter and the beholder, each doing his proper
part, the reality should be sustained; and after the beholding
imagination has come forward and done its best, then, with its help,
and in the full action of it, the beholder should be able to say, I
feel as if I were at the real place, or seeing the real incident.
But not without that help.

§ 18. Farther, in consequence of that other character of the
imagination, fatiguableness, it is a great advantage to the picture
that it need not present too much at once, and that what it does
present may be so chosen and ordered as not only to be more easily
seized, but to give the imagination rest, and, as it were, places to
lie down and stretch its limbs in; kindly vacancies, beguiling it
back into action, with pleasant and cautious sequence of incident;
all jarring thoughts being excluded, all vain redundance denied, and
all just and sweet transition permitted.

And thus it is that, for the most part, imperfect sketches,
engravings, outlines, rude sculptures, and other forms of abstraction,
possess a charm which the most finished picture frequently wants. For
not only does the finished picture excite the imagination less, but,
like nature itself, it _taxes_ it more. None of it can be enjoyed till
the imagination is brought to bear upon it; and the details of the
completed picture are so numerous, that it needs greater strength and
willingness in the beholder to follow them all out; the redundance,
perhaps, being not too great for the mind of a careful observer, but
too great for a casual or careless observer. So that although the
perfection of art will always consist in the utmost _acceptable_
completion, yet, as every added idea will increase the difficulty of
apprehension, and every added touch advance the dangerous realism
which makes the imagination languid, the difference between a noble
and ignoble painter is in nothing more sharply defined than in
this,--that the first wishes to put into his work as much truth as
possible, and yet to keep it looking _un_-real; the second wishes to
get through his work lazily, with as little truth as possible, and yet
to make it look real; and, so far as they add color to their abstract
sketch, the first realizes for the sake of the color, and the second
colors for the sake of the realization.[50]

§ 19. And then, lastly, it is another infinite advantage possessed
by the picture, that in these various differences from reality it
becomes the expression of the power and intelligence of a
companionable human soul. In all this choice, arrangement,
penetrative sight, and kindly guidance, we recognize a supernatural
operation, and perceive, not merely the landscape or incident as in
a mirror, but, besides, the presence of what, after all, may perhaps
be the most wonderful piece of divine work in the whole matter--the
great human spirit through which it is manifested to us. So that,
although with respect to many important scenes, it might, as we saw
above, be one of the most precious gifts that could be given us to
see them with _our own eyes_, yet also in many things it is more
desirable to be permitted to see them with the eyes of others; and
although, to the small, conceited, and affected painter displaying
his narrow knowledge and tiny dexterities, our only word may be,
"Stand aside from between that nature and me," yet to the great
imaginative painter--greater a million times in every faculty of
soul than we--our word may wisely be, "Come between this nature and
me--this nature which is too great and too wonderful for me; temper
it for me, interpret it to me; let me see with your eyes, and hear
with your ears, and have help and strength from your great spirit."

All the noblest pictures have this character. They are true or
inspired ideals, seen in a moment to _be_ ideal; that is to say, the
result of all the highest powers of the imagination, engaged in the
discovery and apprehension of the purest truths, and having so
arranged them as best to show their preciousness and exalt their
clearness. They are always orderly, always one, ruled by one great
purpose throughout, in the fulfilment of which every atom of the
detail is called to help, and would be missed if removed; this
peculiar oneness being the result, not of obedience to any teachable
law, but of the magnificence of tone in the perfect mind, which
accepts only what is good for its great purposes, rejects whatever is
foreign or redundant, and instinctively and instantaneously ranges
whatever it accepts, in sublime subordination and helpful brotherhood.

§ 20. Then, this being the greatest art, the lowest art is the
mimicry of it,--the subordination of nothing to nothing; the
elaborate arrangement of sightlessness and emptiness; the order
which has no object; the unity which has no life, and the law which
has no love; the light which has nothing to illumine, and shadow
which has nothing to relieve.[51]

§ 21. And then, between these two, comes the wholesome, happy, and
noble--though not noblest--art of simple transcript from nature;
into which, so far as our modern Pre-Raphaelitism falls, it will
indeed do sacred service in ridding us of the old fallacies and
componencies, but cannot itself rise above the level of simple and
happy usefulness. So far as it is to be great, it must add,--and so
far as it _is_ great, has already added,--the great imaginative
element to all its faithfulness in transcript. And for this reason,
I said in the close of my Edinburgh Lectures, that Pre-Raphaelitism,
as long as it confined itself to the simple copying of nature, could
not take the character of the highest class of art. But it has
already, almost unconsciously, supplied the defect, and taken that
character, in all its best results; and, so far as it ought,
hereafter, it will assuredly do so, as soon as it is permitted to
maintain itself in any other position than that of stern antagonism
to the composition teachers around it. I say "so far as it ought,"
because, as already noticed in that same place, we have enough, and
to spare, of noble _inventful_ pictures; so many have we, that we
let them moulder away on the walls and roofs of Italy without one
regretful thought about them. But of simple transcripts from nature,
till now we have had none; even Van Eyck and Albert Durer having
been strongly filled with the spirit of grotesque idealism; so that
the Pre-Raphaelites have, to the letter, fulfilled Steele's
description of the author, who "determined to write in an entirely
new manner, and describe things exactly as they took place."

§ 22. We have now, I believe, in some sort answered most of the
questions which were suggested to us during our statement of the
nature of great art. I could recapitulate the answers; but perhaps
the reader is already sufficiently wearied of the recurrence of the
terms "Ideal," "Nature," "Imagination," "Invention," and will hardly
care to see them again interchanged among each other, in the
formalities of a summary. What difficulties may yet occur to him
will, I think, disappear as he either re-reads the passages which
suggested them, or follows out the consideration of the subject for
himself:--this very simple, but very precious, conclusion being
continually remembered by him as the sum of all; that greatness in
art (as assuredly in all other things, but more distinctly in this
than in most of them,) is not a teachable nor gainable thing, but
_the expression of the mind of a God-made great man_; that teach, or
preach, or labor as you will, everlasting difference is set between
one man's capacity and another's; and that this God-given supremacy
is the priceless thing, always just as rare in the world at one time
as another. What you can manufacture, or communicate, you can lower
the price of, but this mental supremacy is incommunicable; you will
never multiply its quantity, nor lower its price; and nearly the
best thing that men can generally do is to set themselves, not to
the attainment, but the discovery of this; learning to know gold,
when we see it, from iron-glance, and diamonds from flint-sand,
being for most of us a more profitable employment than trying to
make diamonds out of our own charcoal. And for this God-made
supremacy, I generally have used, and shall continue to use, the
word Inspiration, not carelessly nor lightly, but in all logical
calmness and perfect reverence. We English have many false ideas
about reverence: we should be shocked, for instance, to see a
market-woman come into church with a basket of eggs on her arm: we
think it more reverent to lock her out till Sunday; and to surround
the church with respectability of iron railings, and defend it with
pacing inhabitation of beadles. I believe this to be _ir_reverence;
and that it is more truly reverent, when the market-woman, hot and
hurried, at six in the morning, her head much confused with
calculations of the probable price of eggs, can nevertheless get
within church porch, and church aisle, and church chancel, lay the
basket down on the very steps of the altar, and receive thereat so
much of help and hope as may serve her for the day's work. In like
manner we are solemnly, but I think not wisely, shocked at any one
who comes hurriedly into church, in any figurative way, with his
basket on his arm; and perhaps, so long as we feel it so, it is
better to keep the basket out. But, as for this one commodity of
high mental supremacy, it cannot be kept out, for the very fountain
of it is in the church wall, and there is no other right word for it
but this of Inspiration; a word, indeed, often ridiculously
perverted, and irreverently used of fledgling poets and pompous
orators--no one being offended then, and yet cavilled at when
quietly used of the spirit that it is in a truly great man; cavilled
at, chiefly, it seems to me, because we expect to know inspiration
by the look of it. Let a man have shaggy hair, dark eyes, a rolling
voice, plenty of animal energy, and a facility of rhyming or
sentencing, and--improvisatore or sentimentalist--we call him
"inspired" willingly enough; but let him be a rough, quiet worker,
not proclaiming himself melodiously in any wise, but familiar with
us, unpretending, and letting all his littlenesses and feeblenesses
be seen, unhindered,--wearing an ill-cut coat withal, and, though he
be such a man as is only sent upon the earth once in five hundred
years, for some special human teaching, it is irreverent to call him
"inspired." But, be it irreverent or not, this word I must always
use; and the rest of what work I have here before me, is simply to
prove the truth of it, with respect to the one among these mighty
spirits whom we have just lost; who divided his hearers, as many an
inspired speaker has done before now, into two great sects--a large
and a narrow; these searching the Nature-scripture calmly, "whether
those things were so," and those standing haughtily on their Mars
hill, asking, "what will this babbler say?"

  [46] People of any sense, however, confined themselves to wonder.
       I think it was only in the Art Journal of September 1st,
       1854, that any writer had the meanness to charge me with
       insincerity. "The pictures of Turner and the works of the
       Pre-Raphaelites are the very antipodes of each other; it is,
       therefore, impossible that one and the same individual can
       with any _show of sincerity_ [Note, by the way, the Art-Union
       has no idea that _real_ sincerity is a thing existent or
       possible at all. All that it expects or hopes of human nature
       is, that it should have _show_ of sincerity,] stand forth as
       the thick and thin [I perceive the writer intends to teach me
       English, as well as honesty,] eulogist of both. With a
       certain knowledge of art, such as may be possessed by the
       author of English Painters, [Note, farther, that the eminent
       critic does not so much as know the title of the book he is
       criticising,] it is not difficult to praise any bad or
       mediocre picture that may be qualified with extravagance or
       mysticism. This author owes the public a heavy debt of
       explanation, which a lifetime spent in ingenious
       reconciliations would not suffice to discharge. A fervent
       admiration of certain pictures by Turner, and, at the same
       time, of some of the severest productions of the
       Pre-Raphaelites, presents an insuperable problem to persons
       whose taste in art is regulated by definite principles."

  [47] Part II. Sec. I. Chap. VII. § 46.

  [48] Part II. Sec. IV. Chap. IV. § 23., and Part II. Sec. I. Chap.
       VII. § 9. The whole of the Preface to the Second Edition is
       written to maintain this one point of specific detail against
       the advocates of generalization.

  [49] Vol. II. Chapter on Penetrative Imagination.

  [50] Several other points connected with this subject have already
       been noticed in the last chapter of the Stones of Venice, §
       21. &c.

  [51] "Though my pictures should have nothing else, they shall have
       Chiaroscuro."--CONSTABLE (in Leslie's Life of him). It is
       singular to reflect what that fatal Chiaroscuro has done in
       art, in the full extent of its influence. It has been not
       only shadow, but shadow of Death: passing over the face of
       the ancient art, as death itself might over a fair human
       countenance; whispering, as it reduced it to the white
       projections and lightless orbits of the skull, "Thy face
       shall have nothing else, but it shall have Chiaroscuro."




CHAPTER XI.

OF THE NOVELTY OF LANDSCAPE.


§ 1. Having now obtained, I trust, clear ideas, up to a certain
point, of what is generally right and wrong in all art, both in
conception and in workmanship, we have to apply these laws of right
to the particular branch of art which is the subject of our present
inquiry, namely, landscape-painting. Respecting which, after the
various meditations into which we have been led on the high duties
and ideals of art, it may not improbably occur to us first to
ask,--whether it be worth inquiring about at all.

That question, perhaps the reader thinks, should have been asked and
answered before I had written, or he read, two volumes and a half
about it. So I _had_ answered it, in my own mind; but it seems time
now to give the grounds for this answer. If, indeed, the reader has
never suspected that landscape-painting was anything but good,
right, and healthy work, I should be sorry to put any doubt of its
being so into his mind; but if, as seems to me more likely, he,
living in this busy and perhaps somewhat calamitous age, has some
suspicion that landscape-painting is but an idle and empty business,
not worth all our long talk about it, then, perhaps, he will be
pleased to have such suspicion done away, before troubling himself
farther with these disquisitions.

§ 2. I should rather be glad, than otherwise, that he _had_ formed
some suspicion on this matter. If he has at all admitted the truth
of anything hitherto said respecting great art, and its choices of
subject, it seems to me he ought, by this time, to be questioning
with himself whether road-side weeds, old cottages, broken stones,
and such other materials, be worthy matters for grave men to busy
themselves in the imitation of. And I should like him to probe this
doubt to the deep of it, and bring all his misgivings out to the
broad light, that we may see how we are to deal with them, or
ascertain if indeed they are too well founded to be dealt with.

§ 3. And to this end I would ask him now to imagine himself
entering, for the first time in his life, the room of the Old
Water-Color Society; and to suppose that he has entered it, not for
the sake of a quiet examination of the paintings one by one, but in
order to seize such ideas as it may generally suggest respecting the
state and meaning of modern as compared with elder, art. I suppose
him, of course, that he may be capable of such a comparison, to be
in some degree familiar with the different forms in which art has
developed itself within the periods historically known to us; but
never, till that moment, to have seen any completely modern work. So
prepared, and so unprepared, he would, as his ideas began to arrange
themselves, be first struck by the number of paintings representing
blue mountains, clear lakes, and ruined castles or cathedrals, and
he would say to himself: "There is something strange in the mind of
these modern people! Nobody ever cared about blue mountains before,
or tried to paint the broken stones of old walls." And the more he
considered the subject, the more he would feel the peculiarity; and,
as he thought over the art of Greeks and Romans, he would still
repeat, with increasing certainty of conviction: "Mountains! I
remember none. The Greeks did not seem, as artists, to know that
such things were in the world. They carved, or variously
represented, men, and horses, and beasts, and birds, and all kinds
of living creatures,--yes, even down to cuttle-fish; and trees, in a
sort of way; but not so much as the outline of a mountain; and as
for lakes, they merely showed they knew the difference between salt
and fresh water by the fish they put into each." Then he would pass
on to mediæval art: and still he would be obliged to repeat:
"Mountains! I remember none. Some careless and jagged arrangements
of blue spires or spikes on the horizon, and, here and there, an
attempt at representing an overhanging rock with a hole through it;
but merely in order to divide the light behind some human figure.
Lakes! No, nothing of the kind,--only blue bays of sea put in to
fill up the background when the painter could not think of anything
else. Broken-down buildings! No; for the most part very complete
and well-appointed buildings, if any; and never buildings at all,
but to give place or explanation to some circumstance of human
conduct." And then he would look up again to the modern pictures,
observing, with an increasing astonishment, that here the human
interest had, in many cases, altogether disappeared. That mountains,
instead of being used only as a blue ground for the relief of the
heads of saints, were themselves the exclusive subjects of reverent
contemplation; that their ravines, and peaks, and forests, were all
painted with an appearance of as much enthusiasm as had formerly
been devoted to the dimple of beauty, or the frowns of asceticism;
and that all the living interest which was still supposed necessary
to the scene, might be supplied by a traveller in a slouched hat, a
beggar in a scarlet cloak, or, in default of these, even by a heron
or a wild duck.

And if he could entirely divest himself of his own modern habits of
thought, and regard the subjects in question with the feelings of a
knight or monk of the middle ages, it might be a question whether
those feelings would not rapidly verge towards contempt. "What!" he
might perhaps mutter to himself, "here are human beings spending the
whole of their lives in making pictures of bits of stone and runlets
of water, withered sticks and flying frogs, and actually not a
picture of the gods or the heroes! none of the saints or the
martyrs! none of the angels and demons! none of councils or battles,
or any other single thing worth the thought of a man! Trees and
clouds indeed! as if I should not see as many trees as I cared to
see, and more, in the first half of my day's journey to-morrow, or
as if it mattered to any man whether the sky were clear or cloudy,
so long as his armor did not get too hot in the sun!"

§ 5. There can be no question that this would have been somewhat the
tone of thought with which either a Lacedæmonian, a soldier of Rome in
her strength, or a knight of the thirteenth century, would have been
apt to regard these particular forms of our present art. Nor can there
be any question that, in many respects, their judgment would have been
just. It is true that the indignation of the Spartan or Roman would
have been equally excited against any appearance of luxurious
industry; but the mediæval knight would, to the full, have admitted
the nobleness of art; only he would have had it employed in decorating
his church or his prayer-book, nor in imitating moors and clouds. And
the feelings of all the three would have agreed in this,--that their
main ground of offence must have been the want of _seriousness_ and
_purpose_ in what they saw. They would all have admitted the nobleness
of whatever conduced to the honor of the gods, or the power of the
nation; but they would not have understood how the skill of human life
could be wisely spent in that which did no honor either to Jupiter or
to the Virgin; and which in no wise tended, apparently, either to the
accumulation of wealth, the excitement of patriotism, or the
advancement of morality.

§ 6. And exactly so far forth their judgment would be just, as the
landscape-painting could indeed be shown, for others as well as for
them, to be art of this nugatory kind; and so far forth unjust, as
that painting could be shown to depend upon, or cultivate, certain
sensibilities which neither the Greek nor mediæval knight possessed,
and which have resulted from some extraordinary change in human nature
since their time. We have no right to assume, without very accurate
examination of it, that this change has been an ennobling one. The
simple fact, that we are, in some strange way, different from all the
great races that have existed before us, cannot at once be received as
the proof of our own greatness; nor can it be granted, without any
question, that we have a legitimate subject of complacency in being
under the influence of feelings, with which neither Miltiades nor the
Black Prince, neither Homer nor Dante, neither Socrates nor St.
Francis, could for an instant have sympathized.

§ 7. Whether, however, this fact be one to excite our pride or not,
it is assuredly one to excite our deepest interest. The fact itself
is certain. For nearly six thousand years the energies of man have
pursued certain beaten paths, manifesting some constancy of feeling
throughout all that period, and involving some fellowship at heart,
among the various nations who by turns succeeded or surpassed each
other in the several aims of art or policy. So that, for these
thousands of years, the whole human race might be to some extent
described in general terms. Man was a creature separated from all
others by his instinctive sense of an Existence superior to his own,
invariably manifesting this sense of the being of a God more
strongly in proportion to his own perfectness of mind and body; and
making enormous and self-denying efforts, in order to obtain some
persuasion of the immediate presence or approval of the Divinity. So
that, on the whole, the best things he did were done as in the
presence, or for the honor, of his gods; and, whether in statues, to
help him to imagine them, or temples raised to their honor, or acts
of self-sacrifice done in the hope of their love, he brought
whatever was best and skilfullest in him into their service, and
lived in a perpetual subjection to their unseen power. Also, he was
always anxious to know something definite about them; and his chief
books, songs, and pictures were filled with legends about them, or
especially devoted to illustration of their lives and nature.

§ 8. Next to these gods he was always anxious to know something
about his human ancestors; fond of exalting the memory, and telling
or painting the history of old rulers and benefactors; yet full of
an enthusiastic confidence in himself, as having in many ways
advanced beyond the best efforts of past time; and eager to record
his own doings for future fame. He was a creature eminently warlike,
placing his principal pride in dominion; eminently beautiful, and
having great delight in his own beauty: setting forth this beauty by
every species of invention in dress, and rendering his arms and
accoutrements superbly decorative of his form. He took, however,
very little interest in anything but what belonged to humanity;
caring in no wise for the external world, except as it influenced
his own destiny; honoring the lightning because it could strike him,
the sea because it could drown him, the fountains because they gave
him drink, and the grass because it yielded him seed; but utterly
incapable of feeling any special happiness in the love of such
things, or any earnest emotion about them, considered as separate
from man; therefore giving no time to the study of them;--knowing
little of herbs, except only which were hurtful, and which healing;
of stones, only which would glitter brightest in a crown, or last
the longest in a wall; of the wild beasts, which were best for food,
and which the stoutest quarry for the hunter;--thus spending only
on the lower creatures and inanimate things his waste energy, his
dullest thoughts, his most languid emotions, and reserving all his
acuter intellect for researches into his own nature and that of the
gods; all his strength of will for the acquirement of political or
moral power; all his sense of beauty for things immediately
connected with his own person and life; and all his deep affections
for domestic or divine companionship.

Such, in broad light and brief terms, was man for five thousand
years. Such he is no longer. Let us consider what he is now,
comparing the descriptions clause by clause.

§ 9. I. He _was_ invariably sensible of the existence of gods, and
went about all his speculations or works holding this as an
acknowledged fact, making his best efforts in their service. _Now_
he is capable of going through life with hardly any positive idea on
this subject,--doubting, fearing, suspecting, analyzing,--doing
everything, in fact, _but_ believing; hardly ever getting quite up
to that point which hitherto was wont to be the starting point for
all generations. And human work has accordingly hardly any reference
to spiritual beings, but is done either from a patriotic or personal
interest,--either to benefit mankind, or reach some selfish end, not
(I speak of human work in the broad sense) to please the gods.

II. He _was_ a beautiful creature, setting forth this beauty by all
means in his power, and depending upon it for much of his authority
over his fellows. So that the ruddy cheek of David, and the ivory
skin of Atrides, and the towering presence of Saul, and the blue
eyes of Coeur de Lion, were among the chief reasons why they
should be kings; and it was one of the aims of all education, and of
all dress, to make the presence of the human form stately and
lovely. _Now_ it has become the task of grave philosophy partly to
depreciate or conceal this bodily beauty; and even by those who
esteem it in their hearts, it is not made one of the great ends of
education: man has become, upon the whole, an ugly animal, and is
not ashamed of his ugliness.

III. He _was_ eminently warlike. He is _now_ gradually becoming more
and more ashamed of all the arts and aims of battle. So that the
desire of dominion, which was once frankly confessed or boasted of as
a heroic passion, is now sternly reprobated or cunningly disclaimed.

IV. He _used_ to take no interest in anything but what immediately
concerned himself. _Now_, he has deep interest in the abstract
natures of things, inquires as eagerly into the laws which regulate
the economy of the material world, as into those of his own being,
and manifests a passionate admiration of inanimate objects, closely
resembling, in its elevation and tenderness, the affection which he
bears to those living souls with which he is brought into the
nearest fellowship.

§ 10. It is this last change only which is to be the subject of our
present inquiry; but it cannot be doubted that it is closely
connected with all the others, and that we can only thoroughly
understand its nature by considering it in this connection. For,
regarded by itself, we might, perhaps, too rashly assume it to be a
natural consequence of the progress of the race. There appears to be
a diminution of selfishness in it, and a more extended and heartfelt
desire of understanding the manner of God's working; and this the
more, because one of the permanent characters of this change is a
greater accuracy in the statement of external facts. When the eyes
of men were fixed first upon themselves, and upon nature solely and
secondarily as bearing upon their interests, it was of less
consequence to them what the ultimate laws of nature were, than what
their immediate effects were upon human beings. Hence they could
rest satisfied with phenomena instead of principles, and accepted
without scrutiny every fable which seemed sufficiently or gracefully
to account for those phenomena. But so far as the eyes of men are
now withdrawn from themselves, and turned upon the inanimate things
about them, the results cease to be of importance, and the laws
become essential.

§ 11. In these respects, it might easily appear to us that this
change was assuredly one of steady and natural advance. But when we
contemplate the others above noted, of which it is clearly one of
the branches or consequences, we may suspect ourselves of
over-rashness in our self-congratulation, and admit the necessity of
a scrupulous analysis both of the feeling itself and of its
tendencies.

Of course a complete analysis, or anything like it, would involve a
treatise on the whole history of the world. I shall merely endeavor
to note some of the leading and more interesting circumstances
bearing on the subject, and to show sufficient practical ground for
the conclusion, that landscape painting is indeed a noble and useful
art, though one not long known by man. I shall therefore examine, as
best I can, the effect of landscape, 1st, on the Classical mind;
2ndly, on the Mediæval mind; and lastly, on the Modern mind. But
there is one point of some interest respecting the effect of it on
_any_ mind, which must be settled first, and this I will endeavor to
do in the next chapter.




CHAPTER XII.

OF THE PATHETIC FALLACY.


§ 1. German dulness and English affectation, have of late much
multiplied among us the use of two of the most objectionable words
that were ever coined by the troublesomeness of metaphysicians,
--namely, "Objective" and "Subjective."

No words can be more exquisitely, and in all points, useless; and I
merely speak of them that I may, at once and for ever, get them out
of my way and out of my reader's. But to get that done, they must be
explained.

The word "Blue," say certain philosophers, means the sensation of
color which the human eye receives in looking at the open sky, or at
a bell gentian.

Now, say they farther, as this sensation can only be felt when the
eye is turned to the object, and as, therefore, no such sensation is
produced by the object when nobody looks at it, therefore the thing,
when it is not looked at, is not blue; and thus (say they) there are
many qualities of things which depend as much on something else as
on themselves. To be sweet, a thing must have a taster; it is only
sweet while it is being tasted, and if the tongue had not the
capacity of taste, then the sugar would not have the quality of
sweetness.

And then they agree that the qualities of things which thus depend
upon our perception of them, and upon our human nature as affected
by them, shall be called Subjective; and the qualities of things
which they always have, irrespective of any other nature, as
roundness or squareness, shall be called Objective.

From these ingenious views the step is very easy to a farther
opinion, that it does not much matter what things are in themselves,
but only what they are to us; and that the only real truth of them
is their appearance to, or effect upon, us. From which position,
with a hearty desire for mystification, and much egotism,
selfishness, shallowness, and impertinence, a philosopher may easily
go so far as to believe, and say, that everything in the world
depends upon his seeing or thinking of it, and that nothing,
therefore, exists, but what he sees or thinks of.

§ 2. Now, to get rid of all these ambiguities and troublesome words
at once, be it observed that the word "Blue" does _not_ mean the
_sensation_ caused by a gentian on the human eye; but it means the
_power_ of producing that sensation; and this power is always there,
in the thing, whether we are there to experience it or not, and
would remain there though there were not left a man on the face of
the earth. Precisely in the same way gunpowder has a power of
exploding. It will not explode if you put no match to it. But it has
always the power of so exploding, and is therefore called an
explosive compound, which it very positively and assuredly is,
whatever philosophy may say to the contrary.

In like manner, a gentian does not produce the sensation of blueness
if you don't look at it. But it has always the power of doing so;
its particles being everlastingly so arranged by its Maker. And,
therefore, the gentian and the sky are always verily blue, whatever
philosophy may say to the contrary; and if you do not see them blue
when you look at them, it is not their fault but yours.[52]

§ 3. Hence I would say to these philosophers: If, instead of using
the sonorous phrase, "It is objectively so," you will use the plain
old phrase, "It _is_ so;" and if instead of the sonorous phrase, "It
is subjectively so," you will say, in plain old English, "It does
so," or "It seems so to me;" you will, on the whole, be more
intelligible to your fellow-creatures: and besides, if you find
that a thing which generally "does so" to other people (as a gentian
looks blue to most men) does _not_ so to you, on any particular
occasion, you will not fall into the impertinence of saying that the
thing is not so, or did not so, but you will say simply (what you
will be all the better for speedily finding out) that something is
the matter with you. If you find that you cannot explode the
gunpowder, you will not declare that all gunpowder is subjective,
and all explosion imaginary, but you will simply suspect and declare
yourself to be an ill-made match. Which, on the whole, though there
may be a distant chance of a mistake about it, is, nevertheless, the
wisest conclusion you can come to until farther experiment.[53]

§ 4. Now, therefore, putting these tiresome and absurd words quite
out of our way, we may go on at our ease to examine the point in
question,--namely, the difference between the ordinary, proper, and
true appearances of things to us; and the extraordinary, or false
appearances, when we are under the influence of emotion, or
contemplative fancy;[54] false appearances, I say, as being entirely
unconnected with any real power or character in the object, and only
imputed to it by us.

For instance--

      "The spendthrift crocus, bursting through the mould
      Naked and shivering, with his cup of gold."[55]

This is very beautiful and yet very untrue. The crocus is not a
spendthrift, but a hardy plant; its yellow is not gold, but saffron.
How is it that we enjoy so much the having it put into our heads
that it is anything else than a plain crocus?

It is an important question. For, throughout our past reasonings
about art, we have always found that nothing could be good or
useful, or ultimately pleasurable, which was untrue. But here is
something pleasurable in written poetry which is nevertheless
_un_true. And what is more, if we think over our favorite poetry, we
shall find it full of this kind of fallacy, and that we like it all
the more for being so.

§ 5. It will appear also, on consideration of the matter, that this
fallacy is of two principal kinds. Either, as in this case of the
crocus, it is the fallacy of wilful fancy, which involves no real
expectation that it will be believed; or else it is a fallacy caused
by an excited state of the feelings, making us, for the time, more
or less irrational. Of the cheating of the fancy we shall have to
speak presently; but, in this chapter, I want to examine the nature
of the other error, that which the mind admits, when affected
strongly by emotion. Thus, for instance, in Alton Locke,--

      "They rowed her in across the rolling foam--
      The cruel, crawling foam."

The foam is not cruel, neither does it crawl. The state of mind
which attributes to it these characters of a living creature is one
in which the reason is unhinged by grief. All violent feelings have
the same effect. They produce in us a falseness in all our
impressions of external things, which I would generally characterize
as the "Pathetic fallacy."

§ 6. Now we are in the habit of considering this fallacy as
eminently a character of poetical description, and the temper of
mind in which we allow it, as one eminently poetical, because
passionate. But, I believe, if we look well into the matter, that
we shall find the greatest poets do not often admit this kind of
falseness,--that it is only the second order of poets who much
delight in it.[56]

Thus, when Dante describes the spirits falling from the bank of
Acheron "as dead leaves flutter from a bough," he gives the most
perfect image possible of their utter lightness, feebleness,
passiveness, and scattering agony of despair, without, however, for
an instant losing his own clear perception that _these_ are souls,
and _those_ are leaves: he makes no confusion of one with the other.
But when Coleridge speaks of

      "The one red leaf, the last of its clan,
      That dances as often as dance it can,"

he has a morbid, that is to say, a so far false, idea about the
leaf: he fancies a life in it, and will, which there are not;
confuses its powerlessness with choice, its fading death with
merriment, and the wind that shakes it with music. Here, however,
there is some beauty, even in the morbid passage; but take an
instance in Homer and Pope. Without the knowledge of Ulysses,
Elpenor, his youngest follower, has fallen from an upper chamber in
the Circean palace, and has been left dead, unmissed by his leader,
or companions, in the haste of their departure. They cross the sea
to the Cimmerian land; and Ulysses summons the shades from Tartarus.
The first which appears is that of the lost Elpenor. Ulysses,
amazed, and in exactly the spirit of bitter and terrified lightness
which is seen in Hamlet,[57] addresses the spirit with the simple,
startled words:--

    "Elpenor? How camest thou under the Shadowy darkness? Hast
    thou come faster on foot than I in my black ship?"

Which Pope renders thus:--

      "O, say, what angry power Elpenor led
      To glide in shades, and wander with the dead?
      How could thy soul, by realms and seas disjoined,
      Outfly the nimble sail, and leave the lagging wind?"

I sincerely hope the reader finds no pleasure here, either in the
nimbleness of the sail, or the laziness of the wind! And yet how is
it that these conceits are so painful now, when they have been
pleasant to us in the other instances?

§ 7. For a very simple reason. They are not a _pathetic_ fallacy at
all, for they are put into the mouth of the wrong passion--a passion
which never could possibly have spoken them--agonized curiosity.
Ulysses wants to know the facts of the matter; and the very last
thing his mind could do at the moment would be to pause, or suggest
in any wise what was _not_ a fact. The delay in the first three
lines, and conceit in the last, jar upon us instantly, like the most
frightful discord in music. No poet of true imaginative power could
possibly have written the passage. It is worth while comparing the
way a similar question is put by the exquisite sincerity of Keats:--

                  "He wept, and his bright tears
        Went trickling down the golden bow he held.
        Thus, with half-shut, suffused eyes, he stood;
        While from beneath some cumb'rous boughs hard by,
        With solemn step, an awful goddess came.
        And there was purport in her looks for him,
        Which he with eager guess began to read:
        Perplexed the while, melodiously he said,
        '_How cam'st thou over the unfooted sea?_'"

Therefore, we see that the spirit of truth must guide us in some
sort, even in our enjoyment of fallacy. Coleridge's fallacy has no
discord in it, but Pope's has set our teeth on edge. Without farther
questioning, I will endeavor to state the main bearings of this
matter.

§ 8. The temperament which admits the pathetic fallacy, is, as I
said above, that of a mind and body in some sort too weak to deal
fully with what is before them or upon them; borne away, or
over-clouded, or over-dazzled by emotion; and it is a more or less
noble state, according to the force of the emotion which has induced
it. For it is no credit to a man that he is not morbid or inaccurate
in his perceptions, when he has no strength of feeling to warp them;
and it is in general a sign of higher capacity and stand in the
ranks of being, that the emotions should be strong enough to
vanquish, partly, the intellect, and make it believe what they
choose. But it is still a grander condition when the intellect also
rises, till it is strong enough to assert its rule against, or
together with, the utmost efforts of the passions; and the whole man
stands in an iron glow, white hot, perhaps, but still strong, and in
no wise evaporating; even if he melts, losing none of his weight.

So, then, we have the three ranks: the man who perceives rightly,
because he does not feel, and to whom the primrose is very
accurately the primrose, because he does not love it. Then,
secondly, the man who perceives wrongly, because he feels, and to
whom the primrose is anything else than a primrose: a star, or a
sun, or a fairy's shield, or a forsaken maiden. And then, lastly,
there is the man who perceives rightly in spite of his feelings, and
to whom the primrose is for ever nothing else than itself--a little
flower, apprehended in the very plain and leafy fact of it, whatever
and how many soever the associations and passions may be, that crowd
around it. And, in general, these three classes may be rated in
comparative order, as the men who are not poets at all, and the
poets of the second order, and the poets of the first; only however
great a man may be, there are always some subjects which _ought_ to
throw him off his balance; some, by which his poor human capacity of
thought should be conquered, and brought into the inaccurate and
vague state of perception, so that the language of the highest
inspiration becomes broken, obscure, and wild in metaphor,
resembling that of the weaker man, overborne by weaker things.

§ 9. And thus, in full, there are four classes: the men who feel
nothing, and therefore see truly; the men who feel strongly, think
weakly, and see untruly (second order of poets); the men who feel
strongly, think strongly, and see truly (first order of poets); and
the men who, strong as human creatures can be, are yet submitted to
influences stronger than they, and see in a sort untruly, because
what they see is inconceivably above them. This last is the usual
condition of prophetic inspiration.

§ 10. I separate these classes, in order that their character may be
clearly understood; but of course they are united each to the other
by imperceptible transitions, and the same mind, according to the
influences to which it is subjected, passes at different times into
the various states. Still, the difference between the great and less
man is, on the whole, chiefly in this point of _alterability_. That
is to say, the one knows too much, and perceives and feels too much
of the past and future, and of all things beside and around that
which immediately affects him, to be in any wise shaken by it. His
mind is made up; his thoughts have an accustomed current; his ways
are steadfast; it is not this or that new sight which will at once
unbalance him. He is tender to impression at the surface, like a
rock with deep moss upon it; but there is too much mass of him to be
moved. The smaller man, with the same degree of sensibility, is at
once carried off his feet; he wants to do something he did not want
to do before; he views all the universe in a new light through his
tears; he is gay or enthusiastic, melancholy or passionate, as
things come and go to him. Therefore the high creative poet might
even be thought, to a great extent, impassive (as shallow people
think Dante stern), receiving indeed all feelings to the full, but
having a great centre of reflection and knowledge in which he stands
serene, and watches the feeling, as it were, from far off.

Dante, in his most intense moods, has entire command of himself, and
can look around calmly, at all moments, for the image or the word that
will best tell what he sees to the upper or lower world. But Keats and
Tennyson, and the poets of the second order, are generally themselves
subdued by the feelings under which they write, or, at least, write as
choosing to be so, and therefore admit certain expressions and modes
of thought which are in some sort diseased or false.

§ 11. Now so long as we see that the _feeling_ is true, we pardon,
or are even pleased by, the confessed fallacy of sight which it
induces: we are pleased, for instance, with those lines of
Kingsley's, above quoted, not because they fallaciously describe
foam, but because they faithfully describe sorrow. But the moment
the mind of the speaker becomes cold, that moment every such
expression becomes untrue, as being for ever untrue in the external
facts. And there is no greater baseness in literature than the habit
of using these metaphorical expressions in cool blood. An inspired
writer, in full impetuosity of passion, may speak wisely and truly
of "raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame;" but it is
only the basest writer who cannot speak of the sea without talking
of "raging waves," "remorseless floods," "ravenous billows," &c.;
and it is one of the signs of the highest power in a writer to check
all such habits of thought, and to keep his eyes fixed firmly on the
_pure fact_, out of which if any feeling comes to him or his reader,
he knows it must be a true one.

To keep to the waves, I forget who it is who represents a man in
despair, desiring that his body may be cast into the sea,

      "_Whose changing mound, and foam that passed away_,
      Might mock the eye that questioned where I lay."

Observe, there is not a single false, or even overcharged,
expression. "Mound" of the sea wave is perfectly simple and true;
"changing" is as familiar as may be; "foam that passed away,"
strictly literal; and the whole line descriptive of the reality with
a degree of accuracy which I know not any other verse, in the range
of poetry, that altogether equals. For most people have not a
distinct idea of the clumsiness and massiveness of a large wave. The
word "wave" is used too generally of ripples and breakers, and
bendings in light drapery or grass: it does not by itself convey a
perfect image. But the word "mound" is heavy, large, dark, definite;
there is no mistaking the kind of wave meant, nor missing the sight
of it. Then the term "changing" has a peculiar force also. Most
people think of waves as rising and falling. But if they look at the
sea carefully, they will perceive that the waves do not rise and
fall. They change. Change both place and form, but they do not fall;
one wave goes on, and on, and still on; now lower, now higher, now
tossing its mane like a horse, now building itself together like a
wall, now shaking, now steady, but still the same wave, till at last
it seems struck by something, and changes, one knows not
how,--becomes another wave.

The close of the line insists on this image, and paints it still
more perfectly,--"foam that passed away." Not merely melting,
disappearing, but passing on, out of sight, on the career of the
wave. Then, having put the absolute ocean fact as far as he may
before our eyes, the poet leaves us to feel about it as we may, and
to trace for ourselves the opposite fact,--the image of the green
mounds that do not change, and the white and written stones that do
not pass away; and thence to follow out also the associated images
of the calm life with the quiet grave, and the despairing life with
the fading foam:--

                   "Let no man move his bones."
    "As for Samaria, her king is cut off like the foam upon the water."

But nothing of this is actually told or pointed out, and the
expressions, as they stand, are perfectly severe and accurate, utterly
uninfluenced by the firmly governed emotion of the writer. Even the
word "mock" is hardly an exception, as it may stand merely for
"deceive" or "defeat," without implying any impersonation of the
waves.

§ 12. It may be well, perhaps, to give one or two more instances to
show the peculiar dignity possessed by all passages which thus limit
their expression to the pure fact, and leave the hearer to gather
what he can from it. Here is a notable one from the Iliad. Helen,
looking from the Scæan gate of Troy over the Grecian host, and
telling Priam the names of its captains, says at last:--

    "I see all the other dark-eyed Greeks; but two I cannot
    see,--Castor and Pollux,--whom one mother bore with me. Have
    they not followed from fair Lacedæmon, or have they indeed
    come in their sea-wandering ships, but now will not enter into
    the battle of men, fearing the shame and the scorn that is in
    me?"

Then Homer:--

    "So she spoke. But them, already, the life-giving earth
    possessed, there in Lacedæmon, in the dear fatherland."

Note, here, the high poetical truth carried to the extreme. The poet
has to speak of the earth in sadness, but he will not let that
sadness affect or change his thoughts of it. No; though Castor and
Pollux be dead, yet the earth is our mother still, fruitful,
life-giving. These are the facts of the thing. I see nothing else
than these. Make what you will of them.

§ 13. Take another very notable instance from Casimir de la Vigne's
terrible ballad, "La Toilette de Constance." I must quote a few
lines out of it here and there, to enable the reader who has not the
book by him, to understand its close.

            "Vite, Anna, vite; au miroir
              Plus vite, Anna. L'heure s'avance,
            Et je vais au bal ce soir
              Chez l'ambassadeur de France.

      Y pensez vous, ils sont fanés, ces noeuds,
        Ils sont d'hier, mon Dieu, comme tout passe!
      Que du réseau qui retient mes cheveux
        Les glands d'azur retombent avec grâce.
      Plus haut! Plus bas! Vous ne comprenez rien!
        Que sur mon front ce saphir étincelle:
      Vous me piquez, mal-adroite. Ah, c'est bien,
        Bien,--chère Anna! Je t'aime, je suis belle.

      Celui qu'en vain je voudrais oublier
        (Anna, ma robe) il y sera, j'espère.
      (Ah, fi, profane, est-ce là mon collier?
        Quoi! ces grains d'or bénits par le Saint Père!)
      Il y sera; Dieu, s'il pressait ma main
        En y pensant, à peine je respire;
      Père Anselmo doit m'entendre demain,
        Comment ferai-je, Anna, pour tout lui dire?

            Vite un coup d'oeil au miroir,
              Le dernier.----J'ai l'assurance
            Qu'on va m'adorer ce soir
              Chez l'ambassadeur de France.

      Près du foyer, Constance s'admirait.
        Dieu! sur sa robe il vole une étincelle!
      Au feu. Courez; Quand l'espoir l'enivrait
        Tout perdre ainsi! Quoi! Mourir,--et si belle!
      L'horrible feu ronge avec volupté
        Ses bras, son sein, et l'entoure, et s'élève,
      Et sans pitie dévore sa beauté,
        Ses dixhuit ans, hélas, et son doux rêve!

            Adieu, bal, plaisir, amour!
              On disait, Pauvre Constance!
            Et on dansait, jusqu'au jour,
              Chez l'ambassadeur de France."

Yes, that is the fact of it. Right or wrong, the poet does not say.
What you may think about it, he does not know. He has nothing to do
with that. There lie the ashes of the dead girl in her chamber.
There they danced, till the morning, at the Ambassador's of France.
Make what you will of it.

If the reader will look through the ballad, of which I have quoted
only about the third part, he will find that there is not, from
beginning to end of it, a single poetical (so called) expression,
except in one stanza. The girl speaks as simple prose as may be; there
is not a word she would not have actually used as she was dressing.
The poet stands by, impassive as a statue, recording her words just as
they come. At last the doom seizes her, and in the very presence of
death, for an instant, his own emotions conquer him. He records no
longer the facts only, but the facts as they seem to him. The fire
gnaws with _voluptuousness--without pity_. It is soon past. The fate
is fixed for ever; and he retires into his pale and crystalline
atmosphere of truth. He closes all with the calm veracity,

      "They said, 'Poor Constance!'"

§ 14. Now in this there is the exact type of the consummate poetical
temperament. For, be it clearly and constantly remembered, that the
greatness of a poet depends upon the two faculties, acuteness of
feeling, and command of it. A poet is great, first in proportion to
the strength of his passion, and then, that strength being granted,
in proportion to his government of it; there being, however, always
a point beyond which it would be inhuman and monstrous if he pushed
this government, and, therefore, a point at which all feverish and
wild fancy becomes just and true. Thus the destruction of the
kingdom of Assyria cannot be contemplated firmly by a prophet of
Israel. The fact is too great, too wonderful. It overthrows him,
dashes him into a confused element of dreams. All the world is, to
his stunned thought, full of strange voices. "Yea, the fir-trees
rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, 'Since thou art
gone down to the grave, no feller is come up against us.'" So, still
more, the thought of the presence of Deity cannot be borne without
this great astonishment. "The mountains and the hills shall break
forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the fields shall
clap their hands."

§ 15. But by how much this feeling is noble when it is justified by
the strength of its cause, by so much it is ignoble when there is not
cause enough for it; and beyond all other ignobleness is the mere
affectation of it, in hardness of heart. Simply bad writing may almost
always, as above noticed, be known by its adoption of these fanciful
metaphorical expressions, as a sort of current coin; yet there is even
a worse, at least a more harmful, condition of writing than this, in
which such expressions are not ignorantly and feelinglessly caught up,
but, by some master, skilful in handling, yet insincere, deliberately
wrought out with chill and studied fancy; as if we should try to make
an old lava stream look red-hot again, by covering it with dead
leaves, or white-hot, with hoar-frost.

When Young is lost in veneration, as he dwells on the character of a
truly good and holy man, he permits himself for a moment to be
overborne by the feeling so far as to exclaim--

      "Where shall I find him? angels, tell me where.
      You know him; he is near you; point him out.
      Shall I see glories beaming from his brow,
      Or trace his footsteps by the rising flowers?"

This emotion has a worthy cause, and is thus true and right. But now
hear the cold-hearted Pope say to a shepherd girl--

      "Where'er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade!
      Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade;
      Your praise the birds shall chant in every grove,
      And winds shall waft it to the powers above.
      But would you sing, and rival Orpheus' strain,
      The wondering forests soon should dance again;
      The moving mountains hear the powerful call,
      And headlong streams hang, listening, in their fall."

This is not, nor could it for a moment be mistaken for, the language
of passion. It is simple falsehood, uttered by hypocrisy; definite
absurdity, rooted in affectation, and coldly asserted in the teeth
of nature and fact. Passion will indeed go far in deceiving itself;
but it must be a strong passion, not the simple wish of a lover to
tempt his mistress to sing. Compare a very closely parallel passage
in Wordsworth, in which the lover has lost his mistress:

      "Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid,
      When thus his moan he made:--

      'Oh, move, thou cottage, from behind yon oak,
        Or let the ancient tree uprooted lie,
      That in some other way yon smoke
        May mount into the sky.

      If still behind yon pine-tree's ragged bough,
        Headlong, the waterfall must come,
        Oh, let it, then, be dumb--
      Be anything, sweet stream, but that which thou art now.'"

Here is a cottage to be moved, if not a mountain, and a waterfall
to be silent, if it is not to hang listening; but with what
different relation to the mind that contemplates them! Here, in the
extremity of its agony, the soul cries out wildly for relief, which
at the same moment it partly knows to be impossible, but partly
believes possible, in a vague impression that a miracle _might_ be
wrought to give relief even to a less sore distress,--that nature is
kind, and God is kind, and that grief is strong; it knows not well
what _is_ possible to such grief. To silence a stream, to move a
cottage wall,--one might think it could do as much as that!

§ 16. I believe these instances are enough to illustrate the main
point I insist upon respecting the pathetic fallacy,--that so far
as it _is_ a fallacy, it is always the sign of a morbid state of
mind, and comparatively of a weak one. Even in the most inspired
prophet it is a sign of the incapacity of his human sight or thought
to bear what has been revealed to it. In ordinary poetry, if it is
found in the thoughts of the poet himself, it is at once a sign of
his belonging to the inferior school; if in the thoughts of the
characters imagined by him, it is right or wrong according to the
genuineness of the emotion from which it springs; always, however,
implying necessarily _some_ degree of weakness in the character.

Take two most exquisite instances from master hands. The Jessy of
Shenstone, and the Ellen of Wordsworth, have both been betrayed and
deserted. Jessy, in the course of her most touching complaint, says:

      "If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
        Where bloom the jasmines that could once allure,
      'Hope not to find delight in us,' they say,
        'For we are spotless, Jessy; we are pure.'"

Compare with this some of the words of Ellen:

      "'Ah, why,' said Ellen, sighing to herself,
      'Why do not words, and kiss, and solemn pledge,
      And nature, that is kind in woman's breast,
      And reason, that in man is wise and good,
      And fear of Him who is a righteous Judge,--
      Why do not these prevail for human life,
      To keep two hearts together, that began
      Their springtime with one love, and that have need
      Of mutual pity and forgiveness, sweet
      To grant, or be received; while that poor bird--
      O, come and hear him! Thou who hast to me
      Been faithless, hear him;--though a lowly creature,
      One of God's simple children, that yet know not
      The Universal Parent, _how_ he sings!
      As if he wished the firmament of heaven
      Should listen, and give back to him the voice
      Of his triumphant constancy and love.
      The proclamation that he makes, how far
      His darkness doth transcend our fickle light.'"

The perfection of both these passages, as far as regards truth and
tenderness of imagination in the two poets, is quite insuperable.
But, of the two characters imagined, Jessy is weaker than Ellen,
exactly in so far as something appears to her to be in nature which is
not. The flowers do not really reproach her. God meant them to comfort
her, not to taunt her; they would do so if she saw them rightly.

Ellen, on the other hand, is quite above the slightest erring
emotion. There is not the barest film of fallacy in all her
thoughts. She reasons as calmly as if she did not feel. And,
although the singing of the bird suggests to her the idea of its
desiring to be heard in heaven, she does not for an instant admit
any veracity in the thought. "As if," she says,--"I know he means
nothing of the kind; but it does verily seem as if." The reader will
find, by examining the rest of the poem, that Ellen's character is
throughout consistent in this clear though passionate strength.

It then being, I hope, now made clear to the reader in all respects
that the pathetic fallacy is powerful only so far as it is pathetic,
feeble so far as it is fallacious, and, therefore, that the dominion
of Truth is entire, over this, as over every other natural and just
state of the human mind, we may go on to the subject for the dealing
with which this prefatory inquiry became necessary; and why
necessary, we shall see forthwith.[58]

  [52] It is quite true, that in all qualities involving sensation,
       there may be a doubt whether different people receive the
       same sensation from the same thing (compare Part II. Sec. I.
       Chap. V. § 6.); but, though this makes such facts not
       distinctly explicable, it does not alter the facts
       themselves. I derive a certain sensation, which I call
       sweetness, from sugar. That is a fact. Another person feels a
       sensation, which _he_ also calls sweetness, from sugar. That
       is also a fact. The sugar's power to produce these two
       sensations, which we suppose to be, and which are, in all
       probability, very nearly the same in both of us, and, on the
       whole, in the human race, is its sweetness.

  [53] In fact (for I may as well, for once, meet our German friends
       in their own style), all that has been subjected to us on
       this subject seems object to this great objection; that the
       subjection of all things (subject to no exceptions) to senses
       which are, in us, both subject and abject, and objects of
       perpetual contempt, cannot but make it our ultimate object to
       subject ourselves to the senses, and to remove whatever
       objections existed to such subjection. So that, finally, that
       which is the subject of examination or object of attention,
       uniting thus in itself the characters of subness and obness
       (so that, that which has no obness in it should be called
       sub-subjective, or a sub-subject, and that which has no
       subness in it should be called upper or ober-objective, or an
       ob-object); and we also, who suppose ourselves the objects of
       every arrangement, and are certainly the subjects of every
       sensual impression, thus uniting in ourselves, in an obverse
       or adverse manner, the characters of obness and subness, must
       both become metaphysically dejected or rejected, nothing
       remaining in _us_ objective, but subjectivity, and the very
       objectivity of the object being lost in the abyss of this
       subjectivity of the Human.

       There is, however, some meaning in the above sentence, if the
       reader cares to make it out; but in a pure German sentence of
       the highest style there is often none whatever. See Appendix
       II. "German Philosophy."

  [54] Contemplative, in the sense explained in Part III. Sec. II.
       Chap. IV.

  [55] Holmes (Oliver Wendell), quoted by Miss Mitford in her
       Recollections of a Literary Life.

  [56] I admit two orders of poets, but no third; and by these two
       orders I mean the Creative (Shakspere, Homer, Dante), and
       Reflective or Perceptive (Wordsworth, Keats, Tennyson). But
       both of these must be _first_-rate in their range, though
       their range is different; and with poetry second-rate in
       _quality_ no one ought to be allowed to trouble mankind.
       There is quite enough of the best,--much more than we can
       ever read or enjoy in the length of a life; and it is a
       literal wrong or sin in any person to encumber us with
       inferior work. I have no patience with apologies made by
       young pseudo-poets, "that they believe there is _some_ good
       in what they have written: that they hope to do better in
       time," etc. _Some_ good! If there is not _all_ good, there is
       no good. If they ever hope to do better, why do they trouble
       us now? Let them rather courageously burn all they have done,
       and wait for the better days. There are few men, ordinarily
       educated, who in moments of strong feeling could not strike
       out a poetical thought, and afterwards polish it so as to be
       presentable. But men of sense know better than so to waste
       their time; and those who sincerely love poetry, know the
       touch of the master's hand on the chords too well to fumble
       among them after him. Nay, more than this; all inferior
       poetry is an injury to the good, inasmuch as it takes away
       the freshness of rhymes, blunders upon and gives a wretched
       commonalty to good thoughts; and, in general, adds to the
       weight of human weariness in a most woful and culpable
       manner. There are few thoughts likely to come across ordinary
       men, which have not already been expressed by greater men in
       the best possible way; and it is a wiser, more generous, more
       noble thing to remember and point out the perfect words, than
       to invent poorer ones, wherewith to encumber temporarily the
       world.

  [57] "Well said, Old mole! can'st work i' the ground so fast?"

  [58] I cannot quit this subject without giving two more instances,
       both exquisite, of the pathetic fallacy, which I have just
       come upon, in Maude:

                                 "For a great speculation had fail'd;
          And ever he mutter'd and madden'd, and ever wann'd with
                despair;
        And out he walk'd, when the wind like a broken worldling
                wail'd,
          And the _flying gold of the ruin'd woodlands drove thro'
                the air_."

            "There has fallen a splendid tear
              From the passion-flower at the gate.
            _The red rose cries, 'She is near, she is near!'_
              _And the white rose weeps, 'She is late.'_
            _The larkspur listens, 'I hear, I hear!'_
              _And the lily whispers, 'I wait.'_"




CHAPTER XIII.

OF CLASSICAL LANDSCAPE.


§ 1. My reason for asking the reader to give so much of his time to
the examination of the pathetic fallacy was, that, whether in
literature or in art, he will find it eminently characteristic of
the modern mind; and in the landscape, whether of literature or art,
he will also find the modern painter endeavoring to express
something which he, as a living creature, imagines in the lifeless
object, while the classical and mediæval painters were content with
expressing the unimaginary and actual qualities of the object
itself. It will be observed that, according to the principle stated
long ago, I use the words painter and poet quite indifferently,
including in our inquiry the landscape of literature, as well as
that of painting; and this the more because the spirit of classical
landscape has hardly been expressed in any other way than by words.

§ 2. Taking, therefore, this wide field, it is surely a very notable
circumstance, to begin with, that this pathetic fallacy is eminently
characteristic of modern painting. For instance, Keats, describing a
wave, breaking, out at sea, says of it--

      "Down whose green back the short-lived foam, all hoar,
      Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence."

That is quite perfect, as an example of the modern manner. The idea
of the peculiar action with which foam rolls down a long, large wave
could not have been given by any other words so well as by this
"wayward indolence." But Homer would never have written, never
thought of, such words. He could not by any possibility have lost
sight of the great fact that the wave, from the beginning to the end
of it, do what it might, was still nothing else than salt water; and
that salt water could not be either wayward or indolent. He will
call the waves "over-roofed," "full-charged," "monstrous,"
"compact-black," "dark-clear," "violet-colored," "wine-colored," and
so on. But every one of these epithets is descriptive of pure
physical nature. "Over-roofed" is the term he invariably uses of
anything--rock, house, or wave--that nods over at the brow; the
other terms need no explanation; they are as accurate and intense in
truth as words can be, but they never show the slightest feeling of
anything animated in the ocean. Black or clear, monstrous or
violet-colored, cold salt water it is always, and nothing but that.

§ 3. "Well, but the modern writer, by his admission of the tinge of
fallacy, has given an idea of something in the action of the wave
which Homer could not, and surely, therefore, has made a step in
advance? Also there appears to be a degree of sympathy and feeling
in the one writer, which there is not in the other; and as it has
been received for a first principle that writers are great in
proportion to the intensity of their feelings, and Homer seems to
have no feelings about the sea but that it is black and deep, surely
in this respect also the modern writer is the greater?"

Stay a moment. Homer _had_ some feeling about the sea; a faith in
the animation of it much stronger than Keats's. But all this sense
of something living in it, he separates in his mind into a great
abstract image of a Sea Power. He never says the waves rage, or the
waves are idle. But he says there is somewhat in, and greater than,
the waves, which rages, and is idle, and _that_ he calls a god.

§ 4. I do not think we ever enough endeavor to enter into what a
Greek's real notion of a god was. We are so accustomed to the modern
mockeries of the classical religion, so accustomed to hear and see
the Greek gods introduced as living personages, or invoked for help,
by men who believe neither in them nor in any other gods, that we
seem to have infected the Greek ages themselves with the breath, and
dimmed them with the shade, of our hypocrisy; and are apt to think
that Homer, as we know that Pope, was merely an ingenious fabulist;
nay, more than this, that all the nations of past time were
ingenious fabulists also, to whom the universe was a lyrical drama,
and by whom whatsoever was said about it was merely a witty
allegory, or a graceful lie, of which the entire upshot and
consummation was a pretty statue in the middle of the court, or at
the end of the garden.

This, at least, is one of our forms of opinion about Greek faith; not,
indeed, possible altogether to any man of honesty or ordinary powers
of thought; but still so venomously inherent in the modern philosophy
that all the pure lightning of Carlyle cannot as yet quite burn it out
of any of us. And then, side by side with this mere infidel folly,
stands the bitter short-sightedness of Puritanism, holding the
classical god to be either simply an idol,--a block of stone
ignorantly, though sincerely, worshipped,--or else an actual diabolic
or betraying power, usurping the place of god.

§ 5. Both these Puritanical estimates of Greek deity are of course
to some extent true. The corruption of classical worship is barren
idolatry; and that corruption was deepened, and variously directed
to their own purposes, by the evil angels. But this was neither the
whole, nor the principal part, of Pagan worship. Pallas was not, in
the pure Greek mind, merely a powerful piece of ivory in a temple at
Athens; neither was the choice of Leonidas between the alternatives
granted him by the oracle, of personal death, or ruin to his
country, altogether a work of the Devil's prompting.

§ 6. What, then, was actually the Greek god? In what way were these
two ideas of human form, and divine power, credibly associated in
the ancient heart, so as to become a subject of true faith,
irrespective equally of fable, allegory, superstitious trust in
stone, and demoniacal influence?

It seems to me that the Greek had exactly the same instinctive
feeling about the elements that we have ourselves; that to Homer, as
much as to Casimir de la Vigne, fire seemed ravenous and pitiless;
to Homer, as much as to Keats, the sea-wave appeared wayward or
idle, or whatever else it may be to the poetical passion. But then
the Greek reasoned upon this sensation, saying to himself: "I can
light the fire, and put it out; I can dry this water up, or drink
it. It cannot be the fire or the water that rages, or that is
wayward. But it must be something _in_ this fire and _in_ the water,
which I cannot destroy by extinguishing the one, or evaporating the
other, any more than I destroy myself by cutting off my finger; _I_
was _in_ my finger,--something of me at least was; I had a power
over it, and felt pain in it, though I am still as much myself when
it is gone. So there may be a power in the water which is not water,
but to which the water is as a body;--which can strike with it, move
in it, suffer in it, yet not be destroyed in it. This something,
this great Water Spirit, I must not confuse with the waves, which
are only its body. _They_ may flow hither and thither, increase or
diminish. _That_ must be indivisible--imperishable--a god. So of
fire also; those rays which I can stop, and in the midst of which I
cast a shadow, cannot be divine, nor greater than I. They cannot
feel, but there may be something in them that feels,--a glorious
intelligence, as much nobler and more swift than mine, as these
rays, which are its body, are nobler and swifter than my flesh;--the
spirit of all light, and truth, and melody, and revolving hours."

§ 7. It was easy to conceive, farther, that such spirits should be
able to assume at will a human form, in order to hold intercourse
with men, or to perform any act for which their proper body, whether
fire, earth, or air, was unfitted. And it would have been to place
them beneath, instead of above, humanity, if, assuming the form of
man, they could not also have tasted his pleasures. Hence the easy
step to the more or less material ideas of deities, which are apt at
first to shock us, but which are indeed only dishonorable so far as
they represent the gods as false and unholy. It is not the
materialism, but the vice, which degrades the conception; for the
materialism itself is never positive or complete. There is always
some sense of exaltation in the spiritual and immortal body; and of
a power proceeding from the visible form through all the infinity of
the element ruled by the particular god. The precise nature of the
idea is well seen in the passage of the Iliad which describes the
river Scamander defending the Trojans against Achilles. In order to
remonstrate with the hero, the god assumes a human form, which
nevertheless is in some way or other instantly recognized by
Achilles as that of the river-god: it is addressed at once as a
river, not as a man; and its voice is the voice of a river, "out of
the deep whirlpools."[59] Achilles refuses to obey its commands; and
from the human form it returns instantly into its natural or divine
one, and endeavors to overwhelm him with waves. Vulcan defends
Achilles, and sends fire against the river, which suffers in its
water-body, till it is able to bear no more. At last even the "nerve
of the river," or "strength of the river" (note the expression),
feels the fire, and this "strength of the river" addresses Vulcan in
supplications for respite. There is in this precisely the idea of a
vital part of the river-body, which acted and felt, and which, if
the fire reached it, was death, just as would be the case if it
touched a vital part of the human body. Throughout the passage the
manner of conception is perfectly clear and consistent; and if, in
other places, the exact connection between the ruling spirit and the
thing ruled is not so manifest, it is only because it is almost
impossible for the human mind to dwell long upon such subjects
without falling into inconsistencies, and gradually slackening its
effort to grasp the entire truth; until the more spiritual part of
it slips from its hold, and only the human form of the god is left,
to be conceived and described as subject to all the errors of
humanity. But I do not believe that the idea ever weakens itself
down to mere allegory. When Pallas is said to attack and strike down
Mars, it does not mean merely that Wisdom at that moment prevailed
against Wrath. It means that there are indeed two great spirits, one
entrusted to guide the human soul to wisdom and chastity, the other
to kindle wrath and prompt to battle. It means that these two
spirits, on the spot where, and at the moment when, a great contest
was to be decided between all that they each governed in man, then
and there assumed human form, and human weapons, and did verily and
materially strike at each other, until the Spirit of Wrath was
crushed. And when Diana is said to hunt with her nymphs in the
woods, it does not mean merely as Wordsworth puts it, that the poet
or shepherd saw the moon and stars glancing between the branches of
the trees, and wished to say so figuratively. It means that there
is a living spirit, to which the light of the moon is a body; which
takes delight in glancing between the clouds and following the wild
beasts as they wander through the night; and that this spirit
sometimes assumes a perfect human form, and in this form, with real
arrows, pursues and slays the wild beasts, which with its mere
arrows of moonlight it could not slay; retaining, nevertheless, all
the while, its power, and being in the moonlight, and in all else
that it rules.

§ 8. There is not the smallest inconsistency or unspirituality in
this conception. If there were, it would attach equally to the
appearance of the angels to Jacob, Abraham, Joshua, or Manoah. In
all those instances the highest authority which governs our own
faith requires us to conceive divine power clothed with a human form
(a form so real that it is recognized for superhuman only by its
"doing wondrously"), and retaining, nevertheless, sovereignty and
omnipresence in all the world. This is precisely, as I understand
it, the heathen idea of a God; and it is impossible to comprehend
any single part of the Greek mind until we grasp this faithfully,
not endeavoring to explain it away in any wise, but accepting, with
frank decision and definition, the tangible existence of its
deities;--blue-eyed--white-fleshed--human-hearted,--capable at their
choice of meeting man absolutely in his own nature--feasting with
him--talking with him--fighting with him, eye to eye, or breast to
breast, as Mars with Diomed; or else, dealing with him in a more
retired spirituality, as Apollo sending the plague upon the Greeks,
when his quiver rattles at his shoulders as he moves, and yet the
darts sent forth of it strike not as arrows, but as plague; or,
finally, retiring completely into the material universe which they
properly inhabit, and dealing with man through that, as Scamander
with Achilles through his waves.

§ 9. Nor is there anything whatever in the various actions recorded of
the gods, however apparently ignoble, to indicate weakness of belief
in them. Very frequently things which appear to us ignoble are merely
the simplicities of a pure and truthful age. When Juno beats Diana
about the ears with her own quiver, for instance, we start at first,
as if Homer could not have believed that they were both real
goddesses. But what should Juno have done? Killed Diana with a look?
Nay, she neither wished to do so, nor could she have done so, by the
very faith of Diana's goddess-ship. Diana is as immortal as herself.
Frowned Diana into submission? But Diana has come expressly to try
conclusions with her, and will by no means be frowned into submission.
Wounded her with a celestial lance? That sounds more poetical, but it
is in reality partly more savage, and partly more absurd, than Homer.
More savage, for it makes Juno more cruel, therefore less divine; and
more absurd, for it only seems elevated in tone, because we use the
word "celestial," which means nothing. What sort of a thing is a
"celestial" lance? Not a wooden one. Of what then? Of moonbeams, or
clouds, or mist. Well, therefore, Diana's arrows were of mist too; and
her quiver, and herself, and Juno, with her lance, and all, vanish
into mist. Why not have said at once, if that is all you mean, that
two mists met, and one drove the other back? That would have been
rational and intelligible, but not to talk of celestial lances. Homer
had no such misty fancy; he believed the two goddesses were there in
true bodies, with true weapons, on the true earth; and still I ask,
what should Juno have done? Not beaten Diana? No; for it is
un-lady-like. Un-English-lady-like, yes; but by no means
un-Greek-lady-like, nor even un-natural-lady-like. If a modern lady
does _not_ beat her servant or her rival about the ears, it is oftener
because she is too weak, or too proud, than because she is of purer
mind than Homer's Juno. She will not strike them; but she will
overwork the one or slander the other without pity; and Homer would
not have thought that one whit more goddess-like than striking them
with her open hand.

§ 10. If, however, the reader likes to suppose that while the two
goddesses in personal presence thus fought with arrow and quiver,
there was also a broader and vaster contest supposed by Homer
between the elements they ruled; and that the goddess of the
heavens, as she struck the goddess of the moon on the flushing
cheek, was at the same instant exercising omnipresent power in the
heavens themselves, and gathering clouds, with which, filled with
the moon's own arrows or beams, she was encumbering and concealing
the moon; he is welcome to this out-carrying of the idea, provided
that he does not pretend to make it an interpretation instead of a
mere extension, nor think to explain away my real, running,
beautiful beaten Diana, into a moon behind clouds.[60]

§ 11. It is only farther to be noted, that the Greek conception of
Godhead, as it was much more real than we usually suppose, so it was
much more bold and familiar than to a modern mind would be possible.
I shall have something more to observe, in a little while, of the
danger of our modern habit of endeavoring to raise ourselves to
something like comprehension of the truth of divinity, instead of
simply believing the words in which the Deity reveals Himself to us.
The Greek erred rather on the other side, making hardly any effort
to conceive divine mind as above the human; and no more shrinking
from frank intercourse with a divine being, or dreading its
immediate presence, than that of the simplest of mortals. Thus
Atrides, enraged at his sword's breaking in his hand upon the helmet
of Paris, after he had expressly invoked the assistance of Jupiter,
exclaims aloud, as he would to a king who had betrayed him, "Jove,
Father, there is not another god more evil-minded than thou!" and
Helen, provoked at Paris's defeat, and oppressed with pouting shame
both for him and for herself, when Venus appears at her side, and
would lead her back to the delivered Paris, impatiently tells the
goddess to "go and take care of Paris herself."

§ 12. The modern mind is naturally, but vulgarly and unjustly,
shocked by this kind of familiarity. Rightly understood, it is not
so much a sign of misunderstanding of the divine nature as of good
understanding of the human. The Greek lived, in all things, a
healthy, and, in a certain degree, a perfect life. He had no morbid
or sickly feeling of any kind. He was accustomed to face death
without the slightest shrinking, to undergo all kinds of bodily
hardship without complaint, and to do what he supposed right and
honorable, in most cases, as a matter of course. Confident of his
own immortality, and of the power of abstract justice, he expected
to be dealt with in the next world as was right, and left the
matter much in his gods' hands; but being thus immortal, and finding
in his own soul something which it seemed quite as difficult to
master, as to rule the elements, he did not feel that it was an
appalling superiority in those gods to have bodies of water, or
fire, instead of flesh, and to have various work to do among the
clouds and waves, out of his human way; or sometimes, even, in a
sort of service to himself. Was not the nourishment of herbs and
flowers a kind of ministering to his wants? were not the gods in
some sort his husbandmen, and spirit-servants? Their mere strength
or omnipresence did not seem to him a distinction absolutely
terrific. It might be the nature of one being to be in two places at
once, and of another to be only in one; but that did not seem of
itself to infer any absolute lordliness of one nature above the
other, any more than an insect must be a nobler creature than a man,
because it can see on four sides of its head, and the man only in
front. They could kill him or torture him, it was true; but even
that not unjustly, or not for ever. There was a fate, and a Divine
Justice, greater than they; so that if they did wrong, and he right,
he might fight it out with them, and have the better of them at
last. In a general way, they were wiser, stronger, and better than
he; and to ask counsel of them, to obey them, to sacrifice to them,
to thank them for all good, this was well; but to be utterly
downcast before them, or not to tell them his mind in plain Greek if
they seemed to him to be conducting themselves in an ungodly
manner,--this would not be well.

§ 13. Such being their general idea of the gods, we can now easily
understand the habitual tone of their feelings towards what was
beautiful in nature. With us, observe, the idea of the Divinity is
apt to get separated from the life of nature; and imagining our God
upon a cloudy throne, far above the earth, and not in the flowers or
waters, we approach those visible things with a theory that they are
dead, governed by physical laws, and so forth. But coming to them,
we find the theory fail; that they are not dead; that, say what we
choose about them, the instinctive sense of their being alive is too
strong for us; and in scorn of all physical law, the wilful fountain
sings, and the kindly flowers rejoice. And then, puzzled, and yet
happy; pleased, and yet ashamed of being so; accepting sympathy
from nature, which we do not believe it gives, and giving sympathy
to nature, which we do not believe it receives,--mixing, besides,
all manner of purposeful play and conceit with these involuntary
fellowships,--we fall necessarily into the curious web of hesitating
sentiment, pathetic fallacy, and wandering fancy, which form a great
part of our modern view of nature. But the Greek never removed his
god out of nature at all; never attempted for a moment to contradict
his instinctive sense that God was everywhere. "The tree _is_ glad,"
said he, "I know it is; I can cut it down; no matter, there was a
nymph in it. The water _does_ sing," said he; "I can dry it up; but
no matter, there was a naiad in it." But in thus clearly defining
his belief, observe, he threw it entirely into a human form, and
gave his faith to nothing but the image of his own humanity. What
sympathy and fellowship he had, were always for the spirit _in_ the
stream, not for the stream; always for the dryad _in_ the wood, not
for the wood. Content with this human sympathy, he approached the
actual waves and woody fibres with no sympathy at all. The spirit
that ruled them, he received as a plain fact. Them, also, ruled and
material, he received as plain facts; they, without their spirit,
were dead enough. A rose was good for scent, and a stream for sound
and coolness; for the rest, one was no more than leaves, the other
no more than water; he could not make anything else of them; and the
divine power, which was involved in their existence, having been all
distilled away by him into an independent Flora or Thetis, the poor
leaves or waves were left, in mere cold corporealness, to make the
most of their being discernibly red and soft, clear and wet, and
unacknowledged in any other power whatsoever.

§ 14. Then, observe farther, the Greeks lived in the midst of the
most beautiful nature, and were as familiar with blue sea, clear
air, and sweet outlines of mountain, as we are with brick walls,
black smoke, and level fields. This perfect familiarity rendered all
such scenes of natural beauty unexciting, if not indifferent, to
them, by lulling and overwearying the imagination as far as it was
concerned with such things; but there was another kind of beauty
which they found it required effort to obtain, and which, when
thoroughly obtained, seemed more glorious than any of this wild
loveliness--the beauty of the human countenance and form. This, they
perceived, could only be reached by continual exercise of virtue;
and it was in Heaven's sight, and theirs, all the more beautiful
because it needed this self-denial to obtain it. So they set
themselves to reach this, and having gained it, gave it their
principal thoughts, and set it off with beautiful dress as best they
might. But making this their object, they were obliged to pass their
lives in simple exercise and disciplined employments. Living
wholesomely, giving themselves no fever fits, either by fasting or
over-eating, constantly in the open air, and full of animal spirit
and physical power, they became incapable of every morbid condition
of mental emotion. Unhappy love, disappointed ambition, spiritual
despondency, or any other disturbing sensation, had little power
over the well-braced nerves, and healthy flow of the blood; and what
bitterness might yet fasten on them was soon boxed or raced out of a
boy, and spun or woven out of a girl, or danced out of both. They
had indeed their sorrows, true and deep, but still, more like
children's sorrows than ours, whether bursting into open cry of
pain, or hid with shuddering under the veil, still passing over the
soul as clouds do over heaven, not sullying it, not mingling with
it;--darkening it perhaps long or utterly, but still not becoming
one with it, and for the most part passing away in dashing rain of
tears, and leaving the man unchanged; in nowise affecting, as our
sorrow does, the whole tone of his thought and imagination
thenceforward.

How far our melancholy may be deeper and wider than theirs, in its
roots and view, and therefore nobler, we shall consider presently;
but at all events, they had the advantage of us in being entirety
free from all those dim and feverish sensations which result from
unhealthy state of the body. I believe that a large amount of the
dreamy and sentimental sadness, tendency to reverie, and general
patheticalness of modern life results merely from derangement of
stomach; holding to the Greek life the same relation that the
feverish night of an adult does to a child's sleep.

§ 15. Farther. The human beauty, which, whether in its bodily being
or in imagined divinity, had become, for the reasons we have seen,
the principal object of culture and sympathy to these Greeks, was,
in its perfection, eminently orderly, symmetrical, and tender.
Hence, contemplating it constantly in this state, they could not but
feel a proportionate fear of all that was disorderly, unbalanced,
and rugged. Having trained their stoutest soldiers into a strength
so delicate and lovely, that their white flesh, with their blood
upon it, should look like ivory stained with purple;[61] and having
always around them, in the motion and majesty of this beauty, enough
for the full employment of their imagination, they shrank with dread
or hatred from all the ruggedness of lower nature,--from the
wrinkled forest bark, the jagged hill-crest, and irregular,
inorganic storm of sky; looking to these for the most part as
adverse powers, and taking pleasure only in such portions of the
lower world as were at once conducive to the rest and health of the
human frame, and in harmony with the laws of its gentler beauty.

§ 16. Thus, as far as I recollect, without a single exception, every
Homeric landscape, intended to be beautiful, is composed of a
fountain, a meadow, and a shady grove. This ideal is very
interestingly marked, as intended for a perfect one, in the fifth
book of the Odyssey; when Mercury himself stops for a moment, though
on a message, to look at a landscape "which even an immortal might
be gladdened to behold." This landscape consists of a cave covered
with a running vine, all blooming into grapes, and surrounded by a
grove of alder, poplar, and sweet-smelling cypress. Four fountains
of white (foaming) water, springing _in succession_ (mark the
orderliness), and close to one another, flow away in different
directions, through a meadow full of violets and parsley (parsley,
to mark its moisture, being elsewhere called "marsh-nourished," and
associated with the lotus);[62] the air is perfumed not only by
these violets and by the sweet cypress, but by Calypso's fire of
finely chopped cedar wood, which sends a smoke as of incense,
through the island; Calypso herself is singing; and finally, upon
the trees are resting, or roosting, owls, hawks, and "long-tongued
sea-crows." Whether these last are considered as a part of the
ideal landscape, as marine singing-birds, I know not; but the
approval of Mercury appears to be elicited chiefly by the fountains
and violet meadow.

§ 17. Now the notable things in this description are, first, the
evident subservience of the whole landscape to human comfort, to the
foot, the taste, or the smell; and, secondly, that throughout the
passage there is not a single figurative word expressive of the
things being in any wise other than plain grass, fruit or flower. I
have used the term "spring" of the fountains, because, without
doubt, Homer means that they sprang forth brightly, having their
source at the foot of the rocks (as copious fountains nearly always
have); but Homer does not say "spring," he says simply flow, and
uses only one word for "growing softly," or "richly," of the tall
trees, the vine, and the violets. There is, however, some expression
of sympathy with the sea-birds; he speaks of them in precisely the
same terms, as in other places of naval nations, saying they "have
care of the works of the sea."

§ 18. If we glance through the references to pleasant landscape which
occur in other parts of the Odyssey, we shall always be struck by this
quiet subjection of their every feature to human service, and by the
excessive similarity in the scenes. Perhaps the spot intended, after
this, to be most perfect, may be the garden of Alcinous, where the
principal ideas are, still more definitely, order, symmetry, and
fruitfulness; the beds being duly ranged between rows of vines, which,
as well as the pear, apple, and fig-trees, bear fruit continually,
some grapes being yet sour, while others are getting black; there are
plenty of "_orderly_ square beds of herbs," chiefly leeks, and two
fountains, one running through the garden, and one under the pavement
of the palace to a reservoir for the citizens. Ulysses, pausing to
contemplate this scene, is described nearly in the same terms as
Mercury pausing to contemplate the wilder meadow; and it is
interesting to observe, that, in spite of all Homer's love of
symmetry, the god's admiration is excited by the free fountains, wild
violets, and wandering vine; but the mortal's, by the vines in rows,
the leeks in beds, and the fountains in pipes.

Ulysses has, however, one touching reason for loving vines in rows.
His father had given him fifty rows for himself, when he was a boy,
with corn between them (just as it now grows in Italy). Proving his
identity afterwards to his father, whom he finds at work in his
garden, "with thick gloves on, to keep his hands from the thorns,"
he reminds him of these fifty rows of vines, and of the "thirteen
pear-trees and ten apple-trees" which he had given him; and Laertes
faints upon his neck.

§ 19. If Ulysses had not been so much of a gardener, it might have
been received as a sign of considerable feeling for landscape
beauty, that, intending to pay the very highest possible compliment
to the Princess Nausicaa (and having indeed, the moment before,
gravely asked her whether she was a goddess or not), he says that he
feels, at seeing her, exactly as he did when he saw the young
palm-tree growing at Apollo's shrine at Delos. But I think the taste
for trim hedges and upright trunks has its usual influence over him
here also, and that he merely means to tell the princess that she is
delightfully tall and straight.

§ 20. The princess is, however, pleased by his address, and tells
him to wait outside the town, till she can speak to her father about
him. The spot to which she directs him is another ideal piece of
landscape, composed of a "beautiful grove of aspen poplars, a
fountain, and a meadow," near the road-side; in fact, as nearly as
possible such a scene as meets the eye of the traveller every
instant on the much-despised lines of road through lowland France;
for instance, on the railway between Arras and Amiens;--scenes, to
my mind, quite exquisite in the various grouping and grace of their
innumerable poplar avenues, casting sweet, tremulous shadows over
their level meadows and labyrinthine streams. We know that the
princess means aspen poplars, because soon afterwards we find her
fifty maid-servants at the palace, all spinning, and in perpetual
motion, compared to the "leaves of the tall poplar;" and it is with
exquisite feeling that it is made afterwards[63] the chief tree in
the groves of Proserpine; its light and quivering leafage having
exactly the melancholy expression of fragility, faintness, and
inconstancy which the ancients attributed to the disembodied
spirit.[64] The likeness to the poplars by the streams of Amiens is
more marked still in the Iliad, where the young Simois, struck by
Ajax, falls to the earth "like an aspen that has grown in an
irrigated meadow, smooth-trunked, the soft shoots springing from its
top, which some coach-making man has cut down with his keen iron,
that he may fit a wheel of it to a fair chariot, and it lies
parching by the side of the stream." It is sufficiently notable that
Homer, living in mountainous and rocky countries, dwells thus
delightedly on all the _flat_ bits; and so I think invariably the
inhabitants of mountain countries do, but the inhabitants of the
plains do not, in any similar way, dwell delightedly on mountains.
The Dutch painters are perfectly contented with their flat fields
and pollards: Rubens, though he had seen the Alps, usually composes
his landscapes of a hayfield or two, plenty of pollards and willows,
a distant spire, a Dutch house with a moat about it, a windmill, and
a ditch. The Flemish sacred painters are the only ones who introduce
mountains in the distance, as we shall see presently; but rather in
a formal way than with any appearance of enjoyment. So Shakspere
never speaks of mountains with the slightest joy, but only of
lowland flowers, flat fields, and Warwickshire streams. And if we
talk to the mountaineer, he will usually characterize his own
country to us as a "pays affreux," or in some equivalent, perhaps
even more violent, German term: but the lowland peasant does not
think his country frightful; he either will have no ideas beyond it,
or about it; or will think it a very perfect country, and be apt to
regard any deviation from its general principle of flatness with
extreme disfavor; as the Lincolnshire farmer in Alton Locke: "I'll
shaw 'ee some'at like a field o' beans, I wool--none o' this here
darned ups and downs o' hills, to shake a body's victuals out of his
inwards--all so vlat as a barn door, for vorty mile on end--there's
the country to live in!"

I do not say whether this be altogether right (though certainly not
wholly wrong), but it seems to me that there must be in the simple
freshness and fruitfulness of level land, in its pale upright
trees, and gentle lapse of silent streams, enough for the
satisfaction of the human mind in general; and I so far agree with
Homer, that if I had to educate an artist to the full perception of
the meaning of the word "gracefulness" in landscape, I should send
him neither to Italy nor to Greece, but simply to those poplar
groves between Arras and Amiens.

§ 21. But to return more definitely to our Homeric landscape. When
it is perfect, we have, as in the above instances, the foliage and
meadows together; when imperfect, it is always either the foliage or
the meadow; preëminently the meadow, or arable field. Thus, meadows
of asphodel are prepared for the happier dead; and even Orion, a
hunter among the mountains in his lifetime, pursues the ghosts of
beasts in these asphodel meadows after death.[65] So the sirens sing
in a meadow; and throughout the Odyssey there is a general tendency
to the depreciation of poor Ithaca, because it is rocky, and only
fit for goats, and has "no meadows;" for which reason Telemachus
refuses Atrides's present of horses, congratulating the Spartan king
at the same time on ruling over a plain which has "plenty of lotus
in it, and rushes," with corn and barley. Note this constant
dwelling on the marsh plants, or, at least, those which grow in flat
and well-irrigated land, or beside streams: when Scamander, for
instance, is restrained by Vulcan, Homer says, very sorrowfully,
that "all his lotus, and reeds, and rushes were burnt;" and thus
Ulysses, after being shipwrecked and nearly drowned, and beaten
about the sea for many days and nights, on raft and mast, at last
getting ashore at the mouth of a large river, casts himself down
first upon its _rushes_, and then, in thankfulness, kisses the
"corn-giving land," as most opposed, in his heart, to the fruitless
and devouring sea.[66]

§ 22. In this same passage, also, we find some peculiar expressions of
the delight which the Greeks had in trees, for, when Ulysses first
comes in sight of land, which gladdens him, "as the reviving of a
father from his sickness gladdens his children," it is not merely the
sight of the land itself which gives him such pleasure, but of the
"land and _wood_." Homer never throws away any words, at least in such
a place as this; and what in another poet would have been merely the
filling up of the deficient line with an otherwise useless word, is in
him the expression of the general Greek sense, that land of any kind
was in nowise grateful or acceptable till there was _wood_ upon it (or
corn; but the corn, in the flats, could not be seen so far as the
black masses of forest on the hill sides), and that, as in being rushy
and corn-giving, the low land, so in being woody, the high land, was
most grateful to the mind of the man who for days and nights had been
wearied on the engulphing sea. And this general idea of wood and corn,
as the types of the fatness of the whole earth, is beautifully marked
in another place of the Odyssey,[67] where the sailors in a desert
island, having no flour or corn to offer as a meat offering with their
sacrifices, take the leaves of the trees, and scatter them over the
burnt offering instead.

§ 23. But still, every expression of the pleasure which Ulysses has in
this landing and resting, contains uninterruptedly the reference to
the utility and sensible pleasantness of all things, not to their
beauty. After his first grateful kiss given to the corn-growing land,
he considers immediately how he is to pass the night: for some minutes
hesitating whether it will be best to expose himself to the misty
chill from the river, or run the risk of wild beasts in the wood. He
decides for the wood, and finds in it a bower formed by a sweet and a
wild olive tree, interlacing their branches, or--perhaps more
accurately translating Homer's intensely graphic expression--"changing
their branches with each other" (it is very curious how often, in an
entanglement of wood, one supposes the branches to belong to the wrong
trees), and forming a roof penetrated by neither rain, sun, nor wind.
Under this bower Ulysses collects the "_vain_ (or _frustrate_)
outpouring of the dead leaves"--another exquisite expression, used
elsewhere of useless grief or shedding of tears;--and, having got
enough together, makes his bed of them, and goes to sleep, having
covered himself up with them, "as embers are covered up with ashes."

Nothing can possibly be more intensely possessive of the _facts_
than this whole passage; the sense of utter deadness and emptiness,
and frustrate fall in the leaves; of dormant life in the human
body,--the fire, and heroism, and strength of it, lulled under the
dead brown heap, as embers under ashes, and the knitting of
interchanged and close strength of living boughs above. But there is
not the smallest apparent sense of there being _beauty_ elsewhere
than in the human being. The wreathed wood is admired simply as
being a perfect roof for it; the fallen leaves only as being a
perfect bed for it; and there is literally no more excitement of
emotion in Homer, as he describes them, nor does he expect us to be
more excited or touched by hearing about them, than if he had been
telling us how the chamber-maid at the Bull aired the four-poster,
and put on two extra blankets.

§ 24. Now, exactly this same contemplation of subservience to human
use makes the Greek take some pleasure in _rocks_, when they assume
one particular form, but one only--that of a _cave_. They are
evidently quite frightful things to him under any other condition,
and most of all if they are rough and jagged; but if smooth, looking
"sculptured," like the sides of a ship, and forming a cave or
shelter for him, he begins to think them endurable. Hence,
associating the ideas of rich and sheltering wood, sea, becalmed and
made useful as a port by projecting promontories of rock, and
smoothed caves or grottoes in the rocks themselves, we get the
pleasantest idea which the Greek could form of a landscape, next to
a marsh with poplars in it; not, indeed, if possible, ever to be
without these last: thus, in commending the Cyclops' country as one
possessed of every perfection, Homer first says: "They have soft
_marshy_ meadows near the sea, and good, rich, crumbling,
ploughing-land, giving fine deep crops, and vines always giving
fruit;" then, "a port so quiet, that they have no need of cables in
it; and at the head of the port, a beautiful clear spring just
_under a cave_, and _aspen poplars all round it_."[68]

§ 25. This, it will be seen, is very nearly Homer's usual "ideal;"
but, going into the middle of the island, Ulysses comes on a rougher
and less agreeable bit, though still fulfilling certain required
conditions of endurableness; a "cave shaded with laurels," which,
having no poplars about it, is, however, meant to be somewhat
frightful, and only fit to be inhabited by a Cyclops. So in the
country of the Læstrygons, Homer, preparing his reader gradually for
something very disagreeable, represents the rocks as bare and
"exposed to the sun;" only with some smooth and slippery roads over
them, by which the trucks bring down wood from the higher hills. Any
one familiar with Swiss slopes of hills must remember how often he
has descended, sometimes faster than was altogether intentional, by
these same slippery woodman's track roads.

And thus, in general, whenever the landscape is intended to be
lovely, it verges towards the ploughed land and poplars; or, at
worst, to _woody_ rocks; but, if intended to be painful, the rocks
are bare and "sharp." This last epithet, constantly used by Homer
for mountains, does not altogether correspond, in Greek, to the
English term, nor is it intended merely to characterize the sharp
mountain summits; for it never would be applied simply to the edge
or point of a sword, but signifies rather "harsh," "bitter," or
"painful," being applied habitually to fate, death, and in Od. ii.
333. to a halter; and, as expressive of general objectionableness
and unpleasantness, to all high, dangerous, or peaked mountains, as
the Maleian promontory (a much dreaded one), the crest of Parnassus,
the Tereian mountain, and a grim or untoward, though, by keeping off
the force of the sea, protective, rock at the mouth of the Jardanus;
as well as habitually to inaccessible or impregnable fortresses
built on heights.

§ 26. In all this I cannot too strongly mark the utter absence of
any trace of the feeling for what we call the picturesque, and the
constant dwelling of the writer's mind on what was available,
pleasant, or useful; his ideas respecting all landscape being not
uncharacteristically summed, finally, by Pallas herself; when,
meeting Ulysses, who after his long wandering does not recognize his
own country, and meaning to describe it as politely and soothingly
as possible, she says:[69]--"This Ithaca of ours is, indeed, a rough
country enough, and not good for driving in; but, still, things
might be worse: it has plenty of corn, and good wine, and _always
rain_, and soft nourishing dew; and it has good feeding for goats
and oxen, and all manner of wood, and springs fit to drink at all
the year round."

We shall see presently how the blundering, pseudo-picturesque,
pseudo-classical minds of Claude and the Renaissance landscape
painters, wholly missing Homer's practical common sense, and equally
incapable of feeling the quiet natural grace and sweetness of his
asphodel meadows, tender aspen poplars, or running vines,--fastened
on his _ports_ and _caves_, as the only available features of his
scenery; and appointed the type of "classical landscape"
thenceforward to consist in a bay of insipid sea, and a rock with a
hole through it.[70]

§ 27. It may indeed be thought that I am assuming too hastily that
this was the general view of the Greeks respecting landscape, because
it was Homer's. But I believe the true mind of a nation, at any
period, is always best ascertainable by examining that of its greatest
men; and that simpler and truer results will be attainable for us by
simply comparing Homer, Dante, and Walter Scott, than by attempting
(what my limits must have rendered absurdly inadequate, and in which,
also, both my time and knowledge must have failed me) an analysis of
the landscape in the range of contemporary literature. All that I can
do, is to state the general impression which has been made upon me by
my desultory reading, and to mark accurately the grounds for this
impression, in the works of the greatest men. Now it is quite true
that in others of the Greeks, especially in Æschylus and Aristophanes,
there is infinitely more of modern feeling, of pathetic fallacy, love
of picturesque or beautiful form, and other such elements, than there
is in Homer; but then these appear to me just the parts of them which
were not Greek, the elements of their minds by which (as one division
of the human race always must be with subsequent ones) they are
connected with the mediævals and moderns. And without doubt, in his
influence over future mankind, Homer is eminently the Greek of Greeks;
if I were to associate any one with him it would be Herodotus, and I
believe all I have said of the Homeric landscape will be found equally
true of the Herodotean, as assuredly it will be of the Platonic; the
contempt, which Plato sometimes expresses by the mouth of Socrates,
for the country in general, except so far as it is shady, and has
cicadas and running streams to make pleasant noises in it, being
almost ludicrous. But Homer is the great type, and the more notable
one because of his influence on Virgil, and, through him, on Dante,
and all the after ages: and in like manner, if we can get the abstract
of mediæval landscape out of Dante, it will serve us as well as if we
had read all the songs of the troubadours, and help us to the farther
changes in derivative temper, down to all modern time.

§ 28. I think, therefore, the reader may safely accept the
conclusions about Greek landscape which I have got for him out of
Homer; and in these he will certainly perceive something very
different from the usual imaginations we form of Greek feelings. We
think of the Greeks as poetical, ideal, imaginative, in the way that
a modern poet or novelist is; supposing that their thoughts about
their mythology and world were as visionary and artificial as ours
are: but I think the passages I have quoted show that it was not so,
although it may be difficult for us to apprehend the strange
minglings in them of the elements of faith, which, in our days, have
been blended with other parts of human nature in a totally different
guise. Perhaps the Greek mind may be best imagined by taking, as its
groundwork, that of a good, conscientious, but illiterate, Scotch
Presbyterian Border farmer of a century or two back, having perfect
faith in the bodily appearances of Satan and his imps; and in all
kelpies, brownies, and fairies. Substitute for the indignant terrors
in this man's mind, a general persuasion of the _Divinity_, more or
less beneficent, yet faultful, of all these beings; that is to say,
take away his belief in the demoniacal malignity of the fallen
spiritual world, and lower, in the same degree, his conceptions of
the angelical, retaining for him the same firm faith in both; keep
his ideas about flowers and beautiful scenery much as they
are,--his delight in regular ploughed land and meadows, and a neat
garden (only with rows of gooseberry bushes instead of vines,)
being, in all probability, about accurately representative of the
feelings of Ulysses; then, let the military spirit that is in him,
glowing against the Border forager, or the foe of old Flodden and
Chevy-Chase, be made more principal, with a higher sense of
nobleness in soldiership, not as a careless excitement, but a
knightly duty; and increased by high cultivation of every personal
quality, not of mere shaggy strength, but graceful strength, aided
by a softer climate, and educated in all proper harmony of sight and
sound: finally, instead of an informed Christian, suppose him to
have only the patriarchal Jewish knowledge of the Deity, and even
this obscured by tradition, but still thoroughly solemn and
faithful, requiring his continual service as a priest of burnt
sacrifice and meat offering; and I think we shall get a pretty close
approximation to the vital being of a true old Greek; some slight
difference still existing in a feeling which the Scotch farmer would
have of a pleasantness in blue hills and running streams, wholly
wanting in the Greek mind; and perhaps also some difference of views
on the subjects of truth and honesty. But the main points, the easy,
athletic, strongly logical and argumentative, yet fanciful and
credulous, characters of mind, would be very similar in both; and
the most serious change in the substance of the stuff among the
modifications above suggested as necessary to turn the Scot into the
Greek, is that effect of softer climate and surrounding luxury,
inducing the practice of various forms of polished art,--the more
polished, because the practical and realistic tendency of the
Hellenic mind (if my interpretation of it be right) would quite
prevent it from taking pleasure in any irregularities of form, or
imitations of the weeds and wildnesses of that mountain nature with
which it thought itself born to contend. In its utmost refinement of
work, it sought eminently for orderliness; carried the principle of
the leeks in squares, and fountains in pipes, perfectly out in its
streets and temples; formalized whatever decoration it put into its
minor architectural mouldings, and reserved its whole heart and
power to represent the action of living men, or gods, though not
unconscious meanwhile, of

      "The simple, the sincere delight;
      The habitual scene of hill and dale
      The rural herds, the vernal gale;
      The tangled vetches' purple bloom;
      The fragrance of the bean's perfume,--
      Theirs, theirs alone, who cultivate the soil,
      And drink the cup of thirst, and eat the bread of toil."

  [59] Compare Lay of the Last Minstrel, canto i. stanza 15., and
       canto v. stanza 2. In the first instance, the river-spirit is
       accurately the Homeric god, only Homer would have believed in
       it,--Scott did not; at least not altogether.

  [60] Compare the exquisite lines of Longfellow on the sunset in
       the Golden Legend:--

           "The day is done, and slowly from the scene
           The stooping sun upgathers his spent shafts,
           And puts them back into his golden quiver."


  [61] Iliad iv. 141.

  [62] Iliad ii. 776.

  [63] Odyssey, x. 510.

  [64] Compare the passage in Dante referred to above, Chap. XII. § 6.

  [65] Odyssey, xi. 571. xxiv. 13. The couch of Ceres, with Homer's
       usual faithfulness, is made of a _ploughed_ field, v. 127.

  [66] Odyssey, v. 398.

  [67] Odyssey, xii. 357.

  [68] Odyssey, ix. 132. &c. Hence Milton's

           "From haunted spring, and dale,
           Edged with poplar pale."

  [69] Odyssey, xiii. 236. &c.

  [70] Educated, as we shall see hereafter, first in this school,
       Turner gave the hackneyed composition a strange power and
       freshness, in his Glaucus and Scylla.




CHAPTER XIV.

OF MEDIÆVAL LANDSCAPE:--FIRST, THE FIELDS.


§ 1. IN our examination of the spirit of classical landscape, we
were obliged to confine ourselves to what is left to us in written
description. Some interesting results might indeed have been
obtained by examining the Egyptian and Ninevite landscape sculpture,
but in nowise conclusive enough to be worth the pains of the
inquiry; for the landscape of sculpture is necessarily confined in
range, and usually inexpressive of the complete feelings of the
workman, being introduced rather to explain the place and
circumstances of events, than for its own sake. In the Middle Ages,
however, the case is widely different. We have written landscape,
sculptured landscape, and painted landscape, all bearing united
testimony to the tone of the national mind in almost every
remarkable locality of Europe.

§ 2. That testimony, taken in its breadth, is very curiously
conclusive. It marks the mediæval mind as agreeing altogether with
the ancients, in holding that flat land, brooks, and groves of
aspens, compose the pleasant places of the earth, and that rocks and
mountains are, for inhabitation, altogether to be reprobated and
detested; but as disagreeing with the classical mind totally in this
other most important respect, that the pleasant flat land is never a
ploughed field, nor a rich lotus meadow good for pasture, but
_garden_ ground covered with flowers, and divided by fragrant
hedges, with a castle in the middle of it. The aspens are delighted
in, not because they are good for "coach-making men" to make
cart-wheels of, but because they are shady and graceful; and the
fruit-trees, covered with delicious fruit, especially apple and
orange, occupy still more important positions in the scenery.
Singing-birds--not "sea-crows," but nightingales[71]--perch on every
bough; and the ideal occupation of mankind is not to cultivate
either the garden or the meadow, but to gather roses and eat oranges
in the one, and ride out hawking over the other.

Finally, mountain scenery, though considered as disagreeable for
general inhabitation, is always introduced as being proper to
meditate in, or to encourage communion with higher beings; and in
the ideal landscape of daily life, mountains are considered
agreeable things enough, so that they be far enough away.

In this great change there are three vital points to be noticed.

[Sidenote: § 3. Three essential characters: 1. Pride in idleness.]

The first, the disdain of agricultural pursuits by the nobility; a
fatal change, and one gradually bringing about the ruin of that
nobility. It is expressed in the mediæval landscape by the eminently
pleasurable and horticultural character of everything; by the
fences, hedges, castle walls, and masses of useless, but lovely
flowers, especially roses. The knights and ladies are represented
always as singing, or making love, in these pleasant places. The
idea of setting an old knight, like Laertes (whatever his state of
fallen fortune), "with thick gloves on to keep his hands from the
thorns," to prune a row of vines, would have been regarded as the
most monstrous violation of the decencies of life; and a senator,
once detected in the home employments of Cincinnatus, could, I
suppose, thenceforward hardly have appeared in society.

[Sidenote: § 4. 2. Poetical observance of nature.]

The second vital point is the evidence of a more sentimental
enjoyment of external nature. A Greek, wishing really to enjoy
himself, shut himself into a beautiful atrium, with an excellent
dinner, and a society of philosophical or musical friends. But a
mediæval knight went into his pleasance, to gather roses and hear
the birds sing; or rode out hunting or hawking. His evening feast,
though riotous enough sometimes, was not the height of his day's
enjoyment; and if the attractions of the world are to be shown
typically to him, as opposed to the horrors of death, they are never
represented by a full feast in a chamber, but by a delicate dessert
in an orange grove, with musicians under the trees; or a ride on a
May morning, hawk on fist.

This change is evidently a healthy, and a very interesting one.

[Sidenote: § 5. 3. Disturbed conscience.]

The third vital point is the marked sense that this hawking and
apple-eating are not altogether right; that there is something else
to be done in the world than that; and that the mountains, as
opposed to the pleasant garden-ground, are places where that other
something may best be learned;--which is evidently a piece of
infinite and new respect for the mountains, and another healthy
change in the tone of the human heart.

Let us glance at the signs and various results of these changes, one
by one.

[Sidenote: § 6. Derivative characters: 1. Love of flowers.]

The two first named, evil and good as they are, are very closely
connected. The more poetical delight in external nature proceeds
just from the fact that it is no longer looked upon with the eye of
the farmer; and in proportion as the herbs and flowers cease to be
regarded as useful, they are felt to be charming. Leeks are not now
the most important objects in the garden, but lilies and roses; the
herbage which a Greek would have looked at only with a view to the
number of horses it would feed, is regarded by the mediæval knight
as a green carpet for fair feet to dance upon, and the beauty of its
softness and color is proportionally felt by him; while the brook,
which the Greek rejoiced to dismiss into a reservoir under the
palace threshold, would be, by the mediæval, distributed into
pleasant pools, or forced into fountains; and regarded alternately
as a mirror for fair faces, and a witchery to ensnare the sunbeams
and the rainbow.

[Sidenote: § 7. 2. Less definite gratitude to God.]

And this change of feeling involves two others, very important. When
the flowers and grass were regarded as means of life, and therefore
(as the thoughtful laborer of the soil must always regard them) with
the reverence due to those gifts of God which were most necessary to
his existence; although their own beauty was less felt, their
proceeding from the Divine hand was more seriously acknowledged, and
the herb yielding seed, and fruit-tree yielding fruit, though in
themselves less admired, were yet solemnly connected in the heart
with the reverence of Ceres, Pomona, or Pan. But when the sense of
these necessary uses was more or less lost, among the upper classes,
by the delegation of the art of husbandry to the hands of the
peasant, the flower and fruit, whose bloom or richness thus became
a mere source of pleasure, were regarded with less solemn sense of
the Divine gift in them; and were converted rather into toys than
treasures, chance gifts for gaiety, rather than promised rewards of
labor; so that while the Greek could hardly have trodden the formal
furrow, or plucked the clusters from the trellised vine, without
reverent thoughts of the deities of field and leaf, who gave the
seed to fructify, and the bloom to darken, the mediæval knight
plucked the violet to wreathe in his lady's hair, or strewed the
idle rose on the turf at her feet, with little sense of anything in
the nature that gave them, but a frail, accidental, involuntary
exuberance; while also the Jewish sacrificial system being now done
away, as well as the Pagan mythology, and, with it, the whole
conception of meat offering or firstfruits offering, the chiefest
seriousness of all the thoughts connected with the gifts of nature
faded from the minds of the classes of men concerned with art and
literature; while the peasant, reduced to serf level, was incapable
of imaginative thought, owing to his want of general cultivation.
But on the other hand, exactly in proportion as the idea of definite
spiritual presence in material nature was lost, the mysterious sense
of _unaccountable_ life in the things themselves would be increased,
and the mind would instantly be laid open to all those currents of
fallacious, but pensive and pathetic sympathy, which we have seen to
be characteristic of modern times.

[Sidenote: § 3. Gloom caused by enforced solitude.]

Farther: a singular difference would necessarily result from the far
greater loneliness of baronial life, deprived as it was of all
interest in agricultural pursuits. The palace of a Greek leader in
early times might have gardens, fields, and farms around it, but was
sure to be near some busy city or sea-port: in later times, the city
itself became the principal dwelling-place, and the country was
visited only to see how the farm went on, or traversed in a line of
march. Far other was the life of the mediæval baron, nested on his
solitary jut of crag; entering into cities only occasionally for some
grave political or warrior's purpose, and, for the most part, passing
the years of his life in lion-like isolation; the village inhabited by
his retainers straggling indeed about the slopes of the rocks at his
feet, but his own dwelling standing gloomily apart, between them and
the uncompanionable clouds, commanding, from sunset to sunrise, the
flowing flame of some calm unvoyaged river, and the endless undulation
of the untraversable hills. How different must the thoughts about
nature have been, of the noble who lived among the bright marble
porticos of the Greek groups of temple or palace,--in the midst of a
plain covered with corn and olives, and by the shore of a sparkling
and freighted sea,--from those of the master of some mountain
promontory in the green recesses of Northern Europe, watching night by
night, from amongst his heaps of storm-broken stone, rounded into
towers, the lightning of the lonely sea flash round the sands of
Harlech, or the mists changing their shapes forever, among the
changeless pines, that fringe the crests of Jura.

[Sidenote: § 9. And frequent pilgrimage.]

Nor was it without similar effect on the minds of men that their
journeyings and pilgrimages became more frequent than those of the
Greek, the extent of ground traversed in the course of them larger,
and the mode of travel more companionless. To the Greek, a voyage to
Egypt, or the Hellespont, was the subject of lasting fame and fable,
and the forests of the Danube and the rocks of Sicily closed for him
the gates of the intelligible world. What parts of that narrow world
he crossed were crossed with fleets or armies; the camp always
populous on the plain, and the ships drawn in cautious symmetry around
the shore. But to the mediæval knight, from Scottish moor to Syrian
sand, the world was one great exercise ground, or field of adventure;
the staunch pacing of his charger penetrated the pathlessness of
outmost forest, and sustained the sultriness of the most secret
desert. Frequently alone,--or, if accompanied, for the most part only
by retainers of lower rank, incapable of entering into complete
sympathy with any of his thoughts,--he must have been compelled often
to enter into dim companionship with the silent nature around him, and
must assuredly sometimes have talked to the wayside flowers of his
love, and to the fading clouds of his ambition.

[Sidenote: 4. Dread of mountains.]

§ 10. But, on the other hand, the idea of retirement from the world
for the sake of self-mortification, of combat with demons, or
communion with angels, and with their King,--authoritatively
commended as it was to all men by the continual practice of Christ
Himself,--gave to all mountain solitude at once a sanctity and a
terror, in the mediæval mind, which were altogether different from
anything that it had possessed in the un-Christian periods. On the
one side, there was an idea of sanctity attached to rocky
wilderness, because it had always been among hills that the Deity
had manifested himself most intimately to men, and to the hills that
His saints had nearly always retired for meditation, for especial
communion with Him, and to prepare for death. Men acquainted with
the history of Moses, alone at Horeb, or with Israel at Sinai,--of
Elijah by the brook Cherith, and in the Horeb cave; of the deaths of
Moses and Aaron on Hor and Nebo; of the preparation of Jephthah's
daughter for her death among the Judea Mountains; of the continual
retirement of Christ Himself to the mountains for prayer, His
temptation in the desert of the Dead Sea, His sermon on the hills of
Capernaum, His transfiguration on the crest of Tabor, and his
evening and morning walks over Olivet for the four or five days
preceding His crucifixion,--were not likely to look with irreverent
or unloving eyes upon the blue hills that girded their golden
horizon, or drew upon them the mysterious clouds out of the height
of the darker heaven. But with this impression of their greater
sanctity was involved also that of a peculiar terror. In all
this,--their haunting by the memories of prophets, the presences of
angels, and the everlasting thoughts and words of the Redeemer,--the
mountain ranges seemed separated from the active world, and only to
be fitly approached by hearts which were condemnatory of it. Just in
so much as it appeared necessary for the noblest men to retire to
the hill-recesses before their missions could be accomplished or
their spirits perfected, in so far did the daily world seem by
comparison to be pronounced profane and dangerous; and to those who
loved that world, and its work, the mountains were thus voiceful
with perpetual rebuke, and necessarily contemplated with a kind of
pain and fear, such as a man engrossed by vanity feels at being by
some accident forced to hear a startling sermon, or to assist at a
funeral service. Every association of this kind was deepened by the
practice and the precept of the time; and thousands of hearts,
which might otherwise have felt that there was loveliness in the
wild landscape, shrank from it in dread, because they knew that the
monk retired to it for penance, and the hermit for contemplation.
The horror which the Greek had felt for hills only when they were
uninhabitable and barren, attached itself now to many of the
sweetest spots of earth; the feeling was conquered by political
interests, but never by admiration; military ambition seized the
frontier rock, or maintained itself in the unassailable pass; but it
was only for their punishment, or in their despair, that men
consented to tread the crocused slopes of the Chartreuse, or the
soft glades and dewy pastures of Vallombrosa.

§ 11. In all these modifications of temper and principle there
appears much which tends to passionate, affectionate, or awe-struck
observance of the features of natural scenery, closely resembling,
in all but this superstitious dread of mountains, our feelings at
the present day. But _one_ character which the mediævals had in
common with the ancients, and that exactly the most eminent
character in both, opposed itself steadily to all the feelings we
have hitherto been examining,--the admiration, namely, and constant
watchfulness, of human beauty. Exercised in nearly the same manner
as the Greeks, from their youth upwards, their countenances were
cast even in a higher mould; for, although somewhat less regular in
feature, and affected by minglings of Northern bluntness and
stolidity of general expression, together with greater thinness of
lip and shaggy formlessness of brow, these less sculpturesque
features were, nevertheless, touched with a seriousness and
refinement proceeding first from the modes of thought inculcated by
the Christian religion, and secondly from their more romantic and
various life. Hence a degree of personal beauty, both male and
female, was attained in the Middle Ages, with which classical
periods could show nothing for a moment comparable; and this beauty
was set forth by the most perfect splendor, united with grace, in
dress, which the human race have hitherto invented. The strength of
their art-genius was directed in great part to this object; and
their best workmen and most brilliant fanciers were employed in
wreathing the mail or embroidering the robe. The exquisite arts of
enamelling and chasing metal enabled them to make the armor as
radiant and delicate as the plumage of a tropical bird; and the most
various and vivid imaginations were displayed in the alternations of
color, and fiery freaks of form, on shield and crest; so that of all
the beautiful things which the eyes of men could fall upon, in the
world about them, the most beautiful must have been a young knight
riding out in morning sunshine, and in faithful hope.

      "His broad, clear brow in sunlight glowed;
      On burnished hooves his war-horse trode;
      From underneath his helmet flowed
      His coal-black curls, as on he rode.
      All in the blue, unclouded weather,
      Thick jewelled shone the saddle leather;
      The helmet and the helmet feather
      Burned like one burning flame together;
      And the gemmy bridle glittered free,
      Like to some branch of stars we see
      Hung in the golden galaxy."

[Sidenote: § 12. 5. care for human beauty.]

Now, the effect of this superb presence of human beauty on men in
general was, exactly as it had been in Greek times, first, to turn
their thoughts and glances in great part away from all other beauty
but that, and to make the grass of the field take to them always more
or less the aspect of a carpet to dance upon, a lawn to tilt upon, or
a serviceable crop of hay; and, secondly, in what attention they paid
to this lower nature, to make them dwell exclusively on what was
graceful, symmetrical, and bright in color. All that was rugged,
rough, dark, wild, unterminated, they rejected at once, as the domain
of "salvage men" and monstrous giants: all that they admired was
tender, bright, balanced, enclosed, symmetrical--only symmetrical in
the noble and free sense: for what we moderns call "symmetry," or
"balance," differs as much from mediæval symmetry as the poise of a
grocer's scales, or the balance of an Egyptian mummy with its hands
tied to its sides, does from the balance of a knight on his horse,
striking with the battle-axe, at the gallop; the mummy's balance
looking wonderfully perfect, and yet sure to be one-sided if you weigh
the dust of it,--the knight's balance swaying and changing like the
wind, and yet as true and accurate as the laws of life.

[Sidenote: § 13. 6. Symmetrical government of design.]

And this love of symmetry was still farther enhanced by the peculiar
duties required of art at the time; for, in order to fit a flower or
leaf for inlaying in armor, or showing clearly in glass, it was
absolutely necessary to take away its complexity, and reduce it to
the condition of a disciplined and orderly pattern; and this the
more, because, for all military purposes, the device, whatever it
was, had to be distinctly intelligible at extreme distance. That it
should be a good imitation of nature, when seen near, was of no
moment; but it was of highest moment that when first the knight's
banner flashed in the sun at the turn of the mountain road, or rose,
torn and bloody, through the drift of the battle dust, it should
still be discernible what the bearing was.

      "At length, the freshening western blast
      Aside the shroud of battle cast;
      And first the ridge of mingled spears
      Above the brightening cloud appears;
      And in the smoke the pennons flew,
      As in the storm the white sea-mew;
      Then marked they, dashing broad and far
      The broken billows of the war.
      Wide raged the battle on the plain;
      Spears shook, and falchions flashed amain,
      Fell England's arrow-flight like rain;
      Crests rose, and stooped, and rose again,
          Wild and disorderly.
      Amidst the scene of tumult, high,
      _They saw Lord Marmion's falcon fly,
      And stainless Tunstall's banner white,
      And Edmund Howard's lion bright._"

It was needed, not merely that they should see it was a falcon, but
Lord Marmion's falcon; not only a lion, but the Howard's lion.
Hence, to the one imperative end of _intelligibility_, every minor
resemblance to nature was sacrificed, and above all, the _curved_,
which are chiefly the confusing lines; so that the straight,
elongated back, doubly elongated tail, projected and separate claws,
and other rectilinear unnaturalnesses of form, became the means by
which the leopard was, in midst of the mist and storm of battle,
distinguished from the dog, or the lion from the wolf; the most
admirable fierceness and vitality being, in spite of these
necessary changes (so often shallowly sneered at by the modern
workman), obtained by the old designer.

Farther, it was necessary to the brilliant harmony of color, and
clear setting forth of everything, that all confusing shadows, all
dim and doubtful lines should be rejected: hence at once an utter
denial of natural appearances by the great body of workmen; and a
calm rest in a practice of representation which would make either
boar or lion blue, scarlet, or golden, according to the device of
the knight, or the need of such and such a color in that place of
the pattern; and which wholly denied that any substance ever cast a
shadow, or was affected by any kind of obscurity.

[Sidenote: § 14. 7. Therefore, inaccurate rendering of nature.]

All this was in its way, and for its end, absolutely right, admirable,
and delightful; and those who despise it, laugh at it, or derive no
pleasure from it, are utterly ignorant of the highest principles of
art, and are mere tyros and beginners in the practice of color. But,
admirable though it might be, one necessary result of it was a farther
withdrawal of the observation of men from the refined and subtle
beauty of nature; so that the workman who first was led to think
_lightly_ of natural beauty, as being subservient to human, was next
led to think _inaccurately_ of natural beauty, because he had
continually to alter and simplify it for his practical purposes.

§ 15. Now, assembling all these different sources of the peculiar
mediæval feeling towards nature in one view, we have:

    1st. Love of the garden instead of love of the farm, leading
    to a sentimental contemplation of nature, instead of a
    practical and agricultural one. (§§ 3. 4. 6.)

    2nd. Loss of sense of actual Divine presence, leading to
    fancies of fallacious animation, in herbs, flowers, clouds,
    &c. (§ 7.)

    3rd. Perpetual, and more or less undisturbed, companionship
    with wild nature. (§§ 8. 9.)

    4th. Apprehension of demoniacal and angelic presence among
    mountains, leading to a reverent dread of them. (§ 10.)

    5th. Principalness of delight in human beauty, leading to
    comparative contempt of natural objects. (§ 11.)

    6th. Consequent love of order, light, intelligibility, and
    symmetry, leading to dislike of the wildness, darkness, and
    mystery of nature. (§ 12.)

    7th. Inaccuracy of observance of nature, induced by the
    habitual practice of change on its forms. (§ 13.)

From these mingled elements, we should necessarily expect to find
resulting, as the characteristic of mediæval landscape art, compared
with Greek, a far higher sentiment about it, and affection for it,
more or less subdued by still greater respect for the loveliness of
man, and therefore subordinated entirely to human interests; mingled
with curious traces of terror, piety, or superstition, and cramped
by various formalisms,--some wise and necessary, some feeble, and
some exhibiting needless ignorance and inaccuracy.

Under these lights, let us examine the facts.

§ 16. The landscape of the Middle Ages is represented in a central
manner by the illuminations of the MSS. of Romances, executed about
the middle of the fifteenth century. On one side of these stands the
earlier landscape work, more or less treated as simple decoration;
on the other, the later landscape work, becoming more or less
affected with modern ideas and modes of imitation.

These central fifteenth century landscapes are almost invariably
composed of a grove or two of tall trees, a winding river, and a
castle, or a garden: the peculiar feature of both these last being
_trimness_; the artist always dwelling especially on the fences;
wreathing the espaliers indeed prettily with sweet-briar, and
putting pots of orange-trees on the tops of the walls, but taking
great care that there shall be no loose bricks in the one, nor
broken stakes in the other,--the trouble and ceaseless warfare of
the times having rendered security one of the first elements of
pleasantness, and making it impossible for any artist to conceive
Paradise but as surrounded by a moat, or to distinguish the road to
it better than by its narrow wicket gate, and watchful porter.

§ 17. One of these landscapes is thus described by Macaulay: "We
have an exact square, enclosed by the rivers Pison, Gihon, Hiddekel,
and Euphrates, each with a convenient bridge in the centre;
rectangular beds of flowers; a long canal neatly bricked and railed
in; the tree of knowledge, clipped like one of the limes behind the
Tuileries, standing in the centre of the grand alley; the snake
turned round it, the man on the right hand, the woman on the left,
and the beasts drawn up in an exact circle round them."

All this is perfectly true; and seems in the description very
curiously foolish. The only curious folly, however, in the matter is
the exquisite _naïveté_ of the historian, in supposing that the
quaint landscape indicates in the understanding of the painter so
marvellous an inferiority to his own; whereas, it is altogether his
own wit that is at fault, in not comprehending that nations, whose
youth had been decimated among the sands and serpents of Syria, knew
probably nearly as much about Eastern scenery as youths trained in
the schools of the modern Royal Academy; and that this curious
symmetry was entirely symbolic, only more or less modified by the
various instincts which I have traced above. Mr. Macaulay is
evidently quite unaware that the serpent with the human head, and
body twisted round the tree, was the universally accepted symbol of
the evil angel, from the dawn of art up to Michael Angelo; that the
greatest sacred artists invariably place the man on the one side of
the tree, the woman on the other, in order to denote the enthroned
and balanced dominion about to fall by temptation; that the beasts
are ranged (when they _are_ so, though this is much more seldom the
case,) in a circle round them, expressly to mark that they were then
not wild, but obedient, intelligent, and orderly beasts; and that
the four rivers are trenched and enclosed on the four sides, to mark
that the waters which now wander in waste, and destroy in fury, had
then for their principal office to "water the garden" of God. The
description is, however, sufficiently apposite and interesting, as
bearing upon what I have noted respecting the eminent _fence_-loving
spirit of the mediævals.

§ 18. Together with this peculiar formality, we find an infinite
delight in drawing pleasant flowers, always articulating and outlining
them completely; the sky is always blue, having only a few delicate
white clouds in it, and in the distance are blue mountains, very far
away, if the landscape is to be simply delightful; but brought near,
and divided into quaint overhanging rocks, if it is intended to be
meditative, or a place of saintly seclusion. But the whole of it
always,--flowers, castles, brooks, clouds, and rocks,--subordinate to
the human figures in the foreground, and painted for no other end than
that of explaining their adventures and occupations.

[Illustration: 7. Botany of 13th Century. (Apple-tree and Cyclamen)]

§ 19. Before the idea of landscape had been thus far developed, the
representations of it had been purely typical; the objects which had
to be shown in order to explain the scene of the event, being firmly
outlined, usually on a pure golden or chequered color background,
not on sky. The change from the golden background, (characteristic
of the finest thirteenth century work) and the colored chequer
(which in like manner belongs to the finest fourteenth) to the blue
sky, gradated to the horizon, takes place early in the fifteenth
century, and is the _crisis_ of change in the spirit of mediæval
art. Strictly speaking, we might divide the art of Christian times
into two great masses--Symbolic and Imitative;--the symbolic,
reaching from the earliest periods down to the close of the
fourteenth century, and the imitative from that close to the present
time; and, then, the most important circumstance indicative of the
culminating point, or turn of tide, would be this of the change from
chequered background to sky background. The uppermost figure in
Plate 7. opposite, representing the tree of knowledge, taken from a
somewhat late thirteenth century Hebrew manuscript (Additional
11,639) in the British Museum, will at once illustrate Mr.
Macaulay's "serpent turned round the tree," and the mode of
introducing the chequer background, will enable the reader better to
understand the peculiar feeling of the period, which no more
intended the formal walls or streams for an imitative representation
of the Garden of Eden, than these chequers for an imitation of sky.

§ 20. The moment the sky is introduced (and it is curious how
perfectly it is done _at once_, many manuscripts presenting, in
alternate pages, chequered backgrounds, and deep blue skies
exquisitely gradated to the horizon)--the moment, I say, the sky is
introduced, the spirit of art becomes for evermore changed, and
thenceforward it gradually proposes imitation more and more as an
end, until it reaches the Turnerian landscape. This broad division
into two schools would therefore be the most true and accurate we
could employ, but not the most convenient. For the great mediæval
art lies in a cluster about the culminating point, including
symbolism on one side, and imitation on the other, and extending
like a radiant cloud upon the mountain peak of ages, partly down
both sides of it, from the year 1200 to 1500; the brightest part of
the cloud leaning a little backwards, and poising itself between
1250 and 1350. And therefore the most convenient arrangement is into
Romanesque and barbaric art, up to 1200,--mediæval art, 1200 to
1500,--and modern art, from 1500 downwards. But it is only in the
earlier or symbolic mediæval art, reaching up to the close of the
fourteenth century, that the peculiar modification of natural forms
for decorative purposes is seen in its perfection, with all its
beauty, and all its necessary shortcomings; the minds of men being
accurately balanced between that honor for the superior human form
which they shared with the Greek ages, and the sentimental love of
nature which was peculiar to their own. The expression of the two
feelings will be found to vary according to the material and place
of the art; in painting, the conventional forms are more adopted, in
order to obtain definition, and brilliancy of color, while in
sculpture the life of nature is often rendered with a love and
faithfulness which put modern art to shame. And in this earnest
contemplation of the natural facts, united with an endeavor to
simplify, for clear expression, the results of that contemplation,
the ornamental artists arrived at two abstract conclusions about
form, which are highly curious and interesting.

§ 21. They saw, first, that a leaf might always be considered as a
sudden expansion of the stem that bore it; an uncontrollable
expression of delight, on the part of the twig, that spring had come,
shown in a fountain-like expatiation of its tender green heart into
the air. They saw that in this violent proclamation of its delight and
liberty, whereas the twig had, until that moment, a disposition only
to grow quietly forwards, it expressed its satisfaction and extreme
pleasure in sunshine by springing out to right and left. Let _a b_,
Fig. 1. Plate 8., be the twig growing forward in the direction from
_a_ to _b_. It reaches the point _b_, and then--spring coming,--not
being able to contain itself, it bursts out in every direction, even
springing backwards at first for joy; but as this backward
direction is contrary to its own proper fate and nature, it cannot go
on so long, and the length of each rib into which it separates is
proportioned accurately to the degree in which the proceedings of that
rib are in harmony with the natural destiny of the plant. Thus the rib
_c_, entirely contradictory, by the direction of his life and energy,
of the general intentions to the tree, is but a short-lived rib; _d_,
not quite so opposite to his fate, lives longer; _e_, accommodating
himself still more to the spirit of progress, attains a greater length
still; and the largest rib of all is the one who has not yielded at
all to the erratic disposition of the others when spring came, but,
feeling quite as happy about the spring as they did, nevertheless took
no holiday, minded his business, and grew straightforward.

[Illustration: 8. The Growth of Leaves.]

§ 22. Fig. 6. in the same plate, which shows the disposition of the
ribs in the leaf of an American Plane, exemplifies the principle
very accurately; it is indeed more notably seen in this than in most
leaves, because the ribs at the base have evidently had a little
fraternal quarrel about their spring holiday; and the more
gaily-minded ones, getting together into trios on each side, have
rather pooh-poohed and laughed at the seventh brother in the middle,
who wanted to go on regularly, and attend to his work. Nevertheless,
though thus starting quite by himself in life, this seventh brother,
quietly pushing on in the right direction, lives longest, and makes
the largest fortune, and the triple partnerships on the right and
left meet with a very minor prosperity.

§ 23. Now if we inclose Fig. 1. in Plate 8. with two curves passing
through the extremities of the ribs, we get Fig. 2., the central type
of all leaves. Only this type is modified of course in a thousand ways
by the life of the plant. If it be marsh or aquatic, instead of
springing out in twigs, it is almost certain to expand in soft
currents, as the liberated stream does at its mouth into the ocean,
Fig. 3. (Alisma Plantago); if it be meant for one of the crowned and
lovely trees of the earth, it will separate into stars, and each ray
of the leaf will form a ray of light in the crown, Fig. 5.
(Horsechestnut); and if it be a commonplace tree, rather prudent and
practical than imaginative, it will not expand all at once, but throw
out the ribs every now and then along the central rib, like a
merchant taking his occasional and restricted holiday, Fig. 4. (Elm).

§ 24. Now in the bud, where all these proceedings on the leaf's part
are first imagined, the young leaf is generally (always?) doubled up in
embryo, so as to present the profile of the half-leaves, as Fig. 7.,
only in exquisite complexity of arrangement; Fig. 9., for instance, is
the profile of the leaf-bud of a rose. Hence the general arrangement of
line represented by Fig. 8. (in which the lower line is slightly curved
to express the bending life in the spine) is everlastingly typical of
the expanding powers of joyful vegetative youth; and it is of all
simple forms the most exquisitely delightful to the human mind. It
presents itself in a thousand different proportions and variations in
the buds and profiles of leaves; those being always the loveliest in
which, either by accidental perspective of position, or inherent
character in the tree, it is most frequently presented to the eye. The
branch of bramble, for instance, Fig. 10. at the bottom of Plate 8.,
owes its chief beauty to the perpetual recurrence of this typical form;
and we shall find presently the enormous importance of it, even in
mountain ranges, though, in these, _falling_ force takes the place of
_vital_ force.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

§ 25. This abstract conclusion the great thirteenth century artists
were the first to arrive at; and whereas, before their time,
ornament had been constantly refined into intricate and
subdivided symmetries, they were content with this simple form as
the termination of its most important features. Fig. 3., which is a
scroll out of a Psalter executed in the latter half of the
thirteenth century, is a sufficient example of a practice at that
time absolutely universal.

[Illustration: 9. Botany of the 14th Century. From the Prayer-book of
Yolande of Navarre.]

§ 26. The second great discovery of the Middle Ages in floral
ornament, was that, in order completely to express the law of
subordination among the leaf-ribs, two ribs were necessary, _and no
more_, on each side of the leaf, forming a series of three with the
central one, because proportion is between three terms at least.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

That is to say, when they had only three ribs altogether, as _a_,
Fig. 4., no _law_ of relation was discernible between the ribs, or
the leaflets they bore; but by the addition of a third on each
side as at _b_, proportion instantly was expressible, whether
arithmetical or geometrical, or of any other kind. Hence the
adoption of forms more or less approximating to that at _c_ (young
ivy), or _d_ (wild geranium), as the favorite elements of their
floral ornament, those leaves being in their disposition of masses,
the simplest which can express a perfect law of proportion, just as
the outline Fig. 7. Plate 8. is the simplest which can express a
perfect law of growth.

Plate 9. opposite gives, in rude outline, the arrangement of the
border of one of the pages of a missal in my own possession, executed
for the Countess Yolande of Flanders,[72] in the latter half of the
fourteenth century, and furnishing, in exhaustless variety, the most
graceful examples I have ever seen of the favorite decoration at the
period, commonly now known as the "Ivy leaf" pattern.

§ 27. In thus reducing these two everlasting laws of beauty to their
simplest possible exponents, the mediæval workmen were the first to
discern and establish the principles of decorative art to the end of
time, nor of decorative art merely, but of mass arrangement in
general. For the members of any great composition, arranged about a
centre, are always reducible to the law of the ivy leaf, the best
cathedral entrances having five porches corresponding in
proportional purpose to its five lobes (three being an imperfect,
and seven a superfluous number); while the loveliest groups of lines
attainable in any pictorial composition are always based on the
section of the leaf-bud, Fig. 7. Plate 8., or on the relation of its
ribs to the convex curve enclosing them.

§ 28. These discoveries of ultimate truth are, I believe, never made
philosophically, but instinctively; so that wherever we find a high
abstract result of the kind, we may be almost sure it has been the
work of the penetrative imagination, acting under the influence of
strong affection. Accordingly, when we enter on our botanical
inquiries, I shall have occasion to show with what tender and loving
fidelity to nature the masters of the thirteenth century always
traced the leading lines of their decorations, either in
missal-painting or sculpture, and how totally in this respect their
methods of subduing, for the sake of distinctness, the natural forms
they loved so dearly, differ from the iron formalisms to which the
Greeks, careless of all that was not completely divine or completely
human, reduced the thorn of the acanthus, and softness of the lily.
Nevertheless, in all this perfect and loving decorative art, we have
hardly any careful references to other landscape features than herbs
and flowers; mountains, water, and clouds are introduced so rudely,
that the representations of them can never be received for anything
else than letters or signs. Thus the _sign_ of clouds, in the
thirteenth century, is an undulating band, usually in painting, of
blue edged with white, in sculpture, wrought so as to resemble very
nearly the folds of a curtain closely tied, and understood for
clouds only by its position, as surrounding angels or saints in
heaven, opening to souls ascending at the Last Judgment, or forming
canopies over the Saviour or the Virgin. Water is represented by
zigzag lines, nearly resembling those employed for clouds, but
distinguished, in sculpture, by having fish in it; in painting, both
by fish and a more continuous blue or green color. And when these
unvaried symbols are associated under the influence of that love of
firm fence, moat, and every other means of definition which we have
seen to be one of the prevailing characteristics of the mediæval
mind, it is not possible for us to conceive, through the rigidity of
the signs employed, what were the real feelings of the workman or
spectator about the natural landscape. We see that the thing carved
or painted is not intended in any wise to imitate the truth, or
convey to us the feelings which the workman had in contemplating the
truth. He has got a way of talking about it so definite and cold,
and tells us with his chisel so calmly that the knight had a castle
to attack, or the saint a river to cross dryshod, without making the
smallest effort to describe pictorially either castle or river, that
we are left wholly at fault as to the nature of the emotion with
which he contemplated the real objects. But that emotion, as the
intermediate step between the feelings of the Grecian and the
Modern, it must be our aim to ascertain as clearly as possible; and,
therefore, finding it not at this period completely expressed in
visible art, we must, as we did with the Greeks, take up the written
landscape instead, and examine this mediæval sentiment as we find it
embodied in the poem of Dante.

§ 29. The thing that must first strike us in this respect, as we
turn our thoughts to the poem, is, unquestionably, the _formality_
of its landscape.

Milton's effort, in all that he tells us of his Inferno, is to make
it indefinite; Dante's, to make it _definite_. Both, indeed,
describe it as entered through gates; but, within the gate, all is
wild and fenceless with Milton, having indeed its four rivers,--the
last vestige of the mediæval tradition,--but rivers which flow
through a waste of mountain and moorland, and by "many a frozen,
many a fiery Alp." But Dante's Inferno is accurately separated into
circles drawn with well-pointed compasses; mapped and properly
surveyed in every direction, trenched in a thoroughly good style of
engineering from depth to depth, and divided in the "_accurate_
middle" (dritto mezzo) of its deepest abyss, into a concentric
series of ten moats and embankments, like those about a castle, with
bridges from each embankment to the next; precisely in the manner of
those bridges over Hiddekel and Euphrates, which Mr. Macaulay thinks
so innocently designed, apparently not aware that he is also
laughing at Dante. These larger fosses are of rock, and the bridges
also; but as he goes further into detail, Dante tells us of various
minor fosses and embankments, in which he anxiously points out to us
not only the formality, but the neatness and perfectness, of the
stonework. For instance, in describing the river Phlegethon, he
tells us that it was "paved with stone at the bottom, and at the
sides, and _over the edges of the sides_," just as the water is at
the baths of Bulicame; and for fear we should think this embankment
at all _larger_ than it really was, Dante adds, carefully, that it
was made just like the embankments of Ghent or Bruges against the
sea, or those in Lombardy which bank the Brenta, only "not so high,
nor so wide," as any of these. And besides the trenches, we have two
well-built castles; one like Ecbatana, with seven circuits of wall
(and surrounded by a fair stream), wherein the great poets and sages
of antiquity live; and another, a great fortified city with walls of
iron, red-hot, and a deep fosse round it, and full of "grave
citizens,"--the city of Dis.

§ 30. Now, whether this be in what we moderns call "good taste," or
not, I do not mean just now to inquire--Dante having nothing to do
with taste, but with the facts of what he had seen; only, so far as
the imaginative faculty of the two poets is concerned, note that
Milton's vagueness is not the sign of imagination, but of its
absence, so far as it is significative in the matter. For it does
not follow, because Milton did not map out his Inferno as Dante did,
that he _could_ not have done so if he had chosen; only, it was the
easier and less imaginative process to leave it vague than to
define it. Imagination is always the seeing and asserting faculty;
that which obscures or conceals may be judgment, or feeling, but not
invention. The invention, whether good or bad, is in the accurate
engineering, not in the fog and uncertainty.

§ 31. When we pass with Dante from the Inferno to Purgatory, we have
indeed more light and air, but no more liberty; being now confined
on various ledges cut into a mountain side, with a precipice on one
hand and a vertical wall on the other; and, lest here also we should
make any mistake about magnitudes, we are told that the ledges were
eighteen feet wide,[73] and that the ascent from one to the other
was by steps, made like those which go up from Florence to the
church of San Minieto.[74]

Lastly, though in the Paradise there is perfect freedom and infinity
of space, though for trenches we have planets, and for cornices
constellations, yet there is more cadence, procession, and order
among the redeemed souls than any others; they fly, so as to
describe letters and sentences in the air, and rest in circles, like
rainbows, or determinate figures, as of a cross and an eagle; in
which certain of the more glorified natures are so arranged as to
form the eye of the bird, while those most highly blessed are
arranged with their white crowds in leaflets, so as to form the
image of a white rose in the midst of heaven.

§ 32. Thus, throughout the poem, I conceive that the first striking
character of its scenery is intense definition; precisely the
reflection of that definiteness which we have already traced in
pictorial art. But the second point which seems noteworthy is, that
the flat ground and embanked trenches are reserved for the Inferno;
and that the entire territory of the Purgatory is a mountain, thus
marking the sense of that purifying and perfecting influence in
mountains which we saw the mediæval mind was so ready to suggest.
The same general idea is indicated at the very commencement of the
poem, in which Dante is overwhelmed by fear and sorrow in passing
through a dark forest, but revives on seeing the sun touch the top
of a hill, afterwards called by Virgil "the pleasant mount--the
cause and source of all delight."

§ 33. While, however, we find this greater honor paid to mountains, I
think we may perceive a much greater dread and dislike of woods. We
saw that Homer seemed to attach a pleasant idea, for the most part, to
forests; regarding them as sources of wealth and places of shelter;
and we find constantly an idea of sacredness attached to them, as
being haunted especially by the gods; so that even the wood which
surrounds the house of Circe is spoken of as a sacred thicket, or
rather, as a sacred glade, or labyrinth of glades (of the particular
word used I shall have more to say presently); and so the wood is
sought as a kindly shelter by Ulysses, in spite of its wild beasts;
and evidently regarded with great affection by Sophocles, for, in a
passage which is always regarded by readers of Greek tragedy with
peculiar pleasure, the aged and blind Oedipus, brought to rest in "the
sweetest resting-place" in all the neighborhood of Athens, has the
spot described to him as haunted perpetually by nightingales, which
sing "in the green glades and in the dark ivy, and in the
thousand-fruited, sunless, and windless thickets of the god"
(Bacchus); the idea of the complete shelter from wind and sun being
here, as with Ulysses, the uppermost one. After this come the usual
staples of landscape,--narcissus, crocus, plenty of rain, olive trees;
and last, and the greatest boast of all,--"it is a good country for
horses, and conveniently by the sea;" but the prominence and
pleasantness of the thick wood in the thoughts of the writer are very
notable; whereas to Dante the idea of a forest is exceedingly
repulsive, so that, as just noticed, in the opening of his poem, he
cannot express a general despair about life more strongly than by
saying he was lost in a wood so savage and terrible, that "even to
think or speak of it is distress,--it was so bitter,--it was something
next door to death;" and one of the saddest scenes in all the Inferno
is in a forest, of which the trees are haunted by lost souls; while
(with only one exception,) whenever the country is to be beautiful, we
find ourselves coming out into open air and open meadows.

It is quite true that this is partly a characteristic, not merely of
Dante, or of mediæval writers, but of _southern_ writers; for the
simple reason that the forest, being with them higher upon the
hills, and more out of the way than in the north was generally a
type of lonely and savage places; while in England, the
"greenwood," coming up to the very walls of the towns, it was
possible to be "merry in the good greenwood," in a sense which an
Italian could not have understood. Hence Chaucer, Spenser, and
Shakspere send their favorites perpetually to the woods for pleasure
or meditation; and trust their tender Canace, or Rosalind, or
Helena, or Silvia, or Belphoebe, where Dante would have sent no one
but a condemned spirit. Nevertheless, there is always traceable in
the mediæval mind a dread of thick foliage, which was not present to
that of a Greek; so that, even in the north, we have our sorrowful
"children in the wood," and black huntsmen of the Hartz forests, and
such other wood terrors; the principal reason for the difference
being that a Greek, being by no means given to travelling, regarded
his woods as so much valuable property; and if he ever went into
them for pleasure expected to meet one or two gods in the course of
his walk, but no banditti; while a mediæval, much more of a solitary
traveller, and expecting to meet with no gods in the thickets, but
only with thieves, or a hostile ambush, or a bear, besides a great
deal of troublesome ground for his horse, and a very serious chance,
next to a certainty, of losing his way, naturally kept in the open
ground as long as he could, and regarded the forests, in general,
with anything but an eye of favor.

§ 34. These, I think, are the principal points which must strike us,
when we first broadly think of the poem as compared with classical
work. Let us now go a little more into detail.

As Homer gave us an ideal landscape, which even a god might have been
pleased to behold, so Dante gives us, fortunately, an ideal landscape,
which is specially intended for the terrestrial paradise. And it will
doubtless be with some surprise, after our reflections above on the
general tone of Dante's feelings, that we find ourselves here first
entering a _forest_, and that even a _thick_ forest. But there is a
peculiar meaning in this. With any other poet than Dante, it might
have been regarded as a wanton inconsistency. Not so with him: by
glancing back to the two lines which explain the nature of Paradise,
we shall see what he means by it. Virgil tells him, as he enters it,
"Henceforward, take thine own pleasure for guide; thou art beyond the
steep ways, and beyond all Art;"--meaning, that the perfectly purified
and noble human creature, having no pleasure but in right, is past
all effort, and past all _rule_. Art has no existence for such a
being. Hence, the first aim of Dante, in his landscape imagery, is to
show evidence of this perfect liberty, and of the purity and
sinlessness of the new nature, converting pathless ways into happy
ones. So that all those fences and formalisms which had been needed
for him in imperfection, are removed in this paradise; and even the
pathlessness of the wood, the most dreadful thing possible to him in
his days of sin and shortcoming, is now a joy to him in his days of
purity. And as the fencelessness and thicket of sin led to the
fettered and fearful order of eternal punishment, so the fencelessness
and thicket of the free virtue lead to the loving and constellated
order of eternal happiness.

§ 35. This forest, then, is very like that of Colonos in several
respects--in its peace and sweetness, and number of birds; it
differs from it only in letting a light breeze through it, being
therefore somewhat thinner than the Greek wood; the tender lines
which tell of the voices of the birds mingling with the wind, and of
the leaves all turning one way before it, have been more or less
copied by every poet since Dante's time. They are, so far as I know,
the sweetest passage of wood description which exists in literature.

Before, however, Dante has gone far in this wood,--that is to say,
only so far as to have lost sight of the place where he entered it,
or rather, I suppose, of the light under the boughs of the outside
trees, and it must have been a very thin wood indeed if he did not
do this in some quarter of a mile's walk,--he comes to a little
river, three paces over, which bends the blades of grass to the
left, with a meadow on the other side of it; and in this meadow

      "A lady, graced with solitude, who went
        Singing, and setting flower by flower apart,
      By which the path she walked on was besprent.
      'Ah, lady beautiful, that basking art
        In beams of love, if I may trust thy face,
      Which useth to bear witness of the heart,
      Let liking come on thee,' said I, 'to trace
        Thy path a little closer to the shore,
      Where I may reap the hearing of thy lays.
      Thou mindest me, how Proserpine of yore
        Appeared in such a place, what time her mother
      Lost her, and she the spring, for evermore.'
      As, pointing downwards and to one another
        Her feet, a lady bendeth in the dance,
      And barely setteth one before the other,
      Thus, on the scarlet and the saffron glance
        Of flowers, with motion maidenlike she bent
      (Her modest eyelids drooping and askance);
      And there she gave my wishes their content,
        Approaching, so that her sweet melodies
      Arrived upon mine ear with what they meant.
      When first she came amongst the blades, that rise,
        Already wetted, from the goodly river,
      She graced me by the lifting of her eyes."   (CAYLEY.)

§ 36. I have given this passage at length, because, for our
purposes, it is by much the most important, not only in Dante, but
in the whole circle of poetry. This lady, observe, stands on the
opposite side of the little stream, which, presently, she explains
to Dante is Lethe, having power to cause forgetfulness of all evil,
and she stands just among the bent blades of grass at its edge. She
is first seen gathering flower from flower, then "passing
continually the multitudinous flowers through her hands," smiling at
the same time so brightly, that her first address to Dante is to
prevent him from wondering at her, saying, "if he will remember the
verse of the ninety-second Psalm, beginning. 'Delectasti,' he will
know why she is so happy."

And turning to the verse of the Psalm, we find it written, "Thou,
Lord, hast made me glad _through Thy works_. I will triumph _in the
works of Thy hands_;" or, in the very words in which Dante would
read it,--

      "Quia delectasti me, Domine, in factura tua,
      Et in operibus manuum Tuarum exultabo."

§ 37. Now we could not for an instant have had any difficulty in
understanding this, but that, some way farther on in the poem, this
lady is called Matilda, and it is with reason supposed by the
commentators to be the great Countess Matilda of the eleventh
century; notable equally for her ceaseless activity, her brilliant
political genius, her perfect piety, and her deep reverence for the
see of Rome. This Countess Matilda is therefore Dante's guide in
the terrestrial paradise, as Beatrice is afterwards in the
celestial; each of them having a spiritual and symbolic character in
their glorified state, yet retaining their definite personality.

The question is, then, what is the symbolic character of the
Countess Matilda, as the guiding spirit of the terrestrial paradise?
Before Dante had entered this paradise he had rested on a step of
shelving rock, and as he watched the stars he slept, and dreamed,
and thus tells us what he saw:--

      "A lady, young and beautiful, I dreamed,
      Was passing o'er a lea; and, as she came,
      Methought I saw her ever and anon
      Bending to cull the flowers; and thus she sang:
      'Know ye, whoever of my name would ask,
      That I am Leah; for my brow to weave
      A garland, these fair hands unwearied ply;
      To please me at the crystal mirror, here
      I deck me. But my sister Rachel, she
      Before her glass abides the livelong day,
      Her radiant eyes beholding, charmed no less
      Than I with this delightful task. Her joy
      In contemplation, as in labor mine.'"

This vision of Rachel and Leah has been always, and with
unquestionable truth, received as a type of the Active and
Contemplative life, and as an introduction to the two divisions of the
paradise which Dante is about to enter. Therefore the unwearied spirit
of the Countess Matilda is understood to represent the Active life,
which forms the felicity of Earth; and the spirit of Beatrice the
Contemplative life, which forms the felicity of Heaven. This
interpretation appears at first straightforward and certain; but it
has missed count of exactly the most important fact in the two
passages which we have to explain. Observe: Leah gathers the flowers
to decorate _herself_, and delights in _Her Own_ Labor. Rachel sits
silent, contemplating herself, and delights in _Her Own_ Image. These
are the types of the Unglorified Active and Contemplative powers of
Man. But Beatrice and Matilda are the same powers, Glorified. And how
are they Glorified? Leah took delight in her own labor; but
Matilda--"in operibus _manuum Tuarum_"--_in God's labor_: Rachel in
the sight of her own face; Beatrice in the sight of _God's face_.

§ 38. And thus, when afterwards Dante sees Beatrice on her throne, and
prays her that, when he himself shall die, she would receive him with
kindness, Beatrice merely looks down for an instant, and answers with
a single smile, then "towards the eternal fountain turns."

Therefore it is evident that Dante distinguishes in both cases, not
between earth and heaven, but between perfect and imperfect happiness,
whether in earth or heaven. The active life which has only the service
of man for its end, and therefore gathers flowers, with Leah, for its
own decoration, is indeed happy, but not perfectly so; it has only the
happiness of the dream, belonging essentially to the dream of human
life, and passing away with it. But the active life which labors for
the more and more discovery of God's work, is perfectly happy, and is
the life of the terrestrial paradise, being a true foretaste of
heaven, and beginning in earth, as heaven's vestibule. So also the
contemplative life which is concerned with human feeling and thought
and beauty--the life which is in earthly poetry and imagery of noble
earthly emotion--is happy, but it is the happiness of the dream; the
contemplative life which has God's person and love in Christ for its
object, has the happiness of eternity. But because this higher
happiness is also begun here on earth, Beatrice descends to earth; and
when revealed to Dante first, he sees the image of the twofold
personality of Christ reflected in her _eyes_; as the flowers, which
are, to the mediæval heart, the chief work of God, are for ever
passing through Matilda's _hands_.

§ 39. Now, therefore, we see that Dante, as the great prophetic
exponent of the heart of the Middle Ages, has, by the lips of the
spirit of Matilda, declared the mediæval faith,--that all perfect
active life was "the expression of man's delight _in God's work_;"
and that all their political and warlike energy, as fully shown in
the mortal life of Matilda, was yet inferior and impure,--the energy
of the dream,--compared with that which on the opposite bank of
Lethe stood "choosing flower from flower." And what joy and peace
there were in this work is marked by Matilda's being the person who
draws Dante through the stream of Lethe, so as to make him forget
all sin, and all sorrow: throwing her arms round him, she plunges
his head under the waves of it; then draws him through, crying to
him, "_hold me, hold me_" (tiemmi, tiemmi), and so presents him,
thus bathed, free from all painful memory, at the feet of the spirit
of the more heavenly contemplation.

§ 40. The reader will, I think, now see, with sufficient
distinctness, why I called this passage the most important, for our
present purposes, in the whole circle of poetry. For it contains the
first great confession of the discovery by the human race (I mean as
a matter of experience, not of revelation), that their happiness was
not in themselves, and that their labor was not to have their own
service as its chief end. It embodies in a few syllables the
_sealing_ difference between the Greek and the mediæval, in that the
former sought the flower and herb for his own uses, the latter for
God's honor; the former, primarily and on principle, contemplated
his own beauty and the workings of his own mind, and the latter,
primarily and on principle, contemplated Christ's beauty and the
workings of the mind of Christ.

§ 41. I will not at present follow up this subject any farther; it
being enough that we have thus got to the root of it, and have a
great declaration of the central mediæval purpose, whereto we may
return for solution of all future questions. I would only,
therefore, desire the reader now to compare the Stones of Venice,
vol. i. chap. xx. §§ 15. 16.; the Seven Lamps of Architecture, chap.
iv. § 3.; and the second volume of this work, Chap. II. §§ 9. 10.,
and Chap. III. § 10.; that he may, in these several places, observe
how gradually our conclusions are knitting themselves together as we
are able to determine more and more of the successive questions that
come before us: and, finally, to compare the two interesting
passages in Wordsworth, which, without any memory of Dante,
nevertheless, as if by some special ordaining, describe in matters
of modern life exactly the soothing or felicitous powers of the two
active spirits of Dante--Leah and Matilda, Excursion, book v. line
608. to 625., and book vi. line 102. to 214.

§ 42. Having thus received from Dante this great lesson, as to the
spirit in which mediæval landscape is to be understood, what else we
have to note respecting it, as seen in his poem, will be
comparatively straightforward and easy. And first, we have to
observe the place occupied in his mind by _color_. It has already
been shown, in the Stones of Venice, vol. ii. chap. v. §§ 30--34,
that color is the most _sacred_ element of all visible things.
Hence, as the mediæval mind contemplated them first for their
sacredness, we should, beforehand, expect that the first thing it
would seize would be the color; and that we should find its
expressions and renderings of color infinitely more loving and
accurate than among the Greeks.

§ 43. Accordingly, the Greek sense of color seems to have been so
comparatively dim and uncertain, that it is almost impossible to
ascertain what the real idea was which they attached to any word
alluding to hue: and above all, color, though pleasant to their
eyes, as to those of all human beings, seems never to have been
impressive to their feelings. They liked purple, on the whole, the
best; but there was no sense of cheerfulness or pleasantness in one
color, and gloom in another, such as the mediævals had.

For instance, when Achilles goes, in great anger and sorrow, to
complain to Thetis of the scorn done him by Agamemnon, the sea appears
to him "wine-colored." One might think this meant that the sea looked
dark and reddish-purple to him, in a kind of sympathy with his anger.
But we turn to the passage of Sophocles, which has been above
quoted--a passage peculiarly intended to express peace and rest--and
we find that the birds sing among "wine-colored" ivy. The uncertainty
of conception of the hue itself, and entire absence of expressive
character in the word, could hardly be more clearly manifested.

§ 44. Again: I said the Greek liked purple, as a general source of
enjoyment, better than any other color. So he did, and so all healthy
persons who have eye for color, and are unprejudiced about it, do; and
will to the end of time, for a reason presently to be noted. But so
far was this instinctive preference for purple from giving, in the
Greek mind, any consistently cheerful or sacred association to the
color, that Homer constantly calls death "purple death."

§ 45. Again: in the passage of Sophocles, so often spoken of, I said
there was some difficulty respecting a word often translated
"thickets." I believe, myself, it means glades; literally, "going
places" in the woods,--that is to say, places where, either naturally
or by force, the trees separate, so as to give some accessible
avenue. Now, Sophocles tells us the birds sang in these "_green_ going
places;" and we take up the expression gratefully, thinking the old
Greek perceived and enjoyed, as we do, the sweet fall of the eminently
_green_ light through the leaves when they are a little thinner than
in the heart of the wood. But we turn to the tragedy of Ajax, and are
much shaken in our conclusion about the meaning of the word, when we
are told that the body of Ajax is to lie unburied, and be eaten by
sea-birds on the "_green_ sand." The formation, geologically
distinguished by that title, was certainly not known to Sophocles; and
the only conclusion which, it seems to me, we can come to under the
circumstances,--assuming Ariel's[75] authority as to the color of
pretty sand, and the ancient mariner's (or, rather, his hearer's[76])
as to the color of ugly sand, to be conclusive,--is that Sophocles
really did not know green from yellow or brown.

§ 46. Now, without going out of the terrestrial paradise, in which
Dante last left us, we shall be able at once to compare with this
Greek incertitude the precision of the mediæval eye for color. Some
three arrowflights further up into the wood we come to a tall tree,
which is at first barren, but, after some little time, visibly opens
into flowers, of a color "less than that of roses, but more than
that of violets."

It certainly would not be possible, in words, to come nearer to the
_definition_ of the exact hue which Dante meant--that of the
apple-blossom. Had he employed any simple color-phrase, as a "pale
pink," or "violet-pink," or any other such combined expression, he
still could not have completely got at the delicacy of the hue; he
might perhaps have indicated its kind, but not its tenderness; but
by taking the rose-leaf as the type of the delicate red, and then
enfeebling this with the violet grey, he gets, as closely as
language can carry him, to the complete rendering of the vision,
though it is evidently felt by him to be in its perfect beauty
ineffable; and rightly so felt, for of all lovely things which grace
the spring time in our fair temperate zone, I am not sure but this
blossoming of the apple-tree is the fairest. At all events, I find
it associated in my mind with four other kinds of color, certainly
principal among the gifts of the northern earth, namely:

    1st. Bell gentians growing close together, mixed with lilies
    of the valley, on the Jura pastures.

    2nd. Alpine roses with dew upon them, under low rays of
    morning sunshine, touching the tops of the flowers.

    3rd. Bell heather in mass, in full light, at sunset.

    4th. White narcissus (red-centred) in mass, on the Vevay
    pastures, in sunshine, after rain.

And I know not where in the group to place the wreaths of
apple-blossoms, in the Vevay orchards, with the far-off blue of the
lake of Geneva seen between the flowers.

A Greek, however, would have regarded this blossom simply with the
eyes of a Devonshire farmer, as bearing on the probable price of
cider, and would have called it red, cerulean, purple, white,
hyacinthine, or generally "aglaos," agreeable, as happened to suit
his verse.

§ 47. Again: we have seen how fond the Greek was of composing his
paradises of rather damp grass; but that in this fondness for grass
there was always an undercurrent of consideration for his horses; and
the characters in it which pleased him most were its depth and
freshness; not its color. Now, if we remember carefully the general
expressions, respecting grass, used in modern literature, I think
nearly the commonest that occurs to us will be that of "enamelled"
turf or sward. This phrase is usually employed by our pseudo-poets,
like all their other phrases, without knowing what it means, because
it has been used by other writers before them, and because they do not
know what else to say of grass. If we were to ask them what enamel
was, they could not tell us; and if we asked why grass was like
enamel, they could not tell us. The expression _has_ a meaning,
however, and one peculiarly characteristic of mediæval and modern
temper.

§ 48. The first instance I know of its right use, though very
probably it had been so employed before, is in Dante. The righteous
spirits of the pre-Christian ages are seen by him, though in the
Inferno, yet in a place open, luminous, and high, walking upon the
"green enamel."

I am very sure that Dante did not use this phrase as we use it. He
knew well what enamel was; and his readers, in order to understand
him thoroughly, must remember what it is,--a vitreous paste,
dissolved in water, mixed with metallic oxides, to give it the
opacity and the color required, spread in a moist state on metal,
and afterwards hardened by fire, so as never to change. And Dante
means, in using this metaphor of the grass of the Inferno, to mark
that it is laid as a tempering and cooling substance over the dark,
metallic, gloomy ground; but yet so hardened by the fire, that it is
not any more fresh or living grass, but a smooth, silent, lifeless
bed of eternal green. And we know how _hard_ Dante's idea of it was;
because afterwards, in what is perhaps the most awful passage of the
whole Inferno, when the three furies rise at the top of the burning
tower, and catching sight of Dante, and not being able to get at
him, shriek wildly for the Gorgon to come up too, that they may turn
him into stone,--the word _stone_ is not hard enough for them. Stone
might crumble away after it was made, or something with life might
grow upon it; no, it shall not be stone; they will make enamel of
him; nothing can grow out of that; it is dead for ever.[77]

    "Venga Medusa, si lo farem di _Smalto_."

§ 49. Now, almost in the opening of the Purgatory, as there at the
entrance of the Inferno, we find a company of great ones resting in
a grassy place. But the idea of the grass now is very different. The
word now used is not "enamel," but "herb," and instead of being
merely green, it is covered with flowers of many colors. With the
usual mediæval accuracy, Dante insists on telling us precisely what
these colors were, and how bright; which he does by naming the
actual pigments used in illumination,--"Gold, and fine silver, and
cochineal, and white lead, and Indian wood, serene and lucid, and
fresh emerald, just broken, would have been excelled, as less is by
greater, by the flowers and grass of the place." It is evident that
the "emerald" here means the emerald green of the illuminators; for
a fresh emerald is no brighter than one which is not fresh, and
Dante was not one to throw away his words thus. Observe, then, we
have here the idea of the growth, life, and variegation of the
"green herb," as opposed to the smalto of the Inferno; but the
colors of the variegation are illustrated and defined by the
reference to actual pigments; and, observe, because the other colors
are rather bright, the blue ground (Indian wood, indigo?) is sober;
lucid, but serene; and presently two angels enter, who are dressed
in green drapery, but of a paler green than the grass, which Dante
marks, by telling us that it was "the green of leaves just budded."

§ 50. In all this, I wish the reader to observe two things: first, the
general carefulness of the poet in defining color, distinguishing it
precisely as a painter would (opposed to the Greek carelessness about
it); and, secondly, his regarding the grass for its greenness and
variegation, rather than, as a Greek would have done, for its depth
and freshness. This greenness or brightness, and variegation, are
taken up by later and modern poets, as the things intended to be
chiefly expressed by the word "enamelled;" and, gradually, the term is
taken to indicate any kind of bright and interchangeable coloring;
there being always this much of propriety about it, when used of
greensward, that such sward is indeed, like enamel, a coat of bright
color on a comparatively dark ground; and is thus a sort of natural
jewelry and painter's work, different from loose and large vegetation.
The word is often awkwardly and falsely used, by the later poets, of
all kinds of growth and color; as by Milton of the flowers of Paradise
showing themselves over its wall; but it retains, nevertheless,
through all its jaded inanity, some half-unconscious vestige of the
old sense, even to the present day.

§ 51. There are, it seems to me, several important deductions to be
made from these facts. The Greek, we have seen, delighted in the
grass for its usefulness; the mediæval, as also we moderns, for its
color and beauty. But both dwell on it as the _first_ element of the
lovely landscape; we saw its use in Homer, we see also that Dante
thinks the righteous spirits of the heathen enough comforted in
Hades by having even the _image_ of green grass put beneath their
feet; the happy resting-place in Purgatory has no other delight than
its grass and flowers; and, finally, in the terrestrial paradise,
the feet of Matilda pause where the Lethe stream first bends the
blades of grass. Consider a little what a depth there is in this
great instinct of the human race. Gather a single blade of grass,
and examine for a minute, quietly, its narrow sword-shaped strip of
fluted green. Nothing, as it seems there, of notable goodness or
beauty. A very little strength, and a very little tallness, and a
few delicate long lines meeting in a point,--not a perfect point
neither, but blunt and unfinished, by no means a creditable or
apparently much cared for example of Nature's workmanship; made, as
it seems, only to be trodden on to-day, and to-morrow to be cast
into the oven; and a little pale and hollow stalk, feeble and
flaccid, leading down to the dull brown fibres of roots. And yet,
think of it well, and judge whether of all the gorgeous flowers that
beam in summer air, and of all strong and goodly trees, pleasant to
the eyes and good for food,--stately palm and pine, strong ash and
oak, scented citron, burdened vine,--there be any by man so deeply
loved, by God so highly graced, as that narrow point of feeble
green. It seems to me not to have been without a peculiar
significance, that our Lord, when about to work the miracle which,
of all that He showed, appears to have been felt by the multitude as
the most impressive,--the miracle of the loaves,--commanded the
people to sit down by companies "upon the green grass." He was about
to feed them with the principal produce of earth and the sea, the
simplest representations of the food of mankind. He gave them the
seed of the herb; He bade them sit down upon the herb itself, which
was as great a gift, in its fitness for their joy and rest, as its
perfect fruit, for their sustenance; thus, in this single order and
act, when rightly understood, indicating for evermore how the
Creator had entrusted the comfort, consolation, and sustenance of
man, to the simplest and most despised of all the leafy families of
the earth. And well does it fulfil its mission. Consider what we owe
merely to the meadow grass, to the covering of the dark ground by
that glorious enamel, by the companies of those soft, and countless,
and peaceful spears. The fields! Follow but forth for a little time
the thoughts of all that we ought to recognise in those words. All
spring and summer is in them,--the walks by silent, scented
paths,--the rests in noon-day heat,--the joy of herds and
flocks,--the power of all shepherd life and meditation,--the life of
sunlight upon the world, falling in emerald streaks, and falling in
soft blue shadows, where else it would have struck upon the dark
mould, or scorching dust,--pastures beside the pacing brooks,--soft
banks and knolls of lowly hills,--thymy slopes of down overlooked by
the blue line of lifted sea,--crisp lawns all dim with early dew, or
smooth in evening warmth of barred sunshine, dinted by happy feet,
and softening in their fall the sound of loving voices: all these
are summed in those simple words; and these are not all. We may not
measure to the full the depth of this heavenly gift, in our own
land; though still, as we think of it longer, the infinite of that
meadow sweetness, Shakspere's peculiar joy, would open on us more
and more, yet we have it but in part. Go out, in the spring time,
among the meadows that slope from the shores of the Swiss lakes to
the roots of their lower mountains. There, mingled with the taller
gentians and the white narcissus, the grass grows deep and free; and
as you follow the winding mountain paths, beneath arching boughs all
veiled and dim with blossom,--paths that for ever droop and rise
over the green banks and mounds sweeping down in scented undulation,
steep to the blue water, studded here and there with new mown heaps,
filling all the air with fainter sweetness,--look up towards the
higher hills, where the waves of everlasting green roll silently
into their long inlets among the shadows of the pines; and we may,
perhaps, at last know the meaning of those quiet words of the 147th
Psalm, "He maketh grass to grow upon the mountains."

§ 52. There are also several lessons symbolically connected with this
subject, which we must not allow to escape us. Observe, the peculiar
characters of the grass, which adapt it especially for the service of
man, are its apparent _humility_, and _cheerfulness_. Its humility, in
that it seems created only for lowest service,--appointed to be
trodden on, and fed upon. Its cheerfulness, in that it seems to exult
under all kinds of violence and suffering. You roll it, and it is
stronger the next day; you mow it, and it multiplies its shoots, as if
it were grateful; you tread upon it, and it only sends up richer
perfume. Spring comes, and it rejoices with all the earth,--glowing
with variegated flame of flowers,--waving in soft depth of fruitful
strength. Winter comes, and though it will not mock its fellow plants
by growing then, it will not pine and mourn, and turn colorless or
leafless as they. It is always green; and is only the brighter and
gayer for the hoar-frost.

§ 53. Now, these two characters--of humility, and joy under
trial--are exactly those which most definitely distinguish the
Christian from the Pagan spirit. Whatever virtue the pagan possessed
was rooted in pride, and fruited with sorrow. It began in the
elevation of his own nature; it ended but in the "verde smalto"--the
hopeless green--of the Elysian fields. But the Christian virtue is
rooted in self-debasement, and strengthened under suffering by
gladness of hope. And remembering this, it is curious to observe how
utterly without gladness the Greek heart appears to be in watching
the flowering grass, and what strange discords of expression arise
sometimes in consequence. There is one, recurring once or twice in
Homer, which has always pained me. He says, "the Greek army was on
the fields, as thick as flowers in the spring." It might be so; but
flowers in spring time are not the image by which Dante would have
numbered soldiers on their path of battle. Dante could not have
thought of the flowering of the grass but as associated with
happiness. There is a still deeper significance in the passage
quoted, a little while ago, from Homer, describing Ulysses casting
himself down on the _rushes_ and the corn-giving land at the river
shore,--the rushes and corn being to him only good for rest and
sustenance,--when we compare it with that in which Dante tells us he
was ordered to descend to the shore of the lake as he entered
Purgatory, to gather a _rush_, and gird himself with it, it being to
him the emblem not only of rest, but of humility under chastisement,
the rush (or reed) being the only plant which can grow there;--"no
plant which bears leaves, or hardens its bark, can live on that
shore, because it does not yield to the chastisement of its waves."
It cannot but strike the reader singularly how deep and harmonious a
significance runs through all these words of Dante--how every
syllable of them, the more we penetrate it, becomes a seed of
farther thought! For, follow up this image of the girding with the
reed, under trial, and see to whose feet it will lead us. As the
grass of the earth, thought of as the herb yielding seed, leads us
to the place where our Lord commanded the multitude to sit down by
companies upon the green grass; so the grass of the waters, thought
of as sustaining itself among the waters of affliction, leads us to
the place where a stem of it was put into our Lord's hand for his
sceptre; and in the crown of thorns, and the rod of reed, was
foreshown the everlasting truth of the Christian ages--that all
glory was to be begun in suffering, and all power in humility.

Assembling the images we have traced, and adding the simplest of
all, from Isaiah xl. 6., we find, the grass and flowers are types,
in their passing, of the passing of human life, and, in their
excellence, of the excellence of human life; and this in a twofold
way; first, by their Beneficence, and then, by their endurance:--the
grass of the earth, in giving the seed of corn, and in its beauty
under tread of foot and stroke of scythe; and the grass of the
waters, in giving its freshness for our rest, and in its bending
before the wave.[78] But understood in the broad human and Divine
sense, the "_herb_ yielding seed" (as opposed to the fruit-tree
yielding fruit) includes a third family of plants, and fulfils a
third office to the human race. It includes the great family of the
lints and flaxes, and fulfils thus the _three_ offices of giving
food, raiment, and rest. Follow out this fulfilment; consider the
association of the linen garment and the linen embroidery, with the
priestly office, and the furniture of the tabernacle: and consider
how the rush has been, in all time, the first natural carpet thrown
under the human foot. Then next observe the three virtues definitely
set forth by the three families of plants; not arbitrarily or
fancifully associated with them, but in all the three cases marked
for us by Scriptural words:

1st. Cheerfulness, or joyful serenity; in the grass for food and
beauty.--"Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil
not, neither do they spin."

2nd. Humility; in the grass for rest.--"A bruised reed shall He not
break."

3rd. Love; in the grass for clothing (because of its swift
kindling),--"The smoking flax shall He not quench."

And then, finally, observe the confirmation of these last two images
in, I suppose, the most important prophecy, relating to the future
state of the Christian Church, which occurs in the Old Testament,
namely, that contained in the closing chapters of Ezekiel. The
measures of the Temple of God are to be taken; and because it is
only by charity and humility that those measures ever can be taken,
the angel has "a line of _flax_ in his hand, and a measuring
_reed_." The use of the line was to measure the land, and of the
reed to take the dimensions of the buildings; so the buildings of
the church, or its labors, are to be measured by _humility_, and its
territory or land, by _love_.

The limits of the Church have, indeed, in later days, been measured,
to the world's sorrow, by another kind of flaxen line, burning with
the fire of unholy zeal, not with that of Christian charity; and
perhaps the best lesson which we can finally take to ourselves, in
leaving these sweet fields of the mediæval landscape, is the memory
that, in spite of all the fettered habits of thought of his age,
this great Dante, this inspired exponent of what lay deepest at the
heart of the early Church, placed his terrestrial paradise where
there had ceased to be fence or division, and where the grass of the
earth was bowed down, in unity of direction, only by the soft waves
that bore with them the forgetfulness of evil.

  [71] The peculiar dislike felt by the mediævals for the _sea_, is
       so interesting a subject of inquiry, that I have reserved it
       for separate discussion in another work, in present
       preparation, "Harbors of England."

  [72] Married to Philip, younger son of the King of Navarre, in
       1352. She died in 1394.

  [73] "Three times the length of a human body."--Purg. x. 24.

  [74] Purg. xii. 102.

  [75] "Come unto these _yellow_ sands."

  [76] "And thou art long, and lank, and _brown_,
       As is the ribbed sea sand."

  [77] Compare parallel passage, making Dante hard or changeless in
       good Purg. viii. 114.

  [78] So also in Isa. xxxv. 7., the prevalence of righteousness and
       peace over all evil is thus foretold:

       "In the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be
       _grass_, with _reeds_ and _rushes_."




CHAPTER XV.

OF MEDIÆVAL LANDSCAPE:--SECONDLY, THE ROCKS.


§ 1. I closed the last chapter, not because our subject was
exhausted, but to give the reader breathing time, and because I
supposed he would hardly care to turn back suddenly from the
subjects of thought last suggested, to the less pregnant matters of
inquiry connected with mediæval landscape. Nor was the pause
mistimed even as respects the order of our subjects; for hitherto we
have been arrested chiefly by the beauty of the pastures and fields,
and have followed the mediæval mind in its fond regard of leaf and
flower. But now we have some hard hill-climbing to do; and the
remainder of our investigation must be carried on, for the most
part, on hands and knees, so that it is not ill done of us first to
take breath.

§ 2. It will be remembered that in the last chapter, § 14., we
supposed it probable that there would be considerable inaccuracies
in the mediæval mode of regarding nature. Hitherto, however, we have
found none; but, on the contrary, intense accuracy, precision, and
affection. The reason of this is, that all floral and foliaged
beauty might be perfectly represented, as far as its form went, in
the sculpture and ornamental painting of the period; hence the
attention of men was thoroughly awakened to that beauty. But as
mountains and clouds and large features of natural scenery could not
be accurately represented, we must be prepared to find them not so
carefully contemplated,--more carefully, indeed, than by the Greeks,
but still in no wise as the things themselves deserve.

§ 3. It was besides noticed that mountains, though regarded with
reverence by the mediæval, were also the subjects of a certain
dislike and dread. And we have seen already that in fact the place
of the soul's purification, though a mountain, is yet by Dante
subdued, whenever there is any pleasantness to be found upon it,
from all mountainous character into grassy recesses, or slopes to
rushy shore; and, in his general conception of it, resembles much
more a castle mound, surrounded by terraced walks,--in the manner,
for instance, of one of Turner's favorite scenes, the bank under
Richmond Castle (Yorkshire); or, still more, one of the hill slopes
divided by terraces, above the Rhine, in which the picturesqueness
of the ground has been reduced to the form best calculated for the
growing of costly wine, than any scene to which we moderns should
naturally attach the term "Mountainous." On the other hand, although
the Inferno is just as accurately measured and divided as the
Purgatory, it is nevertheless cleft into rocky chasms which possess
something of true mountain nature--nature which we moderns of the
north should most of us seek with delight, but which, to the great
Florentine, appeared adapted only for the punishment of lost
spirits, and which, on the mind of nearly all his countrymen, would
to this day produce a very closely correspondent effect; so that
their graceful language, dying away on the north side of the Alps,
gives its departing accents to proclaim its detestation of hardness
and ruggedness; and is heard for the last time, as it bestows on the
noblest defile in all the Grisons, if not in all the Alpine chain,
the name of the "_evil_ way"--"la Via Mala."

§ 4. This "evil way," though much deeper and more sublime,
corresponds closely in general character to Dante's "Evil-pits,"
just as the banks of Richmond do to his mountain of Purgatory; and
it is notable that Turner has been led to illustrate, with his whole
strength, the character of both; having founded, as it seems to me,
his early dreams of mountain form altogether on the sweet banks of
the Yorkshire streams, and rooted his hardier thoughts of it in the
rugged clefts of the Via Mala.

§ 5. Nor of the Via Mala only: a correspondent defile on the St.
Gothard,--so terrible in one part of it, that it can, indeed,
suggest no ideas but those of horror to minds either of northern or
southern temper, and whose wild bridge, cast from rock to rock over
a chasm as utterly hopeless and escapeless as any into which Dante
gazed from the arches of Malebolge, has been, therefore, ascribed
both by northern and southern lips to the master-building of the
great spirit of evil--supplied to Turner the element of his most
terrible thoughts in mountain vision, even to the close of his life.
The noblest plate in the series of the Liber Studiorum,[79] one
engraved by his own hand, is of that bridge; the last mountain
journey he ever took was up the defile; and a rocky bank and arch,
in the last mountain drawing which he ever executed with his perfect
power, are remembrances of the path by which he had traversed in his
youth this Malebolge of the St. Gothard.

§ 6. It is therefore with peculiar interest, as bearing on our own
proper subject, that we must examine Dante's conception of the rocks
of the eighth circle. And first, as to general tone of color: from
what we have seen of the love of the mediæval for bright and
variegated color, we might guess that his chief cause of dislike to
rocks would be, in Italy, their comparative colorlessness. With
hardly an exception, the range of the Apennines is composed of a
stone of which some special account is given hereafter in the
chapters on Materials of Mountains, and of which one peculiarity,
there noticed, is its monotony of hue. Our slates and granites are
often of very lovely colors; but the Apennine limestone is so grey
and toneless, that I know not any mountain district so utterly
melancholy as those which are composed of this rock, when unwooded.
Now, as far as I can discover from the internal evidence in his
poem, nearly all Dante's mountain wanderings had been upon this
ground. He had journeyed once or twice among the Alps, indeed, but
seems to have been impressed chiefly by the road from Garda to
Trent, and that along the Corniche, both of which are either upon
those limestones, or a dark serpentine, which shows hardly any color
till it is polished. It is not ascertainable that he had ever seen
rocky scenery of the finely colored kind, aided by the Alpine
mosses: I do not know the fall at Forli (Inferno, xvi. 99.), but
every other scene to which he alludes is among these Apennine
limestones; and when he wishes to give the idea of enormous mountain
size, he names Tabernicch and Pietra-pana,--the one clearly chosen
only for the sake of the last syllable of its name, in order to make
a sound as of cracking ice, with the two sequent rhymes of the
stanza,--and the other is an Apennine near Lucca.

§ 7. His idea, therefore, of rock color, founded on these
experiences, is that of a dull or ashen grey, more or less stained
by the brown of iron ochre, precisely as the Apennine limestones
nearly always are; the grey being peculiarly cold and disagreeable.
As we go down the very hill which stretches out from Pietra-pana
towards Lucca, the stones laid by the road-side to mend it are of
this ashen grey, with efflorescences of manganese and iron in the
fissures. The whole of Malebolge is made of this rock, "All wrought
in stone of iron-colored grain."[80]

Perhaps the iron color may be meant to predominate in Evil-pits; but
the definite grey limestone color is stated higher up, the river
Styx flowing at the base of "malignant _grey_ cliffs"[81] (the word
malignant being given to the iron-colored Malebolge also); and the
same whitish-grey idea is given again definitely in describing the
robe of the purgatorial or penance angel, which is "of the color of
ashes, or earth dug dry." Ashes necessarily mean _wood_-ashes in an
Italian mind, so that we get the tone very pale; and there can be no
doubt whatever about the hue meant, because it is constantly seen on
the sunny sides of the Italian hills, produced by the scorching of
the ground, a dusty and lifeless whitish grey, utterly painful and
oppressive; and I have no doubt that this color, assumed eminently
also by limestone crags in the sun, is the quality which Homer means
to express by a term he applies often to bare rocks, and which is
usually translated "craggy," or "rocky." Now Homer is indeed quite
capable of talking of "rocky rocks," just as he talks sometimes of
"wet water;" but I think he means more by this word: it sounds as if
it were derived from another, meaning "meal," or "flour," and I have
little doubt it means "mealy white;" the Greek limestones being for
the most part brighter in effect than the Apennine ones.

§ 8. And the fact is, that the great and pre-eminent fault of
southern, as compared with northern scenery, is this rock-whiteness,
which gives to distant mountain ranges, lighted by the sun, sometimes
a faint and monotonous glow, hardly detaching itself from the whiter
parts of the sky, and sometimes a speckled confusion of white light
with blue shadow, breaking up the whole mass of the hills, and making
them look near and small; the whiteness being still distinct at the
distance of twenty or twenty-five miles. The inferiority and
meagreness of such effects of hill, compared with the massive purple
and blue of our own heaps of crags and morass, or the solemn
grass-green and pine-purples of the Alps, have always struck me most
painfully; and they have rendered it impossible for any poet or
painter studying in the south, to enter with joy into hill scenery.
Imagine the difference to Walter Scott, if instead of the single
lovely color which, named by itself alone, was enough to describe his
hills,--

      "Their southern rapine to renew,
      Far in the distant Cheviot's _blue_,"--

a dusty whiteness had been the image that first associated itself
with a hill range, and he had been obliged, instead of "blue"
Cheviots, to say, "barley-meal-colored" Cheviots.

§ 9. But although this would cause a somewhat painful shock even to
a modern mind, it would be as nothing when compared with the pain
occasioned by absence of color to a mediæval one. We have been
trained, by our ingenious principles of Renaissance architecture, to
think that meal-color and ash-color are the properest colors of all;
and that the most aristocratic harmonies are to be deduced out of
grey mortar and creamy stucco. Any of our modern classical
architects would delightedly "face" a heathery hill with Roman
cement; and any Italian sacristan would, but for the cost of it, at
once whitewash the Cheviots. But the mediævals had not arrived at
these abstract principles of taste. They liked fresco better than
whitewash; and, on the whole, thought that Nature was in the right
in painting her flowers yellow, pink, and blue;--not grey.
Accordingly, this absence of color from rocks, as compared with
meadows and trees, was in their eyes an unredeemable defect; nor did
it matter to them whether its place was supplied by the grey neutral
tint, or the iron-colored stain; for both colors, grey and brown,
were, to them, hues of distress, despair, and mortification, hence
adopted always for the dresses of monks; only the word "brown" bore,
in their color vocabulary, a still gloomier sense than with us. I
was for some time embarrassed by Dante's use of it with respect to
dark skies and water. Thus, in describing a simple twilight--not a
Hades twilight, but an ordinarily fair evening--(Inf. ii. 1.) he
says, the "brown" air took the animals of earth away from their
fatigues;--the waves under Charon's boat are "brown" (Inf. iii.
117.); and Lethe, which is perfectly clear and yet dark, as with
oblivion, is "bruna-bruna," "brown, _exceeding_ brown." Now, clearly
in all these cases no _warmth_ is meant to be mingled in the color.
Dante had never seen one of our bog-streams, with its porter-colored
foam; and there can be no doubt that, in calling Lethe brown, he
means that it was dark slate grey, inclining to black; as, for
instance, our clear Cumberland lakes, which, looked straight down
upon where they are deep, seem to be lakes of ink. I am sure this is
the color he means; because no clear stream or lake on the Continent
ever looks brown, but blue or green; and Dante, by merely taking
away the pleasant color, would get at once to this idea of grave
clear grey. So, when he was talking of twilight, his eye for color
was far too good to let him call it _brown_ in our sense. Twilight
is not brown, but purple, golden, or dark grey; and this last was
what Dante meant. Farther, I find that this negation of color is
always the means by which Dante subdues his tones. Thus the fatal
inscription on the Hades gate is written in "obscure color," and the
air which torments the passionate spirits is "aer nero" _black_ air
(Inf. v. 51.), called presently afterwards (line 81.) malignant air,
just as the grey cliffs are called malignant cliffs.

§ 10. I was not, therefore, at a loss to find out what Dante meant
by the word; but I was at a loss to account for his not, as it
seemed, acknowledging the existence of the color of _brown_ at all;
for if he called dark neutral tint "brown," it remained a question
what term he would use for things of the color of burnt umber. But,
one day, just when I was puzzling myself about this, I happened to
be sitting by one of our best living modern colorists, watching him
at his work, when he said, suddenly, and by mere accident, after we
had been talking of other things, "Do you know I have found that
there is no _brown_ in Nature? What we call brown is always a
variety either of orange or purple. It never can be represented by
umber, unless altered by contrast."

§ 11. It is curious how far the significance of this remark extends,
how exquisitely it illustrates and confirms the mediæval sense of
hue;--how far, on the other hand, it cuts into the heart of the old
umber idolatries of Sir George Beaumont and his colleagues, the "where
do you put your _brown_ tree" system; the code of Cremona-violin-
colored foregrounds, of brown varnish and asphaltum; and all the old
night-owl science, which, like Young's pencil of sorrow,

      "In melancholy dipped, _embrowns_ the whole."

Nay, I do Young an injustice by associating his words with the
asphalt schools; for his eye for color was true, and like Dante's;
and I doubt not that he means dark grey, as Byron purple-grey in
that night piece in the Siege of Corinth, beginning

      "'Tis midnight; on the mountains _brown_
      The cold, round moon looks deeply down;"

and, by the way, Byron's best piece of evening color farther
certifies the hues of Dante's twilight,--it

      "Dies like the dolphin, when it gasps away--
      The last still loveliest; till 'tis gone, and all is _grey_."

§ 12. Let not, however, the reader confuse the use of brown, as an
expression of a natural tint, with its use as a means of _getting
other tints_. Brown is often an admirable ground, just because it is
the only tint which is _not_ to be in the finished picture, and
because it is the best basis of many silver greys and purples, utterly
opposite to it in their nature. But there is infinite difference
between laying a brown ground as a representation of shadow,--and as a
base for light; and also an infinite difference between using brown
shadows, associated with colored lights--always the characteristic of
false schools of color--and using brown as a warm neutral tint for
general study. I shall have to pursue this subject farther hereafter,
in noticing how brown is used by great colorists in their studies,
not as color, but as the pleasantest negation of color, possessing
more transparency than black, and having more pleasant and sunlike
warmth. Hence Turner, in his early studies, used blue for distant
neutral tint, and brown for foreground neutral tint; while, as he
advanced in color science, he gradually introduced, in the place of
brown, strange purples, altogether peculiar to himself, founded,
apparently, on Indian red and vermilion, and passing into various
tones of russet and orange.[82] But, in the meantime, we must go back
to Dante and his mountains.

§ 13. We find, then, that his general type of rock color was meant,
whether pale or dark, to be a colorless grey--the most melancholy
hue which he supposed to exist in Nature (hence the synonym for it,
subsisting even till late times, in mediæval appellatives of dress,
"_sad_-colored")--with some rusty stain from iron; or perhaps the
"color ferrigno" of the Inferno does not involve even so much of
orange, but ought to be translated "iron grey."

This being his idea of the color of rocks, we have next to observe
his conception of their substance. And I believe it will be found that
the character on which he fixes first in them is _frangibility_
--breakableness to bits, as opposed to wood, which can be sawn or
rent, but not shattered with a hammer, and to metal, which is tough
and malleable.

Thus, at the top of the abyss of the seventh circle, appointed for
the "violent," or souls who had done evil by force, we are told,
first, that the edge of it was composed of "great broken stones in a
circle;" then, that the place was "Alpine;" and, becoming hereupon
attentive, in order to hear what an Alpine place is like, we find
that it was "like the place beyond Trent, where the rock, either by
earthquake, or failure of support, has broken down to the plain, so
that it gives any one at the top some means of getting down to the
bottom." This is not a very elevated or enthusiastic description of
an Alpine scene; and it is far from mended by the following verses,
in which we are told that Dante "began to go down by this great
_unloading_ of stones," and that they moved often under his feet by
reason of the new weight. The fact is that Dante, by many
expressions throughout the poem, shows himself to have been a
notably bad climber; and being fond of sitting in the sun, looking
at his fair Baptistery, or walking in a dignified manner on flat
pavement in a long robe, it puts him seriously out of his way when
he has to take to his hands and knees, or look to his feet; so that
the first strong impression made upon him by any Alpine scene
whatever, is, clearly, that it is bad walking. When he is in a
fright and hurry, and has a very steep place to go down, Virgil has
to carry him altogether, and is obliged to encourage him, again and
again, when they have a steep slope to go up,--the first ascent of
the purgatorial mountain. The similes by which he illustrates the
steepness of that ascent are all taken from the Riviera of Genoa,
now traversed by a good carriage road under the name of the
Corniche; but as this road did not exist in Dante's time, and the
steep precipices and promontories were then probably traversed by
footpaths, which, as they necessarily passed in many places over
crumbling and slippery limestone, were doubtless not a little
dangerous, and as in the manner they commanded the bays of sea
below, and lay exposed to the full blaze of the south-eastern sun,
they corresponded precisely to the situation of the path by which he
ascends above the purgatorial sea, the image could not possibly have
been taken from a better source for the fully conveying his idea to
the reader: nor, by the way, is there reason to discredit, in _this_
place, his powers of climbing; for, with his usual accuracy, he has
taken the angle of the path for us, saying it was considerably more
than forty-five. Now a continuous mountain slope of forty-five
degrees is already quite unsafe either for ascent or descent, except
by zigzag paths; and a greater slope than this could not be climbed,
straightforward, but by help of crevices or jags in the rock, and
great physical exertion besides.

§ 14. Throughout these passages, however, Dante's thoughts are
clearly fixed altogether on the question of mere accessibility or
inaccessibility. He does not show the smallest interest in the
rocks, except as things to be conquered; and his description of
their appearance is utterly meagre, involving no other epithets than
"erto" (steep or upright), Inf. xix. 131., Purg. iii. 48. &c.;
"sconcio" (monstrous), Inf. xix. 131.; "stagliata" (cut), Inf. xvii.
134.; "maligno" (malignant), Inf. vii. 108; "duro" (hard), xx. 25.;
with "large" and "broken" (rotto) in various places. No idea of
roundness, massiveness, or pleasant form of any kind appears for a
moment to enter his mind; and the different names which are given to
the rocks in various places seem merely to refer to variations in
size: thus a "rocco" is a part of a "scoglio," Inf. xx. 25. and
xxvi. 27.; a "scheggio" (xxi. 69. and xxvi. 17.) is a less fragment
yet; a "petrone," or "sasso," is a large stone or boulder (Purg. iv.
101. 104.), and "pietra," a less stone,--both of these last terms,
especially "sasso," being used for any large mountainous mass, as in
Purg. xxi. 106.; and the vagueness of the word "monte" itself, like
that of the French "montagne," applicable either to a hill on a
post-road requiring the drag to be put on,--or to the Mont Blanc,
marks a peculiar carelessness in both nations, at the time of the
formation of their languages, as to the sublimity of the higher
hills; so that the effect produced on an English ear by the word
"mountain," signifying always a mass of a certain large size, cannot
be conveyed either in French or Italian.

§ 15. In all these modes of regarding rocks we find (rocks being in
themselves, as we shall see presently, by no means monstrous or
frightful things) exactly that inaccuracy in the mediæval mind which
we had been led to expect, in its bearings on things contrary to the
spirit of that symmetrical and perfect humanity which had formed its
ideal; and it is very curious to observe how closely in the terms he
uses, and the feelings they indicate, Dante here agrees with Homer.
For the word stagliata (cut) corresponds very nearly to a favorite
term of Homer's respecting rocks "sculptured," used by him also of
ships' sides; and the frescoes and illuminations of the Middle Ages
enable us to ascertain exactly what this idea of "cut" rock was.

§ 16. In Plate 10. I have assembled some examples, which will give
the reader a sufficient knowledge of mediæval rock-drawing, by men
whose names are known. They are chiefly taken from engravings, with
which the reader has it in his power to compare them,[83] and if,
therefore, any injustice is done to the original paintings the fault
is not mine; but the general impression conveyed is quite accurate,
and it would not have been worth while, where work is so deficient
in first conception, to lose time in insuring accuracy of facsimile.
Some of the crags may be taller here, or broader there, than in the
original paintings; but the character of the work is perfectly
preserved, and that is all with which we are at present concerned.

[Illustration: 10. Geology of the Middle Ages.]

Figs. 1. and 5. are by Ghirlandajo; 2. by Filippo Pesellino; 4. by
Leonardo da Vinci; and 6. by Andrea del Castagno. All these are
indeed workmen of a much later period than Dante, but the system of
rock-drawing remains entirely unchanged from Giotto's time to
Ghirlandajo's;--is then altered only by an introduction of
stratification indicative of a little closer observance of nature,
and so remains until Titian's time. Fig 1. is exactly representative
of one of Giotto's rocks, though actually by Ghirlandajo; and Fig.
2. is rather less skilful than Giotto's ordinary work. Both these
figures indicate precisely what Homer and Dante meant by "cut"
rocks. They had observed the concave smoothness of certain rock
fractures as eminently distinctive of rock from earth, and use the
term "cut" or "sculptured" to distinguish the smooth surface from
the knotty or sandy one, having observed nothing more respecting its
real contours than is represented in Figs. 1. and 2., which look as
if they had been hewn out with an adze. Lorenzo Ghiberti preserves
the same type, even in his finest work.

Fig. 3., from an interesting sixteenth century MS. in the British
Museum (Cotton, Augustus, A. 5.), is characteristic of the best
later illuminators' work; and Fig. 5., from Ghirlandajo, is pretty
illustrative of Dante's idea of terraces on the purgatorial
mountain. It is the road by which the Magi descend in his picture of
their Adoration, in the Academy of Florence. Of the other examples I
shall have more to say in the chapter on Precipices; meanwhile we
have to return to the landscape of the poem.

§ 17. Inaccurate as this conception of rock was, it seems to have been
the only one which, in mediæval art had place as representative of
mountain scenery. To Dante, mountains are inconceivable except as
great broken stones or crags; all their broad contours and undulations
seem to have escaped his eye. It is, indeed, with his usual undertone
of symbolic meaning that he describes the great broken stones, and the
fall of the shattered mountain, as the entrance to the circle
appointed for the punishment of the violent; meaning that the violent
and cruel, notwithstanding all their iron hardness of heart, have no
true strength, but, either by earthquake, or want of support, fall at
last into desolate ruin, naked, loose, and shaking under the tread.
But in no part of the poem do we find allusion to mountains in any
other than a stern light; nor the slightest evidence that Dante cared
to look at them. From that hill of San Miniato, whose steps he knew so
well, the eye commands, at the farther extremity of the Val d'Arno,
the whole purple range of the mountains of Carrara, peaked and mighty,
seen always against the sunset light in silent outline, the chief
forms that rule the scene as twilight fades away. By this vision Dante
seems to have been wholly unmoved, and, but for Lucan's mention of
Aruns at Luna, would seemingly not have spoken of the Carrara hills in
the whole course of his poem: when he does allude to them, he speaks
of their white marble, and their command of stars and sea, but has
evidently no regard for the hills themselves. There is not a single
phrase or syllable throughout the poem which indicates such a regard.
Ugolino, in his dream, seemed to himself to be in the mountains, "by
cause of which the Pisan cannot see Lucca;" and it is impossible to
look up from Pisa to that hoary slope without remembering the awe that
there is in the passage; nevertheless, it was as a hunting-ground only
that he remembered those hills. Adam of Brescia, tormented with
eternal thirst, remembers the hills of Romena, but only for the sake
of their sweet waters:

      "The rills that glitter down the grassy slopes
      Of Casentino, making fresh and soft
      The banks whereby they glide to Arno's stream,
      Stand ever in my view."

And, whenever hills are spoken of as having any influence on
character, the repugnance to them is still manifest; they are always
causes of rudeness or cruelty:

      "But that ungrateful and malignant race,
      Who in old times came down from Fesole,
      _Ay, and still smack of their rough mountain flint_,
      Will, for thy good deeds, show thee enmity.
      Take heed thou cleanse thee of their ways."

So again--

                "As one _mountain-bred_,
      Rugged, and clownish, if some city's walls
      He chance to enter, round him stares agape."

§ 18. Finally, although the Carrara mountains are named as having
command of the stars and sea, the _Alps_ are never specially
mentioned but in bad weather, or snow. On the sand of the circle of
the blasphemers--

                "Fell slowly wafting down
      Dilated flakes of fire, as flakes of snow
      On Alpine summit, when the wind is hushed."

So the Paduans have to defend their town and castles against
inundation,

              "Ere the genial warmth be felt,
      On Chiarentana's top."

The clouds of anger, in Purgatory, can only be figured to the reader
who has

      "On an Alpine height been ta'en by cloud,
      Through which thou sawest no better than the mole
      Doth through opacous membrane."

And in approaching the second branch of Lethe, the seven ladies
pause,--

                "Arriving at the verge
      Of a dim umbrage hoar, such as is seen
      Beneath green leaves and gloomy branches oft
      To overbrow a bleak and Alpine cliff."

§ 19. Truly, it is unfair of Dante, that when he is going to use
snow for a lovely image, and speak of it as melting away under
heavenly sunshine, he must needs put it on the Apennines, not on the
Alps:

            "As snow that lies
      Amidst the living rafters, on the back
      Of Italy, congealed, when drifted high
      And closely piled by rough Sclavonian blasts,
      Breathe but the land whereon no shadow falls,
      And straightway melting, it distils away,
      Like a fire-washed taper; thus was I,
      Without a sigh, or tear, consumed in heart."

The reader will thank me for reminding him, though out of its proper
order, of the exquisite passage of Scott which we have to compare
with this:

      "As snow upon the mountain's breast
      Slides from the rock that gave it rest,
      Sweet Ellen glided from her stay,
      And at the monarch's feet she lay."

Examine the context of this last passage, and its beauty is quite
beyond praise; but note the northern love of rocks in the very first
words I have to quote from Scott, "The rocks that gave it rest." Dante
could not have thought of his "cut rocks" as giving rest even to snow.
He must put it on the pine branches, if it is to be at peace.

§ 20. There is only one more point to be noticed in the Dantesque
landscape; namely, the feeling entertained by the poet towards the
sky. And the love of mountains is so closely connected with the love
of clouds, the sublimity of both depending much on their
association, that having found Dante regardless of the Carrara
mountains as seen from San Miniato, we may well expect to find him
equally regardless of the clouds in which the sun sank behind them.
Accordingly, we find that his only pleasure in the sky depends on
its "white clearness,"--that turning into "bianca aspette di
celestro" which is so peculiarly characteristic of fine days in
Italy. His pieces of pure pale light are always exquisite. In the
dawn on the purgatorial mountain, first, in its pale white, he sees
the "tremola della marina"--trembling of the sea; then it becomes
vermilion; and at last, near sunrise, orange. These are precisely
the changes of a calm and perfect dawn. The scenery of Paradise
begins with "Day added to day," the light of the sun so flooding the
heavens, that "never rain nor river made lake so wide;" and
throughout the Paradise all the beauty depends on spheres of light,
or stars, never on clouds. But the pit of the Inferno is at first
sight obscure, deep, and so _cloudy_ that at its bottom nothing
could be seen. When Dante and Virgil reach the marsh in which the
souls of those who have been angry and sad in their lives are for
ever plunged, they find it covered with thick fog; and the condemned
souls say to them,--

                          "We once were sad,
      In the _sweet air, made gladsome by the sun_.
      Now in these murky settlings are we sad."

Even the angel crossing the marsh to help them is annoyed by this
bitter marsh smoke, "fummo acerbo," and continually sweeps it with
his hand from before his face.

Anger, on the purgatorial mountain, is in like manner imaged,
because of its blindness and wildness, by the Alpine clouds. As they
emerge from its mist they see the white light radiated through the
fading folds of it; and, except this appointed cloud, no other can
touch the mountain of purification.

              "Tempest none, shower, hail, or snow,
      Hoar-frost, or dewy moistness, higher falls,
      Than that brief scale of threefold steps. Thick clouds,
      Nor scudding rack, are ever seen, swift glance
      Ne'er lightens, nor Thaumantian iris gleams."

Dwell for a little while on this intense love of Dante for
light,--taught, as he is at last by Beatrice, to gaze on the sun
itself like an eagle,--and endeavor to enter into his equally
intense detestation of all mist, rack of cloud, or dimness of rain;
and then consider with what kind of temper he would have regarded a
landscape of Copley Fielding's or passed a day in the Highlands. He
has, in fact, assigned to the souls of the gluttonous no other
punishment in the Inferno than perpetuity of Highland weather:

                                    "Showers
      Ceaseless, accursed, heavy and cold, unchanged
      For ever, both in kind and in degree,--
      Large hail, discolored water, sleety flaw,
      Through the dim midnight air streamed down amain."

§ 21. However, in this immitigable dislike of clouds, Dante goes
somewhat beyond the general temper of his age. For although the calm
sky was alone loved, and storm and rain were dreaded by all men,
yet the white horizontal clouds of serene summer were regarded with
great affection by all early painters, and considered as one of the
accompaniments of the manifestation of spiritual power; sometimes,
for theological reasons which we shall soon have to examine, being
received, even without any other sign, as the types of blessing or
Divine acceptance: and in almost every representation of the
heavenly paradise, these level clouds are set by the early painters
for its floor, or for thrones of its angels; whereas Dante retains
steadily, through circle after circle, his cloudless thought, and
concludes his painting of heaven, as he began it upon the
purgatorial mountain, with the image of shadowless morning:

      "I raised my eyes, and as at morn is seen
      The horizon's eastern quarter to excel,
      So likewise, that pacific Oriflamb
      Glowed in the midmost, and toward every part,
      With like gradation paled away its flame."

But the best way of regarding this feeling of Dante's is as the
ultimate and most intense expression of the love of light, color,
and clearness, which, as we saw above, distinguished the mediæval
from the Greek on one side, and, as we shall presently see,
distinguished him from the modern on the other. For it is evident
that precisely in the degree in which the Greek was agriculturally
inclined, in that degree the sight of clouds would become to him
more acceptable than to the mediæval knight, who only looked for the
fine afternoons in which he might gather the flowers in his garden,
and in no wise shared or imagined the previous anxieties of his
gardener. Thus, when we find Ulysses comforted about Ithaca, by
being told it had "plenty of rain," and the maids of Colonos
boasting of their country for the same reason, we may be sure that
they had some regard for clouds; and accordingly, except
Aristophanes, of whom more presently, all the Greek poets speak
fondly of the clouds, and consider them the fitting resting-places
of the gods; including in their idea of clouds not merely the thin
clear cirrus, but the rolling and changing volume of the
thundercloud; nor even these only, but also the dusty whirlwind
cloud of the earth, as in that noble chapter of Herodotus which
tells us of the cloud, full of mystic voices, that rose out of the
dust of Eleusis, and went down to Salamis. Clouds and rain were of
course regarded with a like gratitude by the eastern and southern
nations--Jews and Egyptians; and it is only among the northern
mediævals, with whom fine weather was rarely so prolonged as to
occasion painful drought, or dangerous famine, and over whom the
clouds broke coldly and fiercely when they came, that the love of
serene light assumes its intense character, and the fear of tempest
is gloomiest; so that the powers of the clouds which to the Greek
foretold his conquest at Salamis, and with whom he fought in
alliance, side by side with their lightnings, under the crest of
Parnassus, seemed, in the heart of the Middle Ages, to be only under
the dominion of the spirit of evil. I have reserved, for our last
example of the landscape of Dante, the passage in which this
conviction is expressed; a passage not less notable for its close
description of what the writer feared and disliked, than for the
ineffable tenderness, in which Dante is always raised as much above
all other poets, as in softness the rose above all other flowers. It
is the spirit of Buonconte da Montefeltro who speaks:

      "Then said another: 'Ah, so may thy wish,
      That takes thee o'er the mountain, be fulfilled,
      As thou shalt graciously give aid to mine!
      Of Montefeltro I; Buonconte I:
      Giovanna, nor none else, have care for me;
      Sorrowing with these I therefore go.' I thus:
      From Campaldino's field what force or chance
      Drew thee, that ne'er thy sepulchre was known?'
      'Oh!' answered he, 'at Casentino's foot
      A stream there courseth, named Archiano, sprung
      In Apennine, above the hermit's seat.
      E'en where its name is cancelled, there came I,
      Pierced in the throat, fleeing away on foot,
      And bloodying the plain. Here sight and speech
      failed me; and finishing with Mary's name,
      I fell, and tenantless my flesh remained.
                        ...
      _That evil will, which in his intellect
      Still follows evil, came;_
                           ... the valley, soon
      As day was spent, _he covered o'er with cloud_.
      From Pratomagno to the mountain range,
      And stretched the sky above; so that the air,
      Impregnate, changed to water. Fell the rain;
      And to the fosses came all that the land
      Contained not; and as mightiest streams are wont.
      To the great river, with such headlong sweep,
      Rushed, that nought stayed its course. My stiffened frame,
      Laid at his mouth, the fell Archiano found,
      And dashed it into Arno; from my breast
      Loosening the cross, that of myself I made
      When overcome with pain. He hurled me on,
      Along the banks and bottom of his course;
      Then in his muddy spoils encircling wrapt.'"

Observe, Buonconte, as he dies, crosses his arms over his breast,
pressing them together, partly in his pain, partly in prayer. His
body thus lies by the river shore, as on a sepulchral monument, the
arms folded into a cross. The rage of the river, under the influence
of the evil demon, _unlooses this cross_, dashing the body supinely
away, and rolling it over and over by bank and bottom. Nothing can
be truer to the action of a stream in fury than these lines. And how
desolate is it all! The lonely flight,--the grisly wound, "pierced
in the throat,"--the death, without help or pity,--only the name of
Mary on the lips,-and the cross folded over the heart. Then the rage
of the demon and the river,--the noteless grave,--and, at last, even
she who had been most trusted forgetting him,--

      "Giovanna, none else have care for me."

There is, I feel assured, nothing else like it in all the range of
poetry; a faint and harsh echo of it, only, exists in one Scottish
ballad, "The Twa Corbies."

Here, then, I think, we may close our inquiry into the nature of the
mediæval landscape; not but that many details yet require to be worked
out; but these will be best observed by recurrence to them, for
comparison with similar details in modern landscape,--our principal
purpose, the getting at the governing tones and temper of conception,
being, I believe, now sufficiently accomplished. And I think that our
subject may be best pursued by immediately turning from the mediæval
to the perfectly modern landscape; for although I have much to say
respecting the transitional state of mind exhibited in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, I believe the transitions may be more
easily explained after we have got clear sight of the extremes; and
that by getting perfect and separate hold of the three great phases of
art,--Greek, mediæval, and modern,--we shall be enabled to trace, with
least chance of error, those curious vacillations which brought us to
the modern temper while vainly endeavoring to resuscitate the Greek. I
propose, therefore, in the next chapter, to examine the spirit of
modern landscape, as seen generally in modern painting, and especially
in the poetry of Scott.

  [79] It is an unpublished plate. I know only two impressions of it.

  [80] (Cayley.) "Tutto di pietra, e di color ferrigno"--Inf. xviii. 2.

  [81] "Maligne piagge grige."--Inf. vii. 108.

  [82] It is in these subtle purples that even the more
       elaborate passages of the earlier drawings are worked; as,
       for instance, the Highland streams, spoken of in
       Pre-Raphaelitism. Also, Turner could, by opposition, get what
       color he liked out of a brown. I have seen cases in which he
       had made it stand for the purest _rose_ light.

  [83] The references are in Appendix I.




CHAPTER XVI.

OF MODERN LANDSCAPE.


§ 1. We turn our eyes, therefore, as boldly and as quickly as may
be, from these serene fields and skies of mediæval art, to the most
characteristic examples of modern landscape. And, I believe, the
first thing that will strike us, or that ought to strike us, is
their _cloudiness_.

Out of perfect light and motionless air, we find ourselves on a
sudden brought under sombre skies, and into drifting wind; and, with
fickle sunbeams flashing in our face, or utterly drenched with sweep
of rain, we are reduced to track the changes of the shadows on the
grass, or watch the rents of twilight through angry cloud. And we
find that whereas all the pleasure of the mediæval was in
_stability_, _definiteness_, and _luminousness_, we are expected to
rejoice in darkness, and triumph in mutability; to lay the
foundation of happiness in things which momentarily change or fade;
and to expect the utmost satisfaction and instruction from what is
impossible to arrest, and difficult to comprehend.

§ 2. We find, however, together with this general delight in breeze
and darkness, much attention to the real form of clouds, and careful
drawing of effects of mist: so that the appearance of objects, as
seen through it, becomes a subject of science with us: and the
faithful representation of that appearance is made of primal
importance, under the name of aerial perspective. The aspects of
sunset and sunrise, with all their attendant phenomena of cloud and
mist, are watchfully delineated; and in ordinary daylight landscape,
the sky is considered of so much importance, that a principal mass
of foliage, or a whole foreground, is unhesitatingly thrown into
shade merely to bring out the form of a white cloud. So that, if a
general and characteristic name were needed for modern landscape
art, none better could be invented than "the service of clouds."

§ 3. And this name would, unfortunately, be characteristic of our
art in more ways than one. In the last chapter, I said that all the
Greeks spoke kindly about the clouds, except Aristophanes; and he, I
am sorry to say (since his report is so unfavorable), is the only
Greek who had studied them attentively. He tells us, first, that
they are "great goddesses to idle men;" then, that they are
"mistresses of disputings, and logic, and monstrosities, and noisy
chattering;" declares that whoso believes in their divinity must
first disbelieve in Jupiter, and place supreme power in the hands of
an unknown god "Whirlwind;" and, finally, he displays their
influence over the mind of one of their disciples, in his sudden
desire "to speak ingeniously concerning smoke."

There is, I fear, an infinite truth in this Aristophanic judgment
applied to our modern cloud-worship. Assuredly, much of the love of
mystery in our romances, our poetry, our art, and, above all, in our
metaphysics, must come under that definition so long ago given by
the great Greek, "speaking ingeniously concerning smoke." And much
of the instinct, which, partially developed in painting, may be now
seen throughout every mode of exertion of mind,--the easily
encouraged doubt, easily excited curiosity, habitual agitation, and
delight in the changing and the marvellous, as opposed to the old
quiet serenity of social custom and religious faith,--is again
deeply defined in those few words, the "dethroning of Jupiter," the
"coronation of the whirlwind."

§ 4. Nor of whirlwind merely, but also of darkness or ignorance
respecting all stable facts. That darkening of the foreground to
bring out the white cloud, is, in one aspect of it, a type of the
subjection of all plain and positive fact, to what is uncertain and
unintelligible. And as we examine farther into the matter, we shall
be struck by another great difference between the old and modern
landscape, namely, that in the old no one ever thought of drawing
anything but as well _as he could_. That might not be _well_, as we
have seen in the case of rocks; but it was as well as he _could_,
and always distinctly. Leaf, or stone, or animal, or man, it was
equally drawn with care and clearness, and its essential characters
shown. If it was an oak tree, the acorns were drawn; if a flint
pebble, its veins were drawn; if an arm of the sea, its fish were
drawn; if a group of figures, their faces and dresses were drawn--to
the very last subtlety of expression and end of thread that could be
got into the space, far off or near. But now our ingenuity is all
"concerning smoke." Nothing is truly drawn but that; all else is
vague, slight, imperfect; got with as little pains as possible. You
examine your closest foreground, and find no leaves; your largest
oak, and find no acorns; your human figure, and find a spot of red
paint instead of a face; and in all this, again and again, the
Aristophanic words come true, and the clouds seem to be "great
goddesses to idle men."

§ 5. The next thing that will strike us, after this love of clouds, is
the love of liberty. Whereas the mediæval was always shutting himself
into castles, and behind fosses, and drawing brickwork neatly, and
beds of flowers primly, our painters delight in getting to the open
fields and moors; abhor all hedges and moats; never paint anything but
free-growing trees, and rivers gliding "at their own sweet will;"
eschew formality down to the smallest detail; break and displace the
brickwork which the mediæval would have carefully cemented; leave
unpruned the thickets he would have delicately trimmed; and, carrying
the love of liberty even to license, and the love of wildness even to
ruin, take pleasure at last in every aspect of age and desolation
which emancipates the objects of nature from the government of
men;--on the castle wall displacing its tapestry with ivy, and
spreading, through the garden, the bramble for the rose.

§ 6. Connected with this love of liberty we find a singular
manifestation of love of mountains, and see our painters traversing
the wildest places of the globe in order to obtain subjects with
craggy foregrounds and purple distances. Some few of them remain
content with pollards and flat land; but these are always men of
third-rate order; and the leading masters, while they do not reject
the beauty of the low grounds, reserve their highest powers to paint
Alpine peaks or Italian promontories. And it is eminently
noticeable, also, that this pleasure in the mountains is never
mingled with fear, or tempered by a spirit of meditation, as with
the mediæval; but it is always free and fearless, brightly
exhilarating, and wholly unreflective; so that the painter feels
that his mountain foreground may be more consistently animated by a
sportsman than a hermit; and our modern society in general goes to
the mountains, not to fast, but to feast, and leaves their glaciers
covered with chicken-bones and egg-shells.

§ 7. Connected with this want of any sense of solemnity in mountain
scenery, is a general profanity of temper in regarding all the rest
of nature; that is to say, a total absence of faith in the presence
of any deity therein. Whereas the mediæval never painted a cloud,
but with the purpose of placing an angel in it; and a Greek never
entered a wood without expecting to meet a god in it; _we_ should
think the appearance of an angel in the cloud wholly unnatural, and
should be seriously surprised by meeting a god anywhere. Our chief
ideas about the wood are connected with poaching. We have no belief
that the clouds contain more than so many inches of rain or hail,
and from our ponds and ditches expect nothing more divine than ducks
and watercresses.

§ 8. Finally: connected with this profanity of temper is a strong
tendency to deny the sacred element of color, and make our boast in
blackness. For though occasionally glaring, or violent, modern color
is on the whole eminently sombre, tending continually to grey or
brown, and by many of our best painters consistently falsified, with
a confessed pride in what they call chaste or subdued tints; so
that, whereas a mediæval paints his sky bright blue, and his
foreground bright green, gilds the towers of his castles, and
clothes his figures with purple and white, we paint our sky grey,
our foreground black, and our foliage brown, and think that enough
is sacrificed to the sun in admitting the dangerous brightness of a
scarlet cloak or a blue jacket.

§ 9. These, I believe, are the principal points which would strike
us instantly, if we were to be brought suddenly into an exhibition
of modern landscapes out of a room filled with mediæval work. It is
evident that there are both evil and good in this change; but how
much evil, or how much good, we can only estimate by considering, as
in the former divisions of our inquiry, what are the real roots of
the habits of mind which have caused them.

[Sidenote: Distinctive characters of the modern mind:]

And first, it is evident that the title "Dark Ages," given to the
mediæval centuries, is, respecting art, wholly inapplicable. They
were, on the contrary, the bright ages; ours are the dark ones. I do
not mean metaphysically, but literally. They were the ages of gold:
ours are the ages of umber.

[Sidenote: 1. Despondency arising from faithlessness.]

This is partly mere mistake in us; we build brown brick walls, and
wear brown coats, because we have been blunderingly taught to do so,
and go on doing so mechanically. There is, however, also some cause
for the change in our own tempers. On the whole, these are much
_sadder_ ages than the early ones; not sadder in a noble and deep way,
but in a dim, wearied way,--the way of ennui, and jaded intellect, and
uncomfortableness of soul and body. The Middle Ages had their wars and
agonies, but also intense delights. Their gold was dashed with blood;
but ours is sprinkled with dust. Their life was interwoven with white
and purple; ours is one seamless stuff of brown. Not that we are
without apparent festivity, but festivity more or less forced,
mistaken, embittered, incomplete--not of the heart. How wonderfully,
since Shakspere's time, have we lost the power of laughing at bad
jests! The very finish of our wit belies our gaiety.

§ 10. The profoundest reason of this darkness of heart is, I believe,
our want of faith. There never yet was a generation of men (savage or
civilized) who, taken as a body, so wofully fulfilled the words,
"having no hope, and without God in the world," as the present
civilized European race. A Red Indian or Otaheitan savage has more
sense of a Divine existence round him, or government over him, than
the plurality of refined Londoners and Parisians; and those among us
who may in some sense be said to believe, are divided almost without
exception into two broad classes, Romanist and Puritan; who, but for
the interference of the unbelieving portions of society, would, either
of them, reduce the other sect as speedily as possible to ashes; the
Romanist having always done so whenever he could, from the beginning
of their separation, and the Puritan at this time holding himself in
complacent expectation of the destruction of Rome by volcanic fire.
Such division as this between persons nominally of one religion, that
is to say, believing in the same God, and the same Revelation, cannot
but become a stumbling-block of the gravest kind to all thoughtful and
far-sighted men,--a stumbling-block which they can only surmount under
the most favorable circumstances of early education. Hence, nearly all
our powerful men in this age of the world are unbelievers; the best of
them in doubt and misery; the worst in reckless defiance; the
plurality in plodding hesitation, doing, as well as they can, what
practical work lies ready to their hands. Most of our scientific men
are in this last class; our popular authors either set themselves
definitely against all religious form, pleading for simple truth and
benevolence (Thackeray, Dickens), or give themselves up to bitter and
fruitless statement of facts (De Balzac), or surface-painting (Scott),
or careless blasphemy, sad or smiling (Byron, Beranger). Our earnest
poets, and deepest thinkers, are doubtful and indignant (Tennyson,
Carlyle); one or two, anchored, indeed, but anxious, or weeping
(Wordsworth, Mrs. Browning); and of these two, the first is not so
sure of his anchor, but that now and then it drags with him, even to
make him cry out,--

                        "Great God, I had rather be
      A Pagan suckled in some creed outworn:
        So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
      Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn."

In politics, religion is now a name; in art, a hypocrisy or
affectation. Over German religious pictures the inscription, "See
how Pious I am," can be read at a glance by any clear-sighted
person. Over French and English religious pictures, the inscription,
"See how Impious I am," is equally legible. All sincere and modest
art is, among us, profane.[84]

[Sidenote: § 11. 2. Levity from the same cause.]

This faithlessness operates among us according to our tempers,
producing either sadness or levity, and being the ultimate root
alike of our discontents and of our wantonnesses. It is marvellous
how full of contradiction it makes us; we are first dull, and seek
for wild and lonely places because we have no heart for the garden;
presently we recover our spirits, and build an assembly room among
the mountains, because we have no reverence for the desert. I do not
know if there be game on Sinai, but I am always expecting to hear of
some one's shooting over it.

§ 12. There is, however, another, and a more innocent root of our
delight in wild scenery.

[Sidenote: 3. Reactionary love of inanimate beauty.]

All the Renaissance principles of art tended, as I have before often
explained, to the setting Beauty above Truth, and seeking for it
always at the expense of truth. And the proper punishment of such
pursuit--the punishment which all the laws of the universe rendered
inevitable--was, that those who thus pursued beauty should wholly lose
sight of beauty. All the thinkers of the age, as we saw previously,
declared that it did not exist. The age seconded their efforts, and
banished beauty, so far as human effort could succeed in doing so,
from the face of the earth, and the form of man. To powder the hair,
to patch the cheek, to hoop the body, to buckle the foot, were all
part and parcel of the same system which reduced streets to brick
walls, and pictures to brown stains. One desert of Ugliness was
extended before the eyes of mankind; and their pursuit of the
beautiful, so recklessly continued, received unexpected consummation
in high-heeled shoes and periwigs,--Gower Street, and Gaspar Poussin.

§ 13. Reaction from this state was inevitable, if any true life was
left in the races of mankind; and, accordingly, though still forced,
by rule and fashion, to the producing and wearing all that is ugly,
men steal out, half-ashamed of themselves for doing so, to the
fields and mountains; and, finding among these the color, and
liberty, and variety, and power, which are for ever grateful to
them, delight in these to an extent never before known; rejoice in
all the wildest shattering of the mountain side, as an opposition to
Gower Street; gaze in a rapt manner at sunsets and sunrises, to see
there the blue, and gold, and purple, which glow for them no longer
on knight's armor or temple porch; and gather with care out of the
fields, into their blotted herbaria, the flowers which the five
orders of architecture have banished from their doors and casements.

[Sidenote: § 14. 4. Disdain of beauty in man.]

The absence of care for personal beauty, which is another great
characteristic of the age, adds to this feeling in a twofold way:
first, by turning all reverent thoughts away from human nature; and
making us think of men as ridiculous or ugly creatures, getting
through the world as well as they can, and spoiling it in doing so;
not ruling it in a kingly way and crowning all its loveliness. In
the Middle Ages hardly anything but vice could be caricatured,
because virtue was always visibly and personally noble; now virtue
itself is apt to inhabit such poor human bodies, that no aspect of
it is invulnerable to jest; and for all fairness we have to seek to
the flowers, for all sublimity, to the hills.

The same want of care operates, in another way, by lowering the
standard of health, increasing the susceptibility to nervous or
sentimental impressions, and thus adding to the other powers of
nature over us whatever charm may be felt in her fostering the
melancholy fancies of brooding idleness.

[Sidenote: § 15. 5. Romantic imagination of the past.]

It is not, however, only to existing inanimate nature that our want
of beauty in person and dress has driven us. The imagination of it,
as it was seen in our ancestors, haunts us continually; and while we
yield to the present fashions, or act in accordance with the dullest
modern principles of economy and utility, we look fondly back to the
manners of the ages of chivalry, and delight in painting, to the
fancy, the fashions we pretend to despise, and the splendors we
think it wise to abandon. The furniture and personages of our
romance are sought, when the writer desires to please most easily,
in the centuries which we profess to have surpassed in everything;
the art which takes us into the present times is considered as both
daring and degraded; and while the weakest words please us, and are
regarded as poetry, which recall the manners of our forefathers, or
of strangers, it is only as familiar and vulgar that we accept the
description of our own.

In this we are wholly different from all the races that preceded us.
All other nations have regarded their ancestors with reverence as
saints or heroes; but have nevertheless thought their own deeds and
ways of life the fitting subjects for their arts of painting or of
verse. We, on the contrary, regard our ancestors as foolish and
wicked, but yet find our chief artistic pleasures in descriptions of
their ways of life.

The Greeks and mediævals honored, but did not imitate, their
forefathers; we imitate, but do not honor.

[Sidenote: § 16. 6. Interest in science.]

[Sidenote: 7. Fear of war.]

With this romantic love of beauty, forced to seek in history, and in
external nature, the satisfaction it cannot find in ordinary life,
we mingle a more rational passion, the due and just result of newly
awakened powers of attention. Whatever may first lead us to the
scrutiny of natural objects, that scrutiny never fails of its
reward. Unquestionably they are intended to be regarded by us with
both reverence and delight; and every hour we give to them renders
their beauty more apparent, and their interest more engrossing.
Natural science--which can hardly be considered to have existed
before modern times--rendering our knowledge fruitful in
accumulation and exquisite in accuracy, has acted for good or evil,
according to the temper of the mind which received it; and though it
has hardened the faithlessness of the dull and proud, has shown new
grounds for reverence to hearts which were thoughtful and humble.
The neglect of the art of war, while it has somewhat weakened and
deformed the body,[85] has given us leisure and opportunity for
studies to which, before, time and space were equally wanting; lives
which once were early wasted on the battle field are now passed
usefully in the study; nations which exhausted themselves in annual
warfare now dispute with each other the discovery of new planets;
and the serene philosopher dissects the plants, and analyzes the
dust, of lands which were of old only traversed by the knight in
hasty march, or by the borderer in heedless rapine.

§ 17. The elements of progress and decline being thus strangely
mingled in the modern mind, we might beforehand anticipate that one
of the notable characters of our art would be its inconsistency;
that efforts would be made in every direction, and arrested by every
conceivable cause and manner of failure; that in all we did, it
would become next to impossible to distinguish accurately the
grounds for praise or for regret; that all previous canons of
practice and methods of thought would be gradually overthrown, and
criticism continually defied by successes which no one had expected,
and sentiments which no one could define.

§ 18. Accordingly, while, in our inquiries into Greek and mediæval
art, I was able to describe, in general terms, what all men did or
felt, I find now many characters in many men; some, it seems to me,
founded on the inferior and evanescent principles of modernism, on
its recklessness, impatience, or faithlessness; others founded on
its science, its new affection for nature, its love of openness and
liberty. And among all these characters, good or evil, I see that
some, remaining to us from old or transitional periods, do not
properly belong to us, and will soon fade away; and others, though
not yet distinctly developed, are yet properly our own, and likely
to grow forward into greater strength.

For instance: our reprobation of bright color is, I think, for the
most part, mere affectation, and must soon be done away with.
Vulgarity, dulness, or impiety, will indeed always express
themselves through art in brown and grey, as in Rembrandt,
Caravaggio, and Salvator; but we are not wholly vulgar, dull, or
impious; nor, as moderns, are we necessarily obliged to continue so
in any wise. Our greatest men, whether sad or gay, still delight,
like the great men of all ages, in brilliant hues. The coloring of
Scott and Byron is full and pure; that of Keats and Tennyson rich
even to excess. Our practical failures in coloring are merely the
necessary consequences of our prolonged want of practice during the
periods of Renaissance affectation and ignorance; and the only
durable difference between old and modern coloring, is the
acceptance of certain hues, by the modern, which please him by
expressing that melancholy peculiar to his more reflective or
sentimental character, and the greater variety of them necessary to
express his greater science.

§ 19. Again: if we ever become wise enough to dress consistently and
gracefully, to make health a principal object in education, and to
render our streets beautiful with art, the external charm of past
history will in great measure disappear. There is no essential
reason, because we live after the fatal seventeenth century, that we
should never again be able to confess interest in sculpture, or see
brightness in embroidery; nor, because now we choose to make the
night deadly with our pleasures, and the day with our labors,
prolonging the dance till dawn, and the toil to twilight, that we
should never again learn how rightly to employ the sacred trusts of
strength, beauty, and time. Whatever external charm attaches itself
to the past, would then be seen in proper subordination to the
brightness of present life; and the elements of romance would exist,
in the earlier ages, only in the attraction which must generally
belong to whatever is unfamiliar; in the reverence which a noble
nation always pays to its ancestors; and in the enchanted light
which races, like individuals, must perceive in looking back to the
days of their childhood.

§ 20. Again: the peculiar levity with which natural scenery is
regarded by a large number of modern minds cannot be considered as
entirely characteristic of the age, inasmuch as it never can belong
to its greatest intellects. Men of any high mental power must be
serious, whether in ancient or modern days: a certain degree of
reverence for fair scenery is found in all our great writers without
exception,--even the one who has made us laugh oftenest, taking us
to the valley of Chamouni, and to the sea beach, there to give peace
after suffering, and change revenge into pity.[86] It is only the
dull, the uneducated, or the worldly, whom it is painful to meet on
the hill sides; and levity, as a ruling character, cannot be
ascribed to the whole nation, but only to its holiday-making
apprentices, and its House of Commons.

§ 21. We need not, therefore, expect to find any single poet or
painter representing the entire group of powers, weaknesses, and
inconsistent instincts which govern or confuse our modern life. But
we may expect that in the man who seems to be given by Providence as
the type of the age (as Homer and Dante were given, as the types of
classical and mediæval mind), we shall find whatever is fruitful and
substantial to be completely present, together with those of our
weaknesses, which are indeed nationally characteristic, and
compatible with general greatness of mind; just as the weak love of
fences, and dislike of mountains, were found compatible with Dante's
greatness in other respects.

§ 22. Farther: as the admiration of mankind is found, in our times,
to have in great part passed from men to mountains, and from human
emotion to natural phenomena, we may anticipate that the great
strength of art will also be warped in this direction; with this
notable result for us, that whereas the greatest painters or painter
of classical and mediæval periods, being wholly devoted to the
representation of humanity, furnished us with but little to examine
in landscape, the greatest painters or painter of modern times will
in all probability be devoted to landscape principally; and farther,
because in representing human emotion words surpass painting, but in
representing natural scenery painting surpasses words, we may
anticipate also that the painter and poet (for convenience' sake I
here use the words in opposition) will somewhat change their
relations of rank in illustrating the mind of the age; that the
painter will become of more importance, the poet of less; and that
the relations between the men who are the types and firstfruits of
the age in word and work,--namely, Scott and Turner,--will be, in
many curious respects, different from those between Homer and
Phidias, or Dante and Giotto.

It is this relation which we have now to examine.

§ 23. And, first, I think it probable that many readers may be
surprised at my calling Scott the great representative of the mind
of the age in literature. Those who can perceive the intense
penetrative depth of Wordsworth, and the exquisite finish and
melodious power of Tennyson, may be offended at my placing in higher
rank that poetry of careless glance, and reckless rhyme, in which
Scott poured out the fancies of his youth; and those who are
familiar with the subtle analysis of the French novelists, or who
have in any wise submitted themselves to the influence of German
philosophy, may be equally indignant at my ascribing a principality
to Scott among the literary men of Europe, in an age which has
produced De Balzac and Goethe.

So also in painting, those who are acquainted with the sentimental
efforts made at present by the German religious and historical
schools, and with the disciplined power and learning of the French,
will think it beyond all explanation absurd to call a painter of
light water-color landscapes, eighteen inches by twelve, the first
representative of the arts of the age. I can only crave the reader's
patience, and his due consideration of the following reasons for my
doing so, together with those advanced in the farther course of the
work.

§ 24. I believe the first test of a truly great man is his humility.
I do not mean, by humility, doubt of his own power, or hesitation in
speaking of his opinions; but a right understanding of the relation
between what _he_ can do and say, and the rest of the world's
sayings and doings. All great men not only know their business, but
usually know that they know it; and are not only right in their main
opinions, but they usually know that they are right in them; only,
they do not think much of themselves on that account. Arnolfo knows
he can build a good dome at Florence; Albert Durer writes calmly to
one who had found fault with his work, "It cannot be better done;"
Sir Isaac Newton knows that he has worked out a problem or two that
would have puzzled anybody else;--only they do not expect their
fellow-men therefore to fall down and worship them; they have a
curious under-sense of powerlessness, feeling that the greatness is
not _in_ them, but _through_ them; that they could not do or be
anything else than God-made them. And they see something divine and
God-made in every other man they meet, and are endlessly, foolishly,
incredibly merciful.

§ 25. Now, I find among the men of the present age, as far as I know
them, this character in Scott and Turner preeminently; I am not
sure if it is not in them alone. I do not find Scott talking about
the dignity of literature, nor Turner about the dignity of painting.
They do their work, feeling that they cannot well help it; the story
must be told, and the effect put down; and if people like it, well
and good; and if not, the world will not be much the worse.

I believe a very different impression of their estimate of
themselves and their doings will be received by any one who reads
the conversations of Wordsworth or Goethe. The _slightest_
manifestation of jealousy or self-complacency is enough to mark a
second-rate character of the intellect; and I fear that especially
in Goethe, such manifestations are neither few nor slight.

§ 26. Connected with this general humility is the total absence of
affectation in these men,--that is to say, of any assumption of
manner or behavior in their work, in order to attract attention. Not
but that they are mannerists both. Scott's verse is strongly
mannered, and Turner's oil painting; but the manner of it is
necessitated by the feelings of the men, entirely natural to both,
never exaggerated for the sake of show. I hardly know any other
literary or pictorial work of the day which is not in some degree
affected. I am afraid Wordsworth was often affected in his
simplicity, and De Balzac in his finish. Many fine French writers
are affected in their reserve, and full of stage tricks in placing
of sentences. It is lucky if in German writers we ever find so much
as a sentence without affectation. I know no painters without it,
except one or two Pre-Raphaelites (chiefly Holman Hunt), and some
simple water-color painters, as William Hunt, William Turner of
Oxford, and the late George Robson; but these last have no
invention, and therefore by our fourth canon, Chap. III. sec. 21.,
are excluded from the first rank of artists; and of the
Pre-Raphaelites there is here no question, as they in no wise
represent the modern school.

§ 27. Again: another very important, though not infallible, test of
greatness is, as we have often said, the appearance of Ease with
which the thing is done. It may be that, as with Dante and Leonardo,
the finish given to the work effaces the evidence of ease; but where
the ease is manifest, as in Scott, Turner, and Tintoret; and the
thing done is very noble, it is a strong reason for placing the men
above those who confessedly work with great pains. Scott writing his
chapter or two before breakfast--not retouching, Turner finishing a
whole drawing in a forenoon before he goes out to shoot (providing
always the chapter and drawing be good), are instantly to be set
above men who confessedly have spent the day over the work, and
think the hours well spent if it has been a little mended between
sunrise and sunset. Indeed, it is no use for men to think to appear
great by working fast, dashing, and scrawling; the thing they do
must be good and great, cost what time it may; but if it _be_ so,
and they have honestly and unaffectedly done it with _no effort_, it
is probably a greater and better thing than the result of the
hardest efforts of others.

§ 28. Then, as touching the kind of work done by these two men, the
more I think of it I find this conclusion more impressed upon
me,--that the greatest thing a human soul ever does in this world is
to _see_ something, and tell what it _saw_ in a plain way. Hundreds
of people can talk for one who can think, but thousands can think
for one who can see. To see clearly is poetry, prophecy, and
religion,--all in one.

Therefore, finding the world of Literature more or less divided into
Thinkers and Seers, I believe we shall find also that the Seers are
wholly the greater race of the two. A true Thinker, who has practical
purpose in his thinking, and is sincere, as Plato, or Carlyle, or
Helps, becomes in some sort a seer, and must be always of infinite use
in his generation; but an affected Thinker, who supposes his thinking
of any other importance than as it tends to work, is about the vainest
kind of person that can be found in the occupied classes. Nay, I
believe that metaphysicians and philosophers are, on the whole, the
greatest troubles the world has got to deal with; and that while a
tyrant or bad man is of some use in teaching people submission or
indignation, and a thoroughly idle man is only harmful in setting an
idle example, and communicating to other lazy people his own lazy
misunderstandings, busy metaphysicians are always entangling _good_
and _active_ people, and weaving cobwebs among the finest wheels of
the world's business; and are as much as possible, by all prudent
persons, to be brushed out of their way, like spiders, and the meshed
weed that has got into the Cambridgeshire canals, and other such
impediments to barges and business. And if we thus clear the
metaphysical element out of modern literature, we shall find its bulk
amazingly diminished, and the claims of the remaining writers, or of
those whom we have thinned by this abstraction of their straw
stuffing, much more easily adjusted.[87]

§ 29. Again: the mass of sentimental literature, concerned with the
analysis and description of emotion, headed by the poetry of Byron,
is altogether of lower rank than the literature which merely
describes what it saw. The true Seer always feels as intensely as
any one else; but he does not much describe his feelings. He tells
you whom he met, and what they said; leaves you to make out, from
that, what they feel, and what he feels, but goes into little
detail. And, generally speaking, pathetic writing and careful
explanation of passion are quite easy, compared with this plain
recording of what people said or did, or with the right invention of
what they are likely to say and do; for this reason, that to invent
a story, or admirably and thoroughly tell any part of a story, it is
necessary to grasp the entire mind of every personage concerned in
it, and know precisely how they would be affected by what happens;
which to do requires a colossal intellect; but to describe a
separate emotion delicately, it is only needed that one should feel
it oneself; and thousands of people are capable of feeling this or
that noble emotion, for one who is able to enter into all the
feelings of somebody sitting on the other side of the table. Even,
therefore, when this sentimental literature is first rate, as in
passages of Byron, Tennyson, and Keats, it ought not to be ranked so
high as the Creative; and though perfection, even in narrow fields,
is perhaps as rare as in the wider, and it may be as long before we
have another In Memoriam as another Guy Mannering, I unhesitatingly
receive as a greater manifestation of power the right invention of a
few sentences spoken by Pleydell and Mannering across their
supper-table, than the most tender and passionate melodies of the
self-examining verse.

§ 30. Having, therefore, cast metaphysical writers out of our way,
and sentimental writers into the second rank, I do not think Scott's
supremacy among those who remain will any more be doubtful; nor
would it, perhaps, have been doubtful before, had it not been
encumbered by innumerable faults and weaknesses. But it is
preeminently in these faults and weaknesses that Scott is
representative of the mind of his age: and because he is the
greatest man born amongst us, and intended for the enduring type of
us, all our principal faults must be laid on his shoulders, and he
must bear down the dark marks to the latest ages; while the smaller
men, who have some special work to do, perhaps not so much belonging
to this age as leading out of it to the next, are often kept
providentially quit of the encumbrances which they had not strength
to sustain, and are much smoother and pleasanter to look at, in
their way; only that is a smaller way.

§ 31. Thus, the most startling fault of the age being its
faithlessness, it is necessary that its greatest man should be
faithless. Nothing is more notable or sorrowful in Scott's mind than
its incapacity of steady belief in anything. He cannot even resolve
hardily to believe in a ghost, or a water-spirit; always explains
them away in an apologetic manner, not believing, all the while,
even his own explanation. He never can clearly ascertain whether
there is anything behind the arras but rats; never draws sword, and
thrusts at it for life or death; but goes on looking at it timidly,
and saying, "it must be the wind." He is educated a Presbyterian,
and remains one, because it is the most sensible thing he can do if
he is to live in Edinburgh; but he thinks Romanism more picturesque,
and profaneness more gentlemanly: does not see that anything affects
human life but love, courage, and destiny; which are, indeed, not
matters of faith at all, but of sight. Any gods but those are very
misty in outline to him; and when the love is laid ghastly in poor
Charlotte's coffin; and the courage is no more of use,--the pen
having fallen from between the fingers; and destiny is sealing the
scroll,--the God-light is dim in the tears that fall on it.

He is in all this the epitome of his epoch.

§ 32. Again: as another notable weakness of the age is its habit of
looking back, in a romantic and passionate idleness, to the past ages,
not understanding them all the while, nor really desiring to
understand them, so Scott gives up nearly the half of his intellectual
power to a fond, yet purposeless, dreaming over the past, and spends
half his literary labors in endeavors to revive it, not in reality,
but on the stage of fiction; endeavors which were the best of the
kind that modernism made, but still successful only so far as Scott
put, under the old armor, the everlasting human nature which he knew;
and totally unsuccessful, so far as concerned the painting of the
armor itself, which he knew _not_. The excellence of Scott's work is
precisely in proportion to the degree in which it is sketched from
present nature. His familiar life is inimitable; his quiet scenes of
introductory conversation, as the beginning of Rob Roy and
Redgauntlet, and all his living Scotch characters, mean or noble, from
Andrew Fairservice to Jeanie Deans, are simply right, and can never be
bettered. But his romance and antiquarianism, his knighthood and
monkery, are all false, and he knows them to be false; does not care
to make them earnest; enjoys them for their strangeness, but laughs at
his own antiquarianism, all through his own third novel,--with
exquisite modesty indeed, but with total misunderstanding of the
function of an Antiquary. He does not see how anything is to be got
out of the past but confusion, old iron on drawingroom chairs, and
serious inconvenience to Dr. Heavysterne.

§ 33. Again: more than any age that had preceded it, ours had been
ignorant of the meaning of the word "Art." It had not a single fixed
principle, and what unfixed principles it worked upon were all wrong.
It was necessary that Scott should know nothing of art. He neither
cared for painting nor sculpture, and was totally incapable of forming
a judgment about them. He had some confused love of Gothic
architecture, because it was dark, picturesque, old, and like nature;
but could not tell the worst from the best, and built for himself
perhaps the most incongruous and ugly pile that gentlemanly modernism
ever designed; marking, in the most curious and subtle way, that
mingling of reverence with irreverence which is so striking in the
age; he reverences Melrose, yet casts one of its piscinas, puts a
modern steel grate into it, and makes it his fireplace. Like all pure
moderns, he supposes the Gothic barbarous, notwithstanding his love of
it; admires, in an equally ignorant way, totally opposite styles; is
delighted with the new town of Edinburgh; mistakes its dulness for
purity of taste, and actually compares it, in its deathful formality
of street, as contrasted with the rudeness of the old town, to
Britomart taking off her armor.

§ 34. Again: as in reverence and irreverence, so in levity and
melancholy, we saw that the spirit of the age was strangely
interwoven. Therefore, also, it is necessary that Scott should be
light, careless, unearnest, and yet eminently sorrowful. Throughout
all his work there is no evidence of any purpose but to while away
the hour. His life had no other object than the pleasure of the
instant, and the establishing of a family name. All his thoughts
were, in their outcome and end, less than nothing, and vanity. And
yet, of all poetry that I know, none is so sorrowful as Scott's.
Other great masters are pathetic in a resolute and predetermined
way, when they choose; but, in their own minds, are evidently stern,
or hopeful, or serene; never really melancholy. Even Byron is rather
sulky and desperate than melancholy; Keats is sad because he is
sickly; Shelley because he is impious; but Scott is inherently and
consistently sad. Around all his power, and brightness, and
enjoyment of eye and heart, the far-away Æolian knell is for ever
sounding; there is not one of those loving or laughing glances of
his but it is brighter for the film of tears; his mind is like one
of his own hill rivers,--it is white, and flashes in the sun fairly,
careless, as it seems, and hasty in its going, but

      "Far beneath, where slow they creep
      From pool to eddy, dark and deep,
      Where alders moist, and willows weep,
          You hear her streams repine."

Life begins to pass from him very early; and while Homer sings
cheerfully in his blindness, and Dante retains his courage, and
rejoices in hope of Paradise, through all his exile, Scott, yet
hardly past his youth, lies pensive in the sweet sunshine and among
the harvest of his native hills.

      "Blackford, on whose uncultured breast,
        Among the broom, and thorn, and whin,
      A truant boy, I sought the nest,
      Or listed as I lay at rest,
        While rose on breezes thin
      The murmur of the city crowd,
      And, from his steeple jangling loud,
        St. Giles's mingling din!
      Now, from the summit to the plain,
      Waves all the hill with yellow grain;
        And on the landscape as I look,
      Nought do I see unchanged remain,
        Save the rude cliffs and chiming brook;
      To me they make a heavy moan
      Of early friendships past and gone."

§ 35. Such, then, being the weaknesses which it was necessary that
Scott should share with his age, in order that he might sufficiently
represent it, and such the grounds for supposing him, in spite of
all these weaknesses, the greatest literary man whom that age
produced, let us glance at the principal points in which his view of
landscape differs from that of the mediævals.

I shall not endeavor now, as I did with Homer and Dante, to give a
complete analysis of all the feelings which appear to be traceable
in Scott's allusions to landscape scenery,--for this would require a
volume,--but only to indicate the main points of differing character
between his temper and Dante's. Then we will examine in detail, not
the landscape of literature, but that of painting, which must, of
course, be equally, or even in a higher degree, characteristic of
the age.

§ 36. And, first, observe Scott's habit of looking at nature neither
as dead, or merely material, in the way that Homer regards it, nor
as altered by his own feelings, in the way that Keats and Tennyson
regard it, but as having an animation and pathos of _its own_,
wholly irrespective of human presence or passion,--an animation
which Scott loves and sympathizes with, as he would with a fellow
creature, forgetting himself altogether, and subduing his own
humanity before what seems to him the power of the landscape.

      "Yon lonely thorn,--would he could tell
      The changes of his parent dell,
      Since he, so grey and stubborn now,
      Waved in each breeze a sapling bough!
      Would he could tell, how deep the shade
      A thousand mingled branches made,
      How broad the shadows of the oak,
      How clung the rowan to the rock,
      And through the foliage showed his head,
      With narrow leaves and berries red!"

Scott does not dwell on the grey stubbornness of the thorn, because he
himself is at that moment disposed to be dull, or stubborn; neither on
the cheerful peeping forth of the rowan, because he himself is that
moment cheerful or curious: but he perceives them both with the kind
of interest that he would take in an old man, or a climbing boy;
forgetting himself, in sympathy with either age or youth.

      "And from the grassy slope he sees
      The Greta flow to meet the Tees,
      Where issuing from her darksome bed,
      She caught the morning's eastern red,
      And through the softening vale below
      Rolled her bright waves in rosy glow,
      All blushing to her bridal bed,
      Like some shy maid, in convent bred;
          While linnet, lark, and blackbird gay
      Sing forth her nuptial roundelay."

Is Scott, or are the persons of his story, gay at this moment? Far
from it. Neither Scott nor Risingham are happy, but the Greta is;
and all Scott's sympathy is ready for the Greta, on the instant.

§ 37. Observe, therefore, this is not _pathetic_ fallacy; for there
is no passion in _Scott_ which alters nature. It is not the lover's
passion, making him think the larkspurs are listening for his lady's
foot; it is not the miser's passion, making him think that dead
leaves are falling coins; but it is an inherent and continual habit
of thought, which Scott shares with the moderns in general, being,
in fact, nothing else than the instinctive sense which men must have
of the Divine presence, not formed into distinct belief. In the
Greek it created, as we saw, the faithfully believed gods of the
elements: in Dante and the mediævals, it formed the faithfully
believed angelic presence; in the modern, it creates no perfect
form, does not apprehend distinctly any Divine being or operation;
but only a dim, slightly credited animation in the natural object,
accompanied with great interest and affection for it. This feeling
is quite universal with us, only varying in depth according to the
greatness of the heart that holds it; and in Scott, being more than
usually intense, and accompanied with infinite affection and
quickness of sympathy, it enables him to conquer all tendencies to
the pathetic fallacy, and, instead of making Nature anywise
subordinate to himself, he makes himself subordinate to
_her_--follows her lead simply--does not venture to bring his own
cares and thoughts into her pure and quiet presence--paints her in
her simple and universal truth, adding no result of momentary
passion or fancy, and appears, therefore, at first shallower than
other poets, being in reality wider and healthier. "What am I?" he
says continually, "that I should trouble this sincere nature with my
thoughts. I happen to be feverish and depressed, and I could see a
great many sad and strange things in those waves and flowers; but I
have no business to see such things. Gay Greta! sweet harebells!
_you_ are not sad nor strange to most people; you are but bright
water and blue blossoms; you shall not be anything else to me,
except that I cannot help thinking you are a little alive,--no one
can help thinking that." And thus, as Nature is bright, serene, or
gloomy, Scott takes her temper, and paints her as she is; nothing of
himself being ever intruded, except that far-away Eolian tone, of
which he is unconscious; and sometimes a stray syllable or two, like
that about Blackford Hill, distinctly stating personal feeling, but
all the more modestly for that distinctness and for the clear
consciousness that it is not the chiming brook, nor the cornfields,
that are sad, but only the boy that rests by them; so returning on
the instant to reflect, in all honesty, the image of Nature as she
is meant by all to be received; nor that in fine words, but in the
first that come; nor with comment of far-fetched thoughts, but with
easy thoughts, such as all sensible men ought to have in such
places, only spoken sweetly; and evidently also with an undercurrent
of more profound reflection, which here and there murmurs for a
moment, and which I think, if we choose, we may continually pierce
down to, and drink deeply from, but which Scott leaves us to seek,
or shun, at our pleasure.

§ 38. And in consequence of this unselfishness and humility, Scott's
enjoyment of Nature is incomparably greater than that of any other
poet I know. All the rest carry their cares to her, and begin
maundering in her ears about their own affairs. Tennyson goes out on
a furzy common, and sees it is calm autumn sunshine, but it gives
him no pleasure. He only remembers that it is

            "Dead calm in that noble breast
      Which heaves but with the heaving deep."

He sees a thundercloud in the evening, and _would_ have "doted and
pored" on it, but cannot, for fear it should bring the ship bad
weather. Keats drinks the beauty of Nature violently; but has no more
real sympathy with her than he has with a bottle of claret. His palate
is fine; but he "bursts joy's grape against it," gets nothing but
misery, and a bitter taste of dregs out of his desperate draught.

Byron and Shelley are nearly the same, only with less truth of
perception, and even more troublesome selfishness. Wordsworth is more
like Scott, and understands how to be happy, but yet cannot altogether
rid himself of the sense that he is a philosopher, and ought always to
be saying something wise. He has also a vague notion that Nature would
not be able to get on well without Wordsworth; and finds a
considerable part of his pleasure in looking at himself as well as at
her. But with Scott the love is entirely humble and unselfish. "I,
Scott, am nothing, and less than nothing; but these crags, and heaths,
and clouds, how great they are, how lovely, how for ever to be
beloved, only for their own silent, thoughtless sake!"

§ 39. This pure passion for nature in its abstract being, is still
increased in its intensity by the two elements above taken notice
of,--the love of antiquity, and the love of color and beautiful form,
mortified in our streets, and seeking for food in the wilderness and
the ruin: both feelings, observe, instinctive in Scott from his
childhood, as everything that makes a man great is always.

      "And well the lonely infant knew
      Recesses where the wallflower grew,
      And honeysuckle loved to crawl
      Up the long crag and ruined wall.
      I deemed such nooks the sweetest shade
      The sun in all its round surveyed."

Not that these could have been instinctive in a child in the Middle
Ages. The sentiments of a people increase or diminish in intensity
from generation to generation,--every disposition of the parents
affecting the frame of the mind in their offspring: the soldier's
child is born to be yet more a soldier, and the politician's to be
still more a politician; even the slightest colors of sentiment and
affection are transmitted to the heirs of life; and the crowning
expression of the mind of a people is given when some infant of
highest capacity, and sealed with the impress of this national
character, is born where providential circumstances permit the full
development of the powers it has received straight from Heaven, and
the passions which it has inherited from its fathers.

§ 40. This love of ancientness, and that of natural beauty,
associate themselves also in Scott with the love of liberty, which
was indeed at the root even of all his Jacobite tendencies in
politics. For, putting aside certain predilections about landed
property, and family name, and "gentlemanliness" in the club sense
of the word,--respecting which I do not now inquire whether they
were weak or wise,--the main element which makes Scott like
Cavaliers better than Puritans is, that he thinks the former _free_
and _masterful_ as well as loyal; and the latter _formal_ and
_slavish_. He is loyal, not so much in respect for law, as in
unselfish love for the king; and his sympathy is quite as ready for
any active borderer who breaks the law, or fights the king, in what
Scott thinks a generous way, as for the king himself. Rebellion of a
rough, free, and bold kind he is always delighted by; he only
objects to rebellion on principle and in form: bare-headed and
open-throated treason he will abet to any extent, but shrinks from
it in a peaked hat and starched collar: nay, politically, he only
delights in kingship itself, because he looks upon it as the head
and centre of liberty; and thinks that, keeping hold of a king's
hand, one may get rid of the cramps and fences of law; and that the
people may be governed by the whistle, as a Highland clan on the
open hill-side, instead of being shut up into hurdled folds or
hedged fields, as sheep or cattle left masterless.

§ 41. And thus nature becomes dear to Scott in a threefold way: dear
to him, first, as containing those remains or memories of the past,
which he cannot find in cities, and giving hope of Prætorian mound
or knight's grave, in every green slope and shade of its desolate
places;--dear, secondly, in its moorland liberty, which has for him
just as high a charm as the fenced garden had for the mediæval:

      "For I was wayward, bold, and wild,
      A self-willed imp--a grandame's child;
      But, half a plague, and half a jest,
      Was still endured, beloved, caressed.
      For me, thus nurtured, dost thou ask
      The classic poet's well-conned task?
      Nay, Erskine, nay. On the wild hill
      Let the wild heathbell flourish still;
      Cherish the tulip, prune the vine;
      But freely let the woodbine twine,
      And leave untrimmed the eglantine;"

--and dear to him, finally, in that perfect beauty, denied alike in
cities and in men, for which every modern heart had begun at last to
thirst, and Scott's, in its freshness and power, of all men's, most
earnestly.

§ 42. And in this love of beauty, observe, that (as I said we might
except) the love of _color_ is a leading element, his healthy mind
being incapable of losing, under any modern false teaching, its joy
in brilliancy of hue. Though not so subtle a colorist as Dante,
which, under the circumstances of the age, he could not be, he
depends quite as much upon color for his power or pleasure. And, in
general, if he does not mean to say much about things, the _one_
character which he will give is color, using it with the most
perfect mastery and faithfulness, up to the point of possible modern
perception. For instance, if he has a sea-storm to paint in a single
line, he does not, as a feebler poet would probably have done, use
any expression about the temper or form of the waves; does not call
them angry or mountainous. He is content to strike them out with two
dashes of Tintoret's favorite colors:

      "_The blackening wave edged with white_;
      To inch and rock the seamews fly."

There is no form in this. Nay, the main virtue of it is, that it
gets rid of all form. The dark raging of the sea--what form has
that? But out of the cloud of its darkness those lightning flashes
of the foam, coming at their terrible intervals--you need no more.

Again: where he has to describe tents mingled among oaks, he says
nothing about the form of either tent or tree, but only gives the
two strokes of color:

      "Thousand pavilions, _white as snow_,
      _Chequered_ the borough moor below,
      Oft giving way, where still there stood
      Some relics of the old oak wood,
      That darkly huge did intervene,
      _And tamed the glaring white with green_."

Again: of tents at Flodden:

      "Next morn the Baron climbed the tower,
      To view, afar, the Scottish power,
        Encamped on Flodden edge.
      The white pavilions made a show,
      Like remnants of the winter snow,
        Along the dusky ridge."

Again: of trees mingled with dark rocks:

      "Until, where Teith's young waters roll
      Betwixt him and a wooded knoll,
      That graced the _sable_ strath with _green_,
      The chapel of St. Bride was seen."

Again: there is hardly any form, only smoke and color, in his
celebrated description of Edinburgh:

      "The wandering eye could o'er it go,
      And mark the distant city glow
        With gloomy splendor red;
      For on the smoke-wreaths, huge and slow,
      That round her sable turrets flow,
        The morning beams were shed,
      And tinged them with a lustre proud,
      Like that which streaks a thundercloud.
      Such dusky grandeur clothed the height,
      Where the huge castle holds its state,
        And all the steep slope down,
      Whose ridgy back heaves to the sky,
      Piled deep and massy, close and high,
        Mine own romantic town!
      But northward far with purer blaze,
      On Ochil mountains fell the rays,
      And as each heathy top they kissed,
      It gleamed a purple amethyst.
      Yonder the shores of Fife you saw;
      Here Preston Bay and Berwick Law:
        And, broad between them rolled,
      The gallant Frith the eye might note,
      Whose islands on its bosom float,
        Like emeralds chased in gold."

I do not like to spoil a fine passage by italicizing it; but
observe, the only hints at form, given throughout, are in the
somewhat vague words, "ridgy," "massy," "close," and "high;" the
whole being still more obscured by modern mystery, in its most
tangible form of smoke. But the _colors_ are all definite; note the
rainbow band of them--gloomy or dusky red, sable (pure black),
amethyst (pure purple), green, and gold--a noble chord throughout;
and then, moved doubtless less by the smoky than the amethystine
part of the group,

      "Fitz Eustace' heart felt closely pent,
      The spur he to his charger lent,
        And raised his bridle hand.
      And making demivolte in air,
      Cried, 'Where's the coward would not dare
        To fight for such a laud?'"

I need not multiply examples: the reader can easily trace for
himself, through verse familiar to us all, the force of these color
instincts. I will therefore add only two passages, not so completely
known by heart as most of the poems in which they occur.

      "'Twas silence all. He laid him down
      Where purple heath profusely strown,
      And throatwort, with its azure bell,
      And moss and thyme his cushion swell.
      There, spent with toil, he listless eyed
      The course of Greta's playful tide;
      Beneath her banks, now eddying dun,
      Now brightly gleaming to the sun,
      As, dancing over rock and stone,
      In yellow light her currents shone,
      Matching in hue the favorite gem
      Of Albin's mountain diadem.
      Then tired to watch the current play,
      He turned his weary eyes away
      To where the bank opposing showed
      Its huge square cliffs through shaggy wood.
      One, prominent above the rest,
      Reared to the sun its pale grey breast;
      Around its broken summit grew
      The hazel rude, and sable yew;
      A thousand varied lichens dyed
      Its waste and weather-beaten side;
      And round its rugged basis lay,
      By time or thunder rent away,
      Fragments, that, from its frontlet torn,
      Were mantled now by verdant thorn."

§ 43. Note, first, what an exquisite chord of color is given in the
succession of this passage. It begins with purple and blue; then
passes to gold, or cairngorm color (topaz color); then to _pale
grey_, through which the yellow passes into black; and the black,
through broken dyes of lichen, into green. Note, secondly,--what is
indeed so manifest throughout Scott's landscape as hardly to need
pointing out,--the love of rocks, and true understanding of their
colors and characters, opposed as it is in every conceivable way to
Dante's hatred and misunderstanding of them.

I have already traced, in various places, most of the causes of this
great difference: namely, first, the ruggedness of northern temper
(compare § 8. of the chapter on the Nature of Gothic in the Stones
of Venice); then the really greater beauty of the northern rocks, as
noted when we were speaking of the Apennine limestone; then the need
of finding beauty among them, if it were to be found anywhere,--no
well-arranged colors being any more to be seen in dress, but only in
rock lichens; and, finally, the love of irregularity, liberty, and
power, springing up in glorious opposition to laws of prosody,
fashion, and the five orders.

§ 44. The other passage I have to quote is still more interesting;
because it has _no form_ in it _at all_ except in one word
(chalice), but wholly composes its imagery either of color, or of
that delicate half-believed life which we have seen to be so
important an element in modern landscape.

      "The summer dawn's reflected hue
      _To purple changed Loch Katrine blue_;
      Mildly and soft the western breeze
      Just kissed the lake; just stirred the trees;
      _And the pleased lake, like maiden coy_,
      _Trembled, but dimpled not, for joy_;
      The mountain-shadows on her breast
      Were neither broken nor at rest;
      In bright uncertainty they lie,
      Like future joys to Fancy's eye.
      The water-lily to the light
      Her chalice reared of silver bright:
      The doe awoke, and to the lawn,
      Begemmed with dew-drops, led her fawn;
      The grey mist left the mountain side;
      The torrent showed its glistening pride;
      Invisible in flëcked sky,
      The lark sent down her revelry;
      The blackbird and the speckled thrush
      Good-morrow gave from brake and bush;
      In answer cooed the cushat dove
      Her notes of peace, and rest, and love."

Two more considerations are, however, suggested by the above
passage. The first, that the love of natural history, excited by the
continual attention now given to all wild landscape, heightens
reciprocally the interest of that landscape, and becomes an
important element in Scott's description, leading him to finish,
down to the minutest speckling of breast, and slightest shade of
attributed emotion, the portraiture of birds and animals; in strange
opposition to Homer's slightly named "sea-crows, who have care of
the works of the sea," and Dante's singing-birds, of undefined
species. Compare carefully a passage, too long to be quoted,--the
2nd and 3rd stanzas of canto VI. of Rokeby.

§ 45. The second, and the last point I have to note, is Scott's
habit of drawing a slight _moral_ from every scene, just enough to
excuse to his conscience his want of definite religious feeling; and
that this slight moral is almost always melancholy. Here he has
stopped short without entirely expressing it--

      "The mountain shadows ...
                              ... lie
      Like future joys to Fancy's eye."

His completed thought would be, that those future joys, like the
mountain shadows, were never to be attained. It occurs fully uttered
in many other places. He seems to have been constantly rebuking his
own worldly pride and vanity, but never purposefully:

      "The foam-globes on her eddies ride,
      Thick as the schemes of human pride
      That down life's current drive amain,
      As frail, as frothy, and as vain."

      "Foxglove, and nightshade, side by side,
      Emblems of punishment and pride."

      "Her dark eye flashed; she paused and sighed;--
      'Ah, what have I to do with pride!'"

And hear the thought he gathers from the sunset (noting first the
Turnerian color,--as usual, its principal element):

      "The sultry summer day is done.
      The western hills have hid the sun,
      But mountain peak and village spire
      Retain reflection of his fire.
      Old Barnard's towers are purple still,
      To those that gaze from Toller Hill;
      Distant and high the tower of Bowes
      Like steel upon the anvil glows;
      And Stanmore's ridge, behind that lay,
      Rich with the spoils of parting day,
      In crimson and in gold arrayed,
      Streaks yet awhile the closing shade;
      Then slow resigns to darkening heaven
      The tints which brighter hours had given
      Thus, aged men, full loth and slow,
      The vanities of life forego,
      And count their youthful follies o'er
      Till Memory lends her light no more."

That is, as far as I remember, one of the most finished pieces of
sunset he has given; and it has a woful moral; yet one which, with
Scott, is inseparable from the scene.

Hark, again:

      "'Twere sweet to mark the setting day
      On Bourhope's lonely top decay;
      And, as it faint and feeble died
      On the broad lake and mountain's side,
      To say, 'Thus pleasures fade away;
      Youth, talents, beauty, thus decay,
      And leave us dark, forlorn, and grey.'"

And again, hear Bertram:

      "Mine be the eve of tropic sun:
      With disk like battle target red,
      He rushes to his burning bed,
      Dyes the wide wave with bloody light,
      Then sinks at once; and all is night."

In all places of this kind, where a passing thought is suggested by
some external scene, that thought is at once a slight and sad one.
Scott's deeper moral sense is marked in the _conduct_ of his
stories, and in casual reflections or exclamations arising out of
their plot, and therefore sincerely uttered; as that of Marmion:

      "Oh, what a tangled web we weave,
      When first we practise to deceive!"

But the reflections which are founded, not on events, but on scenes,
are, for the most part, shallow, partly insincere, and, as far as
sincere, sorrowful. This habit of ineffective dreaming and moralizing
over passing scenes, of which the earliest type I know is given in
Jaques, is, as aforesaid, usually the satisfaction made to our modern
consciences for the want of a sincere acknowledgment of God in nature:
and Shakspere has marked it as the characteristic of a mind "compact
of jars" (Act II. Sc. VII., As You Like It). That description attaches
but too accurately to all the moods which we have traced in the
moderns generally, and in Scott as the first representative of them;
and the question now is, what this love of landscape, so composed, is
likely to lead us to, and what use can be made of it.

We began our investigation, it will be remembered, in order to
determine whether landscape-painting was worth studying or not. We
have now reviewed the three principal phases of temper in the
civilized human race, and we find that landscape has been mostly
disregarded by great men, or cast into a second place, until now;
and that now it seems dear to us, partly in consequence of our
faults, and partly owing to accidental circumstances, soon, in all
likelihood, to pass away: and there seems great room for question
still, whether our love of it is a permanent and healthy feeling, or
only a healthy crisis in a generally diseased state of mind. If the
former, society will for ever hereafter be affected by its results;
and Turner, the first great landscape painter, must take a place in
the history of nations corresponding in art accurately to that of
Bacon in philosophy;--Bacon having first opened the study of the
laws of material nature, when, formerly, men had thought only of the
laws of human mind; and Turner having first opened the study of the
aspect of material nature, when, before, men had thought only of the
aspect of the human form. Whether, therefore, the love of landscape
be trivial and transient, or important and permanent, it now becomes
necessary to consider. We have, I think, data enough before us for
the solution of the question, and we will enter upon it,
accordingly, in the following chapter.

  [84] Pre-Raphaelitism, of course, excepted, which is a new phase
       of art, in no wise considered in this chapter. Blake was
       sincere, but full of wild creeds, and somewhat diseased in
       brain.

  [85] Of course this is only meant of the modern citizen or country
       gentleman, as compared with a citizen of Sparta or old
       Florence. I leave it to others to say whether the "neglect of
       the _art_ of war" may or may not, in a yet more fatal sense,
       be predicated of the English nation. War, _without_ art, we
       seem, with God's help, able still to wage nobly.

  [86] See David Copperfield, chap. lv. and lviii.

  [87] Observe, I do not speak thus of metaphysics because I have no
       pleasure in them. When I speak contemptuously of philology,
       it may be answered me, that I am a bad scholar; but I cannot
       be so answered touching metaphysics, for every one conversant
       with such subjects may see that I have strong inclination
       that way, which would, indeed, have led me far astray long
       ago, if I had not learned also some use of my hands, eyes,
       and feet.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE MORAL OF LANDSCAPE.


§ 1. SUPPOSING then the preceding conclusions correct, respecting
the grounds and component _elements_ of the pleasure which the
moderns take in landscape, we have here to consider what are the
probable or usual _effects_ of this pleasure. Is it a safe or a
seductive one? May we wisely boast of it, and unhesitatingly indulge
it? or is it rather a sentiment to be despised when it is slight,
and condemned when it is intense; a feeling which disinclines us to
labor, and confuses us in thought; a joy only to the inactive and
the visionary, incompatible with the duties of life, and the
accuracies of reflection?

§ 2. It seems to me that, as matters stand at present, there is
considerable ground for the latter opinion. We saw, in the preceding
chapter, that our love of nature had been partly forced upon us by
mistakes in our social economy, and led to no distinct issues of
action or thought. And when we look to Scott--the man who feels it
most deeply--for some explanation of its effect upon him, we find a
curious tone of apology (as if for involuntary folly) running
through his confessions of such sentiment, and a still more curious
inability to define, beyond a certain point, the character of this
emotion. He has lost the company of his friends among the hills, and
turns to these last for comfort. He says, "there is a pleasure in
the pain" consisting in such thoughts

        "As oft awake
      By lone St. Mary's silent lake;"

but, when we look for some definition of these thoughts, all that we
are told is, that they compose

      "A mingled sentiment
      Of resignation and content!"[88]

a sentiment which, I suppose, many people can attain to on the loss
of their friends, without the help of lakes or mountains; while
Wordsworth definitely and positively affirms that _thought_ has
nothing whatever to do with the matter, and that though, in his
youth, the cataract and wood "haunted him like a passion," it was
without the help of any "remoter charm, by thought supplied."

§ 3. There is not, however, any question, but that both Scott and
Wordsworth are here mistaken in their analysis of their feelings.
Their delight, so far from being without thought, is more than half
made up of thought, but of thought in so curiously languid and
neutralized a condition that they cannot trace it. The thoughts are
beaten to a powder so small that they know not what they are; they
know only that in such a state they are not good for much, and
disdain to call them thoughts. But the way in which thought, even
thus broken, acts in producing the delight will be understood by
glancing back to §§ 9. and 10. of the tenth chapter, in which we
observed the power of the imagination in exalting any visible
object, by gathering round it, in farther vision, all the facts
properly connected with it; this being, as it were, a spiritual or
second sight, multiplying the power of enjoyment according to the
fulness of the vision. For, indeed, although in all lovely nature
there is, first, an excellent degree of simple beauty, addressed to
the eye alone, yet often what impresses us most will form but a very
small portion of that visible beauty. That beauty may, for instance,
be composed of lovely flowers and glittering streams, and blue sky,
and white clouds; and yet the thing that impresses us most, and
which we should be sorriest to lose, may be a thin grey film on the
extreme horizon, not so large, in the space of the scene it
occupies, as a piece of gossamer on a near at hand bush, nor in any
wise prettier to the eye than the gossamer; but, because the
gossamer is known by us for a little bit of spider's work, and the
other grey film is known to mean a mountain ten thousand feet high,
inhabited by a race of noble mountaineers, we are solemnly impressed
by the aspect of it; and yet, all the while the thoughts and
knowledge which cause us to receive this impression are so obscure
that we are not conscious of them; we think we are only enjoying the
visible scene; and the very men whose minds are fullest of such
thoughts absolutely deny, as we have just heard, that they owe their
pleasure to anything but the eye, or that the pleasure consists in
anything else than "Tranquillity."

§ 4. And observe, farther, that this comparative Dimness and
Untraceableness of the thoughts which are the sources of our
admiration, is not a _fault_ in the thoughts, at such a time. It is,
on the contrary, a necessary condition of their subordination to the
pleasure of Sight. If the thoughts were more distinct we should not
_see_ so well; and beginning definitely to think, we must
comparatively cease to see. In the instance just supposed, as long as
we look at the film of mountain or Alp, with only an obscure
consciousness of its being the source of mighty rivers, that
consciousness adds to our sense of its sublimity; and if we have ever
seen the Rhine or the Rhone near their mouths, our knowledge, so long
as it is only obscurely suggested, adds to our admiration of the Alp;
but once let the idea define itself,--once let us begin to consider
seriously _what_ rivers flow from that mountain, to trace their
course, and to recall determinately our memories of their distant
aspects,--and we cease to behold the Alp; or, if we still behold it,
it is only as a point in a map which we are painfully designing, or as
a subordinate object which we strive to thrust aside, in order to make
room for our remembrances of Avignon or Rotterdam.

Again: so long as our idea of the multitudes who inhabit the ravines
at its foot remains indistinct, that idea comes to the aid of all
the other associations which increase our delight. But let it once
arrest us, and entice us to follow out some clear course of thought
respecting the causes of the prosperity or misfortune of the Alpine
villagers, and the snowy peak again ceases to be visible, or holds
its place only as a white spot upon the retina, while we pursue our
meditations upon the religion or the political economy of the
mountaineers.

§ 5. It is thus evident that a curiously balanced condition of the
powers of mind is necessary to induce full admiration of any natural
scene. Let those powers be themselves inert, and the mind vacant of
knowledge, and destitute of sensibility, and the external object
becomes little more to us than it is to birds or insects; we fall
into the temper of the clown. On the other hand, let the reasoning
powers be shrewd in excess, the knowledge vast, or sensibility
intense, and it will go hard but that the visible object will
suggest so much that it shall be soon itself forgotten, or become,
at the utmost, merely a kind of key-note to the course of purposeful
thought. Newton, probably, did not perceive whether the apple which
suggested his meditations on gravity was withered or rosy; nor could
Howard be affected by the picturesqueness of the architecture which
held the sufferers it was his occupation to relieve.

§ 6. This wandering away in thought from the thing seen to the
business of life, is not, however, peculiar to men of the highest
reasoning powers, or most active benevolence. It takes place more or
less in nearly all persons of average mental endowment. They see and
love what is beautiful, but forget their admiration of it in
following some train of thought which it suggested, and which is of
more personal interest to them. Suppose that three or four persons
come in sight of a group of pine-trees, not having seen pines for
some time. One, perhaps an engineer, is struck by the manner in
which their roots hold the ground, and sets himself to examine their
fibres, in a few minutes retaining little more consciousness of the
beauty of the trees than if he were a rope-maker untwisting the
strands of a cable: to another, the sight of the trees calls up some
happy association, and presently he forgets them, and pursues the
memories they summoned: a third is struck by certain groupings of
their colors, useful to him as an artist, which he proceeds
immediately to note mechanically for future use, with as little
feeling as a cook setting down the constituents of a newly
discovered dish; and a fourth, impressed by the wild coiling of
boughs and roots, will begin to change them in his fancy into
dragons and monsters, and lose his grasp of the scene in fantastic
metamorphosis: while, in the mind of the man who has most the power
of contemplating the thing itself, all these perceptions and trains
of idea are partially present, not distinctly, but in a mingled and
perfect harmony. He will not see the colors of the tree so well as
the artist, nor its fibres so well as the engineer; he will not
altogether share the emotion of the sentimentalist, nor the trance
of the idealist; but fancy, and feeling, and perception, and
imagination, will all obscurely meet and balance themselves in him,
and he will see the pine-trees somewhat in this manner:

          "Worthier still of note
      Are those fraternal Four of Borrowdale,
      Joined in one solemn and capacious grove;
      Huge trunks! and each particular trunk a growth
      Of intertwisted fibres serpentine
      Up-coiling, and inveterately convolved;
      Nor uniformed with Phantasy, and looks
      That threaten the profane; a pillared shade,
      Upon whose grassless floor of red-brown hue,
      By sheddings from the pining umbrage tinged
      Perennially,--beneath whose sable roof
      Of boughs, as if for festal purpose, decked
      With unrejoicing berries, ghostly Shapes
      May meet at noontide; Fear and trembling Hope,
      Silence and Foresight; Death the Skeleton,
      And Time the Shadow; there to celebrate,
      As in a natural temple scattered o'er
      With altars undisturbed of mossy stone,
      United worship."

§ 7. The power, therefore, of thus fully _perceiving_ any natural
object depends on our being able to group and fasten all our fancies
about it as a centre, making a garland of thoughts for it, in which
each separate thought is subdued and shortened of its own strength,
in order to fit it for harmony with others; the intensity of our
enjoyment of the object depending, first, on its own beauty, and
then on the richness of the garland. And men who have this habit of
clustering and harmonizing their thoughts are a little too apt to
look scornfully upon the harder workers who tear the bouquet to
pieces to examine the stems. This was the chief narrowness of
Wordsworth's mind; he could not understand that to break a rock with
a hammer in search of crystal may sometimes be an act not
disgraceful to human nature, and that to dissect a flower may
sometimes be as proper as to dream over it; whereas all experience
goes to teach us, that among men of average intellect the most
useful members of society are the dissectors, not the dreamers. It
is not that they love nature or beauty less, but that they love
result, effect, and progress more; and when we glance broadly along
the starry crowd of benefactors to the human race, and guides of
human thought, we shall find that this dreaming love of natural
beauty--or at least its expression--has been more or less checked by
them all, and subordinated either to hard work or watching of
_human_ nature. Thus in all the classical and mediæval periods, it
was, as we have seen, subordinate to agriculture, war, and religion;
and in the modern period, in which it has become far more powerful,
observe in what persons it is chiefly manifested.

  (1.) It is subordinate in        (2.) It is intense in
          Bacon.                       Mrs. Radclyffe.
          Milton.                      St. Pierre.
          Johnson.                     Shenstone.
          Richardson.                  Byron.
          Goldsmith.                   Shelley.
          Young.                       Keats.
          Newton.                      Burns.
          Howard.                      Eugene Sue.
          Fenelon.                     George Sand.
          Pascal.                      Dumas.

§ 8. I have purposely omitted the names of Wordsworth, Tennyson, and
Scott, in the second list, because, glancing at the two columns as
they now stand, we may, I think, draw some useful conclusions from
the high honorableness and dignity of the names on one side, and the
comparative slightness of those on the other,--conclusions which may
help us to a better understanding of Scott and Tennyson themselves.
Glancing, I say, down those columns in their present form, we shall
at once perceive that the intense love of nature is, in modern
times, characteristic of persons not of the first order of
intellect, but of brilliant imagination, quick sympathy, and
undefined religious principle, suffering also usually under strong
and ill-governed passions: while in the same individual it will be
found to vary at different periods, being, for the most part,
strongest in youth, and associated with force of emotion, and with
indefinite and feeble powers of thought; also, throughout life,
perhaps developing itself most at times when the mind is slightly
unhinged by love, grief, or some other of the passions.

§ 9. But, on the other hand, while these feelings of delight in
natural objects cannot be construed into signs of the highest
mental powers, or purest moral principles, we see that they are
assuredly indicative of minds above the usual standard of power, and
endowed with sensibilities of great preciousness to humanity; so
that those who find themselves entirely destitute of them, must make
this want a subject of humiliation, not of pride. The apathy which
cannot perceive beauty is very different from the stern energy which
disdains it; and the coldness of heart which receives no emotion
from external nature, is not to be confounded with the wisdom of
purpose which represses emotion in action. In the case of most men,
it is neither acuteness of the reason, nor breadth of humanity,
which shields them from the impressions of natural scenery, but
rather low anxieties, vain discontents, and mean pleasures; and for
one who is blinded to the works of God by profound abstraction or
lofty purpose, tens of thousands have their eyes sealed by vulgar
selfishness, and their intelligence crushed by impious care.

Observe, then: we have, among mankind in general, the three orders
of being;--the lowest, sordid and selfish, which neither sees nor
feels; the second, noble and sympathetic, but which sees and feels
without concluding or acting; the third and highest, which loses
sight in resolution, and feeling in work.[89]

Thus, even in Scott and Wordsworth themselves, the love of nature
is more or less associated with their weaknesses. Scott shows it
most in the cruder compositions of his youth, his perfect powers of
mind being displayed only in dialogues with which description has
nothing whatever to do. Wordsworth's distinctive work was a war with
pomp and pretence, and a display of the majesty of simple feelings
and humble hearts, together with high reflective truth in his
analysis of the courses of politics and ways of men; without these,
his love of nature would have been comparatively worthless.

§ 10. "If this be so, it is not well to encourage the observance of
landscape, any more than other ways of dreamily and ineffectually
spending time?"

Stay a moment. We have hitherto observed this love of natural beauty
only as it distinguishes one man from another, not as it acts for
good or evil on those minds to which it necessarily belongs. It may,
on the whole, distinguish weaker men from stronger men, and yet in
those weaker men may be of some notable use. It may distinguish
Byron from St. Bernard, and Shelley from Sir Isaac Newton, and yet
may, perhaps, be the best thing that Byron and Shelley possess--a
saving element in them; just as a rush may be distinguished from an
oak by its bending, and yet the bending may be the saving element
in the rush, and an admirable gift in its place and way. So that,
although St. Bernard journeys all day by the Lake of Geneva, and
asks at evening "where it is," and Byron learns by it "to love earth
only for its earthly sake,"[90] it does not follow that Byron,
hating men, was the worse for loving the earth, nor that St.
Bernard, loving men, was the better or wiser for being blind to it.
And this will become still more manifest if we examine somewhat
farther into the nature of this instinct, as characteristic
especially of youth.

§ 11. We saw above that Wordsworth described the feeling as
independent of thought, and, in the particular place then quoted, he
_therefore_ speaks of it depreciatingly. But in other places he does
not speak of it depreciatingly, but seems to think the absence of
thought involves a certain nobleness:

          "In such high hour
      Of visitation from the living God
      _Thought_ was not."

And he refers to the intense delight which he himself felt, and
which he supposes other men feel, in nature, during their
thoughtless youth, as an intimation of their immortality, and a joy
which indicates their having come fresh from the hand of God.

Now, if Wordsworth be right in supposing this feeling to be in some
degree common to all men, and most vivid in youth, we may question if
it can be _entirely_ explained as I have now tried to explain it. For
if it entirely depended on multitudes of ideas, clustering about a
beautiful object, it might seem that the youth could not feel it so
strongly as the man, because the man knows more, and must have more
ideas to make the garland of. Still less can we suppose the pleasure
to be of that melancholy and languid kind, which Scott defines as
"Resignation" and "Content;" boys being not distinguished for either
of those characters, but for eager effort and delightsome discontent.
If Wordsworth is at all right in this matter, therefore, there must
surely be some other element in the feeling not yet detected.

§ 12. Now, in a question of this subtle kind, relating to a period
of life when self-examination is rare, and expression imperfect, it
becomes exceedingly difficult to trace, with any certainty, the
movements of the minds of others, nor always easy to remember those
of our own. I cannot, from observation, form any decided opinion as
to the extent in which this strange delight in nature influences the
hearts of young persons in general; and, in stating what has passed
in my own mind, I do not mean to draw any positive conclusion as to
the nature of the feeling in other children; but the inquiry is
clearly one in which personal experience is the only safe ground to
go upon, though a narrow one; and I will make no excuse for talking
about myself with reference to this subject, because, though there
is much egotism in the world, it is often the last thing a man
thinks of doing,--and, though there is much work to be done in the
world, it is often the best thing a man can do,--to tell the exact
truth about the movements of his own mind; and there is this farther
reason, that, whatever other faculties I may or may not possess,
this gift of taking pleasure in landscape I assuredly possess in a
greater degree than most men; it having been the ruling passion of
my life, and the reason for the choice of its field of labor.

§ 13. The first thing which I remember as an event in life, was being
taken by my nurse to the brow of Friar's Crag on Derwentwater; the
intense joy, mingled with awe, that I had in looking through the
hollows in the mossy roots, over the crag, into the dark lake, has
associated itself more or less with all twining roots of trees ever
since. Two other things I remember, as, in a sort, beginnings of
life;--crossing Shapfells (being let out of the chaise to run up the
hills), and going through Glenfarg, near Kinross, in a winter's
morning, when the rocks where hung with icicles; these being
culminating points in an early life of more travelling than is usually
indulged to a child. In such journeyings, whenever they brought me
near hills, and in all mountain ground and scenery, I had a pleasure,
as early as I can remember, and continuing till I was eighteen or
twenty, infinitely greater than any which has been since possible to
me in anything; comparable for intensity only to the joy of a lover in
being near a noble and kind mistress, but no more explicable or
definable than that feeling of love itself. Only thus much I can
remember, respecting it, which is important to our present subject.

§ 14. First: it was never independent of associated thought. Almost
as soon as I could see or hear, I had got reading enough to give me
associations with all kinds of scenery; and mountains, in
particular, were always partly confused with those of my favorite
book, Scott's Monastery; so that Glenfarg and all other glens were
more or less enchanted to me, filled with forms of hesitating creed
about Christie of the Clint Hill, and the monk Eustace; and with a
general presence of White Lady everywhere. I also generally knew, or
was told by my father and mother, such simple facts of history as
were necessary to give more definite and justifiable association to
other scenes which chiefly interested me, such as the ruins of
Lochleven and Kenilworth; and thus my pleasure in mountains or ruins
was never, even in earliest childhood, free from a certain awe and
melancholy, and general sense of the meaning of death, though in its
principal influence, entirely exhilarating and gladdening.

§ 15. Secondly: it was partly dependent on contrast with a very
simple and unamused mode of general life; I was born in London, and
accustomed, for two or three years, to no other prospect than that
of the brick walls over the way; had no brothers, nor sisters, nor
companions; and though I could always make myself happy in a quiet
way, the beauty of the mountains had an additional charm of change
and adventure which a country-bred child would not have felt.

§ 16. Thirdly: there was no definite religious feeling mingled with
it. I partly believed in ghosts and fairies; but supposed that
angels belonged entirely to the Mosaic dispensation, and cannot
remember any single thought or feeling connected with them. I
believed that God was in heaven, and could hear me and see me; but
this gave me neither pleasure nor pain, and I seldom thought of it
at all. I never thought of nature as God's work, but as a separate
fact or existence.

§ 17. Fourthly: it was entirely unaccompanied by powers of
reflection or invention. Every fancy that I had about nature was put
into my head by some book; and I never reflected about anything till
I grew older; and then, the more I reflected, the less nature was
precious to me: I could then make myself happy, by thinking, in the
dark, or in the dullest scenery; and the beautiful scenery became
less essential to my pleasure.

§ 18. Fifthly: it was, according to its strength, inconsistent with
every evil feeling, with spite, anger, covetousness, discontent, and
every other hateful passion; but would associate itself deeply with
every just and noble sorrow, joy, or affection. It had not, however,
always the power to repress what was inconsistent with it; and,
though only after stout contention, might at last be crushed by what
it had partly repressed. And as it only acted by setting one impulse
against another, though it had much power in moulding the character,
it had hardly any in strengthening it; it formed temperament, but
never instilled principle; it kept me generally good-humored and
kindly, but could not teach me perseverance or self-denial: what
firmness or principle I had was quite independent of it; and it came
itself nearly as often in the form of a temptation as of a
safeguard, leading me to ramble over hills when I should have been
learning lessons, and lose days in reveries which I might have spent
in doing kindnesses.

§ 19. Lastly: although there was no definite religious sentiment
mingled with it, there was a continual perception of Sanctity in the
whole of nature, from the slightest thing to the vastest:--an
instinctive awe, mixed with delight; an indefinable thrill, such as
we sometimes imagine to indicate the presence of a disembodied
spirit. I could only feel this perfectly when I was alone; and then
it would often make me shiver from head to foot with the joy and
fear of it, when after being some time away from the hills, I first
got to the shore of a mountain river, where the brown water circled
among the pebbles, or when I saw the first swell of distant land
against the sunset, or the first low broken wall, covered with
mountain moss. I cannot in the least _describe_ the feeling; but I
do not think this is my fault, nor that of the English language,
for, I am afraid, no feeling _is_ describable. If we had to explain
even the sense of bodily hunger to a person who had never felt it,
we should be hard put to it for words; and this joy in nature seemed
to me to come of a sort of heart-hunger, satisfied with the presence
of a Great and Holy Spirit. These feelings remained in their full
intensity till I was eighteen or twenty, and then, as the reflective
and practical power increased, and the "cares of this world" gained
upon me, faded gradually away, in the manner described by Wordsworth
in his Intimations of Immortality.

§ 20. I cannot, of course, tell how far I am justified in supposing
that these sensations may be reasoned upon as common to children in
general. In the same degree they are not of course common, otherwise
children would be, most of them, very different from what they are
in their choice of pleasures. But, as far as such feelings exist, I
apprehend they are more or less similar in their nature and
influence; only producing different characters according to the
elements with which they are mingled. Thus, a very religious child
may give up many pleasures to which its instincts lead it, for the
sake of irksome duties; and an inventive child would mingle its love
of nature with watchfulness of human sayings and doings: but I
believe the feelings I have endeavored to describe are the pure
landscape-instinct; and the likelihoods of good or evil resulting
from them may be reasoned upon as generally indicating the
usefulness or danger of the modern love and study of landscape.

§ 21. And, first, observe that the charm of romantic association (§
14.) can be felt only by the modern European child. It rises
eminently out of the contrast of the beautiful past with the
frightful and monotonous present; and it depends for its force on
the existence of ruins and traditions, on the remains of
architecture, the traces of battlefields, and the precursorship of
eventful history. The instinct to which it appeals can hardly be
felt in America, and every day that either beautifies our present
architecture and dress, or overthrows a stone of mediæval monument,
contributes to weaken it in Europe. Of its influence on the mind of
Turner and Prout, and the permanent results which, through them, it
is likely to effect, I shall have to speak presently.

§ 22. Again: the influence of surprise in producing the delight, is
to be noted as a suspicious or evanescent element in it. Observe, my
pleasure was chiefly (§ 19.) when I _first_ got into beautiful
scenery, out of London. The enormous influence of novelty--the way
in which it quickens observation, sharpens sensation, and exalts
sentiment--is not half enough taken note of by us, and is to me a
very sorrowful matter. I think that what Wordsworth speaks of as a
glory in the child, because it has come fresh from God's hands, is
in reality nothing more than the freshness of all things to its
newly opened sight. I find that by keeping long away from hills, I
can in great part still restore the old childish feeling about them;
and the more I live and work among them, the more it vanishes.

§ 23. This evil is evidently common to all minds; Wordsworth himself
mourning over it in the same poem:

      "Custom hangs upon us, with a weight
      Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life."

And if we grow impatient under it, and seek to recover the mental
energy by more quickly repeated and brighter novelty, it is all over
with our enjoyment. There is no cure for this evil, any more than for
the weariness of the imagination already described, but in patience
and rest: if we try to obtain perpetual change, change itself will
become monotonous; and then we are reduced to that old despair, "If
water chokes, what will you drink after it?" And the two points of
practical wisdom in this matter are, first, to be content with as
little novelty as possible at a time; and, secondly, to preserve, as
much as possible in the world, the sources of novelty.

§ 24. I say, first, to be content with as little change as possible.
If the attention is awake, and the feelings in proper train, a turn
of a country road, with a cottage beside it, which we have not seen
before, is as much as we need for refreshment; if we hurry past it,
and take two cottages at a time, it is already too much: hence, to
any person who has all his senses about him, a quiet walk along not
more than ten or twelve miles of road a day, is the most amusing of
all travelling; and all travelling becomes dull in exact proportion
to its rapidity. Going by railroad I do not consider as travelling
at all; it is merely "being sent" to a place, and very little
different from becoming a parcel; the next step to it would of
course be telegraphic transport, of which, however, I suppose it has
been truly said by Octave Feuillet,

    "_Il y aurait des gens assez bêtes_ pour trouver ça amusant."[91]

If we walk more than ten or twelve miles, it breaks up the day too
much; leaving no time for stopping at the stream sides or shady
banks, or for any work at the end of the day; besides that the last
few miles are apt to be done in a hurry, and may then be considered
as lost ground. But if, advancing thus slowly, after some days we
approach any more interesting scenery, every yard of the changeful
ground becomes precious and piquant; and the continual increase of
hope, and of surrounding beauty, affords one of the most exquisite
enjoyments possible to the healthy mind; besides that real knowledge
is acquired of whatever it is the object of travelling to learn, and
a certain sublimity given to all places, so attained, by the true
sense of the spaces of earth that separate them. A man who really
loves travelling would as soon consent to pack a day of such
happiness into an hour of railroad, as one who loved eating would
agree, if it were possible, to concentrate his dinner into a pill.

§ 25. And, secondly, I say that it is wisdom to preserve as much as
possible the innocent _sources_ of novelty;--not definite
inferiorities of one place to another, if such can be done away; but
differences of manners and customs, of language and architecture. The
greatest effort ought especially to be made by all wise and
far-sighted persons, in the present crisis of civilization, to enforce
the distinction between wholesome reform, and heartless abandonment of
ancestral custom; between kindly fellowship of nation with nation, and
ape-like adoption, by one, of the habits of another. It is ludicrously
awful to see the luxurious inhabitants of London and Paris rushing
over the Continent (as they say, to _see_ it), and transposing every
place, as far as lies in their power, instantly into a likeness of
Regent Street and the Rue de la Paix, which they need not certainly
have come so far to see. Of this evil I shall have more to say
hereafter; meantime I return to our main subject.

§ 26. The next character we have to note in the landscape-instinct
(and on this much stress is to be laid), is its total inconsistency
with all evil passion; its absolute contrariety (whether in the
contest it were crushed or not) to all care, hatred, envy, anxiety,
and moroseness. A feeling of this kind is assuredly not one to be
lightly repressed, or treated with contempt.

But how, if it be so, the reader asks, can it be characteristic of
passionate and unprincipled men, like Byron, Shelley, and such
others, and not characteristic of the noblest and most highly
principled men?

First, because it is itself a passion, and therefore likely to be
characteristic of passionate men. Secondly, because it is (§ 18)
wholly a separate thing from moral principle, and may or may not be
joined to strength of will, or rectitude of purpose[92]; only, this
much is always observable in the men whom it characterizes, that,
whatever their faults or failings, they always understand and love
noble qualities of character; they can conceive (if not certain
phases of piety), at all events, self-devotion of the highest kind;
they delight in all that is good, gracious, and noble; and though
warped often to take delight also in what is dark or degraded, that
delight is mixed with bitter self-reproach; or else is wanton,
careless, or affected, while their delight in noble things is
constant and sincere.

§ 27. Look back to the two lists given above, § 7. I have not lately
read anything by Mrs. Radclyffe or George Sand, and cannot,
therefore, take instances from them; Keats hardly introduced human
character into his work; but glance over the others, and note the
general tone of their conceptions. Take St. Pierre's Virginia,
Byron's Myrrha, Angiolina, and Marina, and Eugene Sue's Fleur de
Marie; and out of the other lists you will only be able to find
Pamela, Clementina, and, I suppose, Clarissa,[93] to put beside
them; and these will not more than match Myrrha and Marina; leaving
Fleur de Marie and Virginia rivalless. Then meditate a little, with
all justice and mercy, over the two groups of names; and I think you
will, at last, feel that there is a pathos and tenderness of heart
among the lovers of nature in the second list, of which it is nearly
impossible to estimate either the value or the danger; that the
sterner consistency of the men in the first may, in great part, have
arisen only from the, to them, most merciful, appointment of having
had religious teaching or disciplined education in their youth;
while their want of love for nature, whether that love be originally
absent, or artificially repressed, is to none of them an advantage.
Johnson's indolence, Goldsmith's improvidence, Young's worldliness,
Milton's severity, and Bacon's servility, might all have been less,
if they could in any wise have sympathized with Byron's lonely joy
in a Jura storm,[94] or with Shelley's interest in floating paper
boats down the Serchio.

§ 28. And then observe, farther, as I kept the names of Wordsworth
and Scott out of the second list, I withdrew, also, certain names
from the first; and for this reason, that in all the men who are
named in that list, there is evidently _some_ degree of love for
nature, which may have been originally of more power than we
suppose, and may have had an infinitely hallowing and protective
influence upon them. But there also lived certain men of high
intellect in that age who had _no_ love of nature whatever. They do
not appear ever to have received the smallest sensation of ocular
delight from any natural scene, but would have lived happily all
their lives in drawingrooms or studies. And, therefore, in these men
we shall be able to determine, with the greatest chance of accuracy,
what the real influence of natural beauty is, and what the character
of a mind destitute of its love. Take, as conspicuous instances, Le
Sage and Smollett, and you will find, in meditating over their
works, that they are utterly incapable of conceiving a human soul as
endowed with any nobleness whatever; their heroes are simply beasts
endowed with some degree of human intellect;--cunning, false,
passionate, reckless, ungrateful, and abominable, incapable of noble
joy, of noble sorrow, of any spiritual perception or hope. I said,
"beasts with human intellect;" but neither Gil Blas nor Roderick
Random reach, morally, anything near the level of dogs; while the
delight which the writers themselves feel in mere filth and pain,
with an unmitigated foulness and cruelty of heart, is just as
manifest in every sentence as the distress and indignation which
with pain and injustice are seen by Shelley and Byron.

§ 29. Distinguished from these men by _some_ evidence of love for
nature, yet an evidence much less clear than that for any of those
named even in the first list, stand Cervantes, Pope, and Molière. It
is not easy to say how much the character of these last depended on
their epoch and education; but it is noticeable that the first two
agree thus far in temper with Le Sage and Smollett,--that they delight
in dwelling upon vice, misfortune, or folly, as subjects of amusement;
while yet they are distinguished from Le Sage and Smollett by capacity
of conceiving nobleness of character, only in a humiliating and
hopeless way; the one representing all chivalry as insanity, the other
placing the wisdom of man in a serene and sneering reconciliation of
good with evil. Of Molière I think very differently. Living in the
blindest period of the world's history, in the most luxurious city,
and the most corrupted court, of the time, he yet manifests through
all his writings an exquisite natural wisdom; a capacity for the most
simple enjoyment; a high sense of all nobleness, honor, and purity,
variously marked throughout his slighter work, but distinctly made the
theme of his two perfect plays--the Tartuffe and Misanthrope; and in
all that he says of art or science he has an unerring instinct for
what is useful and sincere, and uses his whole power to defend it,
with as keen a hatred of everything affected and vain. And, singular
as it may seem, the first definite lesson read to Europe, in that
school of simplicity of which Wordsworth was the supposed originator
among the mountains of Cumberland, was, in fact, given in the midst of
the court of Louis XIV., and by Molière. The little canzonet "J'aime
mieux ma mie," is, I believe, the first Wordsworthian poem brought
forward on philosophical principles to oppose the schools of art and
affectation.

§ 30. I do not know if, by a careful analysis, I could point out any
evidences of a capacity for the love of natural scenery in Molière
stealing forth through the slightness of his pastorals; but, if not,
we must simply set him aside as exceptional, as a man uniting
Wordsworth's philosophy with Le Sage's wit, turned by circumstances
from the observance of natural beauty to that of human frailty. And
thus putting him aside for the moment, I think we cannot doubt of
our main conclusion, that, though the absence of the love of nature
is not an assured condemnation, its presence is an invariable sign
of goodness of heart and justness of moral _perception_, though by
no means of moral _practice_; that in proportion to the degree in
which it is felt, will _probably_ be the degree in which all
nobleness and beauty of character will also be felt; that when it is
originally absent from any mind, that mind is in many other respects
hard, worldly, and degraded; that where, having been originally
present, it is repressed by art or education, that repression
appears to have been detrimental to the person suffering it; and
that wherever the feeling exists, it acts for good on the character
to which it belongs, though, as it may often belong to characters
weak in other respects, it may carelessly be mistaken for a source
of evil in them.

§ 31. And having arrived at this conclusion by a review of facts,
which I hope it will be admitted, whether accurate or not, has at
least been candid, these farther considerations may confirm our
belief in its truth. Observe: the whole force of education, until
very lately, has been directed in every possible way to the
destruction of the love of nature. The only knowledge which has been
considered essential among us is that of words, and, next after it,
of the abstract sciences; while every liking shown by children for
simple natural history has been either violently checked, (if it
took an inconvenient form for the housemaids,) or else scrupulously
limited to hours of play: so that it has really been impossible for
any child earnestly to study the works of God but against its
conscience; and the love of nature has become inherently the
characteristic of truants and idlers. While also the art of drawing,
which is of more real importance to the human race than that of
writing (because people can hardly draw anything without being of
some use both to themselves and others, and can hardly write
anything without wasting their own time and that of others),--this
art of drawing, I say, which on plain and stern system should be
taught to every child, just as writing is,--has been so neglected
and abused, that there is not one man in a thousand, even of its
professed teachers, who knows its first principles: and thus it
needs much ill-fortune or obstinacy--much neglect on the part of his
teachers, or rebellion on his own--before a boy can get leave to use
his eyes or his fingers; so that those who _can_ use them are for
the most part neglected or rebellious lads--runaways and bad
scholars--passionate, erratic, self-willed, and restive against all
forms of education; while your well-behaved and amiable scholars are
disciplined into blindness and palsy of half their faculties.
Wherein there is at once a notable ground for what difference we
have observed between the lovers of nature and its despisers;
between the somewhat immoral and unrespectable watchfulness of the
one, and the moral and respectable blindness of the other.

§ 32. One more argument remains, and that, I believe, an unanswerable
one. As, by the accident of education, the love of nature has been,
among us, associated with _wilfulness_, so, by the accident of time,
it has been associated with _faithlessness_. I traced, above, the
peculiar mode in which this faithlessness was indicated; but I never
intended to imply, therefore, that it was an invariable concomitant of
the love. Because it happens that, by various concurrent operations of
evil, we have been led, according to those words of the Greek poet
already quoted, "to dethrone the gods, and crown the whirlwind," it is
no reason that we should forget there was once a time when "the Lord
answered Job _out of_ the whirlwind." And if we now take final and
full view of the matter, we shall find that the love of nature,
wherever it has existed, has been a faithful and sacred element of
human feeling; that is to say, supposing all circumstances otherwise
the same with respect to two individuals, the one who loves nature
most will be _always_ found to have more _faith in God_ than the
other. It is intensely difficult, owing to the confusing and counter
influences which always mingle in the data of the problem, to make
this abstraction fairly; but so far as we can do it, so far, I boldly
assert, the result is constantly the same: the nature-worship will be
found to bring with it such a sense of the presence and power of a
Great Spirit as no mere reasoning can either induce or controvert; and
where that nature-worship is innocently pursued,--i.e. with due
respect to other claims on time, feeling, and exertion, and associated
with the higher principles of religion,--it becomes the channel of
certain sacred truths, which by no other means can be conveyed.

§ 33. This is not a statement which any investigation is needed to
prove. It comes to us at once from the highest of all authority. The
greater number of the words which are recorded in Scripture, as
directly spoken to men by the lips of the Deity, are either simple
revelations of His law, or special threatenings, commands, and
promises relating to special events. But two passages of God's
speaking, one in the Old and one in the New Testament, possess, it
seems to me, a different character from any of the rest, having been
uttered, the one to effect the last necessary change in the mind of
a man whose piety was in other respects perfect; and the other, as
the first statement to all men of the principles of Christianity by
Christ Himself--I mean the 38th to 41st chapters of the book of Job,
and the Sermon on the Mount. Now the first of these passages is,
from beginning to end, nothing else than a direction of the mind
which was to be perfected to humble observance of the works of God
in nature. And the other consists only in the inculcation of _three_
things: 1st, right conduct; 2nd, looking for eternal life; 3rd,
trusting God, through watchfulness of His dealings with His
creation: and the entire contents of the book of Job, and of the
Sermon on the Mount, will be found resolvable simply into these
three requirements from all men,--that they should act rightly, hope
for heaven, and watch God's wonders and work in the earth; the right
conduct being always summed up under the three heads of _justice_,
_mercy_, and _truth_, and no mention of any doctrinal point whatsoever
occurring in either piece of divine teaching.

§ 34. As far as I can judge of the ways of men, it seems to me that
the simplest and most necessary truths are always the last
believed; and I suppose that well-meaning people in general would
rather regulate their conduct and creed by almost any other portion
of Scripture whatsoever, than by that Sermon on the Mount, which
contains the things that Christ thought it first necessary for all
men to understand. Nevertheless, I believe the time will soon come
for the full force of these two passages of Scripture to be
accepted. Instead of supposing the love of nature necessarily
connected with the faithlessness of the age, I believe it is
connected properly with the benevolence and liberty of the age; that
it is precisely the most healthy element which distinctively belongs
to us; and that out of it, cultivated no longer in levity or
ignorance, but in earnestness and as a duty, results will spring of
an importance at present inconceivable; and lights arise, which, for
the first time in man's history, will reveal to him the true nature
of his life, the true field for his energies, and the true relations
between him and his Maker.

§ 35. I will not endeavor here to trace the various modes in which
these results are likely to be effected, for this would involve an
essay on education, on the uses of natural history, and the probable
future destiny of nations. Somewhat on these subjects I have spoken
in other places; and I hope to find time, and proper place, to say
more. But one or two observations maybe made merely to suggest the
directions in which the reader may follow out the subject for
himself.

The great mechanical impulses of the age, of which most of us are so
proud, are a mere passing fever, half-speculative, half-childish.
People will discover at last that royal roads to anything can no
more be laid in iron than they can in dust; that there are, in fact,
no royal roads to anywhere worth going to; that if there were, it
would that instant cease to be worth going to,--I mean so far as the
things to be obtained are in any way estimable in terms of _price_.
For there are two classes of precious things in the world: those
that God gives us for nothing--sun, air, and life (both mortal life
and immortal); and the secondarily precious things which he gives us
for a price: these secondarily precious things, worldly wine and
milk, can only be bought for definite money; they never can be
cheapened. No cheating nor bargaining will ever get a single thing
out of nature's "establishment" at half-price. Do we want to be
strong?--we must work. To be hungry?--we must starve. To be
happy?--we must be kind. To be wise?--we must look and think. No
changing of place at a hundred miles an hour, nor making of stuffs a
thousand yards a minute, will make us one whit stronger, happier, or
wiser. There was always more in the world than men could see, walked
they ever so slowly; they will see it no better for going fast. And
they will at last, and soon too, find out that their grand
inventions for conquering (as they think) space and time, do, in
reality, conquer nothing; for space and time are, in their own
essence, unconquerable, and besides did not want any sort of
conquering; they wanted _using_. A fool always wants to shorten
space and time: a wise man wants to lengthen both. A fool wants to
kill space and kill time: a wise man, first to gain them, then to
animate them. Your railroad, when you come to understand it, is only
a device for making the world smaller: and as for being able to talk
from place to place, that is, indeed, well and convenient; but
suppose you have, originally, nothing to say.[95] We shall be
obliged at last to confess, what we should long ago have known, that
the really precious things are thought and sight, not pace. It does
a bullet no good to go fast; and a man, if he be truly a man, no
harm to go slow; for his glory is not at all in going, but in being.

§ 36. "Well; but railroads and telegraphs are so useful for
communicating knowledge to savage nations." Yes, if you have any to
give them. If you know nothing _but_ railroads, and can communicate
nothing but aqueous vapor and gunpowder,--what then? But if you have
any other thing than those to give, then the railroad is of use only
because it communicates that other thing and the question is--what
that other thing may be. Is it religion? I believe if we had really
wanted to communicate that, we could have done it in less than 1800
years, without steam. Most of the good religious communication that
I remember has been done on foot; and it cannot be easily done
faster than at foot pace. Is it science? But what science--of
motion, meat, and medicine? Well; when you have moved your savage,
and dressed your savage, fed him with white bread, and shown him how
to set a limb,--what next? Follow out that question. Suppose every
obstacle overcome; give your savage every advantage of civilization
to the full: suppose that you have put the Red Indian in tight
shoes; taught the Chinese how to make Wedgwood's ware, and to paint
it with colors that will rub off; and persuaded all Hindoo women
that it is more pious to torment their husbands into graves than to
burn themselves at the burial,--what next? Gradually, thinking on
from point to point, we shall come to perceive that all true
happiness and nobleness are near us, and yet neglected by us; and
that till we have learned how to be happy and noble, we have not
much to tell, even to Red Indians. The delights of horse-racing and
hunting, of assemblies in the night instead of the day, of costly
and wearisome music, of costly and burdensome dress, of chagrined
contention for place or power, or wealth, or the eyes of the
multitude; and all the endless occupation without purpose, and
idleness without rest, of our vulgar world, are not, it seems to me,
enjoyments we need be ambitious to communicate. And all real and
wholesome enjoyments possible to man have been just as possible to
him, since first he was made of the earth, as they are now; and they
are possible to him chiefly in peace. To watch the corn grow, and
the blossoms set; to draw hard breath over ploughshare or spade; to
read, to think, to love, to hope, to pray,--these are the things
that make men happy; they have always had the power of doing these,
they never _will_ have power to do more. The world's prosperity or
adversity depends upon our knowing and teaching these few things:
but upon iron, or glass, or electricity, or steam, in no wise.

§ 37. And I am Utopian and enthusiastic enough to believe, that the
time will come when the world will discover this. It has now made
its experiments in every possible direction but the right one; and
it seems that it must, at last, try the right one, in a mathematical
necessity. It has tried fighting, and preaching, and fasting, buying
and selling, pomp and parsimony, pride and humiliation,--every
possible manner of existence in which it could conjecture there was
any happiness or dignity; and all the while, as it bought, sold,
and fought, and fasted, and wearied itself with policies, and
ambitions, and self-denials, God had placed its real happiness in
the keeping of the little mosses of the wayside, and of the clouds
of the firmament. Now and then a weary king, or a tormented slave,
found out where the true kingdoms of the world were, and possessed
himself, in a furrow or two of garden ground, of a truly infinite
dominion. But the world would not believe their report, and went on
trampling down the mosses, and forgetting the clouds, and seeking
happiness in its own way, until, at last, blundering and late, came
natural science; and in natural science not only the observation of
things, but the finding out of new uses for them. Of course the
world, having a choice left to it, went wrong as usual, and thought
that these mere material uses were to be the sources of its
happiness. It got the clouds packed into iron cylinders, and made it
carry its wise self at their own cloud pace. It got weavable fibres
out of the mosses, and made clothes for itself, cheap and
fine,--here was happiness at last. To go as fast as the clouds, and
manufacture everything out of anything,--here was paradise, indeed!

§ 38. And now, when, in a little while, it is unparadised again, if
there were any other mistake that the world could make, it would of
course make it. But I see not that there is any other; and, standing
fairly at its wits' end, having found that going fast, when it is
used to it, is no more paradisiacal than going slow; and that all
the prints and cottons in Manchester cannot make it comfortable in
its mind, I do verily believe it will come, finally, to understand
that God paints the clouds and shapes the moss-fibres, that men may
be happy in seeing Him at His work, and that in resting quietly
beside Him, and watching His working, and--according to the power He
has communicated to ourselves, and the guidance He grants,--in
carrying out His purposes of peace and charity among all His
creatures, are the only real happinesses that ever were, or will be,
possible to mankind.

§ 39. How far art is capable of helping us in such happiness we
hardly yet know; but I hope to be able, in the subsequent parts of
this work, to give some data for arriving at a conclusion in the
matter. Enough has been advanced to relieve the reader from any
lurking suspicion of unworthiness in our subject, and to induce him
to take interest in the mind and work of the great painter who has
headed the landscape school among us. What farther considerations
may, within any reasonable limits, be put before him, respecting the
effect of natural scenery on the human heart, I will introduce in
their proper places either as we examine, under Turner's guidance,
the different classes of scenery, or at the close of the whole work;
and therefore I have only one point more to notice here, namely, the
exact relation between landscape-painting and natural science,
properly so-called.

§ 40. For it may be thought that I have rashly assumed that the
Scriptural authorities above quoted apply to that partly superficial
view of nature which is taken by the landscape-painter, instead of
to the accurate view taken by the man of science. So far from there
being rashness in such an assumption, the whole language, both of
the book of Job and the Sermon on the Mount, gives precisely the
view of nature which is taken by the uninvestigating affection of a
humble, but powerful mind. There is no dissection of muscles or
counting of elements, but the boldest and broadest glance at the
apparent facts, and the most magnificent metaphor in expressing
them. "His eyes are like the eyelids of the morning. In his neck
remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him." And
in the often repeated, never obeyed, command, "Consider the lilies
of the field," observe there is precisely the delicate attribution
of life which we have seen to be the characteristic of the modern
view of landscape,--"They toil not," There is no science, or hint of
science; no counting of petals, nor display of provisions for
sustenance: nothing but the expression of sympathy, at once the most
childish, and the most profound,--"They toil not."

§ 41. And we see in this, therefore, that the instinct which leads
us thus to attribute life to the lowest forms of organic nature,
does not necessarily spring from faithlessness, nor the deducing a
moral out of them from an irregular and languid conscientiousness.
In this, as in almost all things connected with moral discipline,
the same results may follow from contrary causes; and as there are a
good and evil contentment, a good and evil discontent, a good and
evil care, fear, ambition, and so on, there are also good and evil
forms of this sympathy with nature, and disposition to moralize over
it.[96] In general, active men, of strong sense and stern principle,
do not care to see anything in a leaf, but vegetable tissue, and are
so well convinced of useful moral truth, that it does not strike
them as a new or notable thing when they find it in any way
symbolized by material nature; hence there is a strong presumption,
when first we perceive a tendency in any one to regard trees as
living, and enunciate moral aphorisms over every pebble they stumble
against, that such tendency proceeds from a morbid temperament, like
Shelley's, or an inconsistent one, like Jaques's. But when the
active life is nobly fulfilled, and the mind is then raised beyond
it into clear and calm beholding of the world around us, the same
tendency again manifests itself in the most sacred way: the simplest
forms of nature are strangely animated by the sense of the Divine
presence; the trees and flowers seem all, in a sort, children of
God; and we ourselves, their fellows, made out of the same dust, and
greater than they only in having a greater portion of the Divine
power exerted on our frame, and all the common uses and palpably
visible forms of things, become subordinate in our minds to their
inner glory,--to the mysterious voices in which they talk to us
about God, and the changeful and typical aspects by which they
witness to us of holy truth, and fill us with obedient, joyful, and
thankful emotion.

§ 42. It is in raising us from the first state of inactive reverie
to the second of useful thought, that scientific pursuits are to be
chiefly praised. But in restraining us at this second stage, and
checking the impulses towards higher contemplation, they are to be
feared or blamed. They may in certain minds be consistent with such
contemplation; but only by an effort: in their nature they are
always adverse to it, having a tendency to chill and subdue the
feelings, and to resolve all things into atoms and numbers. For most
men, an ignorant enjoyment is better than an informed one; it is
better to conceive the sky as a blue dome than a dark cavity, and
the cloud as a golden throne than a sleety mist. I much question
whether any one who knows optics, however religious he may be, can
feel in equal degree the pleasure or reverence which an unlettered
peasant may feel at the sight of a rainbow. And it is mercifully
thus ordained, since the law of life, for a finite being, with
respect to the works of an infinite one, must be always an infinite
ignorance. We cannot fathom the mystery of a single flower, nor is
it intended that we should; but that the pursuit of science should
constantly be stayed by the love of beauty, and accuracy of
knowledge by tenderness of emotion.

§ 43. Nor is it even just to speak of the love of beauty as in all
respects unscientific; for there is a science of the aspects of
things as well as of their nature; and it is as much a fact to be
noted in their constitution, that they produce such and such an
effect upon the eye or heart (as, for instance, that minor scales of
sound cause melancholy), as that they are made up of certain atoms
or vibrations of matter.

It is as the master of this science of _Aspects_, that I said, some
time ago, Turner must eventually be named always with Bacon, the
master of the science of _Essence_. As the first poet who has, in
all their range, understood the grounds of noble emotion which exist
in Landscape, his future influence will be of a still more subtle
and important character. The rest of this work will therefore be
dedicated to the explanation of the principles on which he composed,
and of the aspects of nature which he was the first to discern.

  [88] Marmion, Introduction to canto II.

  [89] The investigation of this subject becomes, therefore,
       difficult beyond all other parts of our inquiry, since
       precisely the same sentiments may arise in different minds
       from totally opposite causes; and the extreme of frivolity
       may sometimes for a moment desire the same things as the
       extreme of moral power and dignity. In the following extract
       from "Marriage," the sentiment expressed by Lady Juliana (the
       ineffably foolish and frivolous heroine of the story) is as
       nearly as possible what Dante would have felt, under the same
       circumstances:

       "The air was soft and genial; not a cloud stained the bright
       azure of the heavens; and the sun shone out in all his
       splendor, shedding life and beauty even over the desolate
       heath-clad hills of Glenfern. But, after they had journeyed a
       few miles, suddenly emerging from the valley, a scene of
       matchless beauty burst at once upon the eye. Before them lay
       the dark blue waters of Lochmarlie, reflecting, as in a
       mirror, every surrounding object, and bearing on its placid,
       transparent bosom a fleet of herring-boats, the drapery of
       whose black, suspended nets contrasted, with picturesque
       effect, the white sails of the larger vessels, which were
       vainly spread to catch a breeze. All around, rocks, meadows,
       woods, and hills mingled in wild and lovely irregularity.

       "Not a breath was stirring, not a sound was heard, save the
       rushing of a waterfall, the tinkling of some silver rivulet,
       or the calm rippling of the tranquil lake; now and then, at
       intervals, the fisherman's Gaelic ditty, chanted as he lay
       stretched on the sand in some sunny nook; or the shrill,
       distant sound of childish glee. How delicious to the feeling
       heart to behold so fair a scene of unsophisticated nature, and
       to listen to her voice alone, breathing the accents of
       innocence and joy! But none of the party who now gazed on it
       had minds capable of being touched with the emotions it was
       calculated to inspire.

       "Henry, indeed, was rapturous in his expressions of admiration;
       but he concluded his panegyrics by wondering his brother did
       not keep a cutter, and resolving to pass a night on board one
       of the herring-boats, that he might eat the fish in perfection.

       "Lady Juliana thought it might be very pretty, if, instead of
       those frightful rocks and shabby cottages, there could be
       villas, and gardens, and lawns, and conservatories, and
       summer-houses, and statues.

       "Miss Bella observed, if it was hers she would cut down the
       woods, and level the hills, and have races."

  [90] Childe Harold, canto iii. st. 71.

  [91] Scènes et Proverbes. La Crise; (Scène en calèche, hors
       Paris.)

  [92] Compare the characters of Fleur de Marie and Rigolette, in
       the Mystères de Paris. I know no other instance in which the
       two tempers are so exquisitely delineated and opposed. Read
       carefully the beautiful pastoral, in the eighth chapter of
       the first Part, where Fleur de Marie is first taken into the
       fields under Montmartre, and compare it with the sixth of the
       second Part, its accurately traced companion sketch, noting
       carefully Rigolette's "Non, _je déteste la campagne_." She
       does not, however, dislike flowers or birds: "Cette caisse de
       bois, que Rigolette appellait le jardin de ses oiseaux, était
       remplie de terre recouverte de mousse, pendant l'hiver. Elle
       travaillait auprès de la fenêtre ouverte, à-demi-voilée par
       un verdoyant rideau de pois de senteur roses, de capucines
       oranges, de volubilis bleus et blancs."

  [93] I have not read Clarissa.

  [94] It might be thought that Young _could_ have sympathized with
       it. He would have made better use of it, but he would not
       have had the same delight in it. He turns his solitude to
       good account; but this is because, to him, solitude is
       sorrow, and his real enjoyment would have been of amiable
       society, and a place at court.

  [95] "The light-outspeeding telegraph
       Bears nothing on its beam."    EMERSON.

       See Appendix III., Plagiarism.

  [96] Compare what is said before in various places of good and bad
       finish, good and bad mystery, &c. If a man were disposed to
       system-making, he could easily throw together a
       counter-system to Aristotle's, showing that in all things
       there were two extremes which exactly resembled each other,
       but of which one was bad, the other good; and a mean,
       resembling neither, but better than the one, and worse than
       the other.




CHAPTER XVIII.

OF THE TEACHERS OF TURNER.


§ 1. The first step to the understanding either the mind or position
of a great man ought, I think, to be an inquiry into the elements of
his early instruction, and the mode in which he was affected by the
circumstances of surrounding life. In making this inquiry, with
respect to Turner, we shall be necessarily led to take note of the
causes which had brought landscape-painting into the state in which
he found it; and, therefore, of those transitions of style which, it
will be remembered, we overleaped (hoping for a future opportunity
of examining them) at the close of the fifteenth chapter.

§ 2. And first, I said, it will be remembered, some way back, that
the relations between Scott and Turner would probably be found to
differ very curiously from those between Dante and Giotto. They
differ primarily in this,--that Dante and Giotto, living in a
consistent age, were subjected to one and the same influence, and
maybe reasoned about almost in similar terms. But Scott and Turner,
living in an inconsistent age, became subjected to inconsistent
influences; and are at once distinguished by notable contrarieties,
requiring separate examination in each.

§ 3. Of these, the chief was that Scott, having had the blessing of
a totally neglected education, was able early to follow most of his
noble instincts; but Turner, having suffered under the instruction
of the Royal Academy, had to pass nearly thirty years of his life in
recovering from its consequences;[97] this permanent result
following for both,--that Scott never was led into any fault
foreign to his nature, but spoke what was in him, in rugged or idle
simplicity; erring only where it was natural to err, and failing
only where it was impossible to succeed. But Turner, from the
beginning, was led into constrained and unnatural error; diligently
debarred from every ordinary help to success. The one thing which
the Academy _ought_ to have taught him (namely, the simple and safe
use of oil color), it never taught him; but it carefully repressed
his perceptions of truth, his capacities of invention, and his
tendencies of choice. For him it was impossible to do right but in
the spirit of defiance; and the first condition of his progress in
learning, was the power to forget.

§ 4. One most important distinction in their feelings throughout
life was necessitated by this difference in early training. Scott
gathered what little knowledge of architecture he possessed, in
wanderings among the rocky walls of Crichtoun, Lochleven, and
Linlithgow, and among the delicate pillars of Holyrood, Roslin, and
Melrose. Turner acquired his knowledge of architecture at the desk,
from academical elevations of the Parthenon and St. Paul's; and
spent a large portion of his early years in taking views of
gentlemen's seats, temples of the Muses, and other productions of
modern taste and imagination; being at the same time directed
exclusively to classical sources for information as to the proper
subjects of art. Hence, while Scott was at once directed to the
history of his native land, and to the Gothic fields of imagination;
and his mind was fed in a consistent, natural, and felicitous way
from his youth up, poor Turner for a long time knew no inspiration
but that of Twickenham; no sublimity but that of Virginia Water. All
the history and poetry presented to him at the age when the mind
receives its dearest associations, were those of the gods and
nations of long ago; and his models of sentiment and style were the
worst and last wrecks of the Renaissance affectations.

§ 5. Therefore (though utterly free from affectation), his early
works are full of an _enforced_ artificialness, and of things
ill-done and ill-conceived, because foreign to his own instincts;
and, throughout life, whatever he did, because he thought he _ought_
to do it, was wrong; all that he planned on any principle, or in
supposed obedience to canons of taste, was false and abortive: he
only did right when he ceased to reflect; was powerful only when he
made no effort, and successful only when he had taken no aim.

§ 6. And it is one of the most interesting things connected with the
study of his art, to watch the way in which his own strength of
English instinct breaks gradually through fetter and formalism; how
from Egerian wells he steals away to Yorkshire streamlets; how from
Homeric rocks, with laurels at the top and caves in the bottom, he
climbs, at last, to Alpine precipices fringed with pine, and fortified
with the slopes of their own ruins; and how from Temples of Jupiter
and Gardens of the Hesperides, a spirit in his feet guides him, at
last, to the lonely arches of Whitby, and bleak sands of Holy Isle.

§ 7. As, however, is the case with almost all inevitable evil, in
its effect on great minds, a certain good rose even out of this
warped education; namely, his power of more completely expressing
all the tendencies of his epoch, and sympathizing with many feelings
and many scenes which must otherwise have been entirely profitless
to him. Scott's mind was just as large and full of sympathy as
Turner's; but having been permitted always to take his own choice
among sources of enjoyment, Scott was entirely incapable of entering
into the spirit of any classical scene. He was strictly a Goth and a
Scot, and his sphere of sensation may be almost exactly limited by
the growth of heather. But Turner had been forced to pay early
attention to whatever of good and right there was even in things
naturally distasteful to him. The charm of early association had
been cast around much that to other men would have been tame: while
making drawings of flower-gardens and Palladian mansions, he had
been taught sympathy with whatever grace or refinement the garden or
mansion could display, and to the close of life could enjoy the
delicacy of trellis and parterre, as well as the wildness of the
wood and the moorland; and watch the staying of the silver fountain
at its appointed height in the sky, with an interest as earnest, if
not as intense, as that with which he followed the crash of the
Alpine cataract into its clouds of wayward rage.

§ 8. The distinct losses to be weighed against this gain are, first,
the waste of time during youth in painting subjects of no interest
whatsoever,--parks, villas, and ugly architecture in general:
secondly, the devotion of its utmost strength in later years to
meaningless classical compositions, such as the Fall and Rise of
Carthage, Bay of Baiæ, Daphne and Leucippus, and such others, which,
with infinite accumulation of material, are yet utterly heartless and
emotionless, dead to the very root of thought, and incapable of
producing wholesome or useful effect on any human mind, except only as
exhibitions of technical skill and graceful arrangement: and, lastly,
his incapacity, to the close of life, of entering heartily into the
spirit of any elevated architecture; for those Palladian and classical
buildings which he had been taught that it was right to admire, being
wholly devoid of interest, and in their own formality and barrenness
quite unmanageable, he was obliged to make them manageable in his
pictures by disguising them, and to use all kinds of playing shadows
and glittering lights to obscure their ugly details; and as in their
best state such buildings are white and colorless, he associated the
idea of whiteness with perfect architecture generally, and was
confused and puzzled when he found it grey. Hence he never got
thoroughly into the feeling of Gothic; its darkness and complexity
embarrassed him; he was very apt to whiten by way of idealizing it,
and to cast aside its details in order to get breadth of delicate
light. In Venice, and the towns of Italy generally, he fastened on the
wrong buildings, and used those which he chose merely as kind of white
clouds, to set off his brilliant groups of boats, or burning spaces of
lagoon. In various other minor ways, which we shall trace in their
proper place, his classical education hindered or hurt him; but I feel
it very difficult to say how far the loss was balanced by the general
grasp it gave his mind; nor am I able to conceive what would have been
the result, if his aims had been made at once narrower and more
natural, and he had been led in his youth to delight in Gothic legends
instead of classical mythology; and, instead of the porticos of the
Parthenon, had studied in the aisles of Notre Dame.

§ 9. It is still more difficult to conjecture whether he gathered
most good or evil from the pictorial art which surrounded him in his
youth. What that art was, and how the European schools had arrived
at it, it now becomes necessary briefly to inquire.

It will be remembered that, in the 14th chapter, we left our
mediæval landscape (§ 18.) in a state of severe formality, and
perfect subordination to the interest of figure subject. I will now
rapidly trace the mode and progress of its emancipation.

§ 10. The formalized conception of scenery remained little altered
until the time of Raphael, being only better executed as the
knowledge of art advanced; that is to say, though the trees were
still stiff, and often set one on each side of the principal
figures, their color and relief on the sky were exquisitely
imitated, and all groups of near leaves and flowers drawn with the
most tender care, and studious botanical accuracy. The better the
subjects were painted, however, the more logically absurd they
became: a background wrought in Chinese confusion of towers and
rivers, was in early times passed over carelessly, and forgiven for
the sake of its pleasant color; but it appealed somewhat too far to
imaginative indulgence when Ghirlandajo drew an exquisite
perspective view of Venice and her lagoons behind an Adoration of
the Magi;[98] and the impossibly small boats which might be pardoned
in a mere illumination, representing the miraculous draught of
fishes, became, whatever may be said to the contrary, inexcusably
absurd in Raphael's fully realized landscape; so as at once to
destroy the credibility of every circumstance of the event.

§ 11. A certain charm, however, attached itself to many forms of
this landscape, owing to their very unnaturalness, as I have
endeavored to explain already in the last chapter of the second
volume, §§ 9. to 12.; noting, however, there, that it was in no wise
to be made a subject of imitation; a conclusion which I have since
seen more and more ground for holding finally. The longer I think
over the subject, the more I perceive that the pleasure we take in
such unnatural landscapes is intimately connected with our habit of
regarding the New Testament as a beautiful poem, instead of a
statement of plain facts. He who believes thoroughly that the events
are true will expect, and ought to expect, real olive copse behind
real Madonna, and no sentimental absurdities in either.

[Illustration: 11. Latest Purism.]

§ 12. Nor am I at all sure how far the delight which we take (when I
say _we_, I mean, in general, lovers of old sacred art) in such
quaint landscape, arises from its peculiar _falsehood_, and how far
from its peculiar _truth_. For as it falls into certain errors more
boldly, so, also, what truth it states, it states more firmly than
subsequent work. No engravings, that I know, render the backgrounds
of sacred pictures with sufficient care to enable the reader to
judge of this matter unless before the works themselves. I have,
therefore, engraved, on the opposite page, a bit of the background
of Raphael's Holy Family, in the Tribune of the Uffizii, at
Florence. I copied the trees leaf for leaf, and the rest of the work
with the best care I could; the engraver, Mr. Armytage, has
admirably rendered the delicate atmosphere which partly veils the
distance. Now I do not know how far it is necessary to such pleasure
as we receive from this landscape, that the trees should be both so
straight and formal in stem, and should have branches no thicker
than threads; or that the outlines of the distant hills should
approximate so closely to those on any ordinary Wedgewood's china
pattern. I know that, on the contrary, a great part of the pleasure
arises from the sweet expression of air and sunshine; from the
traceable resemblance of the city and tower to Florence and Fesole;
from the fact that, though the boughs are too thin, the lines of
ramification are true and beautiful; and from the expression of
continually varied form in the clusters of leafage. And although all
lovers of sacred art would shrink in horror from the idea of
substituting for such a landscape a bit of Cuyp or Rubens, I do not
think that the horror they feel is because Cuyp and Rubens's
landscape is _truer_, but because it is _coarser_ and more vulgar in
associated idea than Raphael's; and I think it possible that the
true forms of hills, and true thicknesses of boughs, might be
tenderly stolen into this background of Raphael's without giving
offence to any one.

§ 13. Take a somewhat more definite instance. The rock in Fig. 5.,
at the side, is one put by Ghirlandajo into the background of his
Baptism of Christ. I have no doubt Ghirlandajo's own rocks and trees
are better, in several respects, than those here represented, since
I have copied them from one of Lasinio's execrable engravings;
still, the harsh outline, and generally stiff and uninventful
blankness of the design are true enough, and characteristic of all
rock-painting of the period. In the plate below I have etched[99]
the outline of a fragment of one of Turner's cliffs, out of his
drawing of Bolton Abbey; and it does not seem to me that, supposing
them properly introduced in the composition, the substitution of the
soft natural lines for the hard unnatural ones would make
Ghirlandajo's background one whit less sacred.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

§ 14. But be this as it may, the fact is, as ill luck would have it,
that profanity of feeling, and skill in art, increased together; so
that we do not find the backgrounds rightly painted till the figures
become irreligious and feelingless; and hence we associate
necessarily the perfect landscape with want of feeling. The first
great innovator was either Masaccio or Filippino Lippi: their works
are so confused together in the Chapel of the Carmine, that I know
not to whom I may attribute,--or whether, without being immediately
quarrelled with, and contradicted, I may attribute to anybody,--the
landscape background of the fresco of the Tribute Money. But that
background, with one or two other fragments in the same
chapel, is far in advance of all other work I have seen of the
period, in expression of the rounded contours and large slopes of
hills, and the association of their summits with the clouds. The
opposite engraving will give some better idea of its character than
can be gained from the outlines commonly published; though the dark
spaces, which in the original are deep blue, come necessarily
somewhat too harshly on the eye when translated into light and
shade. I shall have occasion to speak with greater speciality of
this background in examining the forms of hills; meantime, it is
only as an isolated work that it can be named in the history of
pictorial progress, for Masaccio died too young to carry out his
purposes; and the men around him were too ignorant of landscape to
understand or take advantage of the little he had done. Raphael,
though he borrowed from him in the human figure, never seems to have
been influenced by his landscape, and retains either, as in Plate
11., the upright formalities of Perugino; or, by way of being
natural, expands his distances into flattish flakes of hill, nearly
formless, as in the backgrounds of the Charge to Peter and Draught
of Fishes; and thenceforward the Tuscan and Roman schools grew more
and more artificial, and lost themselves finally under round-headed
niches and Corinthian porticos.

[Illustration: 12. The Shores of Wharfe.]

[Illustration: 13. First Mountain Naturalism.]

[Illustration: 14. The Lombard Apennine.]

[Illustration: 15. St. George of the Seaweed.]

§ 15. It needed, therefore, the air of the northern mountains and of
the sea to brace the hearts of men to the development of the true
landscape schools. I sketched by chance one evening the line of the
Apennines from the ramparts of Parma, and I have put the rough note
of it, and the sky that was over it, in Plate 14., and next to this
(Plate 15.) a moment of sunset, behind the Euganean hills at Venice.
I shall have occasion to refer to both hereafter; but they have some
interest here as types of the kind of scenes which were daily set
before the eyes of Correggio and Titian, and of the sweet free
spaces of sky through which rose and fell, to them, the colored rays
of the morning and evening.

§ 16. And they are connected, also, with the forms of landscape
adopted by the Lombardic masters, in a very curious way. We noticed
that the Flemings, educated entirely in flat land, seemed to be
always contented with the scenery it supplied; and we should
naturally have expected that Titian and Correggio, living in the
midst of the levels of the lagoons, and of the plain of Lombardy,
would also have expressed, in their backgrounds, some pleasure in
such level scenery, associated, of course, with the sublimity of the
far-away Apennine, Euganean, or Alp. But not a whit. The plains of
mulberry and maize, of sea and shoal, by which they were surrounded,
never occur in their backgrounds but in cases of necessity; and both
of them, in all their important landscapes, bury themselves in wild
wood; Correggio delighting to relieve with green darkness of oak and
ivy the golden hair and snowy flesh of his figures; and Titian,
whenever the choice of a scene was in his power, retiring to the
narrow glens and forests of Cadore.

§ 17. Of the vegetation introduced by both, I shall have to speak at
length in the course of the chapters on Foliage; meantime, I give in
Plate 16. one of Titian's slightest bits of background, from one of
the frescoes in the little chapel behind St. Antonio, at Padua,
which may be compared more conveniently than any of his more
elaborate landscapes with the purist work from Raphael. For in both
these examples the trees are equally slender and delicate, only the
formality of mediæval art is, by Titian, entirely abandoned, and the
old conception of the aspen grove and meadow done away with for
ever. We are now far from cities: the painter takes true delight in
the desert; the trees grow wild and free; the sky also has lost its
peace, and is writhed into folds of motion, closely impendent upon
earth, and somewhat threatening, through its solemn light.

§ 18. Although, however, this example is characteristic of Titian in
its wildness, it is not so in its _looseness_. It is only in the
distant backgrounds of the slightest work, or when he is in a hurry,
that Titian is vague: in all his near and studied work he completes
every detail with scrupulous care. The next Plate, 17., a background
of Tintoret's, from his picture of the Entombment at Parma, is more
entirely characteristic of the Venetians. Some mistakes made in the
reduction of my drawing during the course of engraving have cramped
the curves of the boughs and leaves, of which I will give the true
outline farther on; meantime the subject, which is that described in
§ 16. of the chapter on Penetrative Imagination, Vol. II., will just
as well answer the purpose of exemplifying the Venetian love of
gloom and wildness, united with perfect definition of detail. Every
leaf and separate blade of grass is drawn; but observe how the
blades of grass are broken, how completely the aim at expression of
faultlessness and felicity has been withdrawn, as contrary to the
laws of the existent world.

[Illustration: 16. Early Naturalism.]

[Illustration: 17. Advanced Naturalism.]

§ 19. From this great Venetian school of landscape Turner received
much important teaching,--almost the only healthy teaching which he
owed to preceding art. The designs of the Liber Studiorum are founded
first on nature, but in many cases modified by _forced_ imitation of
Claude, and _fond_ imitation of Titian. All the worst and feeblest
studies in the book--as the pastoral with the nymph playing the
tambourine, that with the long bridge seen through trees, and with the
flock of goats on the walled road--owe the principal part of their
imbecilities to Claude; another group (Solway Moss, Peat Bog,
Lauffenbourg, &c.) is taken with hardly any modification by pictorial
influence, straight from nature; and the finest works in the book--the
Grande Chartreuse, Rizpah, Jason, Cephalus, and one or two more--are
strongly under the influence of Titian.

§ 20. The Venetian school of landscape expired with Tintoret, in the
year 1594; and the sixteenth century closed, like a grave, over the
great art of the world. There is _no_ entirely sincere or great art
in the seventeenth century. Rubens and Rembrandt are its two
greatest men, both deeply stained by the errors and affectations of
their age. The influence of the Venetians hardly extended to them;
the tower of the Titianesque art fell southwards; and on the dust of
its ruins grew various art-weeds, such as Domenichino and the
Carraccis. Their landscape, which may in few words be accurately
defined as "Scum of Titian," possesses no single merit, nor any
ground for the forgiveness of demerit; they are to be named only as
a link through which the Venetian influence came dimly down to
Claude and Salvator.

§ 21. Salvator possessed real genius, but was crushed by misery in his
youth, and by fashionable society in his age. He had vigorous animal
life, and considerable invention, but no depth either of thought or
perception. He took some hints directly from nature, and expressed
some conditions of the grotesque of terror with original power; but
his baseness of thought, and bluntness of sight, were unconquerable;
and his works possess no value whatsoever for any person versed in the
walks of noble art. They had little, if any, influence on Turner; if
any, it was in blinding him for some time to the grace of tree trunks,
and making him tear them too much into splinters.

§ 22. Not so Claude, who may be considered as Turner's principal
master. Claude's capacities were of the most limited kind; but he
had tenderness of perception, and sincerity of purpose, and he
effected a revolution in art. This revolution consisted mainly in
setting the sun in heaven.[100] Till Claude's time no one had
seriously thought of painting the sun but conventionally; that is to
say, as a red or yellow star, (often) with a face in it, under which
type it was constantly represented in illumination; else it was kept
out of the picture, or introduced in fragmentary distances, breaking
through clouds with almost definite rays. Perhaps the honor of
having first tried to represent the real effect of the sun in
landscape belongs to Bonifazio, in his pictures of the camps of
Israel.[101] Rubens followed in a kind of bravado, sometimes making
the rays issue from anything but the orb of the sun;--here, for
instance, Fig. 6., is an outline of the position of the sun (at _s_)
with respect to his own rays, in a sunset behind a tournament in the
Louvre: and various interesting effects of sunlight issuing from the
conventional face-filled orb occur in contemporary missal-painting;
for instance, very richly in the Harleian MS. Brit. Mus. 3469. But
all this was merely indicative of the tendency to transition which
may always be traced in any age before the man comes who is to
_accomplish_ the transition. Claude took up the new idea seriously,
made the sun his subject, and painted the effects of misty shadows
cast by his rays over the landscape, and other delicate aerial
transitions, as no one had ever done before, and, in some respects,
as no one has done in oil color since.

§ 23. "But, how, if this were so, could his capacities be of the
meanest order?" Because doing _one_ thing well, or better than others
have done it, does not necessarily imply large capacity. Capacity
means breadth of glance, understanding of the relations of things, and
invention, and these are rare and precious; but there are very few men
who have not done _something_, in the course of their lives, better
than other people. I could point out many engravers, draughtsmen, and
artists, who have each a particular merit in their manner, or
particular field of perception, that nobody else has, or ever had. But
this does not make them great men, it only indicates a small special
capacity of some kind: and all the smaller if the gift be very
peculiar and single; for a great man never so limits himself to one
thing, as that we shall be able to say, "That's all he can do." If
Claude had been a great man he would not have been so steadfastly set
on painting effects of sun; he would have looked at all nature, and at
all art, and would have painted sun effects somewhat worse, and nature
universally much better.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

§ 24. Such as he was, however, his discovery of the way to make
pictures look warm was very delightful to the shallow connoisseurs
of the age. Not that they cared for sunshine; but they liked seeing
jugglery. They could not feel Titian's noble color, nor Veronese's
noble composition; but they thought it highly amusing to see the sun
brought into a picture: and Claude's works were bought and
delighted in by vulgar people then, for their real-looking suns, as
pictures are now by vulgar people for having real timepieces in
their church towers.

§ 25. But when Turner arose, with an earnest desire to paint the
whole of nature, he found that the existence of the sun was an
important fact, and by no means an easily manageable one. _He_ loved
sunshine for its own sake; but he could not at first paint it. Most
things else, he would more or less manage without much technical
difficulty; but the burning orb and the golden haze could not,
somehow, be got out of the oil paint. Naturally he went to Claude,
who really had got them out of oil paint; approached him with great
reverence, as having done that which seemed to Turner most difficult
of all technical matters, and he became his faithful disciple. How
much he learned from him of manipulation, I cannot tell; but one
thing is certain, that he never quite equalled him in that
particular forte of his. I imagine that Claude's way of laying on
oil color was so methodical that it could not possibly be imitated
by a man whose mechanism was interfered with by hundreds of thoughts
and aims totally different from Claude's; and, besides, I suppose
that certain useful principles in the management of paint, of which
our schools are now wholly ignorant, had come down as far as Claude,
from the Venetians. Turner at last gave up the attempt, and adopted
a manipulation of his own, which indeed effected certain objects
attainable in no other way, but which still was in many respects
unsatisfactory, dangerous, and deeply to be regretted.

§ 26. But meantime his mind had been strongly warped by Claude's
futilities of conception. It was impossible to dwell on such works for
any length of time without being grievously harmed by them; and the
style of Turner's compositions was for ever afterwards weakened or
corrupted. For, truly, it is almost beyond belief into what depth of
absurdity Claude plunges continually in his most admired designs. For
instance; undertaking to paint Moses at the Burning Bush, he
represents a graceful landscape with a city, a river, and a bridge,
and plenty of tall trees, and the sea, and numbers of people going
about their business and pleasure in every direction; and the bush
burning quietly upon a bank in the corner; rather in the dark, and
not to be seen without close inspection. It would take some pages of
close writing to point out, one by one, the inanities of heart, soul,
and brain which such a conception involves; the ineffable ignorance of
the nature of the event, and of the scene of it; the incapacity of
conceiving anything even _in_ ignorance, which should be impressive;
the dim, stupid, serene, leguminous enjoyment of his sunny
afternoon--burn the bushes as much as they liked--these I leave the
reader to think over at his leisure, either before the picture in Lord
Ellesmere's gallery, or the sketch of it in the Liber Veritatis. But
all these kinds of fallacy sprung more or less out of the vices of the
time in which Claude lived; his own peculiar character reaches beyond
these, to an incapacity of understanding the _main point_ in anything
he had to represent, down to the minutest detail, which is quite
unequalled, as far as I know, in human nugatoriness. For instance;
here, in Fig. 7., is the head, with half the body, of Eneas drawing
his Bow, from No. 180. of the Liber Veritatis. Observe, the string is
too long by half; for if the bow were unbent, it would be two feet
longer than the whole bow. Then the arrow is too long by half, has too
heavy a head by half; and finally, it actually is _under_ the
bow-hand, instead of above it. Of the ideal and heroic refinement of
the head and drapery I will say nothing; but look only at the wretched
archery, and consider if it would be possible for any child to draw
the thing with less understanding, or to make more mistakes in the
given compass.[102]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

§ 27. And yet, exquisite as is Claude's instinct for blunder, he has
not strength of mind enough to blunder in a wholly original manner,
but he must needs falter out of his way to pick up other people's
puerilities, and be absurd at second-hand. I have been obliged to
laugh a little--though I hope reverently--at Ghirlandajo's
landscapes, which yet we saw had a certain charm of quaintness in
them when contrasted with his grand figures; but could any one have
believed that Claude, with all the noble landscapes of Titian set
before him, and all nature round about him, should yet go back to
Ghirlandajo for types of form. Yet such is the case. I said that the
Venetian influence came dimly down to Claude; but the old Florentine
influence came clearly. The Claudesque landscape is not, as so
commonly supposed, an idealized abstract of the nature about Rome.
It is an ultimate condition of the Florentine conventional
landscape, more or less softened by reference to nature. Fig. 8.,
from No. 145. of the Liber Veritatis, is sufficiently characteristic
of Claude's rock-drawing; and compared with Fig. 5. (p. 314), will
show exactly the kind of modification he made on old and received
types. We shall see other instances of it hereafter.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Imagine this kind of reproduction of whatever other people had done
worst, and this kind of misunderstanding of all that he saw himself
in nature, carried out in Claude's trees, rocks, ships--in
everything that he touched,--and then consider what kind of school
this work was for a young and reverent disciple. As I said, Turner
never recovered the effects of it; his compositions were always
mannered, lifeless, and even foolish; and he only did noble things
when the immediate presence of nature had overpowered the
reminiscences of his master.

§ 28. Of the influence of Gaspar and Nicolo Poussin on Turner, there
is hardly anything to be said, nor much respecting that which they
had on landscape generally. Nicolo Poussin had noble powers of
design, and might have been a thoroughly great painter had he been
trained in Venice; but his Roman education kept him tame; his
trenchant severity was contrary to the tendencies of the age, and
had few imitators compared to the dashing of Salvator, and the mist
of Claude. Those few imitators adopted his manner without possessing
either his science or invention; and the Italian school of landscape
soon expired. Reminiscences of him occur sometimes in Turner's
compositions of sculptured stones for foreground; and the beautiful
Triumph of Flora, in the Louvre, probably first showed Turner the
use of definite flower, or blossom-painting, in landscape. I doubt
if he took anything from Gaspar; whatever he might have learned from
him respecting masses of foliage and golden distances, could have
been learned better, and, I believe, _was_ learned, from Titian.

§ 29. Meantime, a lower, but more living school had developed itself
in the north; Cuyp had painted sunshine as truly as Claude, gilding
with it a more homely, but far more honestly conceived landscape; and
the effects of light of De Hooghe and Rembrandt presented examples of
treatment to which southern art could show no parallel. Turner
evidently studied these with the greatest care, and with great benefit
in every way; especially this, that they neutralized the idealisms of
Claude, and showed the young painter what power might be in plain
truth, even of the most familiar kind. He painted several pictures in
imitation of these masters; and those in which he tried to rival Cuyp
are healthy and noble works, being, in fact, just what most of Cuyp's
own pictures are--faithful studies of Dutch boats in calm weather, on
smooth water. De Hooghe was too precise, and Rembrandt too dark, to be
successfully or affectionately followed by him; but he evidently
learned much from both.

§ 30. Finally, he painted many pictures in the manner of Vandevelde
(who was the accepted authority of his time in sea painting), and
received much injury from him. To the close of his life, Turner
always painted the sea too grey, and too opaque, in consequence of
his early study of Vandevelde. He never seemed to perceive color so
truly in the sea as he saw it elsewhere. But he soon discovered the
poorness of Vandevelde's forms of waves, and raised their meanly
divided surfaces into massive surge, effecting rapidly other
changes, of which more in another place.

Such was the art to which Turner, in early years, devoted his most
earnest thoughts. More or less respectful contemplation of Reynolds,
Loutherbourg, Wilson, Gainsborough, Morland, and Wilkie, was
incidentally mingled with his graver study; and he maintained a
questioning watchfulness of even the smallest successes of his
brother artists of the modern landscape school. It remains for us
only to note the position of that living school when Turner, helped
or misled, as the case may be, by the study of the older artists,
began to consider what remained for him to do, or design.

§ 31. The dead schools of landscape, composed of the works we have
just been examining, were broadly divisible into northern and
southern: the Dutch schools, more or less natural, but vulgar; the
Italian, more or less elevated, but absurd. There was a certain
foolish elegance in Claude, and a dull dignity in Gaspar; but then
their work resembled nothing that ever existed in the world. On the
contrary, a canal or cattle piece of Cuyp's had many veracities
about it; but they were, at best, truths of the ditch and dairy. The
grace of nature, or her gloom, her tender and sacred seclusions, or
her reach of power and wrath, had never been painted; nor had
_anything_ been painted yet in true _love_ of it; for both Dutch and
Italians agreed in this, that they always painted for the
_picture's_ sake, to show how well they could imitate sunshine,
arrange masses, or articulate straws,--never because they loved the
scene, or wanted to carry away some memory of it.

And thus, all that landscape of the old masters is to be considered
merely as a struggle of expiring skill to discover some new
direction in which to display itself. There was no love of nature in
the age; only a desire for something new. Therefore those schools
expired at last, leaving the chasm of nearly utter emptiness between
them and the true moderns, out of which chasm the new school rises,
not engrafted on that old one, but, from the very base of all
things, beginning with mere washes of Indian ink, touched upon with
yellow and brown; and gradually feeling its way to color.

But this infant school differed inherently from that ancienter one,
in that its motive was love. However feeble its efforts might be,
they were _for the sake of the nature_, not of the picture, and
therefore, having this germ of true life, it grew and throve. Robson
did not paint purple hills because he wanted to show how he could
lay on purple; but because he truly loved their dark peaks. Fielding
did not paint downs to show how dexterously he could sponge out
mists; but because he loved downs.

This modern school, therefore, became the only true school of
landscape which had yet existed; the artificial Claude and Gaspar
work may be cast aside out of our way,--as I have said in my
Edinburgh lectures, under the general title of "pastoralism,"--and
from the last landscape of Tintoret, if we look for _life_, we must
pass at once to the first of Turner.

§ 32. What help Turner received from this or that companion of his
youth is of no importance to any one now. Of course every great man is
always being helped by everybody,[103] for his gift is to get good out
of all things and all persons; and also there were two men associated
with him in early study, who showed high promise in the same field,
Cousen and Girtin (especially the former), and there is no saying what
these men might have done had they lived; there might, perhaps, have
been a struggle between one or other of them and Turner, as between
Giorgione and Titian. But they lived not; and Turner is the only great
man whom the school has yet produced,--quite great enough, as we shall
see, for all that needed to be done. To him, therefore, we now finally
turn, as the sole object of our inquiry. I shall first reinforce, with
such additions as they need, those statements of his general
principles which I made in the first volume, but could not then
demonstrate fully, for want of time to prepare pictorial illustration;
and then proceed to examine, piece by piece, his representations of
the facts of nature, comparing them, as it may seem expedient, with
what had been accomplished by others.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot close this volume without alluding briefly to a subject of
different interest from any that have occupied us in its pages. For
it may, perhaps, seem to a general reader heartless and vain to
enter zealously into questions about our arts and pleasures in a
time of so great public anxiety as this.

But he will find, if he looks back to the sixth paragraph of the
opening chapter of the last volume, some statement of feelings,
which, as they made me despondent in a time of apparent national
prosperity, now cheer me in one which, though of stern trial, I will
not be so much a coward as to call one of adversity. And I derive
this encouragement first from the belief that the War itself, with
all its bitterness, is, in the present state of the European
nations, productive of more good than evil; and, secondly, because I
have more confidence than others generally entertain, in the justice
of its cause.

I say, first, because I believe the war is at present productive of
good more than of evil. I will not argue this hardly and coldly, as
I might, by tracing in past history some of the abundant evidence
that nations have always reached their highest virtue, and wrought
their most accomplished works, in times of straitening and battle;
as, on the other hand, no nation ever yet enjoyed a protracted and
triumphant peace without receiving in its own bosom ineradicable
seeds of future decline. I will not so argue this matter; but I will
appeal at once to the testimony of those whom the war has cost the
dearest. I know what would be told me, by those who have suffered
nothing; whose domestic happiness has been unbroken; whose daily
comfort undisturbed; whose experience of calamity consists, at its
utmost, in the incertitude of a speculation, the dearness of a
luxury, or the increase of demands upon their fortune which they
could meet fourfold without inconvenience. From these, I can well
believe, be they prudent economists, or careless pleasure-seekers,
the cry for peace will rise alike vociferously, whether in street or
senate. But I ask _their_ witness, to whom the war has changed the
aspect of the earth, and imagery of heaven, whose hopes it has cut
off like a spider's web, whose treasure it has placed, in a moment,
under the seals of clay. Those who can never more see sunrise, nor
watch the climbing light gild the Eastern clouds, without thinking
what graves it has gilded, first, far down behind the dark
earth-line,--who never more shall see the crocus bloom in spring,
without thinking what dust it is that feeds the wild flowers of
Balaclava. Ask _their_ witness, and see if they will not reply that
it is well with them, and with theirs; that they would have it no
otherwise; would not, if they might, receive back their gifts of
love and life, nor take again the purple of their blood out of the
cross on the breastplate of England. Ask them: and though they
should answer only with a sob, listen if it does not gather upon
their lips into the sound of the old Seyton war-cry--"Set on."

And this not for pride--not because the names of their lost ones
will be recorded to all time, as of those who held the breach and
kept the gate of Europe against the North, as the Spartans did
against the East; and lay down in the place they had to guard, with
the like home message, "Oh, stranger, go and tell the English that
we are lying here, having obeyed their words;"--not for this, but
because, also, they have felt that the spirit which has discerned
them for eminence in sorrow--the helmed and sworded skeleton that
rakes with its white fingers the sands of the Black Sea beach into
grave-heap after grave-heap, washed by everlasting surf of
tears--has been to them an angel of other things than agony; that
they have learned, with those hollow, undeceivable eyes of his, to
see all the earth by the sunlight of deathbeds;--no inch-high stage
for foolish griefs and feigned pleasures; no dream, neither, as its
dull moralists told them;--_Any_thing but that: a place of true,
marvellous, inextricable sorrow and power; a question-chamber of
trial by rack and fire, irrevocable decision recording continually;
and no sleep, nor folding of hands, among the demon-questioners;
none among the angel-watchers, none among the men who stand or fall
beside those hosts of God. They know now the strength of sacrifice,
and that its flames can illumine as well as consume; they are bound
by new fidelities to all that they have saved,--by new love to all
for whom they have suffered; every affection which seemed to sink
with those dim life-stains into the dust, has been delegated, by
those who need it no more, to the cause for which they have expired;
and every mouldering arm, which will never more embrace the beloved
ones, has bequeathed to them its strength and its faithfulness.

For the cause of this quarrel is no dim, half-avoidable involution
of mean interests and errors, as some would have us believe. There
never was a great war caused by such things. There never can be. The
historian may trace it, with ingenious trifling, to a courtier's
jest or a woman's glance; but he does not ask--(and it is the sum of
questions)--how the warring nations had come to found their
destinies on the course of the sneer, or the smile. If they have so
based them, it is time for them to learn, through suffering, how to
build on other foundations--for great, accumulated, and most
righteous cause, their foot slides in due time; and against the
torpor, or the turpitude, of their myriads, there is loosed the
haste of the devouring sword and the thirsty arrow. But if they have
set their fortunes on other than such ground, then the war must be
owing to some deep conviction or passion in their own hearts,--a
conviction which, in resistless flow, or reckless ebb, or consistent
stay, is the ultimate arbiter of battle, disgrace, or conquest.

Wherever there is war, there _must_ be injustice on one side or the
other, or on both. There have been wars which were little more than
trials of strength between friendly nations, and in which the
injustice was not to each other, but to the God who gave them life.
But in a malignant war of these present ages there is injustice of
ignobler kind, at once to God and man, which _must_ be stemmed for
both their sakes. It may, indeed, be so involved with national
prejudices, or ignorances, that neither of the contending nations
can conceive it as attaching to their cause; nay, the constitution
of their governments, and the clumsy crookedness of their political
dealings with each other, may be such as to prevent either of them
from knowing the actual cause for which they have gone to war.
Assuredly this is, in a great degree, the state of things with _us_;
for I noticed that there never came news by telegraph of the
explosion of a powder-barrel, or of the loss of thirty men by a
sortie, but the Parliament lost confidence immediately in the
justice of the war; reopened the question whether we ever should
have engaged in it, and remained in a doubtful and repentant state
of mind until one of the enemy's powder-barrels blew up also; upon
which they were immediately satisfied again that the war was a wise
and necessary one. How far, therefore, the calamity may have been
brought upon us by men whose political principles shoot annually
like the leaves, and change color at every autumn frost:--how loudly
the blood that has been poured out round the walls of that city, up
to the horse-bridles, may now be crying from the ground against men
who did not know, when they first bade shed it, exactly what war
was, or what blood was, or what life was, or truth, or what anything
else was upon the earth; and whose tone of opinions touching the
destinies of mankind depended entirely upon whether they were
sitting on the right or left side of the House of Commons;--this, I
repeat, I know not, nor (in all solemnity I say it) do I care to
know. For if it be so, and the English nation could at the present
period of its history be betrayed into a war such as this by the
slipping of a wrong word into a protocol, or bewitched into
unexpected battle under the budding hallucinations of its sapling
senators, truly it is time for us to bear the penalty of our
baseness, and learn, as the sleepless steel glares close upon us,
how to choose our governors more wisely, and our ways more warily.
For that which brings swift punishment in war, must have brought
slow ruin in peace; and those who have now laid down their lives for
England, have doubly saved her; they have humbled at once her
enemies and herself; and have done less for her, in the conquest
they achieve, than in the sorrow that they claim.

But it is not altogether thus: we have not been cast into this war
by mere political misapprehensions, or popular ignorances. It is
quite possible that neither we nor our rulers may clearly understand
the nature of the conflict; and that we may be dealing blows in the
dark, confusedly, and as a soldier suddenly awakened from slumber by
an unknown adversary. But I believe the struggle was inevitable, and
that the sooner it came, the more easily it was to be met, and the
more nobly concluded. France and England are both of them, from
shore to shore, in a state of intense progression, change, and
experimental life. They are each of them beginning to examine, more
distinctly than ever nations did yet in the history of the world,
the dangerous question respecting the rights of governed, and the
responsibilities of governing, bodies; not, as heretofore; foaming
over them in red frenzy, with intervals of fetter and straw crown,
but in health, quietness, and daylight, with the help of a good
Queen and a great Emperor; and to determine them in a way which, by
just so much as it is more effective and rational, is likely to
produce more permanent results than ever before on the policy of
neighboring States, and to force, gradually, the discussion of
similar questions into their places of silence. To force it,--for
true liberty, like true religion, is always aggressive or
persecuted; but the attack is _generally_ made upon it by the nation
which is to be crushed,--by Persian on Athenian, Tuscan on Roman,
Austrian on Swiss; or, as now, by Russia upon us and our allies: her
attack appointed, it seems to me, for confirmation of all our
greatness, trial of our strength, purging and punishment of our
futilities, and establishment for ever, in our hands, of the
leadership in the political progress of the world.

Whether this its providential purpose be accomplished, must depend
on its enabling France and England to love one another, and teaching
these, the two noblest foes that ever stood breast to breast among
the nations, first to decipher the law of international charities;
first to discern that races, like individuals, can only reach their
true strength, dignity, or joy, in seeking each the welfare, and
exulting each in the glory, of the other. It is strange how far we
still seem from fully perceiving this. We know that two men, cast on
a desert island, could not thrive in dispeace; we can understand
that four, or twelve, might still find their account in unity; but
that a multitude should thrive otherwise than by the contentions of
its classes, or _two_ multitudes hold themselves in anywise bound by
brotherly law to serve, support, rebuke, rejoice in one another,
this seems still as far beyond our conception, as the clearest of
commandments, "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's
wealth," is beyond our habitual practice. Yet, if once we comprehend
that precept in its breadth, and feel that what we now call jealousy
for our country's honor, is, so far as it tends to other countries'
_dis_honor, merely one of the worst, because most complacent and
self-gratulatory, forms of irreligion,--a newly breathed strength
will, with the newly interpreted patriotism, animate and sanctify
the efforts of men. Learning, unchecked by envy, will be accepted
more frankly, throned more firmly, guided more swiftly; charity,
unchilled by fear, will dispose the laws of each State without
reluctance to advantage its neighbor by justice to itself; and
admiration, unwarped by prejudice, possess itself continually of new
treasure in the arts and the thoughts of the stranger.

If France and England fail of this, if again petty jealousies or
selfish interests prevail to unknit their hands from the armored
grasp, then, indeed, their faithful children will have fallen in
vain; there will be a sound as of renewed lamentation along those
Euxine waves, and a shaking among the bones that bleach by the
mounds of Sebastopol. But if they fail not of this,--if we, in our
love of our queens and kings, remember how France gave to the cause
of early civilization, first the greatest, then the holiest, of
monarchs;[104] and France, in her love of liberty, remembers how
_we_ first raised the standard of Commonwealth, trusted to the grasp
of one good and strong hand, witnessed for by victory; and so join
in perpetual compact of our different strengths, to contend for
justice, mercy, and truth throughout the world,--who dares say that
one soldier has died in vain? The scarlet of the blood that has
sealed this covenant will be poured along the clouds of a new
aurora, glorious in that Eastern heaven; for every sob of wreck-fed
breaker round those Pontic precipices, the floods shall clap their
hands between the guarded mounts of the Prince-Angel; and the
spirits of those lost multitudes, crowned with the olive and rose
among the laurel, shall haunt, satisfied, the willowy brooks and
peaceful vales of England, and glide, triumphant, by the poplar
groves and sunned coteaux of Seine.

  [97] The education here spoken of is, of course, that bearing on
       the main work of life. In other respects, Turner's education
       was more neglected than Scott's, and that not beneficently.
       See the close of the third of my Edinburgh Lectures.

  [98] The picture is in the Uffizii of Florence.

  [99] This etching is prepared for receiving mezzotint in the next
       volume; it is therefore much heavier in line, especially in
       the water, than I should have made it, if intended to be
       complete as it is.

  [100] Compare Vol. I. Part II. Sec. I. Chap. VII. I repeat here
        some things that were then said; but it is necessary now to
        review them in connection with Turner's education, as well
        as for the sake of enforcing them by illustration.

  [101] Now in the old library of Venice.

  [102] My old friend Blackwood complains bitterly, in his last
        number, of my having given this illustration at one of my
        late lectures, saying, that I "have a disagreeable knack of
        finding out the joints in my opponent's armor," and that "I
        never fight for love." I never do. I fight for truth,
        earnestly, and in no wise for jest; and against all lies,
        earnestly, and in no wise for love. They complain that "a
        noble adversary is not in Mr. Ruskin's way." No; a noble
        adversary never was, never will be. With all that is noble
        I have been, and shall be, in perpetual peace, with all that
        is ignoble and false everlastingly at war. And as for these
        Scotch _bourgeois gentilshommes_ with their "Tu n'as pas la
        patience que je pare," let them look to their fence. But
        truly, if they will tell me where Claude's strong points
        are, I will strike there, and be thankful.

  [103] His first drawing master was, I believe, that Mr. Lowe,
        whose daughters, now aged and poor, have, it seems to me,
        some claim on public regard, being connected distantly with
        the memory of Johnson, and closely with that of Turner.

  [104] Charlemagne and St. Louis.




APPENDIX.

I. CLAUDE'S TREE-DRAWING.


The reader may not improbably hear it said, by persons who are
incapable of maintaining an honest argument, and therefore incapable
of understanding or believing the honesty of an adversary, that I
have caricatured, or unfairly chosen, the examples I give of the
masters I depreciate. It is evident, in the first place, that I
could not, if I were even cunningly disposed, adopt a worse policy
than in so doing; for the discovery of caricature or falsity in my
representations, would not only invalidate the immediate statement,
but the whole book; and invalidate it in the most fatal way, by
showing that all I had ever said about "truth" was hypocrisy, and
that in my own affairs I expected to prevail by help of lies.
Nevertheless it necessarily happens, that in endeavors to facsimile
any work whatsoever, bad or good, some changes are induced from the
exact aspect of the original. These changes are, of course,
sometimes harmful, sometimes advantageous; the bad thing generally
gains; the good thing _always_ loses: so that I am continually
tormented by finding, in my plates of contrasts, the virtue and vice
I exactly wanted to talk about, eliminated from _both_ examples. In
some cases, however, the bad thing will lose also, and then I must
either cancel the plate, or increase the cost of the work by
preparing another (at a similar risk), or run the chance of
incurring the charge of dishonest representation. I desire,
therefore, very earnestly, and once for all, to have it understood
that whatever I say in the text, bearing on questions of comparison,
refers _always_ to the _original_ works; and that, if the reader has
it in his power, I would far rather he should look at those works
than at my plates of them; I only give the plates for his immediate
help and convenience: and I mention this, with respect to my plate
of Claude's ramification, because, if I have such a thing as a
prejudice at all, (and, although I do not myself think I have,
people certainly say so,) it is against Claude; and I might,
therefore, be sooner suspected of some malice in this plate than in
others. But I simply gave the original engravings from the Liber
Veritatis to Mr. Le Keux, earnestly requesting that the portions
selected might be faithfully copied; and I think he is much to be
thanked for so carefully and successfully accomplishing the task.
The figures are from the following plates:--

  No. 1. Part of the central tree in No. 134. of the Liber Veritatis.
      2. From the largest tree       "   158.
      3. Bushes at root of tree      "   134.
      4. Tree on the left            "   183.
      5. Tree on the left            "    95.
      6. Tree on the left            "    72.
      7. Principal tree              "    92.
      8. Tree on the right           "    32.

If, in fact, any change be effected in the examples in this plate, it
is for the better; for, thus detached, they all look like small
boughs, in which the faults are of little consequence; in the original
works they are seen to be intended for large trunks of trees, and the
errors are therefore pronounced on a much larger scale.

The plate of mediæval rocks (10.) has been executed with much less
attention in transcript, because the points there to be illustrated
were quite indisputable, and the instances were needed merely to show
the _kind_ of _thing_ spoken of, not the skill of particular masters.
The example from Leonardo was, however, somewhat carefully treated.
Mr. Cuff copied it accurately from the only engraving of the picture
which I believe exists, and with which, therefore, I suppose the world
is generally content. That engraving, however, in no respect seems to
me to give the look of the light behind Leonardo's rocks; so I
afterwards darkened the rocks, and put some light into the sky and
lily; and the effect is certainly more like that of the picture than
it is in the same portion of the old engraving.

Of the other masters represented in the plates of this volume, the
noblest, Tintoret, has assuredly suffered the most (Plate 17.);
first, in my too hasty drawing from the original, picture; and,
secondly, through some accidental errors of outline which occurred
in the reduction to the size of the page; lastly, and chiefly, in
the withdrawal of the heads of the four figures underneath, in the
shadow, on which the composition entirely depends. This last evil is
unavoidable. It is quite impossible to make _extracts_ from the
great masters without partly spoiling every separated feature; the
very essence of a noble composition being, that none should bear
separation from the rest.

The plate from Raphael (11) is, I think, on the whole, satisfactory.
It cost me much pains, as I had to facsimile the irregular form of
every leaf; each being, in the original picture, executed with a
somewhat wayward pencil-stroke of vivid brown on the clear sky.

Of the other plates it would be tedious to speak in detail.
Generally, it will be found that I have taken most pains to do
justice to the masters of whom I have to speak depreciatingly; and
that, if there be calumny at all, it is always of Turner, rather
than of Claude.

The reader might, however, perhaps suspect me of ill-will towards
Constable, owing to my continually introducing him for depreciatory
comparison. So far from this being the case, I had, as will be seen
in various passages of the first volume, considerable respect for
the feeling with which he worked; but I was compelled to do harsh
justice upon him now, because Mr. Leslie, in his unadvised and
unfortunate _réchauffé_ of the fallacious art-maxims of the last
century, has suffered his personal regard for Constable so far to
prevail over his judgment as to bring him forward as a great artist,
comparable in some kind with Turner. As Constable's reputation was,
even before this, most mischievous, in giving countenance to the
blotting and blundering of Modernism, I saw myself obliged, though
unwillingly, to carry the suggested comparison thoroughly out.


II. GERMAN PHILOSOPHY.

The reader must have noticed that I never speak of German art, or
German philosophy, but in depreciation. This, however, is not
because I cannot feel, or would not acknowledge, the value and
power, within certain limits, of both; but because I also feel that
the immediate tendency of the English mind is to rate them too
highly; and, therefore, it becomes a necessary task, at present, to
mark what evil and weakness there are in them, rather than what
good. I also am brought continually into collision with certain
extravagances of the German mind, by my own steady pursuit of
Naturalism as opposed to Idealism; and, therefore, I become
unfortunately cognizant of the evil, rather than of the good; which
evil, so far as I feel it, I am bound to declare. And it is not to
the point to protest, as the Chevalier Bunsen and other German
writers have done, against the expression of opinions respecting
their philosophy by persons who have not profoundly or carefully
studied it; for the very resolution to study any system of
metaphysics profoundly, must be based, in any prudent man's mind, on
some preconceived opinion of its worthiness to be studied; which
opinion of German metaphysics the naturalistic English cannot be led
to form. This is not to be murmured against,--it is in the simple
necessity of things. Men who have other business on their hands must
be content to choose what philosophy they have occasion for, by the
sample; and when, glancing into the second volume of "Hippolytus,"
we find the Chevalier Bunsen himself talking of a "finite
realization of the infinite" (a phrase considerably less rational
than "a black realization of white"), and of a triad composed of
God, Man, and Humanity[105] (which is a parallel thing to talking of
a triad composed of man, dog, and canineness), knowing those
expressions to be pure, definite, and highly finished nonsense, we
do not in general trouble ourselves to look any farther. Some one
will perhaps answer that if one always judged thus by the
sample,--as, for instance, if one judged of Turner's pictures by the
head of a figure cut out of one of them,--very precious things might
often be despised. Not, I think, often. If any one went to Turner,
expecting to learn figure-drawing from him, the sample of his
figure-drawing would accurately and justly inform him that he had
come to the wrong master. But if he came to be taught landscape, the
smallest fragment of Turner's work would justly exemplify his power.
It may sometimes unluckily happen that, in such short trial, we
strike upon an accidentally failing part of the thing to be tried,
and then we may be unjust; but there is, nevertheless, in multitudes
of cases, no other way of judging or acting; and the necessity of
occasionally being unjust is a law of life,--like that of sometimes
stumbling, or being sick. It will not do to walk at snail's pace all
our lives for fear of stumbling, nor to spend years in the
investigation of everything which, by specimen, we must condemn. He
who seizes all that he plainly discerns to be valuable, and never is
unjust but when he honestly cannot help it, will soon be enviable in
his possessions, and venerable in his equity.

Nor can I think that the risk of loss is great in the matter under
discussion. I have often been told that any one who will read Kant,
Strauss, and the rest of the German metaphysicians and divines,
resolutely through, and give his whole strength to the study of them,
will, after ten or twelve years' labor, discover that there is very
little harm in them; and this I can well believe; but I believe also
that the ten or twelve years may be better spent; and that any man who
honestly wants philosophy not for show, but for _use_, and knowing the
Proverbs of Solomon, can, by way of Commentary, afford to buy, in
convenient editions, Plato, Bacon, Wordsworth, Carlyle, and Helps,
will find that he has got as much as will be sufficient for him and
his household during life, and of as good quality as need be.

It is also often declared necessary to study the German
controversialists, because the grounds of religion "must be inquired
into." I am sorry to hear they have not been inquired into yet; but
if it be so, there are two ways of pursuing that inquiry: one for
scholarly men, who have leisure on their hands, by reading all that
they have time to read, for and against, and arming themselves at
all points for controversy with all persons; the other,--a shorter
and simpler way,--for busy and practical men, who want merely to
find out how to live and die. Now for the learned and leisurely men
I am not writing; they know what and how to read better than I can
tell them. For simple and busy men, concerned much with art, which
is eminently a practical matter, and fatigues the eyes, so as to
render much reading inexpedient, I _am_ writing; and such men I do,
to the utmost of my power, dissuade from meddling with German books;
not because I fear inquiry into the grounds of religion, but because
the only inquiry which is _possible_ to them must be conducted in a
totally different way. They have been brought up as Christians, and
doubt if they should remain Christians. They cannot ascertain, by
investigation, if the Bible be true; but _if it be_, and Christ ever
existed, and was God, then, certainly, the Sermon which He has
permitted for 1800 years to stand recorded as first of all His own
teaching in the New Testament, must be true. Let them take that
Sermon and give it fair practical trial: act out every verse of it,
with no quibbling or explaining away, except the reduction of such
_evidently_ metaphorical expressions as "cut off thy foot," "pluck
the beam out of thine eye," to their effectively practical sense.
Let them act out, or obey, every verse literally for a whole year,
so far as they can,--a year being little enough time to give to an
inquiry into religion; and if, at the end of the year, they are not
satisfied, and still need to prosecute the inquiry, let them try the
German system if they choose.


III. PLAGIARISM.

Some time after I had written the concluding chapter of this work,
the interesting and powerful poems of Emerson were brought under my
notice by one of the members of my class at the Working Men's
College. There is much in some of these poems so like parts of the
chapter in question, even in turn of expression, that though I do
not usually care to justify myself from the charge of plagiarism, I
felt that a few words were necessary in this instance.

I do not, as aforesaid, justify myself, in general, because I know
there is internal evidence in my work of its originality, if people
care to examine it; and if they do not, or have not skill enough to
know genuine from borrowed work, my simple assertion would not
convince them, especially as the charge of plagiarism is hardly ever
made but by plagiarists, and persons of the unhappy class who do not
believe in honesty but on evidence. Nevertheless, as my work is so
much out of doors, and among pictures, that I have time to read few
modern books, and am therefore in more danger than most people of
repeating, as if it were new, what others have said, it may be well
to note, once for all, that any such apparent plagiarism results in
fact from my writings being more original than I wish them to be,
from my having worked out my whole subject in unavoidable, but to
myself hurtful, ignorance of the labors of others. On the other
hand, I should be very sorry if I had _not_ been continually taught
and influenced by the writers whom I love; and am quite unable to
say to what extent my thoughts have been guided by Wordsworth,
Carlyle, and Helps; to whom (with Dante and George Herbert, in olden
time) I owe more than to any other writers;--most of all, perhaps,
to Carlyle, whom I read so constantly, that, without wilfully
setting myself to imitate him, I find myself perpetually falling
into his modes of expression, and saying many things in a "quite
other," and, I hope, stronger, way, than I should have adopted some
years ago; as also there are things which I hope are said more
clearly and simply than before, owing to the influence upon me of
the beautiful _quiet_ English of Helps. It would be both foolish and
wrong to struggle to cast off influences of this kind; for they
consist mainly in a real and healthy help;--the master, in writing
as in painting, showing certain methods of language which it would
be ridiculous, and even affected, not to employ, when once shown;
just as it would have been ridiculous in Bonifacio to refuse to
employ Titian's way of laying on color, if he felt it the best,
because he had not himself discovered it. There is all the
difference in the world between this receiving of guidance, or
allowing of influence, and wilful imitation, much more, plagiarism;
nay, the guidance may even innocently reach into local tones of
thought, and must do so to some extent; so that I find Carlyle's
stronger thinking coloring mine continually; and should be very
sorry if I did not; otherwise I should have read him to little
purpose. But what I have of my own is still all there, and, I
believe, better brought out, by far, than it would have been
otherwise. Thus, if we glance over the wit and satire of the popular
writers of the day, we shall find that the _manner_ of it, so far as
it is distinctive, is always owing to Dickens; and that out of his
first exquisite ironies branched innumerable other forms of wit,
varying with the disposition of the writers; original in the matter
and substance of them, yet never to have been expressed as they now
are, but for Dickens.

Many people will suppose that for several ideas in the chapters on
Landscape I was indebted to Humboldt's Kosmos, and Howitt's Rural
Scenery. I am indebted to Mr. Howitt's book for much pleasure, but
for no suggestion, as it was not put into my hands till the chapters
in question were in type. I wish it had been; as I should have been
glad to have taken farther note on the landscape of Theocritus, on
which Mr. Howitt dwells with just delight. Other parts of the book
will be found very suggestive and helpful to the reader who cares to
pursue the subject. Of Humboldt's Kosmos I heard much talk when it
first came out, and looked through it cursorily; but thinking it
contained no material (connected with my subject)[106] which I had
not already possessed myself of, I have never since referred to the
work. I may be mistaken in my estimate of it, but certainly owe it
absolutely nothing.

It is also often said that I borrow from Pugin. I glanced at Pugin's
Contrasts once, in the Oxford architectural reading-room, during an
idle forenoon. His "Remarks on Articles in the Rambler" were brought
under my notice by some of the reviews. I never read a word of any
other of his works, not feeling, from the style of his architecture,
the smallest interest in his opinions.

I have so often spoken, in the preceding pages, of Holman Hunt's
picture of the Light of the World, that I may as well, in this
place, glance at the envious charge against it, of being plagiarized
from a German print.

It is indeed true that there was a painting of the subject before;
and there were, of course, no paintings of the Nativity before
Raphael's time, nor of the Last Supper before Leonardo's, else those
masters could have laid no claim to originality. But what was still
more singular (the verse to be illustrated being, "Behold, I stand
at the door and knock"), the principal figure in the antecedent
picture was knocking at a door, knocked with its right hand, and had
its face turned to the spectator! Nay, it was even robed in a long
robe, down to its feet. All these circumstances were the same in Mr.
Hunt's picture; and as the chances evidently were a hundred to one
that if he had not been helped to the ideas by the German artist, he
would have represented the figure as _not_ knocking at any door, as
turning its back to the spectator, and as dressed in a short robe,
the plagiarism was considered as demonstrated. Of course no defence
is possible in such a case. All I can say is, that I shall be
sincerely grateful to any unconscientious persons who will adapt a
few more German prints in the same manner.

Finally, touching plagiarism in general, it is to be remembered that
all men who have sense and feeling are being continually helped:
they are taught by every person whom they meet, and enriched by
everything that falls in their way. The greatest is he who has been
oftenest aided; and, if the attainments of all human minds could be
traced to their real sources, it would be found that the world had
been laid most under contribution by the men of most original power,
and that every day of their existence deepened their debt to their
race, while it enlarged their gifts to it. The labor devoted to
trace the origin of any thought, or any invention, will usually
issue in the blank conclusion that there is nothing new under the
sun; yet nothing that is truly great can ever be altogether
borrowed; and he is commonly the wisest, and is always the happiest,
who receives simply, and without envious question, whatever good is
offered him, with thanks to its immediate giver.

  [105] I am truly sorry to have introduced such words in an
        apparently irreverent way. But it would be a guilty
        reverence which prevented us from exposing fallacy,
        precisely where fallacy was most dangerous, and shrank from
        unveiling an error, just because that error existed in
        parlance respecting the most solemn subjects to which it
        could possibly be attached.

  [106] See the Fourth Volume.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *       *



Library Edition

THE COMPLETE WORKS

OF

JOHN RUSKIN

  ARROWS OF THE CHACE
  OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US
  THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
  HORTUS INCLUSUS

  NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
  NEW YORK             CHICAGO


"Our Fathers Have Told Us"

SKETCHES OF THE HISTORY OF CHRISTENDOM

FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

WHO HAVE BEEN HELD AT ITS FONTS

PART I.

THE BIBLE OF AMIENS




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

PREFACE                                                  iii

CHAPTER I.--BY THE RIVERS OF WATERS                        1

  "    II.--UNDER THE DRACHENFELS                         26

  "   III.--THE LION TAMER                                58

  "    IV.--INTERPRETATIONS                               88

APPENDIX I.--CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF PRINCIPAL EVENTS
               REFERRED TO IN THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS'      143

  "     II.--REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF PHOTOGRAPHS TO
               CHAPTER IV                                144

  "    III.--GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US'  153

INDEX                                                    155


PLATES.

ST. MARY (_Frontispiece_)                    _see page_  131

                                               _To face page_

PLATE I.--THE DYNASTIES OF FRANCE                          8

  "  II.--THE BIBLE OF AMIENS, NORTHERN PORCH BEFORE
            RESTORATION                                   26

  " III.--AMIENS, JOUR DES TRÉSPASSÉS, 1880               58

PLAN OF THE WEST PORCHES                                 140




Transcriber's Notes:

1. Italic characters have been represented by _xxxxx_

2. Superscript characters have been represented by xxx^yy

3. A macron, or bar over a letter, is shown as [=letter]

4. In the paragraph that begins, "Sketch for yourself, first, a map of
   France" there are images in the paragraph. I have represented
   back-slanting diagonal shading with "\\\" and forward-slanting
   diagonal shading with "///" and horizontal shading with "=".

5. In the original text, footnotes in Chapter I are represented with
   numbers, and footnotes in all the rest of the text, including the
   notes on Chapter I, are represented with symbols. I have converted
   all of them to numbers, since there is no overlap, and they seem to
   be used in the same way in the text.




PREFACE.


The long abandoned purpose, of which the following pages begin some
attempt at fulfilment, has been resumed at the request of a young
English governess, that I would write some pieces of history which her
pupils could gather some good out of;--the fruit of historical
documents placed by modern educational systems at her disposal, being
to them labour only, and sorrow.

What else may be said for the book, if it ever become one, it must say
for itself: preface, more than this, I do not care to write: and the
less, because some passages of British history, at this hour under
record, call for instant, though brief, comment.

I am told that the Queen's Guards have gone to Ireland; playing "God
save the Queen." And being, (as I have declared myself in the course
of some letters to which public attention has been lately more than
enough directed,) to the best of my knowledge, the staunchest
Conservative in England, I am disposed gravely to question the
propriety of the mission of the Queen's Guards on the employment
commanded them. My own Conservative notion of the function of the
Guards is that they should guard the Queen's throne and life, when
threatened either by domestic or foreign enemy: but not that they
should become a substitute for her inefficient police force, in the
execution of her domiciliary laws.

And still less so, if the domiciliary laws which they are sent to
execute, playing "God save the Queen," be perchance precisely contrary
to that God the Saviour's law; and therefore, such as, in the long run,
no quantity either of Queens, or Queen's men, _could_ execute. Which is
a question I have for these ten years been endeavouring to get the
British public to consider--vainly enough hitherto; and will not at
present add to my own many words on the matter. But a book has just been
published by a British officer, who, if he had not been otherwise and
more actively employed, could not only have written all my books about
landscape and picture, but is very singularly also of one mind with me,
(God knows of how few Englishmen I can now say so,) on matters regarding
the Queen's safety, and the Nation's honour. Of whose book ("Far out:
Rovings retold"), since various passages will be given in my subsequent
terminal notes, I will content myself with quoting for the end of my
Preface, the memorable words which Colonel Butler himself quotes, as
spoken to the British Parliament by its last Conservative leader, a
British officer who had also served with honour and success.

The Duke of Wellington said: "It is already well known to your
Lordships that of the troops which our gracious Sovereign did me the
honour to entrust to my command at various periods during the war--a
war undertaken for the express purpose of securing the happy
institutions and independence of the country--at least one half were
Roman Catholics. My Lords, when I call your recollection to this fact,
I am sure all further eulogy is unnecessary. Your Lordships are well
aware for what length of period and under what difficult circumstances
they maintained the Empire buoyant upon the flood which overwhelmed
the thrones and wrecked the institutions of every other people;--how
they kept alive the only spark of freedom which was left
unextinguished in Europe.... My Lords, it is mainly to the Irish
Catholics that we all owe our proud predominance in our military
career, and that I personally am indebted for the laurels with which
you have been pleased to decorate my brow.... We must confess, my
Lords, that without Catholic blood and Catholic valour no victory
could ever have been obtained, and the first military talents might
have been exerted in vain."

Let these noble words of tender Justice be the first example to my
young readers of what all History ought to be. It has been told them,
in the Laws of Fésole, that all great Art is Praise. So is all
faithful History, and all high Philosophy. For these three, Art,
History, and Philosophy, are each but one part of the Heavenly Wisdom,
which sees not as man seeth, but with Eternal Charity; and because she
rejoices not in Iniquity, _therefore_ rejoices in the Truth.

For true knowledge is of Virtues only; of poisons and vices, it is
Hecate who teaches, not Athena. And of all wisdom, chiefly the
Politician's must consist in this divine Prudence; it is not, indeed,
always necessary for men to know the virtues of their friends, or
their masters; since the friend will still manifest, and the master
use. But woe to the Nation which is too cruel to cherish the virtue of
its subjects, and too cowardly to recognize that of its enemies!




THE BIBLE OF AMIENS.

CHAPTER I.

BY THE RIVERS OF WATERS.


The intelligent English traveller, in this fortunate age for him, is
aware that, half-way between Boulogne and Paris, there is a complex
railway-station, into which his train, in its relaxing speed, rolls
him with many more than the average number of bangs and bumps
prepared, in the access of every important French _gare_, to startle
the drowsy or distrait passenger into a sense of his situation.

He probably also remembers that at this halting-place in mid-journey
there is a well-served buffet, at which he has the privilege of "Dix
minutes d'arrêt."

He is not, however, always so distinctly conscious that these ten
minutes of arrest are granted to him within not so many minutes' walk
of the central square of a city which was once the Venice of France.

Putting the lagoon islands out of question, the French River-Queen was
nearly as large in compass as Venice herself; and divided, not by slow
currents of ebbing and returning tide, but by eleven beautiful trout
streams, of which some four or five are as large, each separately, as
our Surrey Wandle, or as Isaac Walton's Dove; and which, branching out
of one strong current above the city, and uniting again after they have
eddied through its streets, are bordered, as they flow down, (fordless
except where the two Edwards rode them, the day before Crecy,) to the
sands of St. Valery, by groves of aspen, and glades of poplar, whose
grace and gladness seem to spring in every stately avenue instinct with
the image of the just man's life,--"Erit tanquam lignum quod plantatum
est secus decursus aquarum."

But the Venice of Picardy owed her name, not to the beauty of her
streams merely, but to their burden. She was a worker, like the
Adriatic princes, in gold and glass, in stone, wood, and ivory; she
was skilled like an Egyptian in the weaving of fine linen; dainty as
the maids of Judah in divers colours of needlework. And of these, the
fruits of her hands, praising her in her own gates, she sent also
portions to stranger nations, and her fame went out into all lands.

"Un règlement de l'échevinage, du 12^me avril 1566, fait voir qu'on
fabriquait à cette epoque, des velours de toutes couleurs pour
meubles, des colombettes à grands et petits carreaux, des burailles
croises, qu'on expédiait en Allemagne--en Espagne, en Turquie, et en
Barbarie!"[1]

All-coloured velvets, pearl-iridescent colombettes! (I wonder what
they may be?) and sent to vie with the variegated carpet of the Turk,
and glow upon the arabesque towers of Barbary![2] Was not this a phase
of provincial Picard life which an intelligent English traveller might
do well to inquire into? Why should this fountain of rainbows leap up
suddenly here by Somme; and a little Frankish maid write herself the
sister of Venice, and the servant of Carthage and of Tyre?

[Footnote 1: M. H. Dusevel, Histoire de la Ville d'Amiens. Amiens,
Caron et Lambert, 1848; p. 305.]

[Footnote 2: Carpaccio trusts for the chief splendour of any festa in
cities to the patterns of the draperies hung out of windows.]

And if she, why not others also of our northern villages? Has the
intelligent traveller discerned anything, in the country, or in its
shores, on his way from the gate of Calais to the _gare_ of Amiens, of
special advantage for artistic design, or for commercial enterprise? He
has seen league after league of sandy dunes. We also, we, have our sands
by Severn, by Lune, by Solway. He has seen extensive plains of useful
and not unfragrant peat,--an article sufficiently accessible also to
our Scotch and Irish industries. He has seen many a broad down and
jutting cliff of purest chalk; but, opposite, the perfide Albion gleams
no whit less blanche beyond the blue. Pure waters he has seen, issuing
out of the snowy rock; but are ours less bright at Croydon, at
Guildford, or at Winchester? And yet one never heard of treasures sent
from Solway sands to African; nor that the builders at Romsey could give
lessons in colour to the builders at Granada? What can it be, in the air
or the earth--in her stars or in her sunlight--that fires the heart and
quickens the eyes of the little white-capped Amienoise soubrette, till
she can match herself against Penelope?

The intelligent English traveller has of course no time to waste on
any of these questions. But if he has bought his ham-sandwich, and is
ready for the "En voiture, messieurs," he may perhaps condescend for
an instant to hear what a lounger about the place, neither wasteful of
his time, nor sparing of it, can suggest as worth looking at, when his
train glides out of the station.

He will see first, and doubtless with the respectful admiration which an
Englishman is bound to bestow upon such objects, the coal-sheds and
carriage-sheds of the station itself, extending in their ashy and oily
splendours for about a quarter of a mile out of the town; and then, just
as the train gets into speed, under a large chimney tower, which he
cannot see to nearly the top of, but will feel overcast by the shadow of
its smoke, he _may_ see, if he will trust his intelligent head out of
the window, and look back, fifty or fifty-one (I am not sure of my count
to a unit) similar chimneys, all similarly smoking, all with similar
works attached, oblongs of brown brick wall, with portholes numberless
of black square window. But in the midst of these fifty tall things that
smoke, he will see one, a little taller than any, and more delicate,
that does not smoke; and in the midst of these fifty masses of blank
wall enclosing 'works'--and doubtless producing works profitable and
honourable to France and the world--he will see _one_ mass of wall--not
blank, but strangely wrought by the hands of foolish men of long ago,
for the purpose of enclosing or producing no manner of profitable work
whatsoever, but one--

"This is the work of God; that ye should believe on Him whom He hath
sent"!

Leaving the intelligent traveller now to fulfil his vow of pilgrimage
to Paris,--or wherever else God may be sending him,--I will suppose
that an intelligent Eton boy or two, or thoughtful English girl, may
care quietly to walk with me as far as this same spot of commanding
view, and to consider what the workless--shall we say also
worthless?--building, and its unshadowed minaret, may perhaps farther
mean.

Minaret I have called it, for want of better English word.
Flêche--arrow--is its proper name; vanishing into the air you know not
where, by the mere fineness of it. Flameless--motionless--hurtless--the
fine arrow; unplumed, unpoisoned, and unbarbed; aimless--shall we say
also, readers young and old, travelling or abiding? It, and the walls it
rises from--what have they once meant? What meaning have they left in
them yet, for you, or for the people that live round them, and never
look up as they pass by?

Suppose we set ourselves first to learn how they came there.

At the birth of Christ, all this hillside, and the brightly-watered
plain below, with the corn-yellow champaign above, were inhabited by a
Druid-taught race, wild enough in thoughts and ways, but under Roman
government, and gradually becoming accustomed to hear the names, and
partly to confess the power, of Roman gods. For three hundred years
after the birth of Christ they heard the name of no other God.

Three hundred years! and neither apostles nor inheritors of
apostleship had yet gone into all the world and preached the gospel to
every creature. Here, on their peaty ground, the wild people, still
trusting in Pomona for apples, in Silvanus for acorns, in Ceres for
bread, and in Proserpina for rest, hoped but the season's blessing
from the Gods of Harvest, and feared no eternal anger from the Queen
of Death.

But at last, three hundred years being past and gone, in the
year of Christ 301, there came to this hillside of Amiens, on the
sixth day of the Ides of October, the Messenger of a new Life.

His name, Firminius (I suppose) in Latin, Firmin in French,--so to be
remembered here in Picardy. Firmin, not Firminius; as Denis, not
Dionysius; coming out of space--no one tells what part of space. But
received by the pagan Amienois with surprised welcome, and seen of
them--forty days--many days, we may read--preaching acceptably, and
binding with baptismal vows even persons in good society: and that in
such numbers, that at last he is accused to the Roman governor, by the
priests of Jupiter and Mercury, as one turning the world upside-down.
And in the last day of the Forty--or of the indefinite many meant by
Forty--he is beheaded, as martyrs ought to be, and his ministrations
in a mortal body ended.

The old, old story, you say? Be it so; you will the more easily
remember it. The Amienois remembered it so carefully, that, twelve
hundred years afterwards, in the sixteenth century, they thought good
to carve and paint the four stone pictures Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 of our
first choice photographs. (N. B.--This series is not yet arranged, but
is distinct from that referred to in Chapter IV. See Appendix II.).
Scene 1st, St. Firmin arriving; scene 2nd, St. Firmin preaching; scene
3rd, St. Firmin baptizing; and scene 4th, St. Firmin beheaded, by an
executioner with very red legs, and an attendant dog of the character
of the dog in 'Faust,' of whom we may have more to say presently.

Following in the meantime the tale of St. Firmin, as of old time
known, his body was received, and buried, by a Roman senator, his
disciple, (a kind of Joseph of Arimathea to St. Firmin,) in the Roman
senator's own garden. Who also built a little oratory over his grave.
The Roman senator's son built a church to replace the oratory,
dedicated it to Our Lady of Martyrs, and established it as an
episcopal seat--the first of the French nation's. A very notable spot
for the French nation, surely? One deserving, perhaps, some little
memory or monument,--cross, tablet, or the like? Where, therefore,
do you suppose this first cathedral of French Christianity stood, and
with what monument has it been honoured?

It stood where we now stand, companion mine, whoever you may be; and
the monument wherewith it has been honoured is this--chimney, whose
gonfalon of smoke overshadows us--the latest effort of modern art in
Amiens, the chimney of St. Acheul.

The first cathedral, you observe, of the _French_ nation; more
accurately, the first germ of cathedral _for_ the French nation--who
are not yet here; only this grave of a martyr is here, and this church
of Our Lady of Martyrs, abiding on the hillside, till the Roman power
pass away.

Falling together with it, and trampled down by savage tribes, alike
the city and the shrine; the grave forgotten,--when at last the Franks
themselves pour from the north, and the utmost wave of them, lapping
along these downs of Somme, is _here_ stayed, and the Frankish
standard planted, and the French kingdom throned.

Here their first capital, here the first footsteps[3] of the Frank in
his France! Think of it. All over the south are Gauls, Burgundians,
Bretons, heavier-hearted nations of sullen mind: at their outmost brim
and border, here at last are the Franks, the source of all Franchise,
for this our Europe. You have heard the word in England, before now,
but English word for it is none! _Honesty_ we have of our own; but
_Frankness_ we must learn of these: nay, all the western nations of us
are in a few centuries more to be known by this name of Frank. Franks,
of Paris that is to be, in time to come; but French of Paris is in
year of grace 500 an unknown tongue in Paris, as much as in
Stratford-att-ye-Bowe. French of Amiens is the kingly and courtly form
of Christian speech, Paris lying yet in Lutetian clay, to develope
into tile-field, perhaps, in due time. Here, by soft-glittering Somme,
reign Clovis and his Clotilde.

[Footnote 3: The first fixed and set-down footsteps; wandering tribes
called Franks, had overswept the country, and recoiled, again and
again. But _this_ invasion of the so-called Salian Franks, never
retreats again.]

And by St. Firmin's grave speaks now another gentle evangelist, and
the first Frank king's prayer to the King of kings is made to Him,
known only as "the God of Clotilde."

I must ask the reader's patience now with a date or two, and stern
facts--two--three--or more.

Clodion, the leader of the first Franks who reach irrevocably beyond
the Rhine, fights his way through desultory Roman cohorts as far as
Amiens, and takes it, in 445.[4]

[Footnote 4: See note at end of chapter, as also for the allusions in
p. 8, to the battle of Soissons.]

Two years afterwards, at his death, the scarcely asserted throne is
seized--perhaps inevitably--by the tutor of his children, Merovée,
whose dynasty is founded on the defeat of Attila at Chalons.

He died in 457. His son Childeric, giving himself up to the love of
women, and scorned by the Frank soldiery, is driven into exile, the
Franks choosing rather to live under the law of Rome than under a base
chief of their own. He receives asylum at the court of the king of
Thuringia, and abides there. His chief officer in Amiens, at his
departure, breaks a ring in two, and, giving him the half of it, tells
him, when the other half is sent, to return.

And, after many days, the half of the broken ring is sent, and he
returns, and is accepted king by his Franks.

The Thuringian queen follows him, (I cannot find if her husband is
first dead--still less, if dead, how dying,) and offers herself to him
for his wife.

"I have known thy usefulness, and that thou art very strong; and I
have come to live with thee. Had I known, in parts beyond sea, any one
more useful than thou, I should have sought to live with _him_."

He took her for his wife, and their son is Clovis.

A wonderful story; how far in literalness true is of no manner of moment
to us; the myth, and power of it, _do_ manifest the nature of the French
kingdom, and prophesy its future destiny. Personal valour, personal
beauty, loyalty to kings, love of women, disdain of unloving marriage,
note all these things for true, and that in the corruption of these will
be the last death of the Frank, as in their force was his first glory.

Personal valour, worth. _Utilitas_, the keystone of all. Birth
nothing, except as gifting with valour;--Law of primogeniture
unknown;--Propriety of conduct, it appears, for the present, also
nowhere! (but we are all pagans yet, remember).

Let us get our dates and our geography, at any rate, gathered out of
the great 'nowhere' of confused memory, and set well together, thus
far.

457. Merovée dies. The useful Childeric, counting his exile, and reign
in Amiens, together, is King altogether twenty-four years, 457 to 481,
and during his reign Odoacer ends the Roman empire in Italy, 476.

481. Clovis is only fifteen when he succeeds his father, as King of
the Franks in Amiens. At this time a fragment of Roman power remains
isolated in central France, while four strong and partly savage
nations form a cross round this dying centre: the Frank on the north,
the Breton on the west, the Burgundian on the east, the Visigoth
strongest of all and gentlest, in the south, from Loire to the sea.

Sketch for yourself, first, a map of France, as large as you like, as
in Plate I., fig. 1, marking only the courses of the five rivers,
Somme, Seine, Loire, Saone, Rhone; then, rudely, you find it was
divided at the time thus, fig. 2: Fleur-de-lysée part, Frank; \\\,
Breton; ///, Burgundian; =, Visigoth. I am not sure how far these last
reached across Rhone into Provence, but I think best to indicate
Provence as semée with roses.

Now, under Clovis, the Franks fight three great battles. The first,
with the Romans, near Soissons, which they win, and become masters of
France as far as the Loire. Copy the rough map fig. 2, and put the
fleur-de-lys all over the middle of it, extinguishing the Romans (fig.
3). This battle was won by Clovis, I believe, before he married
Clotilde. He wins his princess by it: cannot get his pretty vase,
however, to present to her. Keep that story well in your mind, and the
battle of Soissons, as winning mid-France for the French, and ending the
Romans there, for ever. Secondly, after he marries Clotilde, the wild
Germans attack _him_ from the north, and he has to fight for life and
throne at Tolbiac. This is the battle in which he prays to the God of
Clotilde, and quits himself of the Germans by His help. Whereupon he is
crowned in Rheims by St. Remy.

[Illustration: Plate I. THE DYNASTIES OF FRANCE.]

And now, in the new strength of his Christianity, and his twin victory
over Rome and Germany, and his love for his queen, and his ambition
for his people, he looks south on that vast Visigothic power, between
Loire and the snowy mountains. Shall Christ, and the Franks, not be
stronger than villainous Visigoths 'who are Arians also'? All his
Franks are with him, in that opinion. So he marches against the
Visigoths, meets them and their Alaric at Poitiers, ends their Alaric
and their Arianism, and carries his faithful Franks to the Pic du
Midi.

And so now you must draw the map of France once more, and put the
fleur-de-lys all over its central mass from Calais to the Pyrenees:
only Brittany still on the west, Burgundy in the east, and the white
Provence rose beyond Rhone. And now poor little Amiens has become a
mere border town like our Durham, and Somme a border streamlet like
our Tyne. Loire and Seine have become the great French rivers, and men
will be minded to build cities by these; where the well-watered
plains, not of peat, but richest pasture, may repose under the guard
of saucy castles on the crags, and moated towers on the islands. But
now let us think a little more closely what our changed symbols in the
map may mean--five fleur-de-lys for level bar.

They don't mean, certainly, that all the Goths are gone, and nobody but
Franks in France? The Franks have not massacred Visigothic man, woman,
and child, from Loire to Garonne. Nay, where their own throne is still
set by the Somme, the peat-bred people whom they found there, live there
still, though subdued. Frank, or Goth, or Roman may fluctuate hither and
thither, in chasing or flying troops: but, unchanged through all the
gusts of war, the rural people whose huts they pillage, whose farms they
ravage, and over whose arts they reign, must still be diligently,
silently, and with no time for lamentation, ploughing, sowing,
cattle-breeding!

Else how could Frank or Hun, Visigoth or Roman, live for a month, or
fight for a day?

Whatever the name, or the manners, of their masters, the ground
delvers must be the same; and the goatherd of the Pyrenees, and the
vine-dresser of Garonne, and the milkmaid of Picardy, give them what
lords you may, abide in their land always, blossoming as the trees of
the field, and enduring as the crags of the desert. And these, the
warp and first substance of the nation, are divided, not by dynasties,
but by climates; and are strong here, and helpless there, by
privileges which no invading tyrants can abolish, and through faults
which no preaching hermit can repress. Now, therefore, please let us
leave our history a minute or two, and read the lessons of constant
earth and sky.

In old times, when one posted from Calais to Paris, there was about
half an hour's trot on the level, from the gate of Calais to the long
chalk hill, which had to be climbed before arriving at the first
post-house in the village of Marquise.

That chalk rise, virtually, is the front of France; that last bit of
level north of it, virtually the last of Flanders; south of it,
stretches now a district of chalk and fine building limestone,--(if you
keep your eyes open, you may see a great quarry of it on the west of the
railway, half-way between Calais and Boulogne, where once was a blessed
little craggy dingle opening into velvet lawns;)--this high, but never
mountainous, calcareous tract, sweeping round the chalk basin of Paris
away to Caen on one side, and Nancy on the other, and south as far as
Bourges, and the Limousin. This limestone tract, with its keen fresh
air, everywhere arable surface, and quarriable banks above well-watered
meadow, is the real country of the French. Here only are their arts
clearly developed. Farther south they are Gascons, or Limousins, or
Auvergnats, or the like. Westward, grim-granitic Bretons; eastward,
Alpine-bearish Burgundians: here only, on the chalk and finely-knit
marble, between, say, Amiens and Chartres one way, and between Caen and
Rheims on the other, have you real _France_.

Of which, before we carry on the farther vital history, I must ask the
reader to consider with me, a little, how history, so called, has been
for the most part written, and of what particulars it usually
consists.

Suppose that the tale of King Lear were a true one; and that a modern
historian were giving the abstract of it in a school manual,
purporting to contain all essential facts in British history valuable
to British youth in competitive examination. The story would be
related somewhat after this manner:--

"The reign of the last king of the seventy-ninth dynasty closed in a
series of events with the record of which it is painful to pollute the
pages of history. The weak old man wished to divide his kingdom into
dowries for his three daughters; but on proposing this arrangement to
them, finding it received by the youngest with coldness and reserve,
he drove her from his court, and divided the kingdom between his two
elder children.

"The youngest found refuge at the court of France, where ultimately
the prince royal married her. But the two elder daughters, having
obtained absolute power, treated their father at first with
disrespect, and soon with contumely. Refused at last even the comforts
necessary to his declining years, the old king, in a transport of
rage, left the palace, with, it is said, only the court fool for an
attendant, and wandered, frantic and half naked, during the storms of
winter, in the woods of Britain.

"Hearing of these events, his youngest daughter hastily collected an
army, and invaded the territory of her ungrateful sisters, with the
object of restoring her father to his throne; but, being met by a well
disciplined force, under the command of her eldest sister's paramour,
Edmund, bastard son of the Earl of Gloucester, was herself defeated,
thrown into prison, and soon afterwards strangled by the adulterer's
order. The old king expired on receiving the news of her death; and the
participators in these crimes soon after received their reward; for the
two wicked queens being rivals for the affections of the bastard, the
one of them who was regarded by him with less favour poisoned the other,
and afterwards killed herself. Edmund afterwards met his death at the
hand of his brother, the legitimate son of Gloucester, under whose rule,
with that of the Earl of Kent, the kingdom remained for several
succeeding years."

Imagine this succinctly graceful recital of what the historian
conceived to be the facts, adorned with violently black and white
woodcuts, representing the blinding of Gloucester, the phrenzy of
Lear, the strangling of Cordelia, and the suicide of Goneril, and you
have a type of popular history in the nineteenth century; which is,
you may perceive after a little reflection, about as profitable
reading for young persons (so far as regards the general colour and
purity of their thoughts) as the Newgate Calendar would be; with this
farther condition of incalculably greater evil, that, while the
calendar of prison-crime would teach a thoughtful youth the dangers of
low life and evil company, the calendar of kingly crime overthrows his
respect for any manner of government, and his faith in the ordinances
of Providence itself.

Books of loftier pretence, written by bankers, members of Parliament,
or orthodox clergymen, are of course not wanting; and show that the
progress of civilization consists in the victory of usury over
ecclesiastical prejudice, or in the establishment of the Parliamentary
privileges of the borough of Puddlecombe, or in the extinction of the
benighted superstitions of the Papacy by the glorious light of
Reformation. Finally, you have the broadly philosophical history,
which proves to you that there is no evidence whatever of any
overruling Providence in human affairs; that all virtuous actions have
selfish motives; and that a scientific selfishness, with proper
telegraphic communications, and perfect knowledge of all the species
of Bacteria, will entirely secure the future well-being of the upper
classes of society, and the dutiful resignation of those beneath them.

Meantime, the two ignored powers--the Providence of Heaven, and the
virtue of men--have ruled, and rule, the world, not invisibly; and
they are the only powers of which history has ever to tell any
profitable truth. Under all sorrow, there is the force of virtue; over
all ruin, the restoring charity of God. To these alone we have to
look; in these alone we may understand the past, and predict the
future, destiny of the ages.

I return to the story of Clovis, king now of all central France. Fix
the year 500 in your minds as the approximate date of his baptism at
Rheims, and of St. Remy's sermon to him, telling him of the sufferings
and passion of Christ, till Clovis sprang from his throne, grasping
his spear, and crying, "Had I been there with my brave Franks, I would
have avenged His wrongs."

"There is little doubt," proceeds the cockney historian, "that the
conversion of Clovis was as much a matter of policy as of faith." But
the cockney historian had better limit his remarks on the characters
and faiths of men to those of the curates who have recently taken
orders in his fashionable neighbourhood, or the bishops who have
lately preached to the population of its manufacturing suburbs.
Frankish kings were made of other clay.

The Christianity of Clovis does not indeed produce any fruits of the
kind usually looked for in a modern convert. We do not hear of his
repenting ever so little of any of his sins, nor resolving to lead a new
life in any the smallest particular. He had not been impressed with
convictions of sin at the battle of Tolbiac; nor, in asking for the help
of the God of Clotilde, had he felt or professed the remotest intention
of changing his character, or abandoning his projects. What he was,
before he believed in his queen's God, he only more intensely afterwards
became, in the confidence of that before unknown God's supernatural
help. His natural gratitude to the Delivering Power, and pride in its
protection, added only fierceness to his soldiership, and deepened his
political enmities with the rancour of religions indignation. No more
dangerous snare is set by the fiends for human frailty than the belief
that our own enemies are also the enemies of God; and it is perfectly
conceivable to me that the conduct of Clovis might have been the more
unscrupulous, precisely in the measure that his faith was more sincere.

Had either Clovis or Clotilde fully understood the precepts of their
Master, the following history of France, and of Europe, would have
been other than it is. What they could understand, or in any wise were
taught, you will find that they obeyed, and were blessed in obeying.
But their history is complicated with that of several other persons,
respecting whom we must note now a few too much forgotten particulars.

If from beneath the apse of Amiens Cathedral we take the street
leading due south, leaving the railroad station on the left, it brings
us to the foot of a gradually ascending hill, some half a mile long--a
pleasant and quiet walk enough, terminating on the level of the
highest land near Amiens; whence, looking back, the Cathedral is seen
beneath us, all but the flêche, our gained hill-top being on a level
with its roof-ridge: and, to the south, the plain of France.

Somewhere about this spot, or in the line between it and St. Acheul,
stood the ancient Roman gate of the Twins, whereon were carved Romulus
and Remus being suckled by the wolf; and out of which, one bitter
winter's day, a hundred and seventy years ago when Clovis was
baptized--had ridden a Roman soldier, wrapped in his horseman's
cloak,[5] on the causeway which was part of the great Roman road from
Lyons to Boulogne.

[Footnote 5: More properly, his knight's cloak; in all likelihood the
trabea, with purple and white stripes, dedicate to the kings of Rome,
and chiefly to Romulus.]

And it is well worth your while also, some frosty autumn or winter day
when the east wind is high, to feel the sweep of it at this spot,
remembering what chanced here, memorable to all men, and serviceable,
in that winter of the year 332, when men were dying for cold in Amiens
streets:--namely, that the Roman horseman, scarce gone out of the city
gate, was met by a naked beggar, shivering with cold; and that, seeing
no other way of shelter for him, he drew his sword, divided his own
cloak in two, and gave him half of it.

No ruinous gift, nor even enthusiastically generous: Sydney's cup of
cold water needed more self-denial; and I am well assured that many a
Christian child of our day, himself well warmed and clad, meeting one
naked and cold, would be ready enough to give the _whole_ cloak off
his own shoulders to the necessitous one, if his better-advised nurse,
or mamma, would let him. But this Roman soldier was no Christian, and
did his serene charity in simplicity, yet with prudence.

Nevertheless, that same night, he beheld in a dream the Lord Jesus,
who stood before him in the midst of angels, having on his shoulders
the half of the cloak he had bestowed on the beggar.

And Jesus said to the angels that were around him, "Know ye who hath
thus arrayed me? My servant Martin, though yet unbaptized, has done
this." And Martin after this vision hastened to receive baptism, being
then in his twenty-third year.[6]

[Footnote 6: Mrs. Jameson, Legendary Art, Vol. II., p. 721.]

Whether these things ever were so, or how far so, credulous or
incredulous reader, is no business whatever of yours or mine. What is,
and shall be, everlastingly, _so_,--namely, the infallible truth of
the lesson herein taught, and the actual effect of the life of St.
Martin on the mind of Christendom,--is, very absolutely, the business
of every rational being in any Christian realm.

You are to understand, then, first of all, that the especial character
of St. Martin is a serene and meek charity to all creatures. He is not a
preaching saint--still less a persecuting one: not even an anxious one.
Of his prayers we hear little--of his wishes, nothing. What he does
always, is merely the right thing at the right moment;--rightness and
kindness being in his mind one: an extremely exemplary saint, to my
notion.

Converted and baptized--and conscious of having seen Christ--he
nevertheless gives his officers no trouble whatever--does not try to
make proselytes in his cohort. "It is Christ's business, surely!--if
He wants them, He may appear to them as He has to me," seems the
feeling of his first baptized days. He remains seventeen years in the
army, on those tranquil terms.

At the end of that time, thinking it might be well to take other
service, he asks for his dismissal from the Emperor Julian,--on whose
accusation of faintheartedness, Martin offers, unarmed, to lead his
cohort into battle, bearing only the sign of the cross. Julian takes
him at his word,--keeps him in ward till time of battle comes; but,
the day before he counts on putting him to that war ordeal, the
barbarian enemy sends embassy with irrefusable offers of submission
and peace.

The story is not often dwelt upon: how far literally true, again
observe, does not in the least matter;--here _is_ the lesson for ever
given of the way in which a Christian soldier should meet his enemies.
Which, had John Bunyan's Mr. Great-heart understood, the Celestial
gates had opened by this time to many a pilgrim who has failed to hew
his path up to them with the sword of sharpness.

But true in some practical and effectual way the story _is_; for after
a while, without any oratorizing, anathematizing, or any manner of
disturbance, we find the Roman Knight made Bishop of Tours, and
becoming an influence of unmixed good to all mankind, then, and
afterwards. And virtually the same story is repeated of his bishop's
robe as of his knight's cloak--not to be rejected because so probable
an invention; for it is just as probable an act.

Going, in his full robes, to say prayers in church, with one of his
deacons, he came across some unhappily robeless person by the wayside;
for whom he forthwith orders his deacon to provide some manner of
coat, or gown.

The deacon objecting that no apparel of that profane nature is under
his hand, St. Martin, with his customary serenity, takes off his own
episcopal stole, or whatsoever flowing stateliness it might be, throws
it on the destitute shoulders, and passes on to perform indecorous
public service in his waistcoat, or such mediæval nether attire as
remained to him.

But, as he stood at the altar, a globe of light appeared above his
head; and when he raised his bare arms with the Host--the angels were
seen round him, hanging golden chains upon them, and jewels, not of
the earth.

Incredible to you in the nature of things, wise reader, and too
palpably a gloss of monkish folly on the older story?

Be it so: yet in this fable of monkish folly, understood with the
heart, would have been the chastisement and check of every form of the
church's pride and sensuality, which in our day have literally sunk
the service of God and His poor into the service of the clergyman and
his rich; and changed what was once the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness, into the spangling of Pantaloons in an
ecclesiastical Masquerade.

But one more legend,--and we have enough to show us the roots of this
saint's strange and universal power over Christendom.

"What peculiarly distinguished St. Martin was his sweet, serious,
unfailing serenity; no one had ever seen him angry, or sad, or, gay;
there was nothing in his heart but piety to God and pity for men. The
Devil, who was particularly envious of his virtues, detested above all
his exceeding charity, because it was the most inimical to his own
power, and one day reproached him mockingly that he so soon received
into favour the fallen and the repentant. But St. Martin answered him
sorrowfully, saying, 'Oh most miserable that thou art! if _thou_ also
couldst cease to persecute and seduce wretched men, if thou also
couldst repent, thou also shouldst find mercy and forgiveness through
Jesus Christ.'"[7]

[Footnote 7: Mrs. Jameson, Vol. II., p. 722.]

In this gentleness was his strength; and the issue of it is
best to be estimated by comparing its scope with that of the work of
St. Firmin. The impatient missionary riots and rants about Amiens'
streets--insults, exhorts, persuades, baptizes,--turns everything, as
aforesaid, upside down for forty days: then gets his head cut off, and
is never more named, _out_ of Amiens. St. Martin teazes nobody, spends
not a breath in unpleasant exhortation, understands, by Christ's first
lesson to himself, that undipped people may be as good as dipped if
their hearts are clean; helps, forgives, and cheers, (companionable
even to the loving-cup,) as readily the clown as the king; he is the
patron of honest drinking; the stuffing of your Martinmas goose is
fragrant in his nostrils, and sacred to him the last kindly rays of
departing summer. And somehow--the idols totter before him far and
near--the Pagan gods fade, _his_ Christ becomes all men's Christ--his
name is named over new shrines innumerable in all lands; high on the
Roman hills, lowly in English fields;--St. Augustine baptized his
first English converts in St. Martin's church at Canterbury; and the
Charing Cross station itself has not yet effaced wholly from London
minds his memory or his name.

That story of the Episcopal Robe is the last of St. Martin respecting
which I venture to tell you that it is wiser to suppose it literally
true, than a _mere_ myth; myth, however, of the deepest value and
beauty it remains assuredly: and this really last story I have to
tell, which I admit you will be wiser in thinking a fable than exactly
true, nevertheless had assuredly at its root some grain of fact
(sprouting a hundred-fold) cast on good ground by a visible and
unforgettable piece of St. Martin's actual behaviour in high company;
while, as a myth, it is every whit and for ever valuable and
comprehensive.

St. Martin, then, as the tale will have it, was dining one day at the
highest of tables in the terrestrial globe--namely, with the Emperor and
Empress of Germany! You need not inquire what Emperor, or which of the
Emperor's wives! The Emperor of Germany is, in all early myths, the
expression for the highest sacred power of the State, as the Pope is the
highest sacred power of the Church. St. Martin was dining then, as
aforesaid, with the Emperor, of course sitting next him on his
left--Empress opposite on his right: everything orthodox. St. Martin
much enjoying his dinner, and making himself generally agreeable to the
company: not in the least a John Baptist sort of a saint. You are aware
also that in Royal feasts in those days persons of much inferior rank in
society were allowed in the hall: got behind people's chairs, and saw
and heard what was going on, while they unobtrusively picked up crumbs,
and licked trenchers.

When the dinner was a little forward, and time for wine came, the
Emperor fills his own cup--fills the Empress's--fills St.
Martin's,--affectionately hobnobs with St. Martin. The equally loving,
and yet more truly believing, Empress, looks across the table, humbly,
but also royally, expecting St. Martin, of course, next to hobnob with
_her_. St. Martin looks round, first, deliberately; becomes aware of a
tatterdemalion and thirsty-looking soul of a beggar at his chair side,
who has managed to get _his_ cup filled somehow, also--by a charitable
lacquey.

St. Martin turns his back on the Empress, and hobnobs with _him_!

For which charity--mythic if you like, but evermore exemplary--he
remains, as aforesaid, the patron of good-Christian topers to this
hour.

As gathering years told upon him, he seems to have felt that he had
carried weight of crozier long enough--that busy Tours must now find a
busier Bishop--that, for himself, he might innocently henceforward take
his pleasure and his rest where the vine grew and the lark sang. For his
episcopal palace, he takes a little cave in the chalk cliffs of the
up-country river: arranges all matters therein, for bed and board, at
small cost. Night by night the stream murmurs to him, day by day the
vine-leaves give their shade; and, daily by the horizon's breadth so
much nearer Heaven, the fore-running sun goes down for him beyond the
glowing water;--there, where now the peasant woman trots homewards
between her panniers, and the saw rests in the half-cleft wood, and the
village spire rises grey against the farthest light, in Turner's
'Loireside.'[8]

[Footnote 8: Modern Painters, Plate 73.]

All which things, though not themselves without profit, my special
reason for telling you now, has been that you might understand the
significance of what chanced first on Clovis' march south against the
Visigoths.

"Having passed the Loire at Tours, he traversed the lands of the abbey
of St. Martin, which he declared inviolate, and refused permission to
his soldiers to touch anything, save water and grass for their horses.
So rigid were his orders, and the obedience he exacted in this
respect, that a Frankish soldier having taken, without the consent of
the owner, some hay, which belonged to a poor man, saying in raillery
"that it was but grass," he caused the aggressor to be put to death,
exclaiming that "Victory could not be expected, if St. Martin should
be offended."

Now, mark you well, this passage of the Loire at Tours is virtually
the fulfilment of the proper bounds of the French kingdom, and the
sign of its approved and securely set power is "Honour to the poor!"
Even a little grass is not to be stolen from a poor man, on pain of
Death. So wills the Christian knight of Roman armies; throned now high
with God. So wills the first Christian king of far victorious
Franks;--here baptized to God in Jordan of his goodly land, as he goes
over to possess it.

How long?

Until that same Sign should be read backwards from a degenerate
throne;--until, message being brought that the poor of the French
people had no bread to eat, answer should be returned to them "They
may eat grass." Whereupon--by St. Martin's faubourg, and St. Martin's
gate--there go forth commands from the Poor Man's Knight against the
King--which end _his_ Feasting.

And be this much remembered by you, of the power over French souls,
past and to come, of St. Martin of Tours.


NOTES TO CHAPTER I.


The reader will please observe that notes immediately necessary to the
understanding of the text will be given, with _numbered_ references,
under the text itself; while questions of disputing authorities, or
quotations of supporting documents will have _lettered_ references,
and be thrown together at the end of each chapter.[9] One good of this
method will be that, after the numbered notes are all right, if I see
need of farther explanation, as I revise the press, I can insert a
letter referring to a _final_ note without confusion of the standing
types. There will be some use also in the final notes, in summing the
chapters, or saying what is to be more carefully remembered of them.
Thus just now it is of no consequence to remember that the first
taking of Amiens was in 445, because that is not the founding of the
Merovingian dynasty; neither that Merovæus seized the throne in 447
and died ten years later. The real date to be remembered is 481, when
Clovis himself comes to the throne, a boy of fifteen; and the three
battles of Clovis' reign to be remembered are Soissons, Tolbiac, and
Poitiers--remembering also that this was the first of the three great
battles of Poitiers;--how the Poitiers district came to have such
importance as a battle-position, we must afterwards discover if we
can. Of Queen Clotilde and her flight from Burgundy to her Frank lover
we must hear more in next chapter,--the story of the vase at Soissons
is given in "The Pictorial History of France," but must be deferred
also, with such comment as it needs, to next chapter; for I wish the
reader's mind, in the close of this first number, to be left fixed on
two descriptions of the modern 'Frank' (taking that word in its
Saracen sense), as distinguished from the modern Saracen. The first
description is by Colonel Butler, entirely true and admirable, except
in the implied extension of the contrast to olden time: for the Saxon
soul under Alfred, the Teutonic under Charlemagne, and the Frank under
St. Louis, were quite as religious as any Asiatic's, though more
practical; it is only the modern mob of kingless miscreants in the
West, who have sunk themselves by gambling, swindling, machine-making,
and gluttony, into the scurviest louts that have ever fouled the Earth
with the carcases she lent them.

[Footnote 9: The plan for numbered and lettered references is not
followed after the first chapter.]

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of the features of English character brought to light by the spread
of British dominion in Asia, there is nothing more observable than the
contrast between the religious bias of Eastern thought and the innate
absence of religion in the Anglo-Saxon mind. Turk and Greek, Buddhist
and Armenian, Copt and Parsee, all manifest in a hundred ways of daily
life the great fact of their belief in a God. In their vices as well
as in their virtues the recognition of Deity is dominant.

"With the Western, on the contrary, the outward form of practising
belief in a God is a thing to be half-ashamed of--something to hide. A
procession of priests in the Strada Reale would probably cause an
average Briton to regard it with less tolerant eye than he would cast
upon a Juggernaut festival in Orissa: but to each alike would he
display the same iconoclasm of creed, the same idea, not the less
fixed because it is seldom expressed in words: "You pray; therefore I
do not think much of you." But there is a deeper difference between
East and West lying beneath this incompatibility of temper on the part
of modern Englishmen to accept the religious habit of thought in the
East. All Eastern peoples possess this habit of thought. It is the one
tie which links together their widely differing races. Let us give an
illustration of our meaning. On an Austrian Lloyd's steamboat in the
Levant a traveller from Beyrout will frequently see strange groups of
men crowded together on the quarter-deck. In the morning the missal
books of the Greek Church will be laid along the bulwarks of the ship,
and a couple of Russian priests, coming from Jerusalem, will be busy
muttering mass. A yard to right or left a Turkish pilgrim, returning
from Mecca, sits a respectful observer of the scene. It is prayer, and
therefore it is holy in his sight. So, too, when the evening hour has
come, and the Turk spreads out his bit of carpet for the sunset
prayers and obeisance towards Mecca, the Greek looks on in silence,
without trace of scorn in his face, for it is again the worship of the
Creator by the created. They are both fulfilling the _first_ law of
the East--prayer to God; and whether the shrine be Jerusalem, Mecca,
or Lhassa, the sanctity of worship surrounds the votary, and protects
the pilgrim.

"Into this life comes the Englishman, frequently destitute of one
touch of sympathy with the prayers of any people, or the faith of any
creed; hence our rule in the East has ever rested, and will ever rest,
upon the bayonet. We have never yet got beyond the stage of conquest;
never assimilated a people to our ways, never even civilized a single
tribe around the wide dominion of our empire. It is curious how
frequently a well-meaning Briton will speak of a foreign church or
temple as though it had presented itself to his mind in the same light
in which the City of London appeared to Blucher--as something to loot.
The other idea, that a priest was a person to hang, is one which is
also often observable in the British brain. On one occasion, when we
were endeavouring to enlighten our minds on the Greek question, as it
had presented itself to a naval officer whose vessel had been
stationed in Greek and Adriatic waters during our occupation of Corfu
and the other Ionian Isles, we could only elicit from our informant
the fact that one morning before breakfast he had hanged seventeen
priests."

The second passage which I store in these notes for future use, is the
supremely magnificent one, out of a book full of magnificence,--if truth
be counted as having in it the strength of deed: Alphonse Karr's "Grains
de Bon Sens." I cannot praise either this or his more recent
"Bourdonnements" to my own heart's content, simply because they are by a
man utterly after my own heart, who has been saying in France, this
many a year, what I also, this many a year, have been saying in England,
neither of us knowing of the other, and both of us vainly. (See pages 11
and 12 of "Bourdonnements.") The passage here given is the sixty-third
clause in "Grains de Bon Sens."

"Et tout cela, monsieur, vient de ce qu'il n'y a plus de croyances--de
ce qu'on ne croit plus à rien.

"Ah! saperlipopette, monsieur, vous me la baillez belle! Vous dites
qu'on ne croit plus à rien! Mais jamais, à aucune époque, on n'a cru à
tant de billevesées, de bourdes, de mensonges, de sottises,
d'absurdités qu'aujourd'hui.

"D'abord, on _croit_ a l'incrédulité--l'incrédulité est une croyance,
une religion très exigeante, qui a ses dogmes, sa liturgie, ses
pratiques, ses rites! ...son intolérance, ses superstitions. Nous
avons des incrédules et des impies jésuites, et des incrédules et des
impies jansénistes; des impies molinistes, et des impies quiétistes;
des impies pratiquants, et non pratiquants; des impies indifférents et
des impies fanatiques; des incrédules cagots et des impies hypocrites
et tartuffes.--La religion de l'incrédulité ne se refuse même pas le
luxe des hérésies.

"On ne croit plus à la bible, je le veux bien, mais on _croit_ aux
'écritures' des journaux, on croit au 'sacerdoce' des gazettes et
carrés de papier, et à leurs 'oracles' quotidiens.

"On _croit_ au 'baptême' de la police correctionnelle et de la Cour
d'assises--on appelle 'martyrs' et 'confesseurs' les 'absents' à
Nouméa et les 'frères' de Suisse, d'Angleterre et de Belgique--et,
quand on parle des 'martyrs de la Commune' ça ne s'entend pas des
assassinés, mais des assassins.

"On se fait enterrer 'civilement,' on ne veut plus sur son cercueil
des priéres de l'Eglise, on ne veut ni cierges, ni chants
religieux,--mais on veut un cortége portant derrière la bière des
immortelles rouges;--on veut une 'oraison,' une 'prédication' de
Victor Hugo qui a ajouté cette spécialité à ses autres spécialités, si
bien qu'un de ces jours derniers, comme il suivait un convoi en
amateur, un croque-mort s'approcha de lui, le poussa du coude, et lui
dit en souriant: 'Est-ce que nous n'aurons pas quelque chose de vous,
aujourd'hui?'--Et cette prédication il la lit ou la récite--ou, s'il
ne juge pas à propos 'd'officier' lui-même, s'il s'agit d'un mort de
plus, il envoie pour la psalmodier M. Meurice ou tout autre 'prêtre'
ou 'enfant de coeur' du 'Dieu,'--A défaut de M. Hugo, s'il s'agit
d'un citoyen obscur, on se contente d'une homélie improvisée pour la
dixième fois par n'importe quel député intransigeant--et le _Miserere_
est remplacé par les cris de 'Vive la République!' poussés dans le
cimetière.

"On n'entre plus dans les églises, mais on fréquente les brasseries et
les cabarets; on y officie, on y célèbre les mystères, on y chante les
louanges d'une prétendue république _sacro-sainte_, une, indivisible,
démocratique, sociale, athénienne, intransigeante, despotique, invisible
quoique étant partout. On y communie sous différentes espèces; le matin
(_matines_) on 'tue le ver' avec le vin blanc,--il y a plus tard les
vêpres de l'absinthe, auxquelles on se ferait un crime de manquer
d'assiduité.

"On ne croit plus en Dieu, mais on _croit_ pieusement en M. Gambetta,
en MM. Marcou, Naquet, Barodet, Tartempion, etc., et en toute une
longue litanie de saints et de _dii minores_ tels que Goutte-Noire,
Polosse, Boriasse et Silibat, le héros lyonnais.

"On _croit_ à 'l'immuabilité' de M. Thiers, qui a dit avec aplomb 'Je
ne change jamais,' et qui aujourd'hui est à la fois le protecteur et
le protégé de ceux qu'il a passé une partie de sa vie à fusilier, et
qu'il fusillait encore hier.

'On _croit_ au républicanisme 'immaculé' de l'avocat de Cahors qui a
jeté par-dessus bord tous les principes républicains,--qui est à la
fois de son côté le protecteur et le protégé de M. Thiers, qui hier
l'appelait 'fou furieux,' déportait et fusillait ses amis.

"Tous deux, il est vrai, en même temps protecteurs hypocrites, et
protégés dupés.

"On ne croit plus aux miracles anciens, mais on _croit_ à des miracles
nouveaux.

"On _croit_ à une république sans le respect religieux et presque
fanatique des lois.

"On _croit_ qu'on peut s'enrichir en restant imprévoyants, insouciants
et paresseux, et autrement que par le travail et l'économie.

"On se _croit_ libre en obéissant aveuglément et bêtement à deux ou
trois coteries.

"On se _croit_ indépendant parce qu'on a tué ou chassé un lion et
qu'on l'a remplacé par deux douzaines de caniches teints en jaune.

"On _croit_ avoir conquis le 'suffrage universel' en votant par des
mots d'ordre qui en font le contraire du suffrage universel,--mené au
vote comme on mène un troupeau au pâturage, avec cette différence que
ça ne nourrit pas.--D'ailleurs, par ce suffrage universel qu'on croit
avoir et qu'on n'a pas,--il faudrait _croire_ que les soldats doivent
commander au général, les chevaux mener le cocher;--_croire_ que deux
radis valent mieux qu'une truffe, deux cailloux mieux qu'un diamant,
deux crottins mieux qu'une rose.

"On se _croit_ en République, parce que quelques demi-quarterons de
farceurs occupent les mêmes places, émargent les mêmes appointements,
pratiquent les mêmes abus, que ceux qu'on a renversés a leur bénéfice.

"On se _croit_ un peuple opprimé, heroïque, que brise ses fers, et
n'est qu'un domestique capricieux qui aime à changer de maîtres.

"On _croit_ au génie d'avocats de sixième ordre, qui ne se sont jetés
dans la politique et n'aspirent au gouvernement despotique de la
France que faute d'avoir pu gagner honnêtement, sans grand travail,
dans l'exercice d'un profession correcte, une vie obscure humectée de
chopes.

"On _croit_ que des hommes dévoyés, déclassés, décavés, fruits secs,
etc., qui n'ont étudié que le 'domino à quatre' et le 'bezigue en
quinze cents' se réveillent un matin,--après un sommeil alourdi par le
tabac et la bière--possédant la science de la politique, et l'art de
la guerre; et aptes à être dictateurs, généraux, ministres, préfets,
sous-préfets, etc.

"Et les soi-disant conservateurs eux-mêmes _croient_ que la France
peut se relever et vivre tant qu'on n'aura pas fait justice de ce
prétendu suffrage universel qui est le contraire du suffrage
universel.

"Les croyances out subi le sort de ce serpent de la fable--coupé,
haché par morceaux, dont chaque tronçon devenait un serpent.

"Les croyances se sont changées en monnaie--en billon de crédulités.

"Et pour finir la liste bien incomplète des croyances et des
crédulités--vous _croyez_, vous, qu'on ne croit à rien!"




CHAPTER II.

UNDER THE DRACHENFELS.


1. Without ignobly trusting the devices of artificial memory--far less
slighting the pleasure and power of resolute and thoughtful memory--my
younger readers will find it extremely useful to note any coincidences
or links of number which may serve to secure in their minds what may
be called Dates of Anchorage, round which others, less important, may
swing at various cables' lengths.

Thus, it will be found primarily a most simple and convenient
arrangement of the years since the birth of Christ, to divide them by
fives of centuries,--that is to say, by the marked periods of the
fifth, tenth, fifteenth, and, now fast nearing us, twentieth
centuries.

And this--at first seemingly formal and arithmetical--division, will
be found, as we use it, very singularly emphasized by signs of most
notable change in the knowledge, disciplines, and morals of the human
race.

2. All dates, it must farther be remembered, falling within the fifth
century, begin with the number 4 (401, 402, etc.); and all dates in
the tenth century with the number 9 (901, 902, etc.); and all dates in
the fifteenth century with the number 14 (1401, 1402, etc.)

In our immediate subject of study, we are concerned with the first of
these marked centuries--the fifth--of which I will therefore ask you
to observe two very interesting divisions.

All dates of years in that century, we said, must begin with the
number 4.

If you halve it for the second figure, you get 42.

And if you double it for the second figure, you get 48.

[Illustration: Plate II.--THE BIBLE OF AMIENS. NORTHERN PORCH BEFORE
RESTORATION.]

Add 1, for the third figure, to each of these numbers, and you get 421
and 481, which two dates you will please fasten well down, and let
there be no drifting about of them in your heads.

For the first is the date of the birth of Venice herself, and her
dukedom, (see 'St. Mark's Rest,' Part I., p. 30); and the second is
the date of birth of the French Venice, and her kingdom; Clovis being
in that year crowned in Amiens.

3. These are the great Birthdays--Birthdates--in the fifth century, of
Nations. Its Deathdays we will count, at another time.

Since, not for dark Rialto's dukedom, nor for fair France's kingdom,
only, are these two years to be remembered above all others in the
wild fifth century; but because they are also the birth-years of a
great Lady, and greater Lord, of all future Christendom--St.
Genevieve, and St. Benedict.

Genevieve, the 'white wave' (Laughing water)--the purest of all the
maids that have been named from the sea-foam or the rivulet's ripple,
unsullied,--not the troubled and troubling Aphrodite, but the
Leucothea of Ulysses, the guiding wave of deliverance.

White wave on the blue--whether of pure lake or sunny
sea--(thenceforth the colours of France, blue field with white
lilies), she is always the type of purity, in active brightness of the
entire soul and life--(so distinguished from the quieter and
restricted innocence of St. Agnes),--and all the traditions of sorrow
in the trial or failure of noble womanhood are connected with her
name; Ginevra, in Italian, passing into Shakespeare's Imogen; and
Guinevere, the torrent wave of the British mountain streams, of whose
pollution your modern sentimental minstrels chant and moan to you,
lugubriously useless;--but none tell you, that I hear, of the victory
and might of this white wave of France.

4. A shepherd maid she was--a tiny thing, barefooted,
bare-headed--such as you may see running wild and innocent, less
cared for now than their sheep, over many a hillside of France and
Italy. Tiny enough;--seven years old, all told, when first
one hears of her: "Seven times one are seven, (I am old, you may trust
me, linnet, linnet[10])," and all around her--fierce as the Furies, and
wild as the winds of heaven--the thunder of the Gothic armies,
reverberate over the ruins of the world.

5. Two leagues from Paris, (_Roman_ Paris, soon to pass away with Rome
herself,) the little thing keeps her flock, not even her own, nor her
father's flock, like David; she is the hired servant of a richer
farmer of Nanterre. Who can tell me anything about Nanterre?--which of
our pilgrims of this omni-speculant, omni-nescient age has thought of
visiting what shrine may be there? I don't know even on what side of
Paris it lies,[11] nor under which heap of railway cinders and iron one
is to conceive the sheep-walks and blossomed fields of fairy St.
Phyllis. There were such left, even in my time, between Paris and St.
Denis, (see the prettiest chapter in all the "Mysteries of Paris,"
where Fleur de Marie runs wild in them for the first time), but now, I
suppose, St. Phyllis's native earth is all thrown up into bastion and
glacis, (profitable and blessed of all saints, and her, as _these_
have since proved themselves!) or else are covered with manufactories
and cabarets. Seven years old she was, then, when on his way to
_England_ from Auxerre, St. Germain passed a night in her village, and
among the children who brought him on his way in the morning in more
kindly manner than Elisha's convoy, noticed this one--wider-eyed in
reverence than the rest; drew her to him, questioned her, and was
sweetly answered: That she would fain be Christ's handmaid. And he
hung round her neck a small copper coin, marked with the cross.
Thencefoward Genevieve held herself as "separated from the world."

[Footnote 10: Miss Ingelow.]

[Footnote 11: On inquiry, I find in the flat between Paris and Sèvres.]

6. It did not turn out so, however. Far the contrary. You must think of
her, instead, as the first of Parisiennes. Queen of Vanity Fair, that
was to be, sedately poor St. Phyllis, with her copper-crossed farthing
about her neck! More than Nitocris was to Egypt, more than Semiramis to
Nineveh, more than Zenobia to the city of palm trees--this
seven-years-old shepherd maiden became to Paris and her France. You have
not heard of her in that kind?--No: how should you?--for she did not
lead armies, but stayed them, and all her power was in peace.

7. There are, however, some seven or eight and twenty lives of her, I
believe; into the literature of which I cannot enter, nor need, all
having been ineffective in producing any clear picture of her to the
modern French or English mind; and leaving one's own poor sagacities
and fancy to gather and shape the sanctity of her into an
intelligible, I do not say a _credible_, form; for there is no
question here about belief,--the creature is as real as Joan of Arc,
and far more powerful;--she is separated, just as St. Martin is, by
his patience, from too provocative prelates--by her quietness of
force, from the pitiable crowd of feminine martyr saints.

There are thousands of religious girls who have never got themselves
into any calendars, but have wasted and wearied away their
lives--heaven knows why, for _we_ cannot; but here is one, at any
rate, who neither scolds herself to martyrdom, nor frets herself into
consumption, but becomes a tower of the Flock, and builder of folds
for them all her days.

8. The first thing, then, you have to note of her, is that she is a
pure native _Gaul_. She does not come as a missionary out of Hungary,
or Illyria, or Egypt, or ineffable space; but grows at Nanterre, like
a marguerite in the dew, the first "Reine Blanche" of Gaul.

I have not used this ugly word 'Gaul' before, and we must be quite
sure what it means, at once, though it will cost us a long
parenthesis.

9. During all the years of the rising power of Rome, her people called
everybody a Gaul who lived north of the sources of Tiber. If you are not
content with that general statement, you may read the article "Gallia"
in Smith's dictionary, which consists of seventy-one columns of close
print, containing each as much as three of my pages; and tells you at
the end of it, that "though long, it is not complete." You may however,
gather from it, after an attentive perusal, as much as I have above told
you.

But, as early as the second century after Christ, and much more
distinctly in the time with which we are ourselves concerned--the
fifth--the wild nations opposed to Rome, and partially subdued, or
held at bay by her, had resolved themselves into two distinct masses,
belonging to two distinct _latitudes_. One, _fixed_ in habitation of
the pleasant temperate zone of Europe--England with her western
mountains, the healthy limestone plateaux and granite mounts of
France, the German labyrinths of woody hill and winding thal, from the
Tyrol to the Hartz, and all the vast enclosed basin and branching
valleys of the Carpathians. Think of these four districts, briefly and
clearly, as 'Britain,' 'Gaul,' 'Germany,' and 'Dacia.'

10. North of these rudely but patiently _resident_ races, possessing
fields and orchards, quiet herds, homes of a sort, moralities and
memories not ignoble, dwelt, or rather drifted, and shook, a shattered
chain of gloomier tribes, piratical mainly, and predatory, nomad
essentially; homeless, of necessity, finding no stay nor comfort in
earth, or bitter sky: desperately wandering along the waste sands and
drenched morasses of the flat country stretching from the mouths of
the Rhine to those of the Vistula, and beyond Vistula nobody knows
where, nor needs to know. Waste sands and rootless bogs their portion,
ice-fastened and cloud-shadowed, for many a day of the rigorous year:
shallow pools and oozings and windings of retarded streams, black
decay of neglected woods, scarcely habitable, never loveable; to this
day the inner main-lands little changed for good[12]--and their
inhabitants now fallen even on sadder times.

[Footnote 12: See generally any description that Carlyle has had
occasion to give of Prussian or Polish ground, or edge of Baltic
shore.]

11. For in the fifth century they had herds of cattle[13] to drive and
kill, unpreserved hunting-grounds full of game and wild deer, tameable
reindeer also then, even so far in the south; spirited hogs, good for
practice of fight as in Meleager's time, and afterwards for bacon;
furry creatures innumerable, all good for meat or skin. Fish of the
infinite sea breaking their bark-fibre nets; fowl innumerable, migrant
in the skies, for their flint-headed arrows; bred horses for their own
riding; ships of no mean size, and of all sorts, flat-bottomed for the
oozy puddles, keeled and decked for strong Elbe stream and furious
Baltic on the one side, for mountain-cleaving Danube and the black
lake of Colchos on the south.

[Footnote 13: Gigantic--and not yet fossilized! See Gibbon's note on
the death of Theodebert: "The King pointed his spear--the Bull
_overturned a tree on his head_,--he died the same day."--vii. 255.
The Horn of Uri and her shield, with the chiefly towering crests of
the German helm, attest the terror of these Aurochs herds.]

12. And they were, to all outward aspect, and in all _felt_ force, the
living powers of the world, in that long hour of its transfiguration.
All else known once for awful, had become formalism, folly, or
shame:--the Roman armies, a mere sworded mechanism, fast falling
confused, every sword against its fellow;--the Roman civil multitude,
mixed of slaves, slave-masters, and harlots; the East, cut off from
Europe by the intervening weakness of the Greek. These starving troops
of the Black forests and White seas, themselves half wolf, half
drift-wood, (as _we_ once called ourselves Lion-hearts, and
Oak-hearts, so they), merciless as the herded hound, enduring as the
wild birch-tree and pine. You will hear of few beside them for five
centuries yet to come: Visigoths, west of Vistula;--Ostrogoths, east
of Vistula; radiant round little Holy Island (Heligoland), our own
Saxons, and Hamlet the Dane, and his foe the sledded Polack on the
ice,--all these south of Baltic; and pouring _across_ Baltic,
constantly, her mountain-ministered strength, Scandinavia, until at
last _she_ for a time rules all, and the Norman name is of disputeless
dominion, from the North Cape to Jerusalem.

13. _This_ is the apparent, this the only recognised world history, as
I have said, for five centuries to come. And yet the real history is
underneath all this. The wandering armies are, in the heart of them,
only living hail, and thunder, and fire along the ground. But the
Suffering Life, the rooted heart of native humanity, growing up in
eternal gentleness, howsoever wasted, forgotten, or spoiled,--itself
neither wasting, nor wandering, nor slaying, but unconquerable by
grief or death, became the seed ground of all love, that was to be
born in due time; giving, then, to mortality, what hope, joy, or
genius it could receive; and--if there be immortality--rendering out
of the grave to the Church her fostering Saints, and to Heaven her
helpful Angels.

14. Of this low-nestling, speechless, harmless, infinitely submissive,
infinitely serviceable order of being, no Historian ever takes the
smallest notice, except when it is robbed or slain. I can give you no
picture of it, bring to your ears no murmur of it, nor cry. I can only
show you the absolute 'must have been' of its unrewarded past, and the
way in which all we have thought of, or been told, is founded on the
deeper facts in its history, unthought of, and untold.

15. The main mass of this innocent and invincible peasant life is, as I
have above told you, grouped in the fruitful and temperate districts of
(relatively) mountainous Europe,--reaching, west to east, from the
Cornish Land's End to the mouth of the Danube. Already, in the times we
are now dealing with, it was full of native passion--generosity--and
intelligence capable of all things. Dacia gave to Rome the four last of
her great Emperors,[14]--Britain to Christianity the first deeds, and
the final legends, of her chivalry,--Germany, to all manhood, the truth
and the fire of the Frank,--Gaul, to all womanhood, the patience and
strength of St. Genevieve.

[Footnote 14: Claudius, Aurelian, Probus, Constantius; and after the
division of the empire, to the East, Justinian. "The emperor Justinian
was born of an obscure race of Barbarians, the inhabitants of a wild and
desolate country, to which the names of Dardania, of Dacia, and of
Bulgaria have been successively applied. The names of these Dardanian
peasants are Gothic, and almost English. Justinian is a translation of
Uprauder (upright); his father, Sabatius,--in Græco-barbarous language,
Stipes--was styled in his village 'Istock' (Stock)."--Gibbon, beginning
of chap. xl. and note.]

16. The _truth_, and the fire, of the Frank,--I must repeat with
insistence,--for my younger readers have probably been in the habit of
thinking that the French were more polite than true. They will find,
if they examine into the matter, that only Truth _can_ be polished:
and that all we recognize of beautiful, subtle, or constructive, in
the manners, the language, or the architecture of the French, comes of
a pure veracity in their nature, which you will soon feel in the
living creatures themselves if you love them: if you understand even
their worst rightly, their very Revolution was a revolt against lies;
and against the betrayal of Love. No people had ever been so loyal in
vain.

17. That they were originally Germans, they themselves I suppose would
now gladly forget; but how they shook the dust of Germany off their
feet--and gave themselves a new name--is the first of the phenomena
which we have now attentively to observe respecting them.

"The most rational critics," says Mr. Gibbon in his tenth chapter,
"_suppose_ that _about_ the year 240" (_suppose_ then, we, for our
greater comfort, say _about_ the year 250, half-way to end of fifth
century, where we are,--ten years less or more, in cases of 'supposing
about,' do not much matter, but some floating buoy of a date will be
handy here.)

'About' A.D. 250, then, "a new confederacy was formed, under the name
of Franks, by the old inhabitants of the lower Rhine and the Weser."

18. My own impression, concerning the old inhabitants of the lower
Rhine and the Weser, would have been that they consisted mostly of
fish, with superficial frogs and ducks; but Mr. Gibbon's note on the
passage informs us that the new confederation composed itself of human
creatures, in these items following.

1. The Chauci, who lived we are not told where.

2. The Sicambri   "      in the Principality of Waldeck.

3. The Attuarii   "      in the Duchy of Berg.

4. The Bructeri   "      on the banks of the Lippe.

5. The Chamavii   "      in the country of the Bructeri.

6. The Catti      "      in Hessia.

All this I believe you will be rather easier in your minds if you
forget than if you remember; but if it please you to read, or re-read,
(or best of all, get read to you by some real Miss Isabella Wardour,)
the story of Martin Waldeck in the 'Antiquary,' you will gain from it
a sufficient notion of the central character of "the Principality of
_Waldeck_" connected securely with that important German word;
'woody'--or 'wood_ish_,' I suppose?--descriptive of rock and
half-grown forest; together with some wholesome reverence for Scott's
instinctively deep foundations of nomenclature.

19. But for our present purpose we must also take seriously to our
maps again, and get things within linear limits of space.

All the maps of Germany which I have myself the privilege of possessing,
diffuse themselves, just north of Frankfort, into the likeness of a
painted window broken small by Puritan malice, and put together again by
ingenious churchwardens with every bit of it wrong side upwards;--this
curious vitrerie purporting to represent the sixty, seventy, eighty, or
ninety dukedoms, marquisates, counties, baronies, electorates, and the
like, into which hereditary Alemannia cracked itself in that latitude.
But under the mottling colours, and through the jotted and jumbled
alphabets of distracted dignities--besides a chain-mail of black
railroads over all, the chains of it not in links, but bristling
with legs, like centipedes,--a hard forenoon's work with good
magnifying-glass enables one approximately to make out the course of the
Weser, and the names of certain towns near its sources, deservedly
memorable.

20. In case you have not a forenoon to spare, nor eyesight to waste,
this much of merely necessary abstract must serve you,--that from the
Drachenfels and its six brother felsen, eastward, trending to the north,
there runs and spreads a straggling company of gnarled and mysterious
craglets, jutting and scowling above glens fringed by coppice, and
fretful or musical with stream; the crags, in pious ages, mostly
castled, for distantly or fancifully Christian purposes;--the glens,
resonant of woodmen, or burrowed at the sides by miners, and invisibly
tenanted farther, underground, by gnomes, and above by forest and other
demons. The entire district, clasping crag to crag, and guiding dell to
dell, some hundred and fifty miles (with intervals) between the Dragon
mountain above Rhine, and the Rosin mountain, 'Hartz' shadowy still to
the south of the riding grounds of Black Brunswickers of indisputable
bodily presence;--shadowy anciently with 'Hercynian' (hedge, or fence)
forest, corrupted or coinciding into Hartz, or Rosin forest, haunted by
obscurely apparent foresters of at least resinous, not to say
sulphurous, extraction.

21. A hundred and fifty miles east to west, say half as much north to
south--about a thousand square miles in whole--of metalliferous,
coniferous, and Ghostiferous mountain, fluent, and diffluent for us,
both in mediæval and recent times, with the most Essential oil of
Turpentine, and Myrrh or Frankincense of temper and imagination, which
may be typified by it, producible in Germany; especially if we think
how the more delicate uses of Rosin, as indispensable to the
Fiddle-bow, have developed themselves, from the days of St. Elizabeth
of Marburg to those of St. Mephistopheles of Weimar.

22. As far as I know, this cluster of wayward cliff and dingle has no
common name as a group of hills; and it is quite impossible to make
out the diverse branching of it in any maps I can lay hand on: but we
may remember easily, and usefully, that it is _all_ north of the
Maine,--that it rests on the Drachenfels at one end, and tosses itself
away to the morning light with a concave swoop, up to the Hartz,
(Brocken summit, 3700 feet above sea, nothing higher): with one
notable interval for Weser stream, of which presently.

23. We will call this, in future, the chain, or company, of
the Enchanted mountains; and then we shall all the more easily join on
the Giant mountains, Riesen-Gebirge, when we want them; but these are
altogether higher, sterner, and not yet to be invaded; the nearer
ones, through which our road lies, we might perhaps more aptly call
the Goblin mountains; but that would be scarcely reverent to St.
Elizabeth, nor to the numberless pretty chatelaines of towers, and
princesses of park and glen, who have made German domestic manners
sweet and exemplary, and have led their lightly rippling and
translucent lives down the glens of ages, until enchantment becomes,
perhaps, too canonical in the Almanach de Gotha.

We will call them therefore the Enchanted Mountains, not the Goblin;
perceiving gratefully also that the Rock spirits of them have really
much more of the temper of fairy physicians than of gnomes: each--as
it were with sensitive hazel wand instead of smiting rod--beckoning,
out of sparry caves, effervescent Brunnen, beneficently salt and warm.

24. At the very heart of this Enchanted chain, then--(and the
beneficentest, if one use it and guide it rightly, of all the Brunnen
there,) sprang the fountain of the earliest Frank race; "in the
principality of Waldeck,"--you can trace their current to no farther
source; there it rises out of the earth.

'Frankenberg' (Burg), on right bank of the Eder, nineteen miles north of
Marburg, you may find marked clearly in the map No. 18 of Black's
General Atlas, wherein the cluster of surrounding bewitched mountains,
and the valley of Eder-stream otherwise (as the village higher up the
dell still calls itself) "Engel-Bach," "Angel Brook," joining that of
the Fulda, just above Cassel, are also delineated in a way intelligible
to attentive mortal eyes. I should be plagued with the names in trying a
woodcut; but a few careful pen-strokes, or wriggles, of your own
off-hand touching, would give you the concurrence of the actual sources
of Weser in a comfortably extricated form, with the memorable towns on
them, or just south of them, on the other slope of the watershed,
towards Maine. Frankenberg and Waldeck on Eder, Fulda and Cassel on
Fulda, Eisenach on Werra, who accentuates himself into Weser after
taking Fulda for bride, as Tees the Greta, beyond Eisenach, under the
Wartzburg, (of which you have heard as a castle employed on Christian
mission and Bible Society purposes), town-streets below hard paved with
basalt--name of it, Iron-ach, significant of Thuringian armouries in the
old time,--it is active with mills for many things yet.

25. The rocks all the way from Rhine, thus far, are jets and spurts of
basalt through irony sandstone, with a strip of coal or two northward,
by the grace of God not worth digging for; at Frankenberg even a gold
mine; also, by Heaven's mercy, poor of its ore; but wood and iron
always to be had for the due trouble; and, of softer wealth above
ground,--game, corn, fruit, flax, wine, wool, and hemp! Monastic care
over all, in Fulda's and Walter's houses--which I find marked by a
cross as built by some pious Walter, Knight of Meiningen on the Boden
wasser, Bottom water, as of water having found its way well down at
last: so "Boden-See," of Rhine well got down out of Via Mala.

26. And thus, having got your springs of Weser clear from the rock;
and, as it were, gathered up the reins of your river, you can draw for
yourself, easily enough, the course of its farther stream, flowing
virtually straight north, to the North Sea. And mark it strongly on
your sketched map of Europe, next to the border Vistula, leaving out
Elbe yet for a time. For now, you may take the whole space between
Weser and Vistula (north of the mountains), as wild barbarian (Saxon
or Goth); but, piercing the source of the Franks at Waldeck, you will
find them gradually, but swiftly, filling all the space between Weser
and the mouths of Rhine, passing from mountain foam into calmer
diffusion over the Netherland, where their straying forest and
pastoral life has at last to embank itself into muddy agriculture, and
in bleak-flying sea mist, forget the sunshine on its basalt crags.

27. Whereupon, _we_ must also pause, to embank ourselves somewhat; and
before other things, try what we can understand in this name of Frank,
concerning which Gibbon tells us, in his sweetest tones of satisfied
moral serenity--"The love of liberty was the ruling passion of these
Germans. They deserved, they assumed, they maintained, the honourable
epithet of Franks, or Freemen." He does not, however, tell us in what
language of the time--Chaucian, Sicambrian, Chamavian, or
Cattian,--'Frank' ever meant Free: nor can I find out myself what tongue
of any time it first belongs to; but I doubt not that Miss Yonge
('History of Christian Names,' Articles on Frey and Frank), gives the
true root, in what she calls the High German "Frang," Free _Lord_. Not
by any means a Free _Commoner_, or anything of the sort! but a person
whose nature and name implied the existence around him, and beneath, of
a considerable number of other persons who were by no means 'Frang,' nor
Frangs. His title is one of the proudest then maintainable;--ratified at
last by the dignity of age added to that of valour, into the Seigneur,
or Monseigneur, not even yet in the last cockney form of it, 'Mossoo,'
wholly understood as a republican term!

28. So that, accurately thought of, the quality of Frankness glances
only with the flat side of it into any meaning of 'Libre,' but with all
its cutting edge, determinedly, and to all time, it signifies Brave,
strong, and honest, above other men.[15] The old woodland race were
never in any wolfish sense 'free,' but in a most human sense Frank,
outspoken, meaning what they had said, and standing to it, when they had
got it out. Quick and clear in word and act, fearless utterly and
restless always;--but idly lawless, or weakly lavish, neither in deed
nor word. Their frankness, if you read it as a scholar and a Christian,
and not like a modern half-bred, half-brained infidel, knowing no tongue
of all the world but in the slang of it, is really opposed, not to
Servitude,--but to Shyness![16] It is to this day the note of the
sweetest and Frenchiest of French character, that it makes simply
perfect _Servants_. Unwearied in protective friendship, in meekly
dextrous omnificence, in latent tutorship; the lovingly availablest of
valets,--the mentally and personally bonniest of bonnes. But in no
capacity shy of you! Though you be the Duke or Duchess of Montaltissimo,
you will not find them abashed at your altitude. They will speak 'up' to
you, when they have a mind.

[Footnote 15: Gibbon touches the facts more closely in a sentence of
his 22nd chapter. "The independent warriors of Germany, _who
considered truth as the noblest of their virtues_, and freedom as the
most valuable of their possessions." He is speaking especially of the
Frankish tribe of the Attuarii, against whom the Emperor Julian had to
re-fortify the Rhine from Cleves to Basle: but the first letters of
the Emperor Jovian, after Julian's death, "delegated the military
command of _Gaul_ and Illyrium (what a vast one it was, we shall see
hereafter), to Malarich, a _brave and faithful_ officer of the nation
of the Franks;" and they remain the loyal allies of Rome in her last
struggle with Alaric. Apparently for the sake only of an interesting
variety of language,--and at all events without intimation of any
causes of so great a change in the national character,--we find Mr.
Gibbon in his next volume suddenly adopting the abusive epithets of
Procopius, and calling the Franks "a light and perfidious nation"
(vii. 251). The only traceable grounds for this unexpected description
of them are that they refuse to be bribed either into friendship or
activity, by Rome or Ravenna; and that in his invasion of Italy, the
grandson of Clovis did not previously send exact warning of his
proposed route, nor even entirely signify his intentions till he had
secured the bridge of the Po at Pavia; afterwards declaring his mind
with sufficient distinctness by "assaulting, almost at the same
instant, the hostile camps of the Goths and Romans, who, instead of
uniting their arms, fled with equal precipitation."]

[Footnote 16: For detailed illustration of the word, see 'Val d'Arno,'
Lecture VIII.; 'Fors Clavigera,' Letters XLVI. 231, LXXVII. 137; and
Chaucer, 'Romaunt of Rose,' 1212--"Next _him_" (the knight sibbe to
Arthur) "daunced dame Franchise;"--the English lines are quoted and
commented on in the first lecture of 'Ariadne Florentina'; I give the
French here:--

          "Apres tous ceulx estoit Franchise
          Que ne fut ne brune ne bise.
          Ains fut comme la neige blanche
          _Courtoyse_ estoit, _joyeuse_, et _franche_.
          Le nez avoit long et tretis,
          Yeulx vers, riants; sourcilz faitis;
          Les cheveulx eut très-blons et longs
          Simple fut comme les coulons
          Le coeur eut doulx et debonnaire.
          _Elle n'osait dire ne faire
          Nulle riens que faire ne deust._"

And I hope my girl readers will never more confuse Franchise with
'Liberty.']

29. Best of servants: best of _subjects_, also, when they have
an equally frank King, or Count, or Captal, to lead them; of which we
shall see proof enough in due time;--but, instantly, note this
farther, that, whatever side-gleam of the thing they afterwards called
Liberty may be meant by the Frank name, you must at once now, and
always in future, guard yourself from confusing their Liberties with
their Activities. What the temper of the army may be towards its
chief, is _one_ question--whether either chief or army can be kept six
months quiet,--another, and a totally different one. That they must
either be fighting somebody or going somewhere, else, their life isn't
worth living to them; the activity and mercurial flashing and
flickering hither and thither, which in the soul of it is set neither
on war nor rapine, but only on change of place, mood--tense, and
tension;--which never needs to see its spurs in the dish, but has them
always bright, and on, and would ever choose rather to ride fasting
than sit feasting,--this childlike dread of being put in a corner, and
continual want of something to do, is to be watched by us with
wondering sympathy in all its sometimes splendid, but too often
unlucky or disastrous consequences to the nation itself as well as to
its neighbours.

30. And this activity, which we stolid beef-eaters, before we had been
taught by modern science that we were no better than baboons
ourselves, were wont discourteously to liken to that of the livelier
tribes of Monkey, did in fact so much impress the Hollanders, when
first the irriguous Franks gave motion and current to their marshes,
that the earliest heraldry in which we find the Frank power blazoned
seems to be founded on a Dutch endeavour to give some distantly
satirical presentment of it. "For," says a most ingenious historian,
Mons. André Favine,--'Parisian, and Advocate in the High Court of the
French Parliament in the year 1620'--"those people who bordered on the
river Sala, called 'Salts,' by the Allemaignes, were on their descent
into Dutch lands called by the Romans 'Franci Salici'" (whence
'Salique' law to come, you observe) "and by abridgment 'Salii,' as if
of the verb 'salire,' that is to say 'saulter,' to leap"--(and in
future therefore--duly also to dance--in an incomparable manner) "to
be quicke and nimble of foot, to leap and mount well, a quality most
notably requisite for such as dwell in watrie and marshy places; So
that while such of the French as dwelt on the great course of the
river" (Rhine) "were called 'Nageurs,' Swimmers, they of the marshes
were called 'Saulteurs,' Leapers, so that it was a nickname given to
the French in regard both of their natural disposition and of their
dwelling; as, yet to this day, their enemies call them French Toades,
(or Frogs, more properly) from whence grew the fable that their
ancient Kings carried such creatures in their Armes."

31. Without entering at present into debate whether fable or not, you
will easily remember the epithet 'Salian' of these fosse-leaping and
river-swimming folk (so that, as aforesaid, all the length of Rhine
must be refortified against them)--epithet however, it appears, in its
origin delicately Saline, so that we may with good discretion, as we
call our seasoned Mariners, '_old_ Salts,' think of these more brightly
sparkling Franks as 'Young Salts,'--but this equivocated presently by
the Romans, with natural respect to their martial fire and 'elan,' into
'Salii'--exsultantes,[17]--such as their own armed priests of war: and
by us now with some little farther, but slight equivocation, into
useful meaning, to be thought of as here first Salient, as a beaked
promontory, towards the France we know of; and evermore, in brilliant
elasticities of temper, a salient or out-sallying nation; lending to us
English presently--for this much of heraldry we may at once glance on
to--their 'Leopard,' not as a spotted or blotted creature, but as an
inevitably springing and pouncing one, for our own kingly and princely
shields.

[Footnote 17: Their first mischievous exsultation into Alsace being
invited by the Romans themselves, (or at least by Constantius in his
jealousy of Julian,)--with "presents and promises,--the hopes of
spoil, and a perpetual grant of all the territories they were able to
subdue." Gibbon, chap. xix. (3, 208.) By any other historian than
Gibbon, who has really no fixed opinion on any character, or question,
but, safe in the general truism that the worst men sometimes do right,
and the best often do wrong, praises when he wants to round a
sentence, and blames when he cannot otherwise edge one--it might have
startled us to be here told of the nation which "deserved, assumed,
and maintained the _honourable_ name of freemen," that "_these
undisciplined robbers_ treated as their natural enemies all the
subjects of the empire who possessed any property which they were
desirous of acquiring." The first campaign of Julian, which throws
both Franks and Alemanni back across the Rhine, but grants the Salian
Franks, under solemn oath, their established territory in the
Netherlands, must be traced at another time.]

Thus much, of their 'Salian' epithet may be enough; but from the
interpretation of the Frankish one we are still as far as ever, and
must be content, in the meantime, to stay so, noting however two ideas
afterwards entangled with the name, which are of much descriptive
importance to us.

32. "The French poet in the first book of his Franciades" (says Mons.
Favine; but what poet I know not, nor can enquire) "encounters" (in the
sense of en-quarters, or depicts as a herald) certain fables on the name
of the French by the adoption and composure of two _Gaulish_ words
joyned together, Phere-Encos which signifieth 'Beare-_Launce_,'
(--Shake-Lance, we might perhaps venture to translate,) a lighter weapon
than the Spear beginning here to quiver in the hand of its chivalry--and
Fere-encos then passing swiftly on the tongue into Francos;"--a
derivation not to be adopted, but the idea of the weapon most
carefully,--together with this following--that "among the arms of the
ancient French, over and beside the Launce, was the Battaile-Axe, which
they called _Anchon_, and moreover, yet to this day, in many Provinces
of France, it is termed an _Achon_, wherewith they served themselves in
warre, by throwing it a farre off at joyning with the enemy, onely to
discover the man and to cleave his shield. Because this _Achon_ was
darted with such violence, as it would cleave the Shield, and compell
the Maister thereof to hold down his arm, and being so discovered, as
naked or unarmed; it made way for the sooner surprizing of him. It
seemeth, that this weapon was proper and particuler to the French
Souldior, as well him on foote, as on horsebacke. For this cause they
called it _Franciscus_. Francisca, _securis oblonga, quam Franci
librabant in Hostes_. For the Horseman, beside his shield and Francisca
(Armes common, as wee have said, to the Footman), had also the Lance,
which being broken, and serving to no further effect, he laid hand on
his Francisca, as we learn the use of that weapon in the Archbishop of
Tours, his second book, and twenty-seventh chapter."

33. It is satisfactory to find how respectfully these lessons of the
Archbishop of Tours were received by the French knights; and curious
to see the preferred use of the Francisca by all the best of
them--down, not only to Coeur de Lion's time, but even to the day of
Poitiers. In the last wrestle of the battle at Poitiers gate, "Là, fit
le Roy Jehan de sa main, merveilles d'armes, et tenoit une hache de
guerre dont bien se deffendoit et combattoit,--si la quartre partie de
ses gens luy eussent ressemblé, la journée eust été pour eux." Still
more notably, in the episode of fight which Froissart stops to tell
just before, between the Sire de Verclef, (on Severn) and the Picard
squire Jean de Helennes: the Englishman, losing his sword, dismounts
to recover it, on which Helennes _casts_ his own at him with such aim
and force "qu'il acconsuit l'Anglois es cuisses, tellement que l'espée
entra dedans et le cousit tout parmi, jusqu'au hans."

On this the knight rendering himself, the squire binds his wound, and
nurses him, staying fifteen days 'pour l'amour de lui' at
Chasteleraut, while his life was in danger; and afterwards carrying
him in a litter all the way to his own chastel in Picardy. His ransom
however is 6000 nobles--I suppose about 25,000 pounds, of our present
estimate; and you may set down for one of the fatallest signs that the
days of chivalry are near their darkening, how "devint celuy Escuyer,
Chevalier, pour le grand profit qu'il eut du Seigneur de Verclef."

I return gladly to the dawn of chivalry, when, every hour and year,
men were becoming more gentle and more wise; while, even through their
worst cruelty and error, native qualities of noblest cast may be seen
asserting themselves for primal motive, and submitting themselves for
future training.

34. We have hitherto got no farther in our notion of a Salian Frank than
a glimpse of his two principal weapons,--the shadow of him, however,
begins to shape itself to us on the mist of the Brocken, bearing the
lance light, passing into the javelin,--but the axe, his woodman's
weapon, heavy;--for economical reasons, in scarcity of iron,
preferablest of all weapons, giving the fullest swing and weight of blow
with least quantity of actual metal, and roughest forging. Gibbon gives
them also a 'weighty' sword, suspended from a 'broad' belt: but Gibbon's
epithets are always gratis, and the belted sword, whatever its measure,
was probably for the leaders only; the belt, itself of gold, the
distinction of the Roman Counts, and doubtless adopted from them by the
allied Frank leaders, afterwards taking the Pauline mythic meaning of
the girdle of Truth--and so finally; the chief mark of Belted
Knighthood.

35. The Shield, for all, was round, wielded like a Highlander's
target:--armour, presumably, nothing but hard-tanned leather, or
patiently close knitted hemp; "Their close apparel," says Mr. Gibbon,
"accurately expressed the figure of their limbs," but 'apparel' is
only Miltonic-Gibbonian for 'nobody knows what.' He is more
intelligible of their persons. "The lofty stature of the Franks, and
their blue eyes, denoted a Germanic origin; the warlike barbarians
were trained from their earliest youth to run, to leap, to swim, to
dart the javelin and battle-axe with unerring aim, to advance without
hesitation against a superior enemy, and to maintain either in life or
death, the invincible reputation of their ancestors' (vi. 95). For the
first time, in 358, appalled by the Emperor Julian's victory at
Strasburg, and besieged by him upon the Meuse, a body of six hundred
Franks "dispensed with the ancient law which commanded them to conquer
or die." "Although they were strongly actuated by the allurements of
rapine, they professed a disinterested love of war, which they
considered as the supreme honour and felicity of human nature; and
their minds and bodies were so hardened by perpetual action that,
according to the lively expression of an orator, the snows of winter
were as pleasant to them as the flowers of spring" (iii. 220).

36. These mental and bodily virtues, or indurations, were probably
universal in the military rank of the nation: but we learn presently,
with surprise, of so remarkably 'free' a people, that nobody but the
King and royal family might wear their hair to their own liking. The
kings wore theirs in flowing ringlets on the back and shoulders,--the
Queens, in tresses rippling to their feet,--but all the rest of the
nation "were obliged, either by law or custom, to shave the hinder
part of their head, to comb their short hair over their forehead, and
to content themselves with the ornament of two small whiskers."

37. Moustaches,--Mr. Gibbon means, I imagine: and I take leave also to
suppose that the nobles, and noble ladies, might wear such tress and
ringlet as became them. But again, we receive unexpectedly
embarrassing light on the democratic institutions of the Franks, in
being told that "the various trades, the labours of agriculture, and
the arts of hunting and fishing, were _exercised by servile_ hands for
the _emolument_ of the Sovereign."

'Servile' and 'Emolument,' however, though at first they sound very
dreadful and very wrong, are only Miltonic-Gibbonian expressions of
the general fact that the Frankish Kings had ploughmen in their
fields, employed weavers and smiths to make their robes and swords,
hunted with huntsmen, hawked with falconers, and were in other
respects tyrannical to the ordinary extent that an English Master of
Hounds may be. "The mansion of the long-haired Kings was surrounded
with convenient yards and stables for poultry and cattle; the garden
was planted with useful vegetables; the magazines filled with corn and
wine either for sale or consumption; and the whole administration
conducted by the strictest rules of private economy."

38. I have collected these imperfect, and not always extremely
consistent, notices of the aspect and temper of the Franks out of Mr.
Gibbon's casual references to them during a period of more than two
centuries,--and the last passage quoted, which he accompanies with the
statement that "one hundred and sixty of these rural palaces were
scattered through the provinces of their kingdom," without telling us
what kingdom, or at what period, must I think be held descriptive of the
general manner and system of their monarchy after the victories of
Clovis. But, from the first hour you hear of him, the Frank, closely
considered, is always an extremely ingenious, well meaning, and
industrious personage;--if eagerly acquisitive, also intelligently
conservative and constructive; an element of order and crystalline
edification, which is to consummate itself one day, in the aisles of
Amiens; and things generally insuperable and impregnable, if the
inhabitants of them had been as sound-hearted as their builders, for
many a day beyond.

39. But for the present, we must retrace our ground a little; for
indeed I have lately observed with compunction, in rereading some of
my books for revised issue, that if ever I promise, in one number or
chapter, careful consideration of any particular point in the next,
the next never _does_ touch upon the promised point at all, but is
sure to fix itself passionately on some antithetic, antipathic, or
antipodic, point in the opposite hemisphere. This manner of conducting
a treatise I find indeed extremely conducive to impartiality and
largeness of view; but can conceive it to be--to the general
reader--not only disappointing, (if indeed I may flatter myself that I
ever interest enough to disappoint), but even liable to confirm in his
mind some of the fallacious and extremely absurd insinuations of
adverse critics respecting my inconsistency, vacillation, and
liability to be affected by changes of the weather in my principles or
opinions. I purpose, therefore, in these historical sketches, at least
to watch, and I hope partly to correct myself in this fault of promise
breaking, and at whatever sacrifice of my variously fluent or
re-fluent humour, to tell in each successive chapter in some measure
what the reader justifiably expects to be told.

40. I left, merely glanced at, in my opening chapter, the story of the
vase of Soissons. It may be found (and it is very nearly the only thing
that _is_ to be found respecting the personal life or character of the
first Louis) in every cheap popular history of France; with cheap
popular moralities engrafted thereon. Had I time to trace it to its
first sources, perhaps it might take another aspect. But I give it as
you may anywhere find it--asking you only to consider whether even as so
read--it may not properly bear a somewhat different moral.

41. The story is, then, that after the battle of Soissons, in the
division of Roman, or Gallic spoil, the king wished to have a
beautifully wrought silver vase for--'himself,' I was going to
write--and in my last chapter _did_ mistakenly infer that he wanted it
for his better self,--his Queen. But he wanted it for neither;--it was
to restore to St. Remy, that it might remain among the consecrated
treasures of Rheims. That is the first point on which the popular
histories do not insist, and which one of his warriors claiming equal
division of treasure, chose also to ignore. The vase was asked by the
King in addition to his own portion, and the Frank knights, while they
rendered true obedience to their king as a leader, had not the
smallest notion of allowing him what more recent kings call
'Royalties'--taxes on everything they touch. And one of these Frank
knights or Counts--a little franker than the rest--and as incredulous
of St. Remy's saintship as a Protestant Bishop, or Positivist
Philosopher--took upon him to dispute the King's and the Church's
claim, in the manner, suppose, of a Liberal opposition in the House of
Commons; and disputed it with such security of support by the public
opinion of the fifth century, that--the king persisting in his
request--the fearless soldier dashed the vase to pieces with his
war-axe, exclaiming "Thou shalt have no more than thy portion by lot."

42. It is the first clear assertion of French 'Liberté, Fraternité and
Egalité,' supported, then, as now, by the destruction, which is the
only possible active operation of "free" personages, on the art they
cannot produce.

The king did not continue the quarrel. Cowards will think that he paused
in cowardice, and malicious persons, that he paused in malignity. He
_did_ pause in anger assuredly; but biding its time, which the anger of
a strong man always can, and burn hotter for the waiting, which is one
of the chief reasons for Christians being told not to let the sun go
down upon it. Precept which Christians now-a-days are perfectly ready to
obey, if it is somebody else who has been injured; and indeed, the
difficulty in such cases is usually to get them to think of the injury
even while the Sun rises on their wrath.[18]

[Footnote 18: Read Mr. Plimsoll's article on coal mines for instance.]

43. The sequel is very shocking indeed--to modern sensibility. I give
it in the, if not polished, at least delicately varnished, language of
the Pictorial History.

"About a year afterwards, on reviewing his troops, he went to the man
who had struck the vase, and _examining his arms, complained_ that
_they_ were in bad condition!" (Italics mine) "and threw them" (What?
shield and sword?) on the ground. The soldier stooped to recover them;
and at that moment the King struck him on the head with his
battle-axe, crying 'Thus didst thou to the vase at Soissons.'" The
Moral modern historian proceeds to reflect that "this--as an evidence
of the condition of the Franks, and of the ties by which they were
united, gives but the idea of a band of Robbers and their chief."
Which is, indeed, so far as I can myself look into and decipher the
nature of things, the Primary idea to be entertained respecting most
of the kingly and military organizations in this world, down to our
own day; and, (unless perchance it be the Afghans and Zulus who are
stealing our lands in England--instead of we theirs, in their several
countries.) But concerning the _manner_ of this piece of military
execution, I must for the present leave the reader to consider with
himself, whether indeed it be less Kingly, or more savage, to strike
an uncivil soldier on the head with one's own battle-axe, than, for
instance, to strike a person like Sir Thomas More on the neck with an
executioner's,--using for the mechanism, and as it were guillotine bar
and rope to the blow--the manageable forms of National Law, and the
gracefully twined intervention of a polite group of noblemen and
bishops.

44. Far darker things have to be told of him than this, as his proud
life draws towards the close,--things which, if any of us could see
clear _through_ darkness, you should be told in all the truth of them.
But we never can know the truth of Sin; for its nature is to deceive
alike on the one side the Sinner, on the other the Judge.
Diabolic--betraying whether we yield to it, or condemn: Here is
Gibbon's sneer--if you care for it; but I gather first from the
confused paragraphs which conduct to it, the sentences of praise, less
niggard than the Sage of Lausanne usually grants to any hero who has
confessed the influence of Christianity.

45. "Clovis, when he was no more than fifteen years of age, succeeded,
by his father's death, to the command of the Salian tribe. The narrow
limits of his kingdom were confined to the island of the Batavians,
with the ancient dioceses of Tournay and Arras; and at the baptism of
Clovis, the number of his warriors could not exceed five thousand. The
kindred tribes of the Franks who had seated themselves along the
Scheldt, the Meuse, the Moselle, and the Rhine, were governed by their
independent kings, of the Merovingian race, the equals, the allies,
and sometimes the enemies of the Salic Prince. When he first took the
field he had neither gold nor silver in his coffers, nor wine and corn
in his magazines; but he imitated the example of Cæsar, who in the
same country had acquired wealth by the sword, and purchased soldiers
with the fruits of conquest. The untamed spirit of the Barbarians was
taught to acknowledge the advantages of regular discipline. At the
annual review of the month of March, their arms were diligently
inspected; and when they traversed a peaceful territory they were
prohibited from touching a blade of grass. The justice of Clovis was
inexorable; and his careless or disobedient soldiers were punished
with instant death. It would be superfluous to praise the valour of a
Frank; but the valour of Clovis was directed by cool and consummate
prudence. In all his transactions with mankind he calculated the
weight of interest, of passion, and of opinion; and his measures were
sometimes adapted to the sanguinary manners of the Germans,
and sometimes moderated by the milder genius of Rome, and
Christianity.

46. "But the savage conqueror of Gaul was incapable of examining the
proofs of a religion, which depends on the laborious investigation of
historic evidence, and speculative theology. He was still more
incapable of feeling the mild influence of the Gospel, which persuades
and purifies the heart of a genuine convert. His ambitious reign was a
perpetual violation of moral and Christian duties: his hands were
stained with blood, in peace as well as in war; and, as soon as Clovis
had dismissed a synod of the Gallican Church, he calmly assassinated
_all_ the princes of the Merovingian race."

47. It is too true; but rhetorically put, in the first place--for we
ought to be told how many 'all' the princes were;--in the second
place, we must note that, supposing Clovis had in any degree "searched
the Scriptures" as presented to the Western world by St. Jerome, he
was likely, as a soldier-king, to have thought more of the mission of
Joshua[19] and Jehu than of the patience of Christ, whose sufferings he
thought rather of avenging than imitating: and the question whether
the other Kings of the Franks should either succeed him, or, in envy
of his enlarged kingdom, attack and dethrone, was easily in his mind
convertible from a personal danger into the chance of the return of
the whole nation to idolatry. And, in the last place, his faith in the
Divine protection of his cause had been shaken by his defeat before
Aries by the Ostrogoths; and the Frank leopard had not so wholly
changed his spots as to surrender to an enemy the opportunity of a
first spring.

[Footnote 19: The likeness was afterwards taken up by legend, and the
walls of Angoulême, after the battle of Poitiers, are said to have
fallen at the sound of the trumpets of Clovis. "A miracle," says
Gibbon, "which may be reduced to the supposition that some clerical
engineer had secretly undermined the foundations of the rampart." I
cannot too often warn my honest readers against the modern habit of
"reducing" all history whatever to 'the supposition that' ... etc.,
etc. The legend is of course the natural and easy expression of a
metaphor.]

48. Finally, and beyond all these personal questions, the forms of
cruelty and subtlety--the former, observe, arising much out of a scorn
of pain which was a condition of honour in their women as well as men,
are in these savage races all founded on their love of glory in war,
which can only be understood by comparing what remains of the same
temper in the higher castes of the North American Indians; and, before
tracing in final clearness the actual events of the reign of Clovis to
their end, the reader will do well to learn this list of the personages
of the great Drama, taking to heart the meaning of the _name_ of each,
both in its probable effect on the mind of its bearer, and in its
fateful expression of the course of their acts, and the consequences of
it to future generations.

1. Clovis. Frank form, Hluodoveh. 'Glorious Holiness,' or
      consecration. Latin Chlodovisus, when baptized by St.
      Remy, softening afterwards through the centuries into
      Lhodovisus, Ludovicus, Louis.

2. Albofleda. 'White household fairy'? His youngest sister;
      married Theodoric (Theutreich, 'People's ruler'),
      the great King of the Ostrogoths.

3. Clotilde. Hlod-hilda. 'Glorious Battle-maid.' His wife.
      'Hilda' first meaning Battle, pure; and then passing
      into Queen or Maid of Battle. Christianized to Ste
      Clotilde in France, and Ste Hilda of Whitby cliff.

3. Clotilde. His only daughter. Died for the Catholic faith,
      under Arian persecution.

4. Childebert. His eldest son by Clotilde, the first Frank
      King in Paris. 'Battle Splendour,' softening into
      Hildebert, and then Hildebrandt, as in the Nibelung.

5. Chlodomir. 'Glorious Fame.' His second son by Clotilde.

6. Clotaire. His youngest son by Clotilde; virtually the destroyer
      of his father's house. 'Glorious Warrior.'

7. Chlodowald. Youngest son of Chlodomir. 'Glorious
      Power,' afterwards 'St. Cloud.'

49. I will now follow straight, through their light and shadow, the
course of Clovis' reign and deeds.

A.D. 481. Crowned, when he was only fifteen. Five years afterwards, he
challenges, "in the spirit, and almost in the language of chivalry,"
the Roman governor Syagrius, holding the district of Rheims and
Soissons. "Campum sibi præparari jussit--he commanded his antagonist
to prepare him a battle-field"--see Gibbon's note and reference, chap.
xxxviii. (6, 297). The Benedictine abbey of Nogent was afterwards
built on the field, marked by a circle of Pagan sepulchres. "Clovis
bestowed the adjacent lands of Leuilly and Coucy on the church of
Rheims."[20]

[Footnote 20: When?--for this tradition, as well as that of the vase,
points to a friendship between Clovis and St. Remy, and a singular
respect on the King's side for the Christians of Gaul, though he was
not yet himself converted.]

A.D. 485. The Battle of Soissons. Not dated by Gibbon: the subsequent
death of Syagrius at the court of (the younger) Alaric, was in
486--take 485 for the battle.

50. A.D. 493. I cannot find any account of the relations between Clovis
and the King of Burgundy, the uncle of Clotilde, which preceded his
betrothal to the orphan princess. Her uncle, according to the common
history, had killed both her father and mother, and compelled her sister
to take the veil--motives none assigned, nor authorities. Clotilde
herself was pursued on her way to France,[21] and the litter in which
she travelled captured, with part of her marriage portion. But the
princess herself mounted on horseback, and rode with part of her escort,
forward into France, "ordering her attendants to set fire to everything
that pertained to her uncle and his subjects which they might meet with
on the way."

[Footnote 21: It is a curious proof of the want in vulgar historians of
the slightest sense of the vital interest of anything they tell, that
neither in Gibbon, nor in Messrs. Bussey and Gaspey, nor in the
elaborate 'Histoire des Villes de France,' can I find, with the best
research my winter's morning allows, what city was at this time the
capital of Burgundy, or at least in which of its four nominal
capitals,--Dijon, Besancon, Geneva, and Vienne,--Clotilde was brought
up. The evidence seems to me in favour of Vienne--(called always by
Messrs. B. and G., 'Vienna,' with what effect on the minds of their
dimly geographical readers I cannot say)--the rather that Clotilde's
mother is said to have been "thrown into the _Rhone_ with a stone
round her neck." The author of the introduction to 'Bourgogne' in the
'Histoire des Villes' is so eager to get his little spiteful snarl at
anything like religion anywhere, that he entirely forgets the
existence of the first queen of France,--never names her, nor, as
such, the place of her birth,--but contributes only to the knowledge
of the young student this beneficial quota, that Gondeband, "plus
politique que guerrier, trouva au milieu de ses controverses
théologiques avec Avitus, évêque de _Vienne_, le temps de faire mourir
ses trois frères et de recueillir leur heritage."

The one broad fact which my own readers will find it well to remember
is that Burgundy, at this time, by whatever king or victor tribe its
inhabitants may be subdued, does practically include the whole of
French Switzerland, and even of the German, as far east as
Vindonissa:--the Reuss, from Vindonissa through Lucerne to the St.
Gothard being its effective eastern boundary; that westward--it meant
all Jura, and the plains of the Saone; and southward, included all
Savoy and Dauphiné. According to the author of 'La Suisse Historique'
Clotilde was first addressed by Clovis's herald disguised as a beggar,
while she distributed alms at the gate of St. Pierre at Geneva; and
her departure and pursued flight into France were from Dijon.]

51. The fact is not chronicled, usually, among the sayings or doings
of the Saints: but the punishment of Kings by destroying the property
of their subjects, is too well recognized a method of modern Christian
warfare to allow our indignation to burn hot against Clotilde; driven,
as she was, hard by grief and wrath. The years of her youth are not
counted to us; Clovis was already twenty-seven, and for three years
maintained the faith of his ancestral religion against all the
influence of his queen.

52. A.D. 496. I did not in the opening chapter attach nearly enough
importance to the battle of Tolbiac, thinking of it as merely
compelling the Alemanni to recross the Rhine, and establishing the
Frank power on its western bank. But infinitely wider results are
indicated in the short sentence with which Gibbon closes his account
of the battle. "After the conquest of the western provinces, the
Franks _alone_ retained their ancient possessions beyond the Rhine.
They gradually subdued and _civilized_ the exhausted countries as far
as the Elbe and the mountains of Bohemia; and the _peace of Europe_
was secured by the obedience of Germany."

53. For, in the south, Theodoric had already "sheathed the sword in
the pride of victory and the vigour of his age--and his farther reign
of three and thirty years was consecrated to the duties of civil
government." Even when his son-in-law, Alaric, fell by Clovis' hand in
the battle of Poitiers, Theodoric was content to check the Frank power
at Arles, without pursuing his success, and to protect his infant
grandchild, correcting at the same time some abuses in the civil
government of Spain. So that the healing sovereignty of the great Goth
was established from Sicily to the Danube--and from Sirmium to the
Atlantic ocean.

54. Thus, then, at the close of the fifth century, you have Europe
divided simply by her watershed; and two Christian kings reigning,
with entirely beneficent and healthy power--one in the north--one in
the south--the mightiest and worthiest of them married to the other's
youngest sister: a saint queen in the north--and a devoted and earnest
Catholic woman, queen mother in the south. It is a conjunction of
things memorable enough in the Earth's history,--much to be thought
of, O fast whirling reader, if ever, out of the crowd of pent up
cattle driven across Rhine, or Adige, you can extricate yourself for
an hour, to walk peacefully out of the south gate of Cologne, or
across Fra Giocondo's bridge at Verona--and so pausing look through
the clear air across the battlefield of Tolbiac to the blue
Drachenfels, or across the plain of St. Ambrogio to the mountains of
Garda. For there were fought--if you will think closely--the two
victor-battles of the Christian world. Constantine's only gave changed
form and dying colour to the falling walls of Rome; but the Frank and
Gothic races, thus conquering and thus ruled, founded the arts and
established the laws which gave to all future Europe her joy, and her
virtue. And it is lovely to see how, even thus early, the Feudal
chivalry depended for its life on the nobleness of its womanhood.
There was no _vision_ seen, or alleged, at Tolbiac. The King prayed
simply to the God of Clotilde. On the morning of the battle of Verona,
Theodoric visited the tent of his mother and his sister,
"and requested that on the most illustrious festival of his life, they
would adorn him with the rich garments which they had worked with
their own hands."

55. But over Clovis, there was extended yet another influence--greater
than his queen's. When his kingdom was first extended to the Loire,
the shepherdess of Nanterre was already aged,--no torch-bearing maid
of battle, like Clotilde, no knightly leader of deliverance like
Jeanne, but grey in meekness of wisdom, and now "filling more and more
with crystal light." Clovis's father had known her; he himself made
her his friend, and when he left Paris on the campaign of Poitiers,
vowed that if victorious, he would build a Christian church on the
hills of Seine. He returned in victory, and with St. Genevieve at his
side, stood on the site of the ruined Roman Thermæ, just above the
"Isle" of Paris, to fulfil his vow: and to design the limits of the
foundations of the first metropolitan church of Frankish Christendom.

The King "gave his battle-axe the swing," and tossed it with his full
force.

Measuring with its flight also, the place of his own grave, and of
Clotilde's, and St. Genevieve's.

There they rested, and rest,--in soul,--together. "La Colline tout
entière porte encore le nom de la patronne de Paris; une petite rue
obscure a gardé celui du Roi Conquerant."




"OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US."

ADVICE.


The three chapters[22] of "Our Fathers have told us," now submitted to
the public, are enough to show the proposed character and tendencies
of the work, to which, contrary to my usual custom, I now invite
subscription, because the degree in which I can increase its
usefulness by engraved illustration must greatly depend on the known
number of its supporters.

[Footnote 22: Viz., Chapters I. and II., and the separate travellers'
edition of Chapter IV.]

I do not recognize, in the present state of my health, any reason to
fear more loss of general power, whether in conception or industry,
than is the proper and appointed check of an old man's enthusiasm: of
which, however, enough remains in me, to warrant my readers against
the abandonment of a purpose entertained already for twenty years.

The work, if I live to complete it, will consist of ten parts, each
taking up some local division of Christian history, and gathering,
towards their close, into united illustration of the power of the
Church in the Thirteenth Century.

The next chapter, which I hope to issue soon after Christmas,
completes the first part, descriptive of the early Frank power, and of
its final skill, in the Cathedral of Amiens.

The second part, "Ponte della Pietra," will, I hope, do more for
Theodoric and Verona than I have been able to do for Clovis and the
first capital of France.

The third, "Ara Celi," will trace the foundations of the Papal power.

The fourth, "Ponte-a-Mare," and fifth, "Ponte Vecchio," will only with
much difficulty gather into brief form what I have by me of scattered
materials respecting Pisa and Florence.

The sixth, "Valle Crucis," will be occupied with the monastic
architecture of England and Wales.

The seventh, "The Springs of Eure," will be wholly given to the
cathedral of Chartres.

The eighth, "Domrémy," to that of Rouen and the schools of
architecture which it represents.

The ninth, "The Bay of Uri," to the pastoral forms of Catholicism,
reaching to our own times.

And the tenth, "The Bells of Cluse," to the pastoral Protestantism of
Savoy, Geneva, and the Scottish Border.

Each part will consist of four sections only; and one of them, the
fourth, will usually be descriptive of some monumental city or
cathedral, the resultant and remnant of the religious power examined
in the preparatory chapters.

One illustration at least will be given with each chapter,[23] and
drawings made for others, which will be placed at once in the
Sheffield museum for public reference, and engraved as I find support,
or opportunity for binding with the completed work.

[Footnote 23: The first plate for the Bible of Amiens, curiously
enough, failed in the engraving; and I shall probably have to etch it
myself. It will be issued with the fourth, in the full-size edition of
the fourth chapter.]

As in the instance of Chapter IV. of this first part, a smaller
edition of the descriptive chapters will commonly be printed in
reduced form for travellers and non-subscribers; but otherwise, I
intend this work to be furnished to subscribers only.




CHAPTER III.

THE LION TAMER.


1. It has been often of late announced as a new discovery, that man is
a creature of circumstances; and the fact has been pressed upon our
notice, in the hope, which appears to some people so pleasing, of
being able at last to resolve into a succession of splashes in mud, or
whirlwinds in air, the circumstances answerable for his creation. But
the more important fact, that his nature is not levelled, like a
mosquito's, to the mists of a marsh, nor reduced, like a mole's,
beneath the crumblings of a burrow, but has been endowed with sense to
discern, and instinct to adopt, the conditions which will make of it
the best that can be, is very necessarily ignored by philosophers who
propose, as a beautiful fulfilment of human destinies, a life
entertained by scientific gossip, in a cellar lighted by electric
sparks, warmed by tubular inflation, drained by buried rivers, and
fed, by the ministry of less learned and better provisioned races,
with extract of beef, and potted crocodile.

2. From these chemically analytic conceptions of a Paradise in
catacombs, undisturbed in its alkaline or acid virtues by the dread of
Deity, or hope of futurity, I know not how far the modern reader may
willingly withdraw himself for a little time, to hear of men who, in
their darkest and most foolish day, sought by their labour to make the
desert as the garden of the Lord, and by their love to become worthy of
permission to live with Him for ever. It has nevertheless been only by
such toil, and in such hope, that, hitherto, the happiness, skill, or
virtue of man have been possible: and even on the verge of the new
dispensation, and promised Canaan, rich in beatitudes of iron, steam,
and fire, there are some of us, here and there, who may pause in filial
piety to look back towards that wilderness of Sinai in which their
fathers worshipped and died.

[Illustration: Plate III.--AMIENS. JOUR DES TRÉPASSÉS. 1880.]

3. Admitting then, for the moment, that the main streets of
Manchester, the district immediately surrounding the Bank in London,
and the Bourse and Boulevards of Paris, are already part of the future
kingdom of Heaven, when Earth shall be all Bourse and Boulevard,--the
world of which our fathers tell us was divided to them, as you already
know, partly by climates, partly by races, partly by times; and the
'circumstances' under which a man's soul was given to him, had to be
considered under these three heads:--In what climate is he? Of what
race? At what time?

He can only be what these conditions permit. With appeal to these, he
is to be heard;--understood, if it may be;--judged, by our love,
first--by our pity, if he need it--by our humility, finally and
always.

4. To this end, it is needful evidently that we should have truthful
maps of the world to begin with, and truthful maps of our own hearts
to end with; neither of these maps being easily drawn at any time, and
perhaps least of all now--when the use of a map is chiefly to exhibit
hotels and railroads; and humility is held the disagreeablest and
meanest of the Seven mortal Sins.

5. Thus, in the beginning of Sir Edward Creasy's History of England,
you find a map purporting to exhibit the possessions of the British
Nation--illustrating the extremely wise and courteous behaviour of Mr.
Fox to a Frenchman of Napoleon's suite, in "advancing to a terrestrial
globe of unusual magnitude and distinctness, spreading his arms round
it, over both the oceans and both the Indies," and observing, in this
impressive attitude, that "while Englishmen live, they overspread the
whole world, and clasp it in the circle of their power."

6. Fired by Mr. Fox's enthusiasm,--the otherwise seldom fiery--Sir
Edward proceeds to tell us that "our island home is the favourite
domicile of freedom, empire and glory," without troubling himself, or
his readers, to consider how long the nations over whom our freedom is
imperious, and in whose shame is our glory, may be satisfied in that
arrangement of the globe and its affairs; or may be even at present
convinced of their degraded position in it by his method of its
delineation.

For, the map being drawn on Mercator's projection, represents
therefore the British dominions in North America as twice the size of
the States, and considerably larger than all South America put
together: while the brilliant crimson with which all our landed
property is coloured cannot but impress the innocent reader with the
idea of a universal flush of freedom and glory throughout all those
acres and latitudes. So that he is scarcely likely to cavil at results
so marvellous by inquiring into the nature and completeness of our
government at any particular place,--for instance in Ireland, in the
Hebrides, or at the Cape.

7. In the closing chapter of the first volume of 'The Laws of Fésole'
I have laid down the mathematical principles of rightly drawing
maps;--principles which for many reasons it is well that my young
readers should learn; the fundamental one being that you cannot
flatten the skin of an orange without splitting it, and must not, if
you draw countries on the unsplit skin, stretch them afterwards to
fill the gaps.

The British pride of wealth which does not deny itself the magnificent
convenience of penny Walter Scotts and penny Shakespeares, may
assuredly, in its future greatness, possess itself also of penny
universes, conveniently spinnable on their axes. I shall therefore
assume that my readers can look at a round globe, while I am talking
of the world; and at a properly reduced drawing of its surfaces, when
I am talking of a country.

8. Which, if my reader can at present do--or at least refer to a
fairly drawn double-circle map of the globe with converging
meridians--I will pray him next to observe, that, although the
old division of the world into four quarters is now nearly
effaced by emigration and Atlantic cable, yet the great historic
question about the globe is not how it is divided, here and there, by
ins and outs of land or sea; but how it is divided into zones all
round, by irresistible laws of light and air. It is often a matter of
very minor interest to know whether a man is an American or African, a
European or an Asiatic. But it is a matter of extreme and final
interest to know if he be a Brazilian or a Patagonian, a Japanese or a
Samoyede.

9. In the course of the last chapter, I asked the reader to hold
firmly the conception of the great division of climate, which
separated the wandering races of Norway and Siberia from the calmly
resident nations of Britain, Gaul, Germany, and Dacia.

Fasten now that division well home in your mind, by drawing, however
rudely, the course of the two rivers, little thought of by common
geographers, but of quite unspeakable importance in human history, the
Vistula and the Dniester.

10. They rise within thirty miles of each other,[24] and each runs, not
counting ins and outs, its clear three hundred miles,--the Vistula to
the north-east, the Dniester to the south-west: the two of them together
cut Europe straight across, at the broad neck of it,--and, more deeply
looking at the thing, they divide Europe, properly so called--Europa's
own, and Jove's,--the small educationable, civilizable, and more or less
mentally rational fragment of the globe, from the great Siberian
wilderness, Cis-Ural and Trans-Ural; the inconceivable chaotic space,
occupied datelessly by Scythians, Tartars, Huns, Cossacks, Bears,
Ermines, and Mammoths, in various thickness of hide, frost of brain, and
woe of abode--or of unabiding. Nobody's history worth making out, has
anything to do with them; for the force of Scandinavia never came round
by Finland at all, but always sailed or paddled itself across the
Baltic, or down the rocky west coast; and the Siberian and Russian
ice-pressure merely drives the really memorable races into greater
concentration, and kneads them up in fiercer and more necessitous
exploring masses. But by those exploring masses, of true European birth,
our own history was fashioned for ever; and, therefore, these two
truncating and guarding rivers are to be marked on your map of Europe
with supreme clearness: the Vistula, with Warsaw astride of it half way
down, and embouchure in Baltic,--the Dniester, in Euxine, flowing each
of them, measured arrow-straight, as far as from Edinburgh to London,
with windings,[25] the Vistula six hundred miles, and the Dniester
five--count them together for a thousand miles of _moat_, between Europe
and the Desert, reaching from Dantzic to Odessa.

[Footnote 24: Taking the 'San' branch of upper Vistula.]

[Footnote 25: Note, however, generally that the strength of a river,
cæteris paribus, is to be estimated by its straight course, windings
being almost always caused by flats in which it can receive no
tributaries.]

11. Having got your Europe moated off into this manageable and
comprehensible space, you are next to fix the limits which divide the
four Gothic countries, Britain, Gaul, Germany, and Dacia, from the
four Classic countries, Spain, Italy, Greece, and Lydia.

There is no other generally opponent term to 'Gothic' but 'Classic':
and I am content to use it, for the sake of practical breadth and
clearness, though its precise meaning for a little while remains
unascertained. Only get the geography well into your mind, and the
nomenclature will settle itself at its leisure.

12. Broadly, then, you have sea between Britain and Spain--Pyrenees
between Gaul and Spain--Alps between Germany and Italy--Danube between
Dacia and Greece. You must consider everything south of the Danube as
Greek, variously influenced from Athens on one side, Byzantium on the
other: then, across the Ægean, you have the great country absurdly
called Asia Minor, (for we might just as well call Greece, Europe Minor,
or Cornwall, England Minor,) but which is properly to be remembered as
'Lydia,' the country which infects with passion, and tempts with wealth;
which taught the Lydian measure in music and softened the Greek language
on its border into Ionic; which gave to ancient history the tale of
Troy, and to Christian history, the glow, and the decline, of the Seven
Churches.

13. Opposite to these four countries in the south, but separated from
them either by sea or desert, are another four, as easily
remembered--Morocco, Libya, Egypt, and Arabia.

Morocco, virtually consisting of the chain of Atlas and the coasts
depending on it, may be most conveniently thought of as including the
modern Morocco and Algeria, with the Canaries as a dependent group of
islands.

Libya, in like manner, will include the modern Tunis and Tripoli: it
will begin on the west with St. Augustine's town of Hippo; and its
coast is colonized from Tyre and Greece, dividing it into the two
districts of Carthage and Cyrene. Egypt, the country of the River, and
Arabia, the country of _no_ River, are to be thought of as the two
great southern powers of separate Religion.

14. You have thus, easily and clearly memorable, twelve countries,
distinct evermore by natural laws, and forming three zones from north
to south, all healthily habitable--but the races of the northernmost,
disciplined in endurance of cold; those of the central zone, perfected
by the enjoyable suns alike of summer and winter; those of the
southern zone, trained to endurance of heat. Writing them now in
tabular view,

     Britain       Gaul       Germany       Dacia
     Spain         Italy      Greece        Lydia
     Morocco       Libya      Egypt         Arabia,

you have the ground of all useful profane history mapped out in the
simplest terms; and then, as the fount of inspiration, for all these
countries, with the strength which every soul that has possessed, has
held sacred and supernatural, you have last to conceive perfectly the
small hill district of the Holy Land, with Philistia and Syria on its
flanks, both of them chastising forces; but Syria, in the beginning,
herself the origin of the chosen race--"A Syrian ready to perish was
my father"--and the Syrian Rachel being thought of always as the true
mother of Israel.

15. And remember, in all future study of the relations of these
countries, you must never allow your mind to be disturbed by the
accidental changes of political limit. No matter who rules a country,
no matter what it is officially called, or how it is formally divided,
eternal bars and doors are set to it by the mountains and seas,
eternal laws enforced over it by the clouds and stars. The people that
are born on it are its people, be they a thousand times again and
again conquered, exiled, or captive. The stranger cannot be its king,
the invader cannot be its possessor; and, although just laws,
maintained whether by the people or their conquerors, have always the
appointed good and strength of justice, nothing is permanently helpful
to any race or condition of men but the spirit that is in their own
hearts, kindled by the love of their native land.

16. Of course, in saying that the invader cannot be the possessor of
any country, I speak only of invasion such as that by the Vandals of
Libya, or by ourselves of India; where the conquering race does not
become permanently inhabitant. You are not to call Libya Vandalia, nor
India England, because these countries are temporarily under the rule
of Vandals and English; neither Italy Gothland under Ostrogoths, nor
England Denmark under Canute. National character varies as it fades
under invasion or in corruption; but if ever it glows again into a new
life, that life must be tempered by the earth and sky of the country
itself. Of the twelve names of countries now given in their order,
only one will be changed as we advance in our history;--Gaul will
properly become France when the Franks become her abiding inhabitants.
The other eleven primary names will serve us to the end.

17. With a moment's more patience, therefore, glancing to the far East,
we shall have laid the foundations of all our own needful geography. As
the northern kingdoms are moated from the Scythian desert by the
Vistula, so the southern are moated from the dynasties properly called
'Oriental' by the Euphrates; which, "partly sunk beneath the Persian
Gulf, reaches from the shores of Beloochistan and Oman to the mountains
of Armenia, and forms a huge hot-air funnel, the base" (or mouth) "of
which is on the tropics, while its extremity reaches thirty-seven
degrees of northern latitude. Hence it comes that the Semoom itself (the
specific and gaseous Semoom) pays occasional visits to Mosoul and
Djezeerat Omer, while the thermometer at Bagdad attains in summer an
elevation capable of staggering the belief of even an old Indian."[26]

[Footnote 26: Sir F. Palgrave, 'Arabia,' vol. ii., p. 155. I gratefully
adopt in the next paragraph his division of Asiatic nations, p. 160.]

18. This valley in ancient days formed the kingdom of Assyria, as the
valley of the Nile formed that of Egypt. In the work now before us, we
have nothing to do with its people, who were to the Jews merely a
hostile power of captivity, inexorable as the clay of their walls, or
the stones of their statues; and, after the birth of Christ, the
marshy valley is no more than a field of battle between West and East.
Beyond the great river,--Persia, India, and China, form the southern
'Oriens.' Persia is properly to be conceived as reaching from the
Persian Gulf to the mountain chains which flank and feed the Indus;
and is the true vital power of the East in the days of Marathon: but
it has no influence on Christian history except through Arabia; while,
of the northern Asiatic tribes, Mede, Bactrian, Parthian, and
Scythian, changing into Turk and Tartar, we need take no heed until
they invade us in our own historic territory.

19. Using therefore the terms 'Gothic' and 'Classic' for broad
distinction of the northern and central zones of this our own territory,
we may conveniently also use the word 'Arab'[27] for the whole southern
zone. The influence of Egypt vanishes soon after the fourth century,
while that of Arabia, powerful from the beginning, rises in the sixth
into an empire whose end we have not seen. And you may most rightly
conceive the religious principle which is the base of that empire, by
remembering, that while the Jews forfeited their prophetic power by
taking up the profession of usury over the whole earth, the Arabs
returned to the simplicity of prophecy in its beginning by the well of
Hagar, and are not opponents to Christianity; but only to the faults or
follies of Christians. They keep still their faith in the one God who
spoke to Abraham their father; and are His children in that simplicity,
far more truly than the nominal Christians who lived, and live, only to
dispute in vociferous council, or in frantic schism, the relations of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

[Footnote 27: Gibbon's fifty-sixth chapter begins with a sentence which
may be taken as the epitome of the entire history we have to
investigate: "The three great nations of the world, the Greeks, the
Saracens, and the Franks, encountered each other on the theatre of
Italy." I use the more general word, Goths, instead of Franks; and the
more accurate word, Arab, for Saracen; but otherwise, the reader will
observe that the division is the same as mine. Gibbon does not
recognize the Roman people as a nation--but only the Roman power as an
empire.]

20. Trusting my reader then in future to retain in his mind without
confusion the idea of the three zones, Gothic, Classic, and Arab, each
divided into four countries, clearly recognizable through all ages of
remote or recent history;--I must farther, at once, simplify for him the
idea of the Roman _Empire_ (see note to last paragraph,) in the manner
of its affecting them. Its nominal extent, temporary conquests, civil
dissensions, or internal vices, are scarcely of any historical moment at
all; the real Empire is effectual only as an exponent of just law,
military order, and mechanical art, to untrained races, and as a
translation of Greek thought into less diffused and more tenable scheme
for them. The Classic zone, from the beginning to the end of its visible
authority, is composed of these two elements--Greek imagination, with
Roman order: and the divisions or dislocations of the third and fourth
century are merely the natural apparitions of their differences, when
the political system which concealed them was tested by Christianity. It
seems almost wholly lost sight of by ordinary historians, that, in the
wars of the last Romans with the Goths, the great Gothic captains were
all Christians; and that the vigorous and naïve form which the dawning
faith took in their minds is a more important subject of investigation,
by far, than the inevitable wars which followed the retirement of
Diocletian, or the confused schisms and crimes of the lascivious court
of Constantine. I am compelled, however, to notice the terms in which
the last arbitrary dissolutions of the empire took place, that they may
illustrate, instead of confusing, the arrangement of the nations which I
would fasten in your memory.

21. In the middle of the fourth century you have, politically, what
Gibbon calls "the final division of the _Eastern_ and _Western
Empires_." This really means only that the Emperor Valentinian,
yielding, though not without hesitation, to the feeling now confirmed in
the legions that the Empire was too vast to be held by a single person,
takes his brother for his colleague, and divides, not, truly speaking,
their authority, but their attention, between the east and the west. To
his brother Valens he assigns the extremely vague "Præfecture of the
East, from the lower Danube to the confines of Persia," while for his
own immediate government he reserves the "warlike præfectures of
Illyricum, Italy, and Gaul, from the extremity of Greece to the
Caledonian rampart, and from the rampart of Caledonia to the foot of
Mount Atlas." That is to say, in less poetical cadence, (Gibbon had
better have put his history into hexameters at once,) Valentinian kept
under his own watch the whole of Roman Europe and Africa, and left Lydia
and Caucasus to his brother. Lydia and Caucasus never did, and never
could, form an Eastern Empire,--they were merely outside dependencies,
useful for taxation in peace, dangerous by their multitudes in war.
There never was, from the seventh century before Christ to the seventh
after Christ, but _one_ Roman Empire, which meant, the power over
humanity of such men as Cincinnatus and Agricola; it expires as the race
and temper of these expire; the nominal extent of it, or brilliancy at
any moment, is no more than the reflection, farther or nearer upon the
clouds, of the flames of an altar whose fuel was of noble souls. There
is no true date for its division; there is none for its destruction.
Whether Dacian Probus or Noric Odoacer be on the throne of it, the force
of its living principle alone is to be watched--remaining, in arts, in
laws, and in habits of thought, dominant still in Europe down to the
twelfth century;--in language and example, dominant over all educated
men to this hour.

22. But in the nominal division of it by Valentinian, let us note
Gibbon's definition (I assume it to be his, not the Emperor's) of
European Roman Empire into Illyricum, Italy, and Gaul. I have already
said you must hold everything south of the Danube for Greek. The two
chief districts immediately south of the stream are upper and lower
Moesia, consisting of the slope of the Thracian mountains northward
to the river, with the plains between it and them. This district you
must notice for its importance in forming the Moeso-Gothic alphabet,
in which "the Greek is by far the principal element",[28] giving
sixteen letters out of the twenty-four. The Gothic invasion under the
reign of Valens is the first that establishes a Teutonic nation within
the frontier of the empire; but they only thereby bring themselves
more directly under its spiritual power. Their bishop, Ulphilas,
adopts this Moesian alphabet, two-thirds Greek, for his translation
of the Bible, and it is universally disseminated and perpetuated by
that translation, until the extinction or absorption of the Gothic
race.

[Footnote 28: Milman, 'Hist., of Christianity,' vol. iii. p. 36.]

23. South of the Thracian mountains you have Thrace herself, and the
countries confusedly called Dalmatia and Illyria, forming the coast of
the Adriatic, and reaching inwards and eastwards to the mountain
watershed. I have never been able to form a clear notion myself of the
real character of the people of these districts, in any given period;
but they are all to be massed together as northern Greek, having more
or less of Greek blood and dialect according to their nearness to
Greece proper; though neither sharing in her philosophy, nor
submitting to her discipline. But it is of course far more accurate,
in broad terms, to speak of these Illyrian, Moesian, and Macedonian
districts as all Greek, than with Gibbon or Valentinian to speak of
Greece and Macedonia as all Illyrian.[29]

[Footnote 29: I find the same generalization expressed to the modern
student under the term 'Balkan Peninsula,' extinguishing every ray and
trace of past history at once.]

24. In the same imperial or poetical generalization, we find England
massed with France under the term Gaul, and bounded by the "Caledonian
rampart." Whereas in our own division, Caledonia, Hibernia, and Wales,
are from the first considered as essential parts of Britain,[30] and
the link with the continent is to be conceived as formed by the
settlement of Britons in Brittany, and not at all by Roman authority
beyond the Humber.

[Footnote 30: Gibbon's more deliberate statement its clear enough.
"From the coast or the extremity of Caithness and Ulster, the memory
of Celtic origin was distinctly preserved in the perpetual resemblance
of languages, religion, and manners, and the peculiar character of the
British tribes might be naturally ascribed to the influence of
accidental and local circumstances." The Lowland Scots, "wheat eaters"
or Wanderers, and the Irish, are very positively identified by Gibbon
at the time our own history begins. "It is _certain_" (italics his,
not mine) "that in the declining age of the Roman Empire, Caledonia,
Ireland, and the Isle of Man, were inhabited by the Scots."--Chap. 25,
vol. iv., p. 279.

The higher civilization and feebler courage of the Lowland _English_
rendered them either the victims of Scotland, or the grateful subjects
of Rome. The mountaineers, Pict among the Grampians, or of their own
colour in Cornwall and Wales, have never been either instructed or
subdued, and remain to this day the artless and fearless strength of
the British race.]

25. Thus, then, once more reviewing our order of countries, and noting
only that the British Islands, though for the most part thrown by
measured degree much north of the rest of the north zone, are brought
by the influence of the Gulf stream into the same climate;--you have,
at the time when our history of Christianity begins, the Gothic zone
yet unconverted, and having not yet even heard of the new faith. You
have the Classic zone variously and increasingly conscious of it,
disputing with it, striving to extinguish it--and your Arab zone, the
ground and sustenance of it, encompassing the Holy Land with the
warmth of its own wings, and cherishing there--embers of phoenix
fire over all the earth,--the hope of Resurrection.

26. What would have been the course, or issue, of Christianity, had it
been orally preached only, and unsupported by its poetical literature,
might be the subject of deeply instructive speculation--if a
historian's duty were to reflect instead of record. The power of the
Christian faith was however, in the fact of it, always founded on the
written prophecies and histories of the Bible; and on the
interpretations of their meaning, given by the example, far more than
by the precept, of the great monastic orders. The poetry and history
of the Syrian Testaments were put within their reach by St. Jerome,
while the virtue and efficiency of monastic life are all expressed,
and for the most part summed, in the rule of St. Benedict. To
understand the relation of the work of these two men to the general
order of the Church, is quite the first requirement for its farther
intelligible history.

Gibbon's thirty-seventh chapter professes to give an account of the
'Institution of the Monastic Life' in the third century. But the
monastic life had been instituted somewhat earlier, and by many
prophets and kings. By Jacob, when he laid the stone for his pillow;
by Moses, when he drew aside to see the burning bush; by David, before
he had left "those few sheep in the wilderness"; and by the prophet
who "was in the deserts till the time of his showing unto Israel." Its
primary "institution," for Europe, was Numa's, in that of the Vestal
Virgins, and College of Augurs; founded on the originally Etrurian and
derived Roman conception of pure life dedicate to the service of God,
and practical wisdom dependent on His guidance.[31]

[Footnote 31: I should myself mark as the fatallest instant in the
decline of the Roman Empire, Julian's rejection of the counsel of the
Augurs. "For the last time, the Etruscan Haruspices accompanied a
Roman Emperor, but by a singular fatality their adverse interpretation
by the signs of heaven was disdained, and Julian followed the advice
of the philosophers, who coloured their predictions with the bright
hues of the Emperor's ambition." (Milman, Hist. of Christianity, chap.
vi.)]

The form which the monastic spirit took in later times depended far more
on the corruption of the common world, from which it was forced to
recoil either in indignation or terror, than on any change brought
about by Christianity in the ideal of human virtue and happiness.

27. "Egypt" (Mr. Gibbon thus begins to account for the new
Institution!), "the fruitful parent of superstition, afforded the
first example of monastic life." Egypt had her superstitions, like
other countries; but was so little the _parent_ of superstition that
perhaps no faith among the imaginative races of the world has been so
feebly missionary as hers. She never prevailed on even the nearest of
her neighbours to worship cats or cobras with her; and I am alone, to
my belief, among recent scholars, in maintaining Herodotus' statement
of her influence on the archaic theology of Greece. But that
influence, if any, was formative and delineative: not ritual: so that
in no case, and in no country, was Egypt the parent of Superstition:
while she was beyond all dispute, for all people and to all time, the
parent of Geometry, Astronomy, Architecture, and Chivalry. She was, in
its material and technic elements, the mistress of Literature, showing
authors who before could only scratch on wax and wood, how to weave
paper and engrave porphyry. She was the first exponent of the law of
Judgment after Death for Sin. She was the Tutress of Moses; and the
Hostess of Christ.

28. It is both probable and natural that, in such a country, the
disciples of any new spiritual doctrine should bring it to closer
trial than was possible among the illiterate warriors, or in the
storm-vexed solitudes of the North; yet it is a thoughtless error to
deduce the subsequent power of cloistered fraternity from the lonely
passions of Egyptian monachism. The anchorites of the first three
centuries vanish like feverish spectres, when the rational, merciful,
and laborious laws of Christian societies are established; and the
clearly recognizable rewards of heavenly solitude are granted to those
only who seek the Desert for its redemption.

29. 'The clearly _recognizable_ rewards,' I repeat, and with cautious
emphasis. No man has any data for estimating, far less right of judging,
the results of a life of resolute self-denial, until he has had the
courage to try it himself, at least for a time: but I believe no
reasonable person will wish, and no honest person dare, to deny the
benefits he has occasionally felt both in mind and body, during periods
of accidental privation from luxury, or exposure to danger. The extreme
vanity of the modern Englishman in making a momentary Stylites of
himself on the top of a Horn or an Aiguille, and his occasional
confession of a charm in the solitude of the rocks, of which he modifies
nevertheless the poignancy with his pocket newspaper, and from the
prolongation of which he thankfully escapes to the nearest table-d'hôte,
ought to make us less scornful of the pride, and more intelligent of the
passion, in which the mountain anchorites of Arabia and Palestine
condemned themselves to lives of seclusion and suffering, which were
comforted only by supernatural vision, or celestial hope. That phases of
mental disease are the necessary consequence of exaggerated and
independent emotion of any kind must, of course, be remembered in
reading the legends of the wilderness; but neither physicians nor
moralists have yet attempted to distinguish the morbid states of
intellect[32] which are extremities of noble passion, from those which
are the punishments of ambition, avarice, or lasciviousness.

[Footnote 32: Gibbon's hypothetical conclusion respecting the effects
of self-mortification, and his following historical statement, must be
noted as in themselves containing the entire views of the modern
philosophies and policies which have since changed the monasteries of
Italy into barracks, and the churches of France into magazines. "This
voluntary martyrdom _must_ have gradually destroyed the sensibility,
both of mind and body; nor _can it be presumed_ that the fanatics who
torment themselves, are capable of any lively affection for the rest
of mankind. _A cruel unfeeling temper has characterized the monks of
every age and country._"

How much of penetration, or judgment, this sentence exhibits, I hope
will become manifest to the reader as I unfold before him the actual
history of his faith; but being, I suppose, myself one of the last
surviving witnesses of the character of recluse life as it still
existed in the beginning of this century, I can point to the
portraiture of it given by Scott in the introduction to 'The
Monastery' as one perfect and trustworthy, to the letter and to the
spirit; and for myself can say, that the most gentle, refined, and in
the deepest sense amiable, phases of character I have ever known, have
been either those of monks, or of servants trained in the Catholic
Faith.]

30. Setting all questions of this nature aside for the moment, my
younger readers need only hold the broad fact that during the whole of
the fourth century, multitudes of self-devoted men led lives of
extreme misery and poverty in the effort to obtain some closer
knowledge of the Being and Will of God. We know, in any available
clearness, neither what they suffered, nor what they learned. We
cannot estimate the solemnizing or reproving power of their examples
on the less zealous Christian world; and only God knows how far their
prayers for it were heard, or their persons accepted. This only we may
observe with reverence, that among all their numbers, none seemed to
have repented their chosen manner of existence; none perish by
melancholy or suicide; their self-adjudged sufferings are never
inflicted in the hope of shortening the lives they embitter or purify;
and the hours of dream or meditation, on mountain or in cave, appear
seldom to have dragged so heavily as those which, without either
vision or reflection, we pass ourselves, on the embankment and in the
tunnel.

31. But whatever may be alleged, after ultimate and honest scrutiny,
of the follies or virtues of anchorite life, we are unjust to Jerome
if we think of him as its introducer into the West of Europe. He
passed through it himself as a phase of spiritual discipline; but he
represents, in his total nature and final work, not the vexed
inactivity of the Eremite, but the eager industry of a benevolent
tutor and pastor. His heart is in continual fervour of admiration or
of hope--remaining to the last as impetuous as a child's, but as
affectionate; and the discrepancies of Protestant objection by which
his character has been confused, or concealed, may be gathered into
some dim picture of his real self when once we comprehend the
simplicity of his faith, and sympathise a little with the eager
charity which can so easily be wounded into indignation, and is never
repressed by policy.

32. The slight trust which can be placed in modern readings of him, as
they now stand, may be at once proved by comparing the two passages in
which Milman has variously guessed at the leading principles of his
political conduct. "Jerome began (!) and ended his career as a monk of
Palestine; he attained, _he aspired to_, no dignity in the Church.
Though ordained a presbyter against his will, he escaped the episcopal
dignity which was forced upon his distinguished contemporaries."
('History of Christianity,' Book III.)

"Jerome cherished the secret hope, if it was not the avowed object of
his ambition, to succeed Damasus as Bishop of Rome. Is the rejection
of an aspirant so singularly unfit for the station, from his violent
passions, his insolent treatment of his adversaries, his utter want of
self-command, his almost unrivalled faculty of awakening hatred, to be
attributed to the sagacious and intuitive wisdom of Rome?" ('History
of Latin Christianity,' Book I., chap. ii.)

33. You may observe, as an almost unexceptional character in the
"sagacious wisdom" of the Protestant clerical mind, that it
instinctively assumes the desire of power and place not only to be
universal in Priesthood, but to be always _purely selfish_ in the ground
of it. The idea that power might possibly be desired for the sake of its
benevolent use, so far as I remember, does not once occur in the pages
of any ecclesiastical historian of recent date. In our own reading of
past ages we will, with the reader's permission, very calmly put out of
court all accounts of "hopes cherished in secret"; and pay very small
attention to the reasons for mediæval conduct which appear logical to
the rationalist, and probable to the politician.[33] We concern
ourselves only with what these singular and fantastic Christians of the
past really said, and assuredly did.

[Footnote 33: The habit of assuming, for the conduct of men of sense
and feeling, motives intelligible to the foolish, and probable to the
base, gains upon every vulgar historian, partly in the ease of it,
partly in the pride; and it is horrible to contemplate the quantity of
false witness against their neighbours which commonplace writers
commit, in the mere rounding and enforcing of their shallow sentences.
"Jerome admits, indeed, with _specious but doubtful humility_, the
inferiority of the unordained monk to the ordained priest," says Dean
Milman in his eleventh chapter, following up his gratuitous doubt of
Jerome's humility with no less gratuitous asseveration of the ambition
of his opponents. "The clergy, _no doubt_, had the sagacity to foresee
the _dangerous_ rival as to influence and authority, which was rising
up in Christian society."]

34. Jerome's life by no means "began as a monk of Palestine." Dean
Milman has not explained to us how any man's could; but Jerome's
childhood, at any rate, was extremely other than recluse, or
precociously religious. He was born of rich parents living on their
own estate, the name of his native town in North Illyria, Stridon,
perhaps now softened into Strigi, near Aquileia. In Venetian climate,
at all events, and in sight of Alps and sea. He had a brother and
sister, a kind grandfather, and a disagreeable private tutor, and was
a youth still studying grammar at Julian's death in 363.

35. A youth of eighteen, and well begun in all institutes of the
classic schools; but, so far from being a monk, not yet a
Christian;--nor at all disposed towards the severer offices even of
Roman life! or contemplating with aversion the splendours, either
worldly or sacred, which shone on him in the college days spent in its
Capital city.

For the "power and majesty of Paganism were still concentrated at Rome;
the deities of the ancient faith found their last refuge in the capital
of the empire. To the stranger, Rome still offered the appearance of a
Pagan city. It contained one hundred and fifty-two temples, and one
hundred and eighty smaller chapels or shrines, still sacred to their
tutelary God, and used for public worship. Christianity had neither
ventured to usurp those few buildings which might be converted to her
use, still less had she the power to destroy them. The religious
edifices were under the protection of the præfect of the city, and the
præfect was usually a Pagan; at all events he would not permit any
breach of the public peace, or violation of public property. Above all
still towered the Capitol, in its unassailed and awful majesty, with its
fifty temples or shrines, bearing the most sacred names in the religious
and civil annals of Rome, those of Jove, of Mars, of Janus, of Romulus,
of Cæsar, of Victory. Some years after the accession of Theodosius to
the Eastern Empire, the sacrifices were still performed as national
rites at the public cost,--_the pontiffs made their offerings in the
name of the whole human race_. The Pagan orator ventures to assert that
the Emperor dared not to endanger the safety of the empire by their
abolition. The Emperor still bore the title and insignia of the Supreme
Pontiff; the Consuls, before they entered upon their functions, ascended
the Capitol; the religious processions passed along the crowded streets,
and the people thronged to the festivals and theatres which still formed
part of the Pagan worship."[34]

[Footnote 34: Milman, 'History of Christianity,' vol. iii. p. 162. Note
the sentence in italics, for it relates the true origin of the
Papacy.]

36. Here, Jerome must have heard of what by all the Christian sects
was held the judgment of God, between them and their chief enemy--the
death of the Emperor Julian. But I have no means of tracing, and will
not conjecture, the course of his own thoughts, until the tenor of all
his life was changed at his baptism. The candour which lies at the
basis of his character has given us one sentence of his own,
respecting that change, which is worth some volumes of ordinary
confessions. "I left, not only parents and kindred, but _the
accustomed luxuries of delicate life_." The words throw full light on
what, to our less courageous temper, seems the exaggerated reading by
the early converts of Christ's words to them--"He that loveth father
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me." We are content to leave,
for much lower interests, either father or mother, and do not see the
necessity of any farther sacrifice: we should know more of ourselves
and of Christianity if we oftener sustained what St. Jerome found the
more searching trial. I find scattered indications of contempt among
his biographers, because he could not resign one indulgence--that of
scholarship; and the usual sneers at monkish ignorance and indolence
are in his case transferred to the weakness of a pilgrim who carried
his library in his wallet. It is a singular question (putting, as it
is the modern fashion to do, the idea of Providence wholly aside),
whether, but for the literary enthusiasm, which was partly a weakness,
of this old man's character, the Bible would ever have become the
library of Europe.

37. For that, observe, is the real meaning, in its first power, of the
word _Bible_. Not book, merely; but 'Bibliotheca,' Treasury of Books:
and it is, I repeat, a singular question, how far, if Jerome, at the
very moment when Rome, his tutress, ceased from her material power,
had not made her language the oracle of Hebrew prophecy, a literature
of their own, and a religion unshadowed by the terrors of the Mosaic
law, might have developed itself in the hearts of the Goth, the Frank,
and the Saxon, under Theodoric, Clovis, and Alfred.

38. Fate had otherwise determined, and Jerome was so passive an
instrument in her hands that he began the study of Hebrew as a
discipline only, and without any conception of the task he was to
fulfil, still less of the scope of its fulfilment. I could joyfully
believe that the words of Christ, "If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the
dead," had haunted the spirit of the recluse, until he resolved that
the voices of immortal appeal should be made audible to the Churches
of all the earth. But so far as we have evidence, there was no such
will or hope to exalt the quiet instincts of his natural industry; and
partly as a scholar's exercise, partly as an old man's recreation, the
severity of the Latin language was softened, like Venetian crystal, by
the variable fire of Hebrew thought, and the "Book of Books" took the
abiding form of which all the future art of the Western nations was to
be an hourly expanding interpretation.

39. And in this matter you have to note that the gist of it lies, not in
the translation of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures into an easier and a
common language, but in their presentation to the Church as of common
authority. The earlier Gentile Christians had naturally a tendency to
carry out in various oral exaggeration or corruption, the teaching of
the Apostle of the Gentiles, until their freedom from the bondage of the
Jewish law passed into doubt of its inspiration; and, after the fall of
Jerusalem, even into horror-stricken interdiction of its observance. So
that, only a few years after the remnant of exiled Jews in Pella had
elected the Gentile Marcus for their Bishop, and obtained leave to
return to the Ælia Capitolina built by Hadrian on Mount Zion, "it became
a matter of doubt and controversy whether a man who sincerely
acknowledged Jesus as the Messiah, but who still continued to observe
the law of Moses, could possibly hope for salvation!"[35] While, on the
other hand, the most learned and the most wealthy of the Christian name,
under the generally recognised title of "knowing" (Gnostic), had more
insidiously effaced the authority of the Evangelists by dividing
themselves, during the course of the third century, "into more than
fifty numerably distinct sects, and producing a multitude of histories,
in which the actions and discourses of Christ and His Apostles were
adapted to their several tenets."[36]

[Footnote 35: Gibbon, chap. xv. (II. 277).]

[Footnote 36: Ibid., II. 283. His expression "the most learned and most
wealthy" should be remembered in confirmation of the evermore
recurring fact of Christianity, that minds modest in attainment, and
lives careless of gain, are fittest for the reception of every
constant,--_i.e._ not local or accidental,--Christian principle.]

40. It would be a task of great, and in nowise profitable difficulty
to determine in what measure the consent of the general Church, and in
what measure the act and authority of Jerome, contributed to fix in
their ever since undisturbed harmony and majesty, the canons of Mosaic
and Apostolic Scripture. All that the young reader need know is, that
when Jerome died at Bethlehem, this great deed was virtually
accomplished: and the series of historic and didactic books which form
our present Bible, (including the Apocrypha) were established in and
above the nascent thought of the noblest races of men living on the
terrestrial globe, as a direct message to them from its Maker,
containing whatever it was necessary for them to learn of His purposes
towards them, and commanding, or advising, with divine authority and
infallible wisdom, all that was best for them to do, and happiest to
desire.

41. And it is only for those who have obeyed the law sincerely,
to say how far the hope held out to them by the law-giver has been
fulfilled. The worst "children of disobedience" are those who accept,
of the Word, what they like, and refuse what they hate: nor is this
perversity in them always conscious, for the greater part of the sins
of the Church have been brought on it by enthusiasm which, in
passionate contemplation and advocacy of parts of the Scripture easily
grasped, neglected the study, and at last betrayed the balance, of the
rest. What forms and methods of self-will are concerned in the
wresting of the Scriptures to a man's destruction, is for the keepers
of consciences to examine, not for us. The history we have to learn
must be wholly cleared of such debate, and the influence of the Bible
watched exclusively on the persons who receive the Word with joy, and
obey it in truth.

42. There has, however, been always a farther difficulty in examining
the power of the Bible, than that of distinguishing honest from
dishonest readers. The hold of Christianity on the souls of men must
be examined, when we come to close dealing with it, under these three
several heads: there is first, the power of the Cross itself, and of
the theory of salvation, upon the heart,--then, the operation of the
Jewish and Greek Scriptures on the intellect,--then, the influence on
morals of the teaching and example of the living hierarchy. And in the
comparison of men as they are and as they might have been, there are
these three questions to be separately kept in mind,--first, what
would have been the temper of Europe without the charity and labour
meant by 'bearing the cross'; then, secondly, what would the intellect
of Europe have become without Biblical literature; and lastly, what
would the social order of Europe have become without its hierarchy.

43. You see I have connected the words 'charity' and 'labour' under
the general term of 'bearing the cross.' "If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, (for charity) and take up his cross (of
pain) and follow me."

The idea has been _exactly_ reversed by modern Protestantism, which
sees, in the cross, not a furca to which it is to be nailed;
but a raft on which it, and all its valuable properties,[37] are to be
floated into Paradise.

[Footnote 37: Quite one of the most curious colours of modern
Evangelical thought is its pleasing connection of Gospel truth with
the extension of lucrative commerce! See farther the note at p. 83.]

44. Only, therefore, in days when the Cross was received with courage,
the Scripture searched with honesty, and the Pastor heard in faith,
can the pure word of God, and the bright sword of the Spirit, be
recognised in the heart and hand of Christianity. The effect of
Biblical poetry and legend on its intellect, must be traced farther,
through decadent ages, and in unfenced fields;--producing 'Paradise
Lost' for us, no less than the 'Divina Commedia';--Goethe's 'Faust,'
and Byron's 'Cain,' no less than the 'Imitatio Christi.'

45. Much more, must the scholar, who would comprehend in any degree
approaching to completeness, the influence of the Bible on mankind, be
able to read the interpretations of it which rose into the great arts of
Europe at their culmination. In every province of Christendom, according
to the degree of art-power it possessed, a series of illustrations of
the Bible were produced as time went on; beginning with vignetted
illustrations of manuscript, advancing into life-size sculpture, and
concluding in perfect power of realistic painting. These teachings and
preachings of the Church, by means of art, are not only a most important
part of the general Apostolic Acts of Christianity; but their study is a
necessary part of Biblical scholarship, so that no man can in any large
sense understand the Bible itself until he has learned also to read
these national commentaries upon it, and been made aware of their
collective weight. The Protestant reader, who most imagines himself
independent in his thought, and private in his study, of Scripture, is
nevertheless usually at the mercy of the nearest preacher who has a
pleasant voice and ingenious fancy; receiving from him thankfully, and
often reverently, whatever interpretation of texts the agreeable voice
or ready wit may recommend: while, in the meantime, he remains entirely
ignorant of, and if left to his own will, invariably destroys as
injurious, the deeply meditated interpretations of Scripture which, in
their matter, have been sanctioned by the consent of all the Christian
Church for a thousand years; and in their treatment, have been exalted
by the trained skill and inspired imagination of the noblest souls ever
enclosed in mortal clay.

46. There are few of the fathers of the Christian Church whose
commentaries on the Bible, or personal theories of its gospel, have
not been, to the constant exultation of the enemies of the Church,
fretted and disgraced by angers of controversy, or weakened and
distracted by irreconcilable heresy. On the contrary, the scriptural
teaching, through their art, of such men as Orcagna, Giotto, Angelico,
Luca della Robbia, and Luini, is, literally, free from all earthly
taint of momentary passion; its patience, meekness, and quietness are
incapable of error through either fear or anger; they are able,
without offence, to say all that they wish; they are bound by
tradition into a brotherhood which represents unperverted doctrines by
unchanging scenes; and they are compelled by the nature of their work
to a deliberation and order of method which result in the purest state
and frankest use of all intellectual power.

47. I may at once, and without need of returning to this question,
illustrate the difference in dignity and safety between the mental
actions of literature and art, by referring to a passage, otherwise
beautifully illustrative of St. Jerome's sweetness and simplicity of
character, though quoted, in the place where we find it, with no such
favouring intention,--namely, in the pretty letter of Queen Sophie
Charlotte, (father's mother of Frederick the Great,) to the Jesuit
Vota, given in part by Carlyle in his first volume, ch. iv.

"'How can St. Jerome, for example, be a key to Scripture?' she
insinuates; citing from Jerome this remarkable avowal of his method of
composing books;--especially of his method in that book, _Commentary on
the Galatians_, where he accuses both Peter and Paul of simulation, and
even of hypocrisy. The great St. Augustine has been charging him with
this sad fact, (says her Majesty, who gives chapter and verse,) and
Jerome answers, 'I followed the commentaries of Origen, of'--five or
six different persons, who turned out mostly to be heretics before
Jerome had quite done with them, in coming years, 'And to confess the
honest truth to you,' continues Jerome, 'I read all that, and after
having crammed my head with a great many things, I sent for my
amanuensis, and dictated to him, now my own thoughts, now those of
others, without much recollecting the order, nor sometimes the words,
nor even the sense'! In another place, (in the book itself further
on[38]) he says, 'I do not myself write; I have an amanuensis, and I
dictate to him what comes into my mouth. If I wish to reflect a little,
or to say the thing better, or a better thing, he knits his brows, and
the whole look of him tells me sufficiently that he cannot endure to
wait.' Here is a sacred old gentleman whom it is not safe to depend upon
for interpreting the Scriptures,--thinks her Majesty, but does not say
so,--leaving Father Vota to his reflections." Alas, no, Queen Sophie,
neither old St. Jerome's, nor any other human lips nor mind, may be
depended upon in that function; but only the Eternal Sophia, the Power
of God and the Wisdom of God: yet this you may see of your old
interpreter, that he is wholly open, innocent, and true, and that,
through such a person, whether forgetful of his author, or hurried by
his scribe, it is more than probable you may hear what Heaven knows to
be best for you; and extremely improbable you should take the least
harm,--while by a careful and cunning master in the literary art,
reticent of his doubts, and dexterous in his sayings, any number of
prejudices or errors might be proposed to you acceptably, or even
fastened in you fatally, though all the while you were not the least
required to confide in his inspiration.

[Footnote 38: 'Commentary on the Galatians,' Chap. iii.]

48. For indeed, the only confidence, and the only safety which in such
matters we can either hold or hope, are in our own desire to be rightly
guided, and willingness to follow in simplicity the guidance granted.
But all our conceptions and reasonings on the subject of inspiration
have been disordered by our habit, first of distinguishing falsely--or
at least needlessly--between inspiration of words and of acts; and
secondly by our attribution of inspired strength or wisdom to some
persons or some writers only, instead of to the whole body of believers,
in so far as they are partakers of the Grace of Christ, the Love of God,
and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost. In the degree in which every
Christian receives, or refuses, the several gifts expressed by that
general benediction, he enters or is cast out from the inheritance of
the saints,--in the exact degree in which he denies the Christ, angers
the Father, and grieves the Holy Spirit, he becomes uninspired or
unholy,--and in the measure in which he trusts Christ, obeys the Father,
and consents with the Spirit, he becomes inspired in feeling, act, word,
and reception of word, according to the capacities of his nature. He is
not gifted with higher ability, nor called into new offices, but enabled
to use his granted natural powers, in their appointed place, to the best
purpose. A child is inspired as a child, and a maiden as a maiden; the
weak, even in their weakness, and the wise, only in their hour.

That is the simply determinable _theory_ of the inspiration of all
true members of the Church; its truth can only be known by proving it
in trial: but I believe there is no record of any man's having tried
and declared it vain.[39]

[Footnote 39: Compare the closing paragraph in p. 45 of 'The Shrine of
the Slaves.' Strangely, as I revise _this_ page for press, a slip is
sent me from 'The Christian' newspaper, in which the comment of the
orthodox evangelical editor may be hereafter representative to us of
the heresy of his sect; in its last audacity, actually _opposing_ the
power of the Spirit to the work of Christ. (I only wish I had been at
Matlock, and heard the kind physician's sermon.)

"An interesting and somewhat unusual sight was seen in Derbyshire on
Saturday last--two old fashioned Friends, dressed in the original garb
of the Quakers, preaching on the roadside to a large and attentive
audience in Matlock. One of them, who is a doctor in good practice in
the county, by name Dr. Charles A. Fox, made a powerful and effective
appeal to his audience to see to it that each one was living in
obedience to the light of the Holy Spirit within. Christ _within_ was
the hope of glory, and it was as He was followed in the ministry of
the Spirit that we were saved by Him, who became thus to each the
author and finisher of faith. He cautioned his hearers against
building their house on the sand by believing in the free and easy
Gospel so commonly preached to the wayside hearers, as if we were
saved by 'believing' this or that. Nothing short of the work of the
Holy Ghost in the soul of each one could save us, and to preach
anything short of this was simply to delude the simple and unwary in
the most terrible form.

"[It would be unfair to criticise an address from so brief an
abstract, but we must express our conviction that the obedience of
Christ unto death, the death of the Cross, _rather_ than the work of
the Spirit in us, is the good tidings for sinful men.--Ed.]"

In juxtaposition with this editorial piece of modern British press
theology, I will simply place the 4th, 6th, and 13th verses of Romans
viii., italicising the expressions which are of deepest import, and
always neglected. "That the _righteousness of the_ LAW might be
fulfilled _in us_, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.... For to be carnally _minded_, is death, but to be
spiritually _minded_, is life, and peace.... For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if _ye through the Spirit_ do mortify the
_deeds_ of the body, ye shall live."

It would be well for Christendom if the Baptismal service explained
what it professes to abjure.]

49. Beyond this theory of general inspiration, there is that of
special call and command, with actual dictation of the deeds to be
done or words to be said. I will enter at present into no examination
of the evidences of such separating influence; it is not claimed by
the Fathers of the Church, either for themselves, or even for the
entire body of the Sacred writers, but only ascribed to certain
passages dictated at certain times for special needs: and there is no
possibility of attaching the idea of infallible truth to any form of
human language in which even these exceptional passages have been
delivered to us. But this is demonstrably true of the entire volume of
them as we have it, and read,--each of us as it may be rendered in his
native tongue; that, however mingled with mystery which we are not
required to unravel, or difficulties which we should be insolent in
desiring to solve, it contains plain teaching for men of every rank of
soul and state of life, which so far as they honestly and implicitly
obey, they will be happy and innocent to the utmost powers of their
nature, and capable of victory over all adversities, whether of
temptation or pain.

50. Indeed, the Psalter alone, which practically was the service book of
the Church for many ages, contains merely in the first half of it the
sum of personal and social wisdom. The 1st, 8th, 12th, 14th, 15th,
19th, 23rd, and 24th psalms, well learned and believed, are enough for
all personal guidance; the 48th, 72nd, and 75th, have in them the law
and the prophecy of all righteous government; and every real triumph of
natural science is anticipated in the 104th.

51. For the contents of the entire volume, consider what other group
of historic and didactic literature has a range comparable with it.
There are--

I. The stories of the Fall and of the Flood, the grandest human
traditions founded on a true horror of sin.

II. The story of the Patriarchs, of which the effective truth is
visible to this day in the polity of the Jewish and Arab races.

III. The story of Moses, with the results of that tradition in the
moral law of all the civilized world.

IV. The story of the Kings--virtually that of all Kinghood, in David,
and of all Philosophy, in Solomon: culminating in the Psalms and
Proverbs, with the still more close and practical wisdom of
Ecclesiasticus and the Son of Sirach.

V. The story of the Prophets--virtually that of the deepest mystery,
tragedy, and permanent fate, of national existence.

VI. The story of Christ.

VII. The moral law of St. John, and his closing Apocalypse of its
fulfilment.

Think, if you can match that table of contents in any other--I do not
say 'book' but 'literature.' Think, so far as it is possible for any
of us--either adversary or defender of the faith--to extricate his
intelligence from the habit and the association of moral sentiment
based upon the Bible, what literature could have taken its place, or
fulfilled its function, though every library in the world had remained
unravaged, and every teacher's truest words had been written down?

52. I am no despiser of profane literature. So far from it that I
believe no interpretations of Greek religion have ever been so
affectionate, none of Roman religion so reverent, as those which will be
found at the base of my art teaching, and current through the entire
body of my works. But it was from the Bible that I learned the symbols
of Homer, and the faith of Horace; the duty enforced upon me in early
youth of reading every word of the gospels and prophecies as if written
by the hand of God, gave me the habit of awed attention which afterwards
made many passages of the profane writers, frivolous to an irreligious
reader, deeply grave to me. How far my mind has been paralysed by the
faults and sorrow of life,--how far short its knowledge may be of what I
might have known, had I more faithfully walked in the light I had, is
beyond my conjecture or confession: but as I never wrote for my own
pleasure or self-proclaiming, I have been guarded, as men who so write
always will be, from errors dangerous to others; and the fragmentary
expressions of feeling or statements of doctrine, which from time to
time I have been able to give, will be found now by an attentive reader
to bind themselves together into a general system of interpretation of
Sacred literature,--both classic and Christian, which will enable him
without injustice to sympathize in the faiths of candid and generous
souls, of every age and every clime.

53. That there _is_ a Sacred classic literature, running parallel with
that of the Hebrews, and coalescing in the symbolic legends of
mediæval Christendom, is shown in the most tender and impressive way
by the independent, yet similar, influence of Virgil upon Dante, and
upon Bishop Gawaine Douglas. At earlier dates, the teaching of every
master trained in the Eastern schools was necessarily grafted on the
wisdom of the Greek mythology; and thus the story of the Nemean Lion,
with the aid of Athena in its conquest, is the real root-stock of the
legend of St. Jerome's companion, conquered by the healing gentleness
of the Spirit of Life.

54. I call it a legend only. Whether Heracles ever slew, or St. Jerome
ever cherished, the wild or wounded creature, is of no moment to us in
learning what the Greeks meant by their vase-outlines of the great
contest, or the Christian painters by their fond insistence on the
constancy of the Lion-friend. Former tradition, in the story of
Samson,--of the disobedient prophet,--of David's first inspired victory,
and finally of the miracle wrought in the defence of the most favoured
and most faithful of the greater Prophets, runs always parallel in
symbolism with the Dorian fable: but the legend of St. Jerome takes up
the prophecy of the Millennium, and foretells, with the Cumæan Sibyl,
and with Isaiah, a day when the Fear of Man shall be laid in
benediction, not enmity, on inferior beings,--when they shall not hurt
nor destroy in all the holy Mountain, and the Peace of the Earth shall
be as far removed from its present sorrow, as the present gloriously
animate universe from the nascent desert, whose deeps were the place of
dragons, and its mountains, domes of fire.

Of that day knoweth no man; but the Kingdom of God is already come to
those who have tamed in their own hearts what was rampant of the lower
nature, and have learned to cherish what is lovely and human, in the
wandering children of the clouds and fields.

AVALLON, _28th August_, 1882.




CHAPTER IV.

INTERPRETATIONS.


1. It is the admitted privilege of a custode who loves his cathedral
to depreciate, in its comparison, all the other cathedrals of his
country that resemble, and all the edifices on the globe that differ
from it. But I love too many cathedrals--though I have never had the
happiness of becoming the custode of even one--to permit myself the
easy and faithful exercise of the privilege in question; and I must
vindicate my candour, and my judgment, in the outset, by confessing
that the cathedral of AMIENS has nothing to boast of in the way of
towers,--that its central flèche is merely the pretty caprice of a
village carpenter,--that the total structure is in dignity inferior to
Chartres, in sublimity to Beauvais, in decorative splendour to Rheims,
and in loveliness of figure-sculpture to Bourges. It has nothing like
the artful pointing and moulding of the arcades of Salisbury--nothing
of the might of Durham;--no Dædalian inlaying like Florence, no glow
of mythic fantasy like Verona. And yet, in all, and more than these,
ways, outshone or overpowered, the cathedral of Amiens deserves the
name given it by M. Viollet le Duc--

         "The Parthenon of Gothic Architecture."[40]

2. Of Gothic, mind you; Gothic clear of Roman tradition, and of
Arabian taint; Gothic pure, authoritative, unsurpassable, and
unaccusable;--its proper principles of structure being once understood
and admitted.

[Footnote 40: Of French Architecture, accurately, in the place quoted,
"Dictionary of Architecture," vol. i. p. 71; but in the article
"Cathédrale," it is called (vol. ii. p. 330) "l'église _ogivale_ par
excellence."]

No well-educated traveller is now without some consciousness of the
meaning of what is commonly and rightly called "purity of style," in
the modes of art which have been practised by civilized nations; and
few are unaware of the distinctive aims and character of Gothic. The
purpose of a good Gothic builder was to raise, with the native stone
of the place he had to build in, an edifice as high and as spacious as
he could, with calculable and visible security, in no protracted and
wearisome time, and with no monstrous or oppressive compulsion of
human labour.

He did not wish to exhaust in the pride of a single city the energies of
a generation, or the resources of a kingdom; he built for Amiens with
the strength and the exchequer of Amiens; with chalk from the cliffs of
the Somme,[41] and under the orders of two successive bishops, one of
whom directed the foundations of the edifice, and the other gave thanks
in it for its completion. His object, as a designer, in common with all
the sacred builders of his time in the North, was to admit as much light
into the building as was consistent with the comfort of it; to make its
structure intelligibly admirable, but not curious or confusing; and to
enrich and enforce the understood structure with ornament sufficient for
its beauty, yet yielding to no wanton enthusiasm in expenditure, nor
insolent in giddy or selfish ostentation of skill; and finally, to make
the external sculpture of its walls and gates at once an alphabet and
epitome of the religion, by the knowledge and inspiration of which an
acceptable worship might be rendered, within those gates, to the Lord
whose Fear was in His Holy Temple, and whose seat was in Heaven.

[Footnote 41: It was a universal principle with the French builders of
the great ages to use the stones of their quarries as they lay in the
bed; if the beds were thick, the stones were used of their full
thickness--if thin, of their necessary thinness, adjusting them with
beautiful care to directions of thrust and weight. The natural blocks
were never sawn, only squared into fitting, the whole native strength
and crystallization of the stone being thus kept unflawed--"_ne
dédoublant jamais_ une pierre. Cette méthode est excellente, elle
conserve à la pierre toute sa force naturelle,--tous ses moyens de
résistance." See M. Viollet le Duc, Article "Construction"
(Matériaux), vol. iv. p. 129. He adds the very notable fact that, _to
this day, in seventy departments of France, the use of the stone-saw
is unknown_.]

3. It is not easy for the citizen of the modern aggregate of bad
building, and ill-living held in check by constables, which we call a
town,--of which the widest streets are devoted by consent to the
encouragement of vice, and the narrow ones to the concealment of
misery,--not easy, I say, for the citizen of any such mean city to
understand the feeling of a burgher of the Christian ages to his
cathedral. For him, the quite simply and frankly-believed text, "Where
two or three are gathered in My name, there am I in the midst of
them," was expanded into the wider promise to many honest and
industrious persons gathered in His name--"They shall be my people and
I will be their God";--deepened in his reading of it, by some lovely
local and simply affectionate faith that Christ, as he was a Jew among
Jews, and a Galilean among Galileans, was also, in His nearness to
any--even the poorest--group of disciples, as one of their nation; and
that their own "Beau Christ d'Amiens" was as true a compatriot to them
as if He had been born of a Picard maiden.

4. It is to be remembered, however--and this is a theological point on
which depended much of the structural development of the northern
basilicas--that the part of the building in which the Divine presence
was believed to be constant, as in the Jewish Holy of Holies, was only
the enclosed choir; in front of which the aisles and transepts might
become the King's Hall of Justice, as in the presence-chamber of Christ;
and whose high altar was guarded always from the surrounding eastern
aisles by a screen of the most finished workmanship; while from those
surrounding aisles branched off a series of radiating chapels or cells,
each dedicated to some separate saint. This conception of the company of
Christ with His saints, (the eastern chapel of all being the Virgin's,)
was at the root of the entire disposition of the apse with its
supporting and dividing buttresses and piers; and the architectural form
can never be well delighted in, unless in some sympathy with the
spiritual imagination out of which it rose. We talk foolishly and
feebly of symbols and types: in old Christian architecture, every part
is _literal_: the cathedral _is_ for its builders the House of God;--it
is surrounded, like an earthly king's, with minor lodgings for the
servants; and the glorious carvings of the exterior walls and interior
wood of the choir, which an English rector would almost instinctively
think of as done for the glorification of the canons, was indeed the
Amienois carpenter's way of making his Master-carpenter
comfortable,[42]--nor less of showing his own native and insuperable
virtue of carpenter, before God and man.

[Footnote 42: The philosophic reader is quite welcome to 'detect' and
'expose' as many carnal motives as he pleases, besides the good
ones,--competition with neighbour Beauvais--comfort to sleepy
heads--solace to fat sides, and the like. He will find at last that no
quantity of competition or comfort-seeking will do anything the like
of this carving now;--still less his own philosophy, whatever its
species: and that it was indeed the little mustard seed of faith in
the heart, with a very notable quantity of honesty besides in the
habit and disposition, that made all the rest grow together for good.]

5. Whatever you wish to see, or are forced to leave unseen, at Amiens,
if the overwhelming responsibilities of your existence, and the
inevitable necessities of precipitate locomotion in their fulfilment,
have left you so much as one quarter of an hour, not out of
breath--for the contemplation of the capital of Picardy, give it
wholly to the cathedral choir. Aisles and porches, lancet windows and
roses, you can see elsewhere as well as here--but such carpenter's
work, you cannot. It is late,--fully developed flamboyant just past
the fifteenth century--and has some Flemish stolidity mixed with the
playing French fire of it; but wood-carving was the Picard's joy from
his youth up, and, so far as I know, there is nothing else so
beautiful cut out of the goodly trees of the world.

Sweet and young-grained wood it is: oak, _trained_ and chosen for such
work, sound now as four hundred years since. Under the carver's hand it
seems to cut like clay, to fold like silk, to grow like living branches,
to leap like living flame. Canopy crowning canopy, pinnacle piercing
pinnacle--it shoots and wreathes itself into an enchanted glade,
inextricable, imperishable, fuller of leafage than any forest, and
fuller of story than any book.[43]

[Footnote 43: Arnold Boulin, master-joiner (menuisier) at Amiens,
solicited the enterprise, and obtained it in the first months of the
year 1508. A contract was drawn and an agreement made with him for the
construction of one hundred and twenty stalls with historical
subjects, high backings, crownings, and pyramidal canopies. It was
agreed that the principal executor should have seven sous of Tournay
(a little less than the sou of France) a day, for himself and his
apprentice, (threepence a day the two--say a shilling a week the
master, and sixpence a week the man,) and for the superintendence of
the whole work, twelve crowns a year, at the rate of twenty-four sous
the crown; (_i.e._, twelve shillings a year). The salary of the simple
workman was only to be three sous a day. For the sculptures and
histories of the seats, the bargain was made separately with Antoine
Avernier, image-cutter, residing at Amiens, at the rate of thirty-two
sous (sixteen pence) the piece. Most of the wood came from Clermont en
Beauvoisis, near Amiens; the finest, for the bas-reliefs, from
Holland, by St. Valery and Abbeville. The Chapter appointed four of
its own members to superintend the work: Jean Dumas, Jean Fabres,
Pierre Vuaille, and Jean Lenglaché, to whom my authors (canons both)
attribute the choice of subjects, the placing of them, and the
initiation of the workmen 'au sens véritable et plus élevé de la Bible
ou des legendes, et portant quelque fois le simple savoir-faire de
l'ouvrier jusqu'à la hauteur du génie du théologien.'

Without pretending to apportion the credit of savoir-faire and
theology in the business, we have only to observe that the whole
company, master, apprentices, workmen, image-cutter, and four canons,
got well into traces, and set to work on the 3rd of July, 1508, in the
great hall of the évêché, which was to be the workshop and studio
during the whole time of the business. In the following year, another
menuisier, Alexander Huet, was associated with the body, to carry on
the stalls on the right hand of the choir, while Arnold Boulin went on
with those on the left. Arnold, leaving his new associate in command
for a time, went to Beauvais and St. Riquier, to see the woodwork
there; and in July of 1511 both the masters went to Rouen together,
'pour étudier les chaires de la cathédrale.' The year before, also,
two Franciscans, monks of Abbeville, 'expert and renowned in working
in wood,' had been called by the Amiens chapter to give their opinion
on things in progress, and had each twenty sous for his opinion, and
travelling expenses.

In 1516, another and an important name appears on the accounts,--that
of Jean Trupin, 'a simple workman at the wages of three sous a day,'
but doubtless a good and spirited carver, whose true portrait it is
without doubt, and by his own hand, that forms the elbow-rest, of the
85th stall (right hand, nearest apse), beneath which is cut his name
JHAN TRUPIN, and again under the 92nd stall, with the added wish, 'Jan
Trupin, God take care of thee' (_Dieu te pourvoie_).

The entire work was ended on St. John's Day, 1522, without (so far as
we hear) any manner of interruption by dissension, death, dishonesty,
or incapacity, among its fellow-workmen, master or servant. And the
accounts being audited by four members of the Chapter, it was found
that the total expense was 9488 livres, 11 sous, and 3 obols
(décimes), or 474 napoleons, 11 sous, 3 décimes of modern French
money, or roughly four hundred sterling English pounds.

For which sum, you perceive, a company of probably six or eight good
workmen, old and young, had been kept merry and busy for fourteen
years; and this that you see--left for substantial result and gift to
you.

I have not examined the carvings so as to assign, with any decision, the
several masters' work; but in general the flower and leaf design in the
traceries will be by the two head menuisiers, and their apprentices; the
elaborate Scripture histories by Avernier, with variously completing
incidental grotesque by Trupin; and the joining and fitting by the
common workmen. No nails are used,--all is morticed, and so beautifully
that the joints have not moved to this day, and are still almost
imperceptible. The four terminal pyramids 'you might take for giant
pines forgotten for six centuries on the soil where the church was
built; they might be looked on at first as a wild luxury of sculpture
and hollow traceries--but examined in analysis they are marvels of order
and system in construction, uniting all the lightness, strength, and
grace of the most renowned spires in the last epoch of the Middle ages.'

The above particulars are all extracted--or simply translated, out of
the excellent description of the "Stalles et les Clôtures du Choeur"
of the Cathedral of Amiens, by MM. les Chanoines Jourdain et Duval
(Amiens, Vv. Alfred Caron, 1867). The accompanying lithographic
outlines are exceedingly good, and the reader will find the entire
series of subjects indicated with precision and brevity, both for the
woodwork and the external veil of the choir, of which I have no room
to speak in this traveller's summary.]

6. I have never been able to make up my mind which was really the best
way of approaching the cathedral for the first time. If you have plenty
of leisure, and the day is fine, and you are not afraid of an hour's
walk, the really right thing to do is to walk down the main street of
the old town, and across the river, and quite out to the chalk hill[44]
out of which the citadel is half quarried--half walled;--and walk to the
top of that, and look down into the citadel's dry 'ditch,'--or, more
truly, dry valley of death, which is about as deep as a glen in
Derbyshire, (or, more precisely, the upper part of the 'Happy Valley'
at Oxford, above Lower Hincksey,) and thence across to the cathedral and
ascending slopes of the city; so, you will understand the real height
and relation of tower and town:--then, returning, find your way to the
Mount Zion of it by any narrow cross streets and chance bridges you
can--the more winding and dirty the streets, the better; and whether you
come first on west front or apse, you will think them worth all the
trouble you have had to reach them.

[Footnote 44: The strongest and finally to be defended part of the
earliest city was on this height.]

7. But if the day be dismal, as it may sometimes be, even in France,
of late years,--or if you cannot or will not walk, which may also
chance, for all our athletics and lawn-tennis,--or if you must really
go to Paris this afternoon, and only mean to see all you can in an
hour or two,--then, supposing that, notwithstanding these weaknesses,
you are still a nice sort of person, for whom it is of some
consequence which way you come at a pretty thing, or begin to look at
it--I _think_ the best way is to walk from the Hotel de France or the
Place de Perigord, up the Street of Three Pebbles, towards the railway
station--stopping a little as you go, so as to get into a cheerful
temper, and buying some bonbons or tarts for the children in one of
the charming patissiers' shops on the left. Just past them, ask for
the theatre; and just past that, you will find, also on the left,
three open arches, through which you can turn, passing the Palais de
Justice, and go straight up to the south transept, which has really
something about it to please everybody. It is simple and severe at the
bottom, and daintily traceried and pinnacled at the top, and yet seems
all of a piece--though it isn't--and everybody _must_ like the taper
and transparent fretwork of the flèche above, which seems to bend to
the west wind,--though it doesn't--at least, the bending is a long
habit, gradually yielded into, with gaining grace and submissiveness,
during the last three hundred years. And, coming quite up to the
porch, everybody must like the pretty French Madonna in the middle of
it, with her head a little aside, and her nimbus switched a little
aside too, like a becoming bonnet. A Madonna in decadence she is,
though, for all, or rather by reason of all, her prettiness, and
her gay soubrette's smile; and she has no business there, neither, for
this is St. Honoré's porch, not hers; and grim and grey St. Honoré
used to stand there to receive you,--he is banished now to the north
porch, where nobody ever goes in. This was done long ago, in the
fourteenth-century days, when the people first began to find
Christianity too serious, and devised a merrier faith for France, and
would have bright-glancing, soubrette Madonnas everywhere--letting
their own dark-eyed Joan of Arc be burned for a witch. And
thenceforward, things went their merry way, straight on, 'ça allait,
ça ira,' to the merriest days of the guillotine.

But they could still carve, in the fourteenth century, and the Madonna
and her hawthorn-blossom lintel are worth your looking at,--much more
the field above, of sculpture as delicate and more calm, which tells
St. Honoré's own story, little talked of now in his Parisian faubourg.

8. I will not keep you just now to tell St. Honoré's story--(only too
glad to leave you a little curious about it, if it were
possible)[45]--for certainly you will be impatient to go into the
church; and cannot enter it to better advantage than by this door. For
all cathedrals of any mark have nearly the same effect when you enter at
the west door; but I know no other which shows so much of its nobleness
from the south interior transept; the opposite rose being of exquisite
fineness in tracery, and lovely in lustre; and the shafts of the
transept aisles forming wonderful groups with those of the choir and
nave; also, the apse shows its height better, as it opens to you when
you advance from the transept into the mid-nave, than when it is seen at
once from the west end of the nave; where it is just possible for an
irreverent person rather to think the nave narrow, than the apse high.
Therefore, if you let me guide you, go in at this south transept door,
(and put a sou into every beggar's box who asks it there,--it is none of
your business whether they should be there or not, nor whether they
deserve to have the sou,--be sure only that you yourself deserve to have
it to give; and give it prettily, and not as if it burnt your fingers).
Then, being once inside, take what first sensation and general glimpse
of it pleases you--promising the custode to come back to _see_ it
properly; (only then mind you keep the promise;) and in this first
quarter of an hour, seeing only what fancy bid you--but at least, as I
said, the apse from mid-nave, and all the traverses of the building,
from its centre. Then you will know, when you go outside again, what the
architect was working for, and what his buttresses and traceries mean.
For the outside of a French cathedral, except for its sculpture, is
always to be thought of as the wrong side of the stuff, in which you
find how the threads go that produce the inside or right-side pattern.
And if you have no wonder in you for that choir and its encompassing
circlet of light, when you look up into it from the cross-centre, you
need not travel farther in search of cathedrals, for the waiting-room of
any station is a better place for you;--but, if it amaze you and delight
you at first, then, the more you know of it, the more it will amaze. For
it is not possible for imagination and mathematics together, to do
anything nobler or stronger than that procession of window, with
material of glass and stone--nor anything which shall look loftier, with
so temperate and prudent measure of actual loftiness.

[Footnote 45: See, however, pages 32 and 130 (§§ 36, 112-114) of the
octavo edition of 'The Two Paths.']

9. From the pavement to the keystone of its vault is but 132 French
feet--about 150 English. Think only--you who have been in
Switzerland,--the Staubbach falls _nine_ hundred! Nay, Dover cliff
under the castle, just at the end of the Marine Parade, is twice as
high; and the little cockneys parading to military polka on the
asphalt below, think themselves about as tall as it, I suppose,--nay,
what with their little lodgings and stodgings and podgings about it,
they have managed to make it look no bigger than a moderate-sized
limekiln. Yet it is twice the height of Amiens' apse!--and it takes
good building, with only such bits of chalk as one can quarry beside
Somme, to make your work stand half that height, for six hundred
years.

10. It takes good building, I say, and you may even aver the
best--that ever was, or is again likely for many a day to be, on the
unquaking and fruitful earth, where one could calculate on a pillar's
standing fast, once well set up; and where aisles of aspen, and
orchards of apple, and clusters of vine, gave type of what might be
most beautifully made sacred in the constancy of sculptured stone.
From the unhewn block set on end in the Druid's Bethel, to _this_
Lord's House and blue-vitrailed gate of Heaven, you have the entire
course and consummation of the Northern Religious Builder's passion
and art.

11. But, note further--and earnestly,--this apse of Amiens is not only
the best, but the very _first_ thing done _perfectly_ in its manner,
by Northern Christendom. In pages 323 and 327 of the sixth volume of
M. Viollet le Duc, you will find the exact history of the development
of these traceries through which the eastern light shines on you as
you stand, from the less perfect and tentative forms of Rheims: and so
momentary was the culmination of the exact rightness, that here, from
nave to transept--built only ten years later,--there is a little
change, not towards decline, but to a not quite necessary precision.
Where decline begins, one cannot, among the lovely fantasies that
succeeded, exactly say--but exactly, and indisputably, we know that
this apse of Amiens is the first virgin perfect work,--Parthenon also
in that sense,--of Gothic Architecture.

12. Who built it, shall we ask? God, and Man,--is the first and most
true answer. The stars in their courses built it, and the Nations.
Greek Athena labours here--and Roman Father Jove, and Guardian Mars.
The Gaul labours here, and the Frank: knightly Norman,--mighty
Ostrogoth,--and wasted anchorite of Idumea.

The actual Man who built it scarcely cared to tell you he did so; nor do
the historians brag of him. Any quantity of heraldries of knaves and
fainéants you may find in what they call their 'history': but this is
probably the first time you ever read the name of Robert of Luzarches. I
say he 'scarcely cared'--we are not sure that he cared at all. He
signed his name nowhere, that I can hear of. You may perhaps find some
recent initials cut by English remarkable visitors desirous of
immortality, here and there about the edifice, but Robert the
builder--or at least the Master of building, cut _his_ on no stone of
it. Only when, after his death, the headstone had been brought forth
with shouting, Grace unto it, this following legend was written,
recording all who had part or lot in the labour, within the middle of
the labyrinth then inlaid in the pavement of the nave. You must read it
trippingly on the tongue: it was rhymed gaily for you by pure French
gaiety, not the least like that of the Théâtre de Folies.

     "En l'an de Grace mil deux cent
     Et vingt, fu l'oeuvre de cheens
     Premièrement encomenchie.
     A donc y ert de cheste evesquie
     Evrart, évêque bénis;
     Et, Roy de France, Loys
       Qui fut fils Phelippe le Sage.
     Qui maistre y ert de l'oeuvre
     Maistre Robert estoit només
     Et de Luzarches surnomés.
     Maistre Thomas fu après lui
     De Cormont. Et après, son filz
     Maistre Regnault, qui mestre
     Fist a chest point chi cheste lectre
     Que l'incarnation valoit
     Treize cent, moins douze, en faloit."

13. I have written the numerals in letters, else the metre would not
have come clear: they were really in figures thus, "II C. et XX,"
"XIII C. moins XII". I quote the inscription from M. l'Abbé Rozé's
admirable little book, "Visite à la Cathédrale d'Amiens,"--Sup. Lib.
de Mgr l'Evêque d'Amiens, 1877,--which every grateful traveller should
buy, for I am only going to steal a little bit of it here and there. I
only wish there had been a translation of the legend to steal, too;
for there are one or two points, both of idea and chronology, in it,
that I should have liked the Abbé's opinion of.

The main purport of the rhyme, however, we perceive to be, line for
line, as follows:--

     "In the year of Grace, Twelve Hundred
     And twenty, the work, then falling to ruin,
     Was first begun again.
     Then was, of this Bishopric
     Everard the blessed Bishop.
     And, King of France, Louis,
     Who was son to Philip the Wise.
     He who was Master of the Work
     Was called Master Robert,
     And called, beyond that, of Luzarches.
     Master Thomas was after him,
     Of Cormont. And after him, his son,
     Master Reginald, who to be put
     Made--at this point--this reading.
     When the Incarnation was of account
     Thirteen hundred, less twelve, which it failed of."

In which legend, while you stand where once it was written (it was
removed--to make the old pavement more polite--in the year, I
sorrowfully observe, of my own earliest tour on the Continent, 1825,
when I had not yet turned my attention to Ecclesiastical
Architecture), these points are noticeable--if you have still a little
patience.

14. 'The work'--_i.e._, the Work of Amiens in especial, her cathedral,
was 'déchéant,' falling to ruin, for the--I cannot at once say--fourth,
fifth, or what time,--in the year 1220. For it was a wonderfully
difficult matter for little Amiens to get this piece of business fairly
done, so hard did the Devil pull against her. She built her first
Bishop's church (scarcely more than St. Firmin's tomb-chapel) about the
year 350, just outside the railway station on the road to Paris;[46]
then, after being nearly herself destroyed, chapel and all, by the Frank
invasion, having recovered, and converted her Franks, she built another
and a properly called cathedral, where this one stands now, under
Bishop St. Save (St. Sauve, or Salve). But even this proper cathedral
was only of wood, and the Normans burnt it in 881. Rebuilt, it stood for
200 years; but was in great part destroyed by lightning in 1019. Rebuilt
again, it and the town were more or less burnt together by lightning, in
1107,--my authority says calmly, "un incendie provoqué par la même cause
détruisit _la ville_, et une partie de la cathédrale." The 'partie'
being rebuilt once more, the whole was again reduced to ashes, "réduite
en cendre par le feu de ciel en 1218, ainsi que tous les titres, les
martyrologies, les calendriers, et les Archives de l'Evêché et du
Chapitre."

[Footnote 46: At St. Acheul. See the first chapter of this book, and
the "Description Historique de la Cathédrale d'Amiens," by A. P. M.
Gilbert. 8vo, Amiens, 1833, pp. 5-7.]

15. It was the fifth cathedral, I count, then, that lay in 'ashes,'
according to Mons. Gilbert--in ruin certainly--déchéant;--and ruin of
a very discouraging completeness it would have been, to less lively
townspeople--in 1218. But it was rather of a stimulating completeness
to Bishop Everard and his people--the ground well cleared for them, as
it were: and lightning (feu de l'enfer, not du ciel, recognized for a
diabolic plague, as in Egypt), was to be defied to the pit. They only
took two years, you see, to pull themselves together; and to work they
went, in 1220, they, and their bishop, and their king, and their
Robert of Luzarches. And this, that roofs you, was what their hands
found to do with their might.

16. Their king was 'à-donc,' 'at that time,' Louis VIII., who is
especially further called the son of Philip of August, or Philip the
Wise, because his father was not dead in 1220; but must have resigned
the practical kingdom to his son, as his own father had done to him;
the old and wise king retiring to his chamber, and thence silently
guiding his son's hands, very gloriously, yet for three years.

But, farther--and this is the point on which chiefly I would have
desired the Abbé's judgment--Louis VIII. died of fever at Montpensier in
1226. And the entire conduct of the main labour of the cathedral, and
the chief glory of its service, as we shall hear presently, was _Saint_
Louis's; for a time of forty-four years. And the inscription was put "à
ce point ci" by the last architect, six years after St. Louis's death.
How is it that the great and holy king is not named?

17. I must not, in this traveller's brief, lose time in conjectural
answers to the questions which every step here will raise from the
ravaged shrine. But this is a very solemn one; and must be kept in our
hearts, till we may perhaps get clue to it. One thing only we are sure
of,--that at least the _due_ honour--alike by the sons of Kings and
sons of Craftsmen--is given always to their fathers; and that
apparently the chief honour of all is given here to Philip the Wise.
From whose house, not of parliament but of peace, came, in the years
when this temple was first in building, an edict indeed of
peace-making: "That it should be criminal for any man to take
vengeance for an insult or injury till forty days after the commission
of the offence--and then only with the approbation of the Bishop of
the Diocese." Which was perhaps a wiser effort to end the Feudal
system in its Saxon sense,[47] than any of our recent projects for
ending it in the Norman one.

[Footnote 47: Feud, Saxon faedh, low Latin Faida (Scottish 'fae,'
English 'foe,' derivative), Johnson. Remember also that the root of
Feud, in its Norman sense of land-allotment, is _foi_, not _fee_,
which Johnson, old Tory as he was, did not observe--neither in general
does the modern Antifeudalist.]

18. "A ce point ci." The point, namely, of the labyrinth inlaid in the
cathedral floor; a recognized emblem of many things to the people, who
knew that the ground they stood on was holy, as the roof over their
head. Chiefly, to them, it was an emblem of noble human
life--strait-gated, narrow-walled, with infinite darknesses and the
"inextricabilis error" on either hand--and in the depth of it, the
brutal nature to be conquered.

19. This meaning, from the proudest heroic, and purest legislative, days
of Greece, the symbol had borne for all men skilled in her traditions:
to the schools of craftsmen the sign meant further their craft's
noblesse, and pure descent from the divinely-terrestrial skill of
Dædalus, the labyrinth-builder, and the first sculptor of imagery
_pathetic_[48] with human life and death.

[Footnote 48:

                      "Tu quoque, magnam
     Partem opere in tanto, sineret dolor, Icare, haberes,
     Bis conatus erat casus effingere in auro,--
     Bis patriæ cecidere manus."

There is, advisedly, no pathos allowed in primary sculpture. Its heroes
conquer without exultation, and die without sorrow.]

20. Quite the most beautiful sign of the power of true
Christian-Catholic faith is this continual acknowledgment by it of the
brotherhood--nay, more, the fatherhood, of the elder nations who had
not seen Christ; but had been filled with the Spirit of God; and
obeyed, according to their knowledge, His unwritten law. The pure
charity and humility of this temper are seen in all Christian art,
according to its strength and purity of race; but best, to the full,
seen and interpreted by the three great Christian-Heathen poets,
Dante, Douglas of Dunkeld,[49] and George Chapman. The prayer with
which the last ends his life's work is, so far as I know, the
perfectest and deepest expression of Natural Religion given us in
literature; and if you can, pray it here--standing on the spot where
the builder once wrote the history of the Parthenon of Christianity.

[Footnote 49: See 'Fors Clavigera,' Letter LXI., p. 22.]

21. "I pray thee, Lord, the Father, and the Guide of our reason, that
we may remember the nobleness with which Thou hast adorned us; and
that Thou wouldst be always on our right hand and on our left,[50] in
the motion of our own Wills: that so we may be purged from the
contagion of the Body and the Affections of the Brute, and overcome
them and rule; and use, as it becomes men to use them, for
instruments. And then, that Thou wouldst be in Fellowship with us for
the careful correction of our reason, and for its conjunction by the
light of truth with the things that truly are.

[Footnote 50: Thus, the command to the children of Israel "that they go
forward" is to their own wills. They obeying, the sea retreats, _but not
before_ they dare to advance into it. _Then_, the waters are a wall unto
them, on their right hand and their left.]

"And in the third place, I pray to Thee the Saviour, that
Thou wouldst utterly cleanse away the closing gloom from
the eyes of our souls, that we may know well who is to be held
for God, and who for mortal. Amen."[51]

[Footnote 51: The original is written in Latin only. "Supplico tibi,
Domine, Pater et Dux rationis nostræ, ut nostræ Nobilitatis
recordemur, quâ tu nos ornasti: et ut tu nobis presto sis, ut iis qui
per sese moventur; ut et a Corporis contagio, Brutorumque affectuum
repurgemur, eosque superemus, atque regamus; et, sicut decet, pro
instruments iis utamur. Deinde, ut nobis adjuncto sis; ad accuratam
rationis nostræ correctionem, et conjunctionem cum iis qui verè sunt,
per lucem veritatis. Et tertium, Salvatori supplex oro, ut ab oculis
animorum nostrorum caliginem prorsus abstergas; ut norimus bene, qui
Deus, aut Mortalis habendus. Amen."]

22. And having prayed this prayer, or at least, read it with honest
wishing, (which if you cannot, there is no hope of your at present
taking pleasure in any human work of large faculty, whether poetry,
painting, or sculpture,) we may walk a little farther westwards down
the nave, where, in the middle of it, but only a few yards from its
end, two flat stones (the custode will show you them), one a little
farther back than the other, are laid over the graves of the two great
bishops, all whose strength of life was given, with the builder's, to
raise this temple. Their actual graves have not been disturbed; but
the tombs raised over them, once and again removed, are now set on
your right and left hand as you look back to the apse, under the third
arch between the nave and aisles.

23. Both are of bronze, cast at one flow--and with insuperable, in
some respects inimitable, skill in the caster's art.

"Chefs-d'oeuvre de fonte,--le tout fondu d'un seul jet, et
admirablement."[52] There are only two other such tombs left in
France, those of the children of St. Louis. All others of their
kind--and they were many in every great cathedral of France--were
first torn from the graves they covered, to destroy the memory of
France's dead; and then melted down into sous and centimes, to buy
gunpowder and absinthe with for her living,--by the Progressive Mind
of Civilization in her first blaze of enthusiasm and new light, from
1789 to 1800.

[Footnote 52: Viollet le Duc, vol. viii., p. 256. He adds: "L'une
d'elles est comme art" (meaning general art of sculpture), "un
monument du premier ordre;" but this is only partially true--also I
find a note in M. Gilbert's account of them, p. 126: "Les deux doigts
qui manquent, à la main droite de l'évêque Gaudefroi paraissent être
un défaut survenu à la fonte." See further, on these monuments, and
those of St. Louis' children, Viollet le Duc, vol, ix., pp. 61, 62.]

The children's tombs, one on each side of the altar of St. Denis, are
much smaller than these, though wrought more beautifully. These beside
you are the _only two Bronze tombs of her Men of the great ages_, left
in France!

24. And they are the tombs of the pastors of her people, who built for
her the first perfect temple to her God. The Bishop Everard's is on
your right, and has engraved round the border of it this
inscription:[53]--

"Who fed the people, who laid the foundations of this
  Structure, to whose care the City was given,
 Here, in ever-breathing balm of fame, rests Everard.
 A man compassionate to the afflicted, the widow's protector, the orphan's
 Guardian. Whom he could, he recreated with gifts.
                To words of men,
 If gentle, a lamb; if violent, a lion; if proud, biting steel."

[Footnote 53: I steal again from the Abbé Rozé the two
inscriptions,--with his introductory notice of the evilly-inspired
interference with them.

"La tombe d'Evrard de Fouilloy, (died 1222,) coulée en bronze en
plein-relief, était supportée dès le principe, par des monstres
engagés dans une maçonnerie remplissant le dessous du monument, pour
indiquer que cet évêque avait posé les fondements de la Cathédrale. Un
_architecte malheureusement inspiré_ a osé arracher la maçonnerie,
pour qu'on ne vit plus la main du prélat fondateur, à la base de
l'édifice.

"On lit, sur la bordure, l'inscription suivante en beaux caractères du
XIII^e siècle:

     "'Qui populum pavit, qui fundam[=e]ta locavit
       Hui[=u]s structure, cuius fuit urbs data cure
       Hic redolens nardus, famâ requiescit Ewardus,
       Vir pius ahflictis, vidvis tutela, relictis
       Custos, quos poterat recreabat munere; vbis,
       Mitib agnus erat, tumidis leo, lima supbis.'

"Geoffrey d'Eu (died 1237) est représenté comme son prédécesseur en
habits épiscopaux, mais le dessous du bronze supporté par des chimères
est évidé, ce prélat ayant élevé l'édifice jusqu'aux voûtes. Voici la
légende gravée sur la bordure:

     "'Ecce premunt humile Gaufridi membra cubile.
       Seu minus aut simile nobis parat omnibus ille;
       Quem laurus gemina decoraverat, in medicinâ
       Lege q[=u] divina, decuerunt cornua bina;
       Clare vir Augensis, quo sedes Ambianensis
       Crevit in imensis; in coelis auctus, Amen, sis.'

Tout est à étudier dans ces deux monuments; tout y est d'un haut
intérêt, quant au dessin, à la sculpture, à l'agencement des ornements
et des draperies."

In saying above that Geoffroy of Eu returned thanks in the Cathedral
for its completion, I meant only that he had brought at least the
choir into condition for service: "Jusqu'aux voûtes" may or may not
mean that the vaulting was closed.]

English, at its best, in Elizabethan days, is a nobler language than
ever Latin was; but its virtue is in colour and tone, not in what may
be called metallic or crystalline condensation. And it is impossible
to translate the last line of this inscription in as few English
words. Note in it first that the Bishop's friends and enemies are
spoken of as in word, not act; because the swelling, or mocking, or
flattering, words of men are indeed what the meek of the earth must
know how to bear and to welcome;--their deeds, it is for kings and
knights to deal with: not but that the Bishops often took deeds in
hand also; and in actual battle they were permitted to strike with the
mace, but not with sword or lance--_i.e._, not to "shed blood"! For it
was supposed that a man might always recover from a mace-blow; (which,
however, would much depend on the bishop's mind who gave it). The
battle of Bouvines, quite one of the most important in mediæval
history, was won against the English, and against odds besides of
Germans, under their Emperor Otho, by two French bishops (Senlis and
Bayeux)--who both generalled the French King's line, and led its
charges. Our Earl of Salisbury surrendered to the Bishop of Bayeux in
person.

25. Note farther, that quite one of the deadliest and most diabolic
powers of evil words, or, rightly so called, blasphemy, has been
developed in modern days in the effect of sometimes quite innocently
meant and enjoyed 'slang.' There are two kinds of slang, in the essence
of it: one 'Thieves' Latin'--the special language of rascals, used for
concealment; the other, one might perhaps best call Louts' Latin!--the
lowering or insulting words invented by vile persons to bring good
things, in their own estimates, to their own level, or beneath it. The
really worst power of this kind of blasphemy is in its often making it
impossible to use plain words without a degrading or ludicrous attached
sense:--thus I could not end my translation of this epitaph, as the old
Latinist could, with the exactly accurate image "to the proud, a
file"--because of the abuse of the word in lower English, retaining,
however, quite shrewdly, the thirteenth-century idea. But the _exact_
force of the symbol here is in its allusion to jewellers' work, filing
down facets. A proud man is often also a precious one: and may be made
brighter in surface, and the purity of his inner self shown, by good
_filing_.

26. Take it all in all, the perfect duty of a Bishop is expressed in
these six Latin lines,--au mieux mieux--beginning with his pastoral
office--_Feed_ my sheep--qui _pavit_ populum. And be assured, good
reader, these ages never could have told you what a Bishop's, or any
other man's, duty was, unless they had each man in his place both done
it well--and seen it well done. The Bishop Geoffroy's tomb is on your
left, and its inscription is:

     "Behold, the limbs of Godfrey press their lowly bed,
      Whether He is preparing for us all one less than, or like it.
      Whom the twin laurels adorned, in medicine
      And in divine law, the dual crests became him.
      Bright-shining man of Eu, by whom the throne of Amiens
      Rose into immensity, be _thou_ increased in Heaven."

                                                     Amen.

And now at last--this reverence done and thanks paid--we will turn
from these tombs, and go out at one of the western doors--and so see
gradually rising above us the immensity of the three porches, and of
the thoughts engraved in them.

27. What disgrace or change has come upon them, I will not tell you
to-day--except only the 'immeasurable' loss of the great old
foundation-steps, open, sweeping broad from side to side for all who
came; unwalled, undivided, sunned all along by the westering day,
lighted only by the moon and the stars at night; falling steep and many
down the hillside--ceasing one by one, at last wide and few towards the
level--and worn by pilgrim feet, for six hundred years. So I once saw
them, and twice,--such things can now be never seen more.

Nor even of the west front itself, above, is much of the old masonry
left: but in the porches nearly all,--except the actual outside
facing, with its rose moulding, of which only a few flowers have been
spared here and there.[54] But the sculpture has been carefully and
honourably kept and restored to its place--pedestals or niches
restored here and there with clay; or some which you see white and
crude, re-carved entirely; nevertheless the impression you may receive
from the whole is still what the builder meant; and I will tell you
the order of its theology without further notices of its decay.

[Footnote 54: The horizontal lowest part of the moulding between the
northern and central porch is old. Compare its roses with the new ones
running round the arches above--and you will know what 'Restoration'
means.]

28. You will find it always well, in looking at any cathedral, to make
your quarters of the compass sure, in the beginning; and to remember
that, as you enter it, you are looking and advancing eastward; and
that if it has three entrance porches, that on your left in entering
is the northern, that on your right the southern. I shall endeavour in
all my future writing of architecture, to observe the simple law of
always calling the door of the north transept the north door; and that
on the same side of the west front, the northern door, and so of their
opposites. This will save, in the end, much printing and much
confusion, for a Gothic cathedral has, almost always, these five great
entrances; which may be easily, if at first attentively, recognized
under the titles of the Central door (or porch), the Northern door,
the Southern door, the North door, and the South door.

But when we use the terms right and left, we ought always
to use them as in going _out_ of the cathedral, or walking down the
nave,--the entire north side and aisles of the building being its
right side, and the south, its left,--these terms being only used well
and authoritatively, when they have reference either to the image of
Christ in the apse or on the rood, or else to the central statue,
whether of Christ, the Virgin, or a saint, in the west front. At
Amiens, this central statue, on the 'trumeau' or supporting and
dividing pillar of the central porch, is of Christ Immanuel,--God
_with_ us. On His right hand and His left, occupying the entire walls
of the central porch, are the apostles and the four greater prophets.
The twelve minor prophets stand side by side on the front, three on
each of its great piers.[55]

[Footnote 55: See now the plan at the end of this chapter.]

The northern porch is dedicated to St. Firmin, the first Christian
missionary to Amiens.

The southern porch, to the Virgin.

But these are both treated as withdrawn behind the great foundation of
Christ and the Prophets; and their narrow recesses partly conceal
their sculpture, until you enter them. What you have first to think
of, and read, is the scripture of the great central porch, and the
façade itself.

29. You have then in the centre of the front, the image of Christ
Himself, receiving you: "I am the Way, the truth and the life." And the
order of the attendant powers may be best understood by thinking of them
as placed on Christ's right and left hand: this being also the order
which the builder adopts in his Scripture history on the façade--so that
it is to be read from left to right--_i.e._ from Christ's left to
Christ's right, as _He_ sees it. Thus, therefore, following the order of
the great statues: first in the central porch, there are six apostles on
Christ's right hand, and six on His left. On His left hand, next to Him,
Peter; then in receding order, Andrew, James, John, Matthew, Simon; on
His right hand, next Him, Paul; and in receding order, James the Bishop,
Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas and Jude. These opposite ranks of the
Apostles occupy what may be called the apse or curved bay of the porch,
and form a nearly semicircular group, clearly visible as we approach.
But on the sides of the porch, outside the lines of apostles, and not
seen clearly till we enter the porch, are the four greater prophets. On
Christ's left, Isaiah and Jeremiah, on His right, Ezekiel and Daniel.

30. Then in front, along the whole façade--read in order from Christ's
left to His right--come the series of the twelve minor prophets, three
to each of the four piers of the temple, beginning at the south angle
with Hosea, and ending with Malachi.

As you look full at the façade in front, the statues which fill the
minor porches are either obscured in their narrower recesses or
withdrawn behind each other so as to be unseen. And the entire mass of
the front is seen, literally, as built on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief
corner-stone. Literally _that_; for the receding Porch is a deep
'angulus,' and its mid-pillar is the 'Head of the Corner.'

Built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, that is to say
of the Prophets who foretold _Christ_, and the Apostles who declared
Him. Though Moses was an Apostle, of _God_, he is not here--though
Elijah was a Prophet, of _God_, he is not here. The voice of the
entire building is that of the Heaven at the Transfiguration, "This is
my beloved Son, hear ye Him."

31. There is yet another and a greater prophet still, who, as it seems
at first, is not here. Shall the people enter the gates of the temple,
singing "Hosanna to the Son of _David_"; and see no image of His
father, then?--Christ Himself declare, "I am the root and the
offspring of David"; and yet the Root have no sign near it of its
Earth?

Not so. David and his Son are together. David is the pedestal of the
Christ.

32. We will begin our examination of the Temple front, therefore, with
this its goodly pedestal stone. The statue of David is only two-thirds
life-size, occupying the niche in front of the pedestal. He holds his
sceptre in his right hand, the scroll in his left. King and Prophet,
type of all Divinely right doing, and right claiming, and right
proclaiming, kinghood, for ever.

The pedestal of which this statue forms the fronting or Western
sculpture, is square, and on the two sides of it are two flowers in
vases, on its north side the lily, and on its south the rose. And the
entire monolith is one of the noblest pieces of Christian sculpture in
the world.

Above this pedestal comes a minor one, bearing in front of it a
tendril of vine which completes the floral symbolism of the whole. The
plant which I have called a lily is not the Fleur de Lys, nor the
Madonna's, but an ideal one with bells like the crown Imperial
(Shakespeare's type of 'lilies of all kinds'), representing the _mode
of growth_ of the lily of the valley, which could not be sculptured so
large in its literal form without appearing monstrous, and is exactly
expressed in this tablet--as it fulfils, together with the rose and
vine, its companions, the triple saying of Christ, "I am the Rose of
Sharon, and the Lily of the Valley." "I am the true Vine."

       *       *       *       *       *

33. On the side of the upper stone are supporters of a different
character. Supporters,--not captives nor victims; the Cockatrice and
Adder. Representing the most active evil principles of the earth, as
in their utmost malignity; still, Pedestals of Christ, and even in
their deadly life, accomplishing His final will.

Both creatures are represented accurately in the mediæval traditional
form, the cockatrice half dragon, half cock; the deaf adder laying one
ear against the ground and stopping the other with her tail.

The first represents the infidelity of Pride. The cockatrice--king
serpent or highest serpent--saying that he _is_ God, and _will be_
God.

The second, the infidelity of Death. The adder (nieder or nether
snake) saying that he _is_ mud, and _will be_ mud.

34. Lastly, and above all, set under the feet of the statue
of Christ Himself, are the lion and dragon; the images of Carnal sin,
or _Human sin_, as distinguished from the Spiritual and Intellectual
sin of Pride, by which the angels also fell.

To desire kingship rather than servantship--the Cockatrice's sin, or
deaf Death rather than hearkening Life--the Adder's sin,--these are
both possible to all the intelligences of the universe. But the
distinctively Human sins, anger and lust, seeds in our race of their
perpetual sorrow--Christ in His own humanity, conquered; and conquers
in His disciples. Therefore His foot is on the heads of these; and the
prophecy, "Inculcabis super Leonem et Aspidem," is recognized always
as fulfilled in Him, and in all His true servants, according to the
height of their authority, and the truth of their power.

35. In this mystic sense, Alexander III. used the words, in restoring
peace to Italy, and giving forgiveness to her deadliest enemy, under
the porch of St. Mark's.[56] But the meaning of every act, as of every
art, of the Christian ages, lost now for three hundred years, cannot
but be in our own times read reversed, if at all, through the
counter-spirit which we now have reached; glorifying Pride and Avarice
as the virtues by which all things move and have their being--walking
after our own lusts as our sole guides to salvation, and foaming out
our own shame for the sole earthly product of our hands and lips.

[Footnote 56: See my abstract of the history of Barbarossa and
Alexander, in 'Fiction, Fair and Foul,' '_Nineteenth Century_,'
November, 1880, pp. 752 _seq._]

36. Of the statue of Christ, itself, I will not speak here at any
length, as no sculpture would satisfy, or ought to satisfy, the hope of
any loving soul that has learned to trust in Him; but at the time, it
was beyond what till then had been reached in sculptured tenderness; and
was known far and near as the "Beau Dieu d'Amiens."[57] Yet understood,
observe, just as clearly to be no more than a symbol of the Heavenly
Presence, as the poor coiling worms below were no more than symbols of
the demoniac ones. No _idol_, in our sense of the word--only a letter,
or sign of the Living Spirit,--which, however, was indeed conceived by
every worshipper as here meeting him at the temple gate: the Word of
Life, the King of Glory, and the Lord of Hosts.

[Footnote 57: See account, and careful drawing of it, in Viollet le
Duc--article "Christ," Dict. of Architecture, iii. 245.]

"Dominus Virtutum," "Lord of Virtues,"[58] is the best single rendering
of the idea conveyed to a well-taught disciple in the thirteenth
century by the words of the twenty-fourth Psalm.

[Footnote 58: See the circle of the Powers of the Heavens in the
Byzantine rendering. I. Wisdom; II. Thrones; III. Dominations; IV.
Angels; V. Archangels; VI. Virtues; VII. Potentates; VIII. Princes;
IX. Seraphim. In the Gregorian order, (Dante, Par. xxviii., Cary's
note,) the Angels and Archangels are separated, giving altogether nine
orders, but not ranks. Note that in the Byzantine circle the cherubim
are first, and that it is the strength of the Virtues which calls on
the dead to rise ('St. Mark's Rest,' p. 97, and pp. 158-159).]

37. Under the feet of His apostles, therefore, in the quatrefoil
medallions of the foundation, are represented the virtues which each
Apostle taught, or in his life manifested;--it may have been, sore
tried, and failing in the very strength of the character which he
afterwards perfected. Thus St. Peter, denying in fear, is afterwards
the Apostle of courage; and St. John, who, with his brother, would
have burnt the inhospitable village, is afterwards the Apostle of
love. Understanding this, you see that in the sides of the porch, the
apostles with their special virtues stand thus in opposite ranks.

Now you see how these virtues answer to each other in their opposite
ranks. Remember the left-hand side is always the first, and see how
the left-hand virtues lead to the right hand:--

                   Courage        to Faith.
                   Patience       to Hope.
                   Gentillesse    to Charity.
                   Love           to Chastity.
                   Obedience      to Wisdom.
                   Perseverance   to Humility.

38. Note farther that the Apostles are all tranquil, nearly all with
books, some with crosses, but all with the same message,--"Peace be to
this house. And if the Son of Peace be there," etc.[59]

[Footnote 59: The modern slang name for a priest, among the mob of
France, is a 'Pax Vobiscum,' or shortly, a Vobiscum.]

ST. PAUL,              Faith.     Courage,      ST. PETER.

ST. JAMES THE BISHOP,  Hope.      Patience,     ST. ANDREW.

ST. PHILIP,            Charity.   Gentillesse,  ST. JAMES.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW,       Chastity.  Love,         ST. JOHN.

ST. THOMAS,            Wisdom.    Obedience,    ST. MATTHEW.

ST. JUDE,              Humility.  Perseverance, ST. SIMON.

But the Prophets--all seeking, or wistful, or tormented, or wondering,
or praying, except only Daniel. The _most_ tormented is Isaiah;
spiritually sawn asunder. No scene of his martyrdom below, but his
seeing the Lord in His temple, and yet feeling he had unclean lips.
Jeremiah also carries his cross--but more serenely.

39. And now, I give in clear succession, the order of the statues of
the whole front, with the subjects of the quatrefoils beneath each of
them, marking the upper quatrefoil A, the lower B. The six prophets
who stand at the angles of the porches, Amos, Obadiah, Micah, Nahum,
Zephaniah, and Haggai, have each of them four quatrefoils, marked, A
and C the upper ones, B and D the lower.

Beginning, then, on the left-hand side of the central porch, and
reading outwards, you have--

         1. ST. PETER.

                             A. Courage.
                             B. Cowardice.

         2. ST. ANDREW.

                             A. Patience.
                             B. Anger.

         3. ST. JAMES.

                             A. Gentillesse.
                             B. Churlishness.

         4. ST. JOHN.

                             A. Love.
                             B. Discord.

         5. ST. MATTHEW.

                             A. Obedience.
                             B. Rebellion.

         6. ST. SIMON.

                             A. Perseverance.
                             B. Atheism.

Now, right-hand side of porch, reading outwards:

         7. ST. PAUL.

                             A. Faith.
                             B. Idolatry.

         8. ST. JAMES, BISHOP.

                             A. Hope.
                             B. Despair.

         9. ST. PHILIP.

                             A. Charity.
                             B. Avarice.

        10. ST. BARTHOLOMEW.

                             A. Chastity.
                             B. Lust.

        11. ST. THOMAS.

                             A. Wisdom.
                             B. Folly.

        12. ST. JUDE.

                             A. Humility.
                             B. Pride.

Now, left-hand side again--the two outermost statues:

        13. ISAIAH.

          A. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne."        vi. 1.
          B. "Lo, this hath touched thy lips."              vi. 7.

        14. JEREMIAH.

          A. The Burial of the Girdle.                 xiii. 4, 5.
          B. The Breaking of the Yoke.               xxviii.   10.

Right-hand side:

        15. EZEKIEL.

          A. Wheel within wheel.                            i. 16.
          B. "Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem." xxi.  2.

        16. DANIEL.

          A. "He hath shut the lions' mouths."             vi. 22.
          B. "In the same hour came forth fingers
               of a man's hand."                             v. 5.

40. Now, beginning on the left-hand side (southern side)
of the entire façade, and reading it straight across, not turning into
the porches at all except for the paired quatrefoils:

        17. HOSEA.

          A. "So I bought her to me with fifteen
                pieces of silver."                         iii. 2.
          B. "So will I also be for thee."                 iii. 3.

        18. JOEL.

          A. The Sun and Moon lightless.                   ii. 10.
          B. The Fig-tree and Vine leafless.                i.  7.

        19. AMOS.

  To The {A. "The Lord will cry from Zion."                  i. 2.
  front  {B. "The habitations of the shepherds
                shall mourn."                                i. 2.

  Inside {C. The Lord with the mason's line.               vii. 8.
  porch  {D. The place where it rained not.                 iv. 7.

        20. OBADIAH.

  Inside {A. "I hid them in a cave."            2 Kings xviii. 13.
  porch  {B. He fell on his face.                      xviii.   7.

  To the {C. The captain of fifty.
  front  {D. The messenger.

        21. JONAH.

          A. Escaped from the sea.
          B. Under the gourd.

        22. MICAH.

  To the {A. The Tower of the Flock.                        iv. 8.
  front  {B. Each shall rest, and "none shall make
              them afraid."                                 iv. 4.

  Inside {C. Swords into ploughshares.                      iv. 3.
  porch  {D. Spears into pruning-hooks.                     iv. 3.

        23. NAHUM.

  Inside {A. None shall look back.                          ii. 8.
  porch  {B. The burden of Nineveh.                          i. 1.

  To the {C. Thy princes and thy great ones.              iii. 17.
  front  {D. Untimely figs.                               iii. 12.

        24. HABAKKUK.

          A. "I will watch to see what he will say,"        ii. 1.
          B. The ministry to Daniel.

        25. ZEPHANIAH.

  To the {A. The Lord strikes Ethiopia.                    ii. 12.
  front  {B. The Beasts in Nineveh.                        ii. 15.

  Inside {C. The Lord visits Jerusalem.                     i. 12.
  porch  {D. The Hedgehog and Bittern.[60]                 ii. 14.

        26. HAGGAI.

  Inside {A. The houses of the princes, _ornées de
  porch       lambris_.                                     i.  4.
         {B. The heaven is stayed from dew.                 i. 10.

  To the {C. The Lord's temple desolate.                     i. 4.
  front  {D. "Thus saith the Lord of Hosts."                 i. 7.

        27. ZECHARIAH.

          A. The lifting up of iniquity.                   v. 6-9.
          B. The angel that spake to me.                  iv.   1.

        28. MALACHI.

          A. "Ye have wounded the Lord."                   ii. 17.
          B. This commandment is to _you_.                 ii.  1.

[Footnote 60: See the Septuagint version.]

41. Having thus put the sequence of the statues and their quatrefoils
briefly before the spectator--(in case the railway time presses, it
may be a kindness to him to note that if he walks from the east end of
the cathedral down the street to the south, Rue St. Denis, it takes
him by the shortest line to the station)--I will begin again with St.
Peter, and interpret the sculptures in the quatrefoils a little more
fully. Keeping the fixed numerals for indication of the statues, St.
Peter's quatrefoils will be 1 A and 1 B, and Malachi's 28 A and 28 B.

1, A. COURAGE, with a leopard on his shield; the French and
       English agreeing in the reading of that symbol, down
       to the time of the Black Prince's leopard coinage in
       Aquitaine.[61]

[Footnote 61: For a list of the photographs of the quatrefoils
described in this chapter, see the appendices at the end of this
volume.]

2, B. COWARDICE, a man frightened at an animal darting out
       of a thicket, while a bird sings on. The coward has
       not the heart of a thrush.

2, A. PATIENCE, holding a shield with a bull on it (never giving
       back).[62]

[Footnote 62: In the cathedral of Laon there is a pretty compliment
paid to the oxen who carried the stones of its tower to the hill-top
it stands on. The tradition is that they harnessed themselves,--but
tradition does not say how an ox can harness himself even if he had a
mind. Probably the first form of the story was only that they went
joyfully, "lowing as they went." But at all events their statues are
carved on the height of the tower, eight, colossal, looking from its
galleries across the plains of France. See drawing in Viollet le Duc,
under article "Clocher."]

2, B. ANGER, a woman stabbing a man with a sword. Anger
       is essentially a feminine vice--a man, worth calling so,
       may be driven to fury or insanity by _indignation_,
       (compare the Black Prince at Limoges,) but not by
       anger. Fiendish enough, often so--"Incensed with
       indignation, Satan stood, _unterrified_--" but in that last
       word is the difference, there is as much fear in Anger,
       as there is in Hatred.

3, A. GENTILLESSE, bearing shield with a lamb.

3, B. CHURLISHNESS, again a woman, kicking over her cup-bearer.
       The final forms of ultimate French churlishness
       being in the feminine gestures of the Cancan.
       See the favourite prints in shops of Paris.

4, A. LOVE; the Divine, not human love: "I in them, and
       Thou in me." Her shield bears a tree with many
       branches grafted into its cut-off stem: "In those days
       shall Messiah be cut off, but not for Himself."

4, B. DISCORD, a wife and husband quarrelling. She has
       dropped her distaff (Amiens wool manufacture, see farther
       on--9, A.)

5, A. OBEDIENCE, bears shield with camel. Actually the most
       disobedient and ill-tempered of all serviceable beasts,--yet
       passing his life in the most painful service. I do
       not know how far his character was understood by the
       northern sculptor; but I believe he is taken as a type
       of burden-bearing, without joy or sympathy, such as
       the horse has, and without power of offence, such as the
       ox has. His bite is bad enough, (see Mr. Palgrave's
       account of him,) but presumably little known of at
       Amiens, even by Crusaders, who would always ride
       their own war-horses, or nothing.

5, B. REBELLION, a man snapping his fingers at his Bishop.
       (As Henry the Eighth at the Pope,--and the modern
       French and English cockney at all priests whatever.)

6, A. PERSEVERENCE, the grandest spiritual form of the virtue
       commonly called 'Fortitude.' Usually, overcoming
       or tearing a lion; here, _caressing_ one, and _holding_ her
       crown. "Hold fast that which thou hast, that no man
       take thy crown."

6, B. ATHEISM, leaving his shoes at the church door. The infidel
       fool is always represented in twelfth and thirteenth
       century MS. as barefoot--the Christian having "his
       feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace."
       Compare "How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O
       Prince's Daughter!"

7, A. FAITH, holding cup with cross above it, her accepted
       symbol throughout ancient Europe. It is also an enduring
       one, for, all differences of Church put aside, the
       words, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
       Drink His blood, ye have no life in you," remain in
       their mystery, to be understood only by those who have
       learned the sacredness of food, in all times and places,
       and the laws of life and spirit, dependent on its acceptance,
       refusal, and distribution.

7, B. IDOLATRY, kneeling to a monster. The _contrary_ of
       Faith--not _want_ of Faith. Idolatry is faith in the
       wrong thing, and quite distinct from Faith in _No_ thing
       (6, B), the "Dixit Insipiens." Very wise men may be
       idolaters, but they cannot be atheists.

8, A. HOPE, with Gonfalon Standard and _distant_ crown; as
       opposed to the constant crown of Fortitude (6, A).

        The Gonfalon (Gund, war, fahr, standard, according
      to Poitevin's dictionary), is the pointed ensign of forward
      battle; essentially sacred; hence the constant
      name "Gonfaloniere" of the battle standard-bearers of
      the Italian republics.

        Hope has it, because she fights forward always to her
      aim, or at least has the joy of seeing it draw nearer.
      Faith and Fortitude wait, as St. John in prison, but unoffended.
      Hope is, however, put under St. James, because
      of the 7th and 8th verses of his last chapter, ending
      "Stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
      draweth nigh." It is he who examines Dante on the
      nature of Hope. 'Par.,' c. xxv., and compare Cary's
      notes.

8, B. DESPAIR, stabbing himself. Suicide not thought heroic
       or sentimental in the 13th century; and no Gothic
       Morgue built beside Somme.

9, A. CHARITY, bearing shield with woolly ram, and giving a
       mantle to a naked beggar. The old wool manufacture
       of Amiens having this notion of its purpose--namely,
       to clothe the poor first, the rich afterwards. No nonsense
       talked in those days about the evil consequences
       of indiscriminate charity.

9, B. AVARICE, with coffer and money. The modern, alike
       English and Amienois, notion of the Divine consummation
       of the wool manufacture.

10, A. CHASTITY, shield with the Phoenix.[63]

[Footnote 63: For the sake of comparing the pollution, and reversal of
its once glorious religion, in the modern French mind, it is worth the
reader's while to ask at M. Goyer's (Place St. Denis) for the 'Journal
de St. Nicholas' for 1880, and look at the 'Phénix,' as drawn on p.
610. The story is meant to be moral, and the Phoenix there
represents Avarice, but the entire destruction of all sacred and
poetical tradition in a child's mind by such a picture is an
immorality which would neutralize a year's preaching. To make it worth
M. Goyer's while to show you the number, buy the one with 'les
conclusions de Jeanie' in it, p. 337: the church scene (with dialogue)
in the text is lovely.]

10, B. LUST, a too violent kiss.

11, A. WISDOM, shield with, I think, an eatable root; meaning
        temperance, as the beginning of wisdom.

11, B. FOLLY, the ordinary type used in all early Psalters, of
        a glutton, armed with a club. Both this vice and
        virtue are the earthly wisdom and folly, completing
        the spiritual wisdom and folly opposite under St.
        Matthew. Temperance, the complement of Obedience,
        and Covetousness, with violence, that of Atheism.

12, A. HUMILITY, shield with dove.

12, B. PRIDE, falling from his horse.

42. All these quatrefoils are rather symbolic than representative;
and, since their purpose was answered enough if their sign was
understood, they have been entrusted to a more inferior workman than
the one who carved the now sequent series under the Prophets. Most of
these subjects represent an historical fact, or a scene spoken of by
the prophet as a real vision; and they have in general been executed
by the ablest hands at the architect's command.

With the interpretation of these, I have given again the name of the
prophet whose life or prophecy they illustrate.

13. ISAIAH.

13, A. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne" (vi. I).

           The vision of the throne "high and lifted up"
         between seraphim.

13, B. "Lo, this hath touched thy lips" (vi. 7).

           The Angel stands before the prophet, and holds,
         or rather held, the coal with tongs, which have been
         finely undercut, but are now broken away, only a
         fragment remaining in his hand.

14. JEREMIAH.

14, A. The burial of the girdle (xiii. 4, 5).

           The prophet is digging by the shore of Euphrates,
         represented by vertically winding furrows down the
         middle of the tablet. Note, the translation should be
         "hole in the ground," not "rock."

14, B. The breaking of the yoke (xxviii. 10).

           From the prophet Jeremiah's neck; it is here
         represented as a doubled and redoubled chain.

15. EZEKIEL.

15, A. Wheel within wheel (i. 16).

           The prophet sitting; before him two wheels of
         equal size, one involved in the ring of the other.

15, B. "Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem" (xxi. 2).

           The prophet before the gate of Jerusalem.

16. DANIEL.

16, A. "He hath shut the lions' mouths" (vi. 22).

           Daniel holding a book, the lions treated as heraldic
         supporters. The subject is given with more
         animation farther on in the series (24, B).

16, B. "In the same hour came forth fingers of a Man's hand" (v. 5).

           Belshazzar's feast represented by the king alone,
         seated at a small oblong table. Beside him the youth
         Daniel, looking only fifteen or sixteen, graceful and
         gentle, interprets. At the side of the quatrefoil,
         out of a small wreath of cloud, comes a small bent
         hand, writing, as if with a pen upside down on a piece
         of Gothic wall.[64]

           For modern bombast as opposed to old simplicity,
         compare the Belshazzar's feast of John Martin!

[Footnote 64: I fear this hand has been broken since I described it; at
all events, it is indistinguishably shapeless in the photograph (No. 9
of the series).]

  43. The next subject begins the series of the minor prophets.

17. HOSEA.

17, A. "So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver and
         an homer of barley" (iii. 2).

           The prophet pouring the grain and the silver into
         the lap of the woman, "beloved of her friend." The
         carved coins are each wrought with the cross, and, I
         believe, legend of the French contemporary coin.

17, B. "So will I also be for thee" (iii. 3).

           He puts a ring on her finger.

18. JOEL.

18, A. The sun and moon lightless (ii. 10).

           The sun and moon as two small flat pellets, up in
         the external moulding.

18, B. The barked fig-tree and waste vine (i. 7).

           Note the continual insistance on the blight of vegetation
         as a Divine punishment, 19 D.

19. AMOS.

_To the front._

19, A. "The Lord will cry from Zion" (i. 2).

          Christ appears with crossletted nimbus.

19, B. "The habitations of the shepherds shall mourn" (i. 2).

          Amos with the shepherd's hooked or knotted staff,
        and wicker-worked bottle, before his tent. (Architecture
        in right-hand foil restored.)

_Inside Porch._

19, C. The Lord with the mason's line (vii. 8).

           Christ, again here, and henceforward always, with
         crosslet nimbus, has a large trowel in His hand, which
         He lays on the top of a half-built wall. There seems
         a line twisted round the handle.

19, D. The place where it rained not (iv. 7).

           Amos is gathering the leaves of the fruitless vine,
         to feed the sheep, who find no grass. One of the
         finest of the reliefs.

20. OBADIAH.

_Inside Porch._

20, A. "I hid them in a cave" (1 Kings xviii. 13).

            Three prophets at the mouth of a well, to whom
          Obadiah brings loaves.

20, B. "He fell on his face" (xviii. 7).

           He kneels before Elijah, who wears his rough
         mantle.

_To the front._

20, C. The captain of fifty.

           Elijah (?) speaking to an armed man under a tree.

20, D. The Messenger.

           A messenger on his knees before a king. I cannot
         interpret these two scenes (20, C and 20, D).
         The uppermost _may_ mean the dialogue of Elijah
         with the captains (2 Kings i. 2), and the lower one,
         the return of the messengers (2 Kings i. 5).

21. JONAH.

21, A. Escaped from the sea.

21, B. Under the gourd. A small grasshopper-like beast
         gnawing the gourd stem. I should like to know
         what insects _do_ attack the Amiens gourds. This may
         be an entomological study, for aught we know.

22. MICAH.

_To the front._

22, A. The Tower of the Flock (iv. 8).

           The tower is wrapped in clouds, God appearing
         above it.

22, B. Each shall rest and "none shall make them afraid" (iv. 4).

            A man and his wife "under his vine and fig-tree."

_Inside Porch._

22, C. "Swords into ploughshares" (iv. 3).

          Nevertheless, two hundred years after these medallions
        were cut, the sword manufacture had become a
        staple in Amiens! Not to her advantage.

22, D. "Spears into pruning-hooks" (iv. 3).

23. NAHUM.

_Inside Porch._

23, A. "None shall look back" (ii. 8).

23, B. The Burden of Nineveh (i. I).[65]

[Footnote 65: The statue of the prophet, above, is the grandest of the
entire series; and note especially the "diadema" of his own luxuriant
hair plaited like a maiden's, indicating the Achillean force of this
most terrible of the prophets. (Compare 'Fors Clavigera,' Letter LXV.,
page 157.) For the rest, this long flowing hair was always one of the
insignia of the Frankish kings, and their way of dressing both hair
and beard may be seen more nearly and definitely in the
angle-sculptures of the long font in the north transept, the most
interesting piece of work in the whole cathedral, in an antiquarian
sense, and of much artistic value also. (See ante chap. ii. p. 45.)]

_To the front._

23, C. "Thy Princes and thy great ones" (iii. 17).

  23, A, B, and C, are all incapable of sure interpretation. The
         prophet in A is pointing down to a little hill, said by
         the Père Rozé to be covered with grasshoppers. I
         can only copy what he says of them.

23, D. "Untimely figs" (iii. 12).

          Three people beneath a fig-tree catch its falling
        fruit in their mouths.

24. HABAKKUK.

24, A. "I will watch to see what he will say unto me" (ii. 1).

           The prophet is writing on his tablet to Christ's
         dictation.

24, B. The ministry to Daniel.

           The traditional visit to Daniel. An angel carries
         Habakkuk by the hair of his head; the prophet
         has a loaf of bread in each hand. They break
         through the roof of the cave. Daniel is stroking one
         young lion on the back; the head of another is thrust
         carelessly under his arm. Another is gnawing
         bones in the bottom of the cave.

25. ZEPHANIAH.

_To the front._

25, A. The Lord strikes Ethiopia (ii. 12).

           Christ striking a city with a sword. Note that all
         violent actions are in these bas-reliefs feebly or ludicrously
         expressed; quiet ones always right.

25, B. The beasts in Nineveh (ii. 15).

           Very fine. All kinds of crawling things among
         the tottering walls, and peeping out of their rents
         and crannies. A monkey sitting squat, developing
         into a demon, reverses the Darwinian theory.

_Inside porch._

25, C. The Lord visits Jerusalem (i. 12).

           Christ passing through the streets of Jerusalem,
         with a lantern in each hand.

25, D. The Hedgehog and Bittern[66] (ii. 14).

           With a singing bird in a cage in the window.

[Footnote 66: See ante p. 117, note.]

26. HAGGAI.

_Inside Porch._

26, A. The houses of the princes, _ornées de lambris_ (i. 4).

           A perfectly built house of square stones gloomily
         strong, the grating (of a prison?) in front of foundation.

26, B. The Heaven is stayed from dew (i. 10).

           The heavens as a projecting mass, with stars, sun,
         and moon on surface. Underneath, two withered
         trees.

_To the front._

26, C. The Lord's temple desolate (i. 4).

           The falling of the temple, "not one stone left on
         another," grandly loose. Square stones again. Examine
         the text (i. 6).

26, D. "Thus saith the Lord of Hosts" (i. 7).

          Christ pointing up to His ruined temple.

27. ZECHARIAH.

27, A. The lifting up of Iniquity (v. 6 to 9).

          Wickedness in the Ephah.

27, B. "The angel that spake to me" (iv. 1).

          The prophet almost reclining, a glorious winged
        angel hovering out of cloud.

28. MALACHI.

28, A. "Ye have wounded the Lord" (ii. 17).

          The priests are thrusting Christ through with a
        barbed lance, whose point comes out at His back.

28, B. "This commandment is to _you_" (ii. 1).

          In these panels, the undermost is often introductory
        to the one above, an illustration of it. It is perhaps
        chapter i. verse 6, that is meant to be spoken here by
        the sitting figure of Christ, to the indignant priests.

44. With this bas-relief terminates the series of sculpture in
illustration of Apostolic and Prophetic teaching, which constitutes
what I mean by the "Bible" of Amiens. But the two lateral porches
contain supplementary subjects necessary for completion of the
pastoral and traditional teaching addressed to her people in that day.

The Northern Porch, dedicated to her first missionary St. Firmin, has
on its central pier his statue; above, on the flat field of the back
of the arch, the story of the finding of his body; on the sides of the
porch, companion saints and angels in the following order:--

CENTRAL STATUE.

ST. FIRMIN.

  _Southern (left) side._

  41. St. Firmin the Confessor.
  42. St. Domice.
  43. St. Honoré.
  44. St. Salve.
  45. St. Quentin.
  46. St. Gentian.

  _Northern (right) side._

  47. St. Geoffroy.
  48. An angel.
  49. St. Fuscien, martyr.
  50. St. Victoric, martyr.
  51. An angel.
  52. St. Ulpha.

45. Of these saints, excepting St. Firmin and St. Honoré, of whom I have
already spoken,[67] St. Geoffroy is more real for us than the rest; he
was born in the year of the battle of Hastings, at Molincourt in the
Soissonais, and was Bishop of Amiens from 1104 to 1150. A man of
entirely simple, pure, and right life: one of the severest of ascetics,
but without gloom--always gentle and merciful. Many miracles are
recorded of him, but all indicating a tenour of life which was chiefly
miraculous by its justice and peace. Consecrated at Rheims, and attended
by a train of other bishops and nobles to his diocese, he dismounts from
his horse at St. Acheul, the place of St. Firmin's first tomb, and walks
barefoot to his cathedral, along the causeway now so defaced: at another
time he walks barefoot from Amiens to Picquigny to ask from the Vidame
of Amiens the freedom of the Chatelain Adam. He maintained the
privileges of the citizens, with the help of Louis le Gros, against the
Count of Amiens, defeated him, and razed his castle; nevertheless, the
people not enough obeying him in the order of their life, he blames his
own weakness, rather than theirs, and retires to the Grande Chartreuse,
holding himself unfit to be their bishop. The Carthusian superior
questioning him on his reasons for retirement, and asking if he had ever
sold the offices of the Church, the Bishop answered, "My father, my
hands are pure of simony, but I have a thousand times allowed myself to
be seduced by praise."

[Footnote 67: See ante Chap. I., pp. 5-6, for the history of St.
Firmin, and for St. Honoré p. 95, § 8 of this chapter, with the
reference there given.]

46. St. Firmin the Confessor was the son of the Roman senator who
received St. Firmin himself. He preserved the tomb of the martyr in
his father's garden, and at last built a church over it, dedicated to
our Lady of martyrs, which was the first episcopal seat of Amiens, at
St. Acheul, spoken of above. St. Ulpha was an Amienoise girl, who
lived in a chalk cave above the marshes of the Somme;--if ever Mr.
Murray provides you with a comic guide to Amiens, no doubt the
enlightened composer of it will count much on your enjoyment of the
story of her being greatly disturbed at her devotions by the frogs,
and praying them silent. You are now, of course, wholly superior to
such follies, and are sure that God cannot, or will not, so much as
shut a frog's mouth for you. Remember, therefore, that as He also now
leaves open the mouth of the liar, blasphemer, and betrayer, you must
shut your own ears against _their_ voices as you can.

Of her name, St. Wolf--or Guelph--see again Miss Yonge's Christian
names. Our tower of Wolf's stone, Ulverstone, and Kirk of Ulpha, are,
I believe, unconscious of Picard relatives.

47. The other saints in this porch are all in like manner provincial,
and, as it were, personal friends of the Amienois; and under them, the
quatrefoils represent the pleasant order of the guarded and hallowed
year--the zodiacal signs above, and labours of the months below; little
differing from the constant representations of them--except in the May:
see below. The Libra also is a little unusual in the female figure
holding the scales; the lion especially good-tempered--and the 'reaping'
one of the most beautiful figures in the whole series of sculptures;
several of the others peculiarly refined and far-wrought. In Mr.
Kaltenbacher's photographs, as I have arranged them, the bas-reliefs may
be studied nearly as well as in the porch itself. Their order is as
follows, beginning with December, in the left-hand inner corner of the
porch:--

41. DECEMBER.--Killing and scalding swine. Above, Capricorn
      with quickly diminishing tail; I cannot make out
      the accessories.

42. JANUARY.--Twin-headed, obsequiously served. Aquarius
      feebler than most of the series.

43. FEBRUARY.--Very fine; warming his feet and putting coals
      on fire. Fish above, elaborate but uninteresting.

44. MARCH.--At work in vine-furrows. Aries careful, but
      rather stupid.

45. APRIL.--Feeding his hawk--very pretty. Taurus above
      with charming leaves to eat.

46. MAY.--Very singularly, a middle-aged man sitting under
      the trees to hear the birds sing; and Gemini above, a
      bridegroom and bride. This quatrefoil joins the interior
      angle ones of Zephaniah.

52. JUNE.--Opposite, joining the interior angle ones of Haggai.
      Mowing. Note the lovely flowers sculptured all
      through the grass. Cancer above, with his shell superbly
      modelled.

51. JULY.--Reaping. Extremely beautiful. The smiling lion
      completes the evidence that all the seasons and signs
      are regarded as alike blessing and providentially kind.

50. AUGUST.--Threshing. Virgo above, holding a flower, her
      drapery very modern and confused for thirteenth-century
      work.

49. SEPTEMBER.--I am not sure of his action, whether pruning,
      or in some way gathering fruit from the full-leaved
      tree. Libra above; charming.

[Illustration: ST. MARY.]

48. OCTOBER.--Treading grapes. Scorpio, a very traditional
      and gentle form--forked in the tail indeed, but stingless.

47. NOVEMBER.--Sowing, with Sagittarius, half concealed
      when this photograph was taken by the beautiful
      arrangements always now going on for some job or
      other in French cathedrals:--they never can let them
      alone for ten minutes.

48. And now, last of all, if you care to see it, we will go into the
Madonna's porch--only, if you come at all, good Protestant feminine
reader--come civilly: and be pleased to recollect, if you have, in
known history, material for recollection, this (or if you cannot
recollect--be you very solemnly assured of this): that neither
Madonna-worship, nor Lady-worship of any sort, whether of dead ladies
or living ones, ever did any human creature any harm,--but that Money
worship, Wig worship, Cocked-Hat-and-Feather worship, Plate worship,
Pot worship and Pipe worship, have done, and are doing, a great
deal,--and that any of these, and all, are quite million-fold more
offensive to the God of Heaven and Earth and the Stars, than all the
absurdest and lovingest mistakes made by any generations of His simple
children, about what the Virgin-mother could, or would, or might do,
or feel for them.

49. And next, please observe this broad historical fact about the
three sorts of Madonnas.

There is first the Madonna Dolorosa; the Byzantine type, and
Cimabue's. It is the noblest of all; and the earliest, in distinct
popular influence.[68]

[Footnote 68: See the description of the Madonna of Murano, in second
volume of 'Stones of Venice.']

Secondly. The Madone Reine, who is essentially the Frank and Norman
one; crowned, calm, and full of power and gentleness. She is the one
represented in this porch.

Thirdly. The Madone Nourrice, who is the Raphaelesque and generally
late and decadence one. She is seen here in a good French type in the
south transept porch, as before noticed.

An admirable comparison will be found instituted by M. Viollet le Duc
(the article 'Vierge,' in his dictionary, is altogether deserving of
the most attentive study) between this statue of the Queen-Madonna of
the southern porch and the Nurse-Madonna of the transept. I may
perhaps be able to get a photograph made of his two drawings, side by
side: but, if I can, the reader will please observe that he has a
little flattered the Queen, and a little vulgarized the Nurse, which
is not fair. The statue in this porch is in thirteenth-century style,
extremely good: but there is no reason for making any fuss about
it--the earlier Byzantine types being far grander.

50. The Madonna's story, in its main incidents, is told in the series
of statues round the porch, and in the quatrefoils below--several of
which refer, however, to a legend about the Magi to which I have not
had access, and I am not sure of their interpretation.

The large statues are on the left hand, reading outwards as usual.

          29. The Angel Gabriel.
          30. Virgin Annunciate.
          31. Virgin Visitant.
          32. St. Elizabeth.
          33. Virgin in Presentation.
          34. St. Simeon.

On the right hand, reading outward,

          35, 36, 37, The three Kings.
          38. Herod.
          39. Solomon.
          40. The Queen of Sheba.

51. I am not sure of rightly interpreting the introduction of these two
last statues: but I believe the idea of the designer was that virtually
the Queen Mary visited Herod when she sent, or had sent for her, the
Magi to tell him of her presence at Bethlehem: and the contrast between
Solomon's reception of the Queen of Sheba, and Herod's driving out the
Madonna into Egypt, is dwelt on throughout this side of the porch, with
their several consequences to the two Kings and to the world.

The quatrefoils underneath the great statues run as follows:

29. Under Gabriel--
      A. Daniel seeing the stone cut out without hands.
      B. Moses and the burning bush.

30. Under Virgin Annunciate--
      A. Gideon and the dew on the fleece.
      B. Moses with written law, retiring; Aaron, dominant, points to
         his budding rod.

31. Under Virgin Visitant--
      A. The message to Zacharias: "Fear not, for thy prayer is heard."
      B. The dream of Joseph: "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
         wife." (?)

32. Under St. Elizabeth--
      A. The silence of Zacharias: "They perceived that he had seen a
         vision in the temple."
      B. "There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name."
         "He wrote saying, His name is John."

33. Under Virgin in Presentation--
      A. Flight into Egypt.
      B. Christ with the Doctors.

34. Under St. Simeon--
      A. Fall of the idols in Egypt.
      B. The return to Nazareth.

  These two last quatrefoils join the beautiful C and D of Amos.

Then on the opposite side, under the Queen of Sheba, and
joining the A and B of Obadiah--

40.   A. Solomon entertains the Queen of Sheba. The Grace cup.
      B. Solomon teaches the Queen of Sheba, "God is above."

39. Under Solomon--
      A. Solomon on his throne of judgment.
      B. Solomon praying before his temple-gate.

38. Under Herod--
      A. Massacre of Innocents.
      B. Herod orders the ship of the Kings to be burned.

37. Under the third King--
      A. Herod inquires of the Kings.
      B. Burning of the ship.

36. Under the second King--
      A. Adoration in Bethlehem?--not certain.
      B. The voyage of the Kings.

35. Under the first King--
      A. The Star in the East.
      B. "Being warned in a dream that they should not return to Herod."

I have no doubt of finding out in time the real sequence of these
subjects: but it is of little import,--this group of quatrefoils being
of less interest than the rest, and that of the Massacre of the
Innocents curiously illustrative of the incapability of the sculptor
to give strong action or passion.

But into questions respecting the art of these bas-reliefs I do not
here attempt to enter. They were never intended to serve as more than
signs, or guides to thought. And if the reader follows this guidance
quietly, he may create for himself better pictures in his heart; and
at all events may recognize these following general truths, as their
united message.

52. First, that throughout the Sermon on this Amiens Mount, Christ
never appears, or is for a moment thought of, as the Crucified, nor as
the Dead: but as the Incarnate Word--as the present Friend--as the
Prince of Peace on Earth,--and as the Everlasting King in Heaven. What
His life _is_, what His commands _are_, and what His judgment _will
be_, are the things here taught: not what He once did, nor what He
once suffered, but what He is now doing--and what He requires us to
do. That is the pure, joyful, beautiful lesson of Christianity; and
the fall from that faith, and all the corruptions of its abortive
practice, may be summed briefly as the habitual contemplation of
Christ's death instead of His Life, and the substitution of His past
suffering for our present duty.

53. Then, secondly, though Christ bears not _His_ cross, the mourning
prophets,--the persecuted apostles--and the martyred disciples _do_
bear theirs. For just as it is well for you to remember what your
undying Creator is _doing_ for you--it is well for you to remember
what your dying fellow-creatures _have done_: the Creator you may at
your pleasure deny or defy--the Martyr you can only forget; deny, you
cannot. Every stone of this building is cemented with his blood, and
there is no furrow of its pillars that was not ploughed by his pain.

54. Keeping, then, these things in your heart, look back now to the
central statue of Christ, and hear His message with understanding. He
holds the Book of the Eternal Law in His left hand; with His right He
blesses,--but blesses on condition. "This do, and thou shalt live";
nay, in stricter and more piercing sense, This _be_ and thou shalt
live: to show Mercy is nothing--thy soul must be full of mercy; to be
pure in act is nothing--thou shalt be pure in heart also.

And with this further word of the unabolished law--"This if thou do
_not_, this if thou art not, thou shalt die."

55. Die (whatever Death means)--totally and irrevocably. There is no
word in thirteenth-century Theology of the pardon (in our modern
sense) of sins; and there is none of the Purgatory of them. Above that
image of Christ with us, our Friend, is set the image of Christ over
us, our Judge. For this present life--here is His helpful Presence.
After this life--there is His coming to take account of our deeds, and
of our desires in them; and the parting asunder of the Obedient from
the Disobedient, of the Loving from the Unkind, with no hope given to
the last of recall or reconciliation. I do not know what commenting or
softening doctrines were written in frightened minuscule by the
Fathers, or hinted in hesitating whispers by the prelates of the early
Church. But I know that the language of every graven stone and every
glowing window,--of things daily seen and universally understood by
the people, was absolutely and alone, this teaching of Moses from
Sinai in the beginning, and of St. John from Patmos in the end, of the
Revelation of God to Israel.

This it was, simply--sternly--and continually, for the great three
hundred years of Christianity in her strength (eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth centuries), and over the whole breadth and depth of her
dominion, from Iona to Cyrene,--and from Calpe to Jerusalem. At what
time the doctrine of Purgatory was openly accepted by Catholic
Doctors, I neither know nor care to know. It was first formalized by
Dante, but never accepted for an instant by the sacred artist teachers
of his time--or by those of any great school or time whatsoever.[69]

[Footnote 69: The most authentic foundations of the Purgatorial scheme
in art-teaching are in the renderings, subsequent to the thirteenth
century, of the verse "by which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison," forming gradually into the idea of the deliverance
of the waiting saints from the power of the grave.

In literature and tradition, the idea is originally, I believe,
Platonic; certainly not Homeric. Egyptian possibly--but I have read
nothing yet of the recent discoveries in Egypt. Not, however, quite
liking to leave the matter in the complete emptiness of my own
resources, I have appealed to my general investigator, Mr. Anderson
(James R.), who writes as follows:--

"There is no possible question about the doctrine and universal
inculcation of it, ages before Dante. Curiously enough, though, the
statement of it in the Summa Theologiæ as we have it is a later
insertion; but I find by references that St. Thomas teaches it
elsewhere. Albertus Magnus developes it at length. If you refer to the
'Golden Legend' under All Souls' Day, you will see how the idea is
assumed as a commonplace in a work meant for popular use in the
thirteenth century. St. Gregory (the Pope) argues for it (Dial. iv.
38) on two scriptural quotations: (1), the sin that is forgiven
neither in hôc sæculo _nor in that which is to come_, and (2), the
fire which shall try every man's work. I think Platonic philosophy and
the Greek mysteries must have had a good deal to do with introducing
the idea originally; but with them--as to Virgil--it was part of the
Eastern vision of a circling stream of life from which only a few
drops were at intervals tossed to a definitely permanent Elysium or a
definitely permanent Hell. It suits that scheme better than it does
the Christian one, which attaches ultimately in all cases infinite
importance to the results of life in hôc sæculo.

"Do you know any representation of Heaven or Hell unconnected with the
Last Judgment? I don't remember any, and as Purgatory is by that time
past, this would account for the absence of pictures of it.

"Besides, Purgatory precedes the Resurrection--there is continual
question among divines what manner of purgatorial fire it may be that
affects spirits separate from the body--perhaps Heaven and Hell, as
opposed to Purgatory, were felt to be picturable because not only
spirits, but the risen bodies too are conceived in them.

"Bede's account of the Ayrshire seer's vision gives Purgatory in words
very like Dante's description of the second stormy circle in Hell; and
the angel which ultimately saves the Scotchman from the fiends comes
through hell, 'quasi fulgor stellæ micantis inter tenebras'--'qual sul
presso del mattino Per gli grossi vapor Marte rosseggia.' Bede's name
was great in the middle ages. Dante meets him in Heaven, and, I like
to hope, may have been helped by the vision of my fellow-countryman
more than six hundred years before."]

56. Neither do I know nor care to know--at what time the notion of
Justification by Faith, in the modern sense, first got itself
distinctively fixed in the minds of the heretical sects and schools of
the North. Practically its strength was founded by its first authors
on an asceticism which differed from monastic rule in being only able
to destroy, never to build; and in endeavouring to force what severity
it thought proper for itself on everybody else also; and so striving
to make one artless, letterless, and merciless monastery of all the
world. Its virulent effort broke down amidst furies of reactionary
dissoluteness and disbelief, and remains now the basest of popular
solders and plasters for every condition of broken law and bruised
conscience which interest can provoke, or hypocrisy disguise.

57. With the subsequent quarrels between the two great sects of the
corrupted church, about prayers for the Dead, Indulgences to the
Living, Papal supremacies, or Popular liberties, no man, woman, or
child need trouble themselves in studying the history of Christianity:
they are nothing but the squabbles of men, and laughter of fiends
among its ruins. The Life, and Gospel, and Power of it, are all
written in the mighty works of its true believers: in Normandy and
Sicily, on river islets of France and in the river glens of England,
on the rocks of Orvieto, and by the sands of Arno. But of all, the
simplest, completest, and most authoritative in its lessons to the
active mind of North Europe, is this on the foundation stones of
Amiens.

58. Believe it or not, reader, as you will: understand only how
thoroughly it _was_ once believed; and that all beautiful things were
made, and all brave deeds done in the strength of it--until what we may
call 'this present time,' in which it is gravely asked whether Religion
has any effect on morals, by persons who have essentially no idea
whatever of the meaning of either Religion or Morality.

Concerning which dispute, this much perhaps you may have the patience
finally to read, as the Flèche of Amiens fades in the distance, and
your carriage rushes towards the Isle of France, which now exhibits
the most admired patterns of European Art, intelligence, and
behaviour.

59. All human creatures, in all ages and places of the world, who have
had warm affections, common sense, and self-command, have been, and
are, Naturally Moral. Human nature in its fulness is necessarily
Moral,--without Love, it is inhuman, without sense,[70]
inhuman,--without discipline, inhuman.

[Footnote 70: I don't mean æsthesis,--but [Greek: nous], if you _must_
talk in Greek slang.]

In the exact proportion in which men are bred capable of these things,
and are educated to love, to think, and to endure, they become
noble,--live happily--die calmly: are remembered with perpetual honour
by their race, and for the perpetual good of it. All wise men know and
have known these things, since the form of man was separated from the
dust. The knowledge and enforcement of them have nothing to do with
religion: a good and wise man differs from a bad and idiotic one,
simply as a good dog from a cur, and as any manner of dog from a wolf
or a weasel. And if you are to believe in, or preach without half
believing in, a spiritual world or law--only in the hope that whatever
you do, or anybody else does, that is foolish or beastly, may be in
them and by them mended and patched and pardoned and worked up again
as good as new--the less you believe in--and most solemnly, the less
you talk about--a spiritual world, the better.

60. But if, loving well the creatures that are like yourself, you feel
that you would love still more dearly, creatures better than
yourself--were they revealed to you;--if striving with all your might
to mend what is evil, near you and around, you would fain look for a day
when some Judge of all the Earth shall wholly do right, and the little
hills rejoice on every side; if, parting with the companions that have
given you all the best joy you had on Earth, you desire ever to meet
their eyes again and clasp their hands,--where eyes shall no more be
dim, nor hands fail;--if, preparing yourselves to lie down beneath the
grass in silence and loneliness, seeing no more beauty, and feeling no
more gladness--you would care for the promise to you of a time when you
should see God's light again, and know the things you have longed to
know, and walk in the peace of everlasting Love--_then_, the Hope of
these things to you is religion, the Substance of them in your life is
Faith. And in the power of them, it is promised us, that the kingdoms of
this world shall yet become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ.

[Illustration: Plan of West porches of Amiens Cathedral]




APPENDICES.


I.   CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS REFERRED TO IN
       THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS.'

II.  REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF THE PHOTOGRAPHS ILLUSTRATING
       CHAPTER IV.

III. GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US.'

APPENDIX I.

_CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS
     REFERRED TO IN THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS.'_


  A.D.                                                        PAGE

  250. Rise of the Franks                                       33
  301. St. Firmin comes to Amiens                                5
  332. St. Martin                                               15
  345. St. Jerome born                                          75
  350. First church at Amiens, over St. Firmin's grave          99
  358. Franks defeated by Julian near Strasburg                 44
  405. St. Jerome's Bible                                       50
  420. St. Jerome dies                                   78 _seq._
  421. St. Genevieve born. Venice founded                       27
  445. Franks cross the Rhine and take Amiens                    7
  447. Merovée king at Amiens                                 7, 8
  451. Battle of Chalons. Attila defeated by Aëtius              7
  457. Merovée dies. Childeric king at Amiens                    8
  466. Clovis born                                               7
  476. Roman Empire in Italy ended by Odoacer                    8
  481. Roman Empire ended in France                              9
       Clovis crowned at Amiens                              8, 27
       St. Benedict born                                        27
  485. Battle of Soissons. Clovis defeats Syagrius           8, 52
  486. Syagrius dies at the court of Alaric                     52
  489. Battle of Verona. Theodoric defeats Odoacer              54
  493. Clovis marries Clotilde                                   8
  496. Battle of Tolbiac. Clovis defeats the Alemanni           53
       Clovis crowned at Rheims by St. Rémy                      9
       Clovis baptized by St. Rémy                              13
  508. Battle of Poitiers. Clovis defeats the Visigoths
         under Alaric. Death of Alaric                           9




APPENDIX II.

_REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF THE PHOTOGRAPHS
           ILLUSTRATING CHAPTER IV._


The quatrefoils on the foundation of the west front of Amiens
Cathedral, described in the course of the fourth chapter, had never
been engraved or photographed in any form accessible to the public
until last year, when I commissioned M. Kaltenbacher (6, Passage du
Commerce), who had photographed them for M. Viollet le Duc, to obtain
negatives of the entire series, with the central pedestal of the
Christ.

The proofs are entirely satisfactory to me, and extremely honourable
to M. Kaltenbacher's skill: and it is impossible to obtain any more
instructive and interesting, in exposition of the manner of central
thirteenth-century sculpture.

I directed their setting so that the entire succession of the
quatrefoils might be included in eighteen plates; the front and two
sides of the pedestal raise their number to twenty-one: the whole,
unmounted, sold by my agent Mr. Ward (the negatives being my own
property) for four guineas; or separately, each five shillings.

Besides these of my own, I have chosen four general views of the
cathedral from M. Kaltenbacher's formerly-taken negatives, which,
together with the first-named series, (twenty-five altogether,) will
form a complete body of illustrations for the fourth chapter of the
'BIBLE OF AMIENS'; costing in all five guineas, forwarded free by post
from Mr. Ward's (2, Church Terrace, Richmond, Surrey). In addition to
these, Mr. Ward will supply the photograph of the four scenes from the
life of St. Firmin, mentioned on page 5 of Chapter I.; price five
shillings.

For those who do not care to purchase the whole series, I have marked
with an asterisk the plates which are especially desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two following lists will enable readers who possess the plates to
refer without difficulty both from the photographs to the text, and
from the text to the photographs, which will be found to fall into the
following groups:--

  Photographs.

          1-3. THE CENTRAL PEDESTAL.
                      DAVID.

          4-7. THE CENTRAL PORCH.
                      VIRTUES AND VICES.

          8-9. THE CENTRAL PORCH.
                      THE MAJOR PROPHETS, WITH MICAH AND NAHUM.

        10-13. THE FAÇADE.
                      THE MINOR PROPHETS.

        14-17. THE NORTHERN PORCH.
                      THE MONTHS AND ZODIACAL SIGNS, WITH ZEPHANIAH AND
                      HAGGAI.

        18-21. THE SOUTHERN PORCH.
                      SCRIPTURAL HISTORY, WITH OBADIAH AND AMOS.

        22-25. MISCELLANEOUS.


PART I.

LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS WITH REFERENCE TO THE QUATREFOILS, ETC.


  Photographs.
  1-3. CENTRAL PEDASTAL. See pp. 109-110, §§ 32-33.

        *1. FRONT        David. Lion and Dragon. Vine.
        *2. NORTH SIDE   Lily and Cockatrice.
        *3. SOUTH SIDE   Rose and Adder.

  4-7. CENTRAL PORCH.
        _Virtues and Vices_ (pp. 114, 117, §§ 39 & 41).

        4.  1 A. Courage.    2 A. Patience.   3 A. Gentillesse.
            1 B. Cowardice.  2 B. Anger.      3 B. Churlishness.

        5.  4 A. Love.       5 A. Obedience.  6 A. Perseverance.
            4 B. Discord.    5 B. Rebellion.  6 B. Atheism.

        6.  9 A. Charity.    8 A. Hope.       7 A. Faith.
            9 B. Avarice     8 B. Despair.    7 B. Idolatry.

        7. 12 A. Humility.  11 A. Wisdom.    10 A. Chastity.
           12 B. Pride.     11 B. Folly.     10 B. Lust.

  8-9. CENTRAL PORCH.
        _The Major Prophets_ (pp. 114, 121, §§ 39, 42), _with
        Micah and Nahum_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 43).

       *8.   ISAIAH.     JEREMIAH.    MICAH.
              13 A.       14 A.        22 C.
              13 B.       14 B.        22 D.

        9.   NAHUM.      DANIEL.      EZEKIEL.
              23 A.       16 A.        15 A.
              23 B.       16 B.        15 B.

  10-13. THE FAÇADE.
          _The Minor Prophets_ (pp. 114, 127, §§ 40, 43).

      *10.   AMOS.       JOEL.        HOSEA.
              19 A.       18 A.        17 A.
              19 B.       18 B.        17 B.

      *11.   MICAH.      JONAH.       OBADIAH.
              22 A.       21 A.        20 C.
              22 B.       21 B.        20 D.

      *12.   ZEPHANIAH.  HABAKKUK.    NAHUM.
              25 A.       24 A.        23 C.
              25 B.       24 B.        23 D.

       13.   MALACHI.    ZECHARIAH.   HAGGAI.
              28 A.       27 A.        26 C.
              28 B.       27 B.        26 D.

  14-17. THE NORTHERN PORCH.
          _The Months and Zodiacal Signs_ (pp. 129-131, § 47),
          _with Zephaniah and Haggai_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 43).

                 41.          42.        43.       44.
         14.  CAPRICORN.   AQUARIUS.   PISCES.   ARIES.
               December.   January.   February.  March.

                45.              46.          25 C.
         15.  TAURUS.          GEMINI.      ZEPHANIAH.
               April.            May.         25 D.

                26 A.            52.            51.
         16.  HAGGAI.          CANCER.         LEO.
                26 B.           June.          July.

                50.          49.          48.        47.
         17.  VIRGO.        LIBRA.     SCORPIO.  SAGITTARIUS.
              August.     September.   October.   November.

  18-21. THE SOUTHERN PORCH.
          _Scriptural History_ (pp. 132-134, § 51), _with Obadiah
          and Amos_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 42, 43).

        *18. 29 A. Daniel and the stone.       30 A. Gideon and the fleece.
             29 B. Moses and the burning Bush. 30 B. Moses and Aaron.
             31 A. The message to Zacharias.   32 A. The silence of Zacharias.
             31 B. Dream of Joseph.            32 B. "His name is John."

         19. 33 A. The Flight      34 A. The Fall of      19 C. Amos.
                   into Egypt.           the Idols.
             33 B. Christ and      34 B. Return to Nazareth.     19 D. Amos.
                   the Doctors.

         20. 20 A. Obadiah.     40 A. Solomon and the      39 A. Solomon
                                      Queen of Sheba.            enthroned.
                                      The Grace Cup.
             20 B. Obadiah.     40 B. Solomon teaching     39 B. Solomon
                                      the Queen of Sheba.        in prayer.
                                      "God is above."

         21. 38 A. Holy Innocents.             37 A. Herod and the Kings.
             38 B. Herod orders the Kings'     37 B. The burning of the
                    ship to be burnt.                  ship.
             36 A. Adoration in Bethlehem (?)  35 A. The Star in the East.
             36 B. The voyage of the Kings.    35 B. The Kings warned in a
                                                       dream.

  22-25. MISCELLANEOUS.
        *22. THE WESTERN PORCHES.
        *23. THE PORCH OF ST. HONORÉ.
         24. THE SOUTH TRANSEPT AND FLÈCHE.
         25. GENERAL VIEW OF THE CATHEDRAL FROM THE OTHER BANK
                   OF THE SOMME.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.--LIST OF QUATREFOILS WITH REFERENCE TO THE
                    PHOTOGRAPHS.

Black                                                 Page and     No.
letter   Name of Statue.   Subject of Quatrefoil.      Section     of
No. in                                                  where     Photograph.
text.                                                 described.

       _The Apostles._   _Virtues and Vices._

                        {A. Courage                p. 114, § 39 }
1.     ST. PETER        {                          p. 117, § 41 }
                        {B. Cowardice                  "     "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Patience               p. 114, § 39 }
2.     ST. ANDREW       {                          p. 118, § 41 }   4
                        {B. Anger                      "     "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Gentillesse                "     "  }
3.     ST. JAMES        {                                       }
                        {B. Churlishness               "     "  }

                        {A. Love                       "     "  }
4.     ST. JOHN         {                          p. 114, § 39 }
                        {B. Discord                p. 118, § 41 }
                                                                }
                        {A. Obedience              p. 114, § 39 }
5.     ST. MATTHEW      {                          p. 118, § 41 }   5
                        {B. Rebellion              p. 119,   "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Perseverance.              "     "  }
6.     ST. SIMON        {                         {p. 114, § 39 }
                        {B. Atheism               {p. 119, § 41 }

                        {A. Faith                 {p. 115, § 39 }
7.     ST. PAUL         {                         {p. 119, § 41 }
                        {B. Idolatry                 "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Hope                   p. 115, § 39 }
8.     ST. JAMES THE    {                          p. 119, § 41 }   6
          BISHOP        {B. Despair                  "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Charity                  "     "    }
9.     ST. PHILIP       {B. Avarice               {p. 115, § 39 }
                        {                         {p. 120, § 41 }

                        {A. Chastity                 "     "    }
10.    ST. BARTHOLEMEW  {                                       }
                        {B. Lust                     "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Wisdom                   "     "    }
11.    ST. THOMAS       {                                       }   7
                        {B. Folly                    "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Humility               p. 115, § 39 }
12.    ST. JUDE         {                          p. 121, § 41 }
                        {B. Pride                    "     "    }


       _The Major Prophets._

                        {A. The Lord enthroned     p. 115, § 39 }
13.    ISAIAH           {B. Lo! this hath touched               }
                            thy lips               p. 121, § 42 }
                                                                }   8
                        {A. The burial of the girdle p.115, § 39}
14.    JEREMIAH         {                                       }
                        {B. The breaking of the                 }
                            yoke                   p. 122, § 42 }

                        {A. Wheel within wheel     p. 115, § 39 }
15.    EZEKIEL          {                                       }
                        {B. Set thy face towards                }
                            Jerusalem                "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. He hath shut the lions'             }
                        {      mouths                "     "    }   9
16.    DANIEL           {                                       }
                        {B. Fingers of a man's hand p. 115, § 39}
                                                    p. 122, § 42}


       _The Minor Prophets._

                        {A. So I bought her to     {p. 116, § 40  }
                        {      me                  {p. 122, § 43  }
17.    HOSEA            {                                         }
                        {B. So will I also be for  {p. 116, § 40  }
                        {      thee                {p. 123, § 43  }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The sun and moon        {p. 116, § 40 }
                        {      lightless            {p. 123, § 48 }  10
18.    JOEL             {                                         }
                        {B. The fig-tree and vine                 }
                        {      leafless                "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The Lord will cry from                }
                        {      Zion                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
           {Façade      {B. The habitations of the                }
           {                shepherds                  "     "    }
           {
19.    AMOS{            {C. The Lord with the                     }
           {Porch       {      mason's line          p. 116, § 40 }
           {            {D. The place where it                    }  19
           {                   rained not            p. 123, § 43 }

                        {A. I hid them in a cave       "     "    }
              {Porch    {B. He fell on his face      p. 124, "    }  20
20.    OBADIAH{
              {         {C. The captain of fifty       "     "    }  11
              {Façade   {D. The messenger              "     "    }

                        {A. Escaped from the sea     p. 124, § 43 }
21.    JONAH            {                           {p. 116, § 40 }
                        {B. Under the gourd         {p. 124, § 43 }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The tower of the Flock     "     "    }  11
             {Façade    {                                         }
             {          {B. Each shall rest            "     "    }
22.    MICAH {
             {          {C. Swords into ploughshares              }
             {Porch     {                            p. 116, § 40 }   8
             {          {D. Spears into pruning-hooks             }
             {                                       p. 124, § 43 }

                        {A. None shall look back     p. 125, "    }   9
             {Porch     {B. The Burden of Nineveh      "     "    }
23.    NAHUM {          {
             {          {C. Thy Princes and great   {p. 116, §40  }
             {Façade    {      ones                 {p. 125, §43  }
                        {D. Untimely figs              "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. I will watch               "     "    }
24.    HABAKKUK         {                                         }  12
                        {B. The ministry to Daniel     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The Lord strikes        {p. 117, § 40 }
                {Façade {      Ethiopia             {p. 126, § 43 }
                {       {B. The beasts in Nineveh     "     "     }
25.    ZEPHANIAH{
                {       {C. The Lord visits Jerusalem "     "     }
                {Porch  {                                         }  15
                        {D. The Hedgehog and Bittern  "     "     }

                        {A. The houses of the                     }
                        {      princes               p. 117, § 40 }
             { Porch    {                                         }
             {          {B. The Heaven stayed                     }  16
26.    HAGGAI{          {      from dew              p. 126, § 43 }
             {
             {          {C. The temple desolate        "     "    }
             { Façade   {                                         }
                        {D. Thus saith the Lord.     p. 127, "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. The lifting up of Iniquity p. 127, § 43}
27.    ZECHARIAH       {                                          }  13
                       {B. The angel that spake to me   "     "   }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Ye have wounded the      {p. 117, § 40 }
28.    MALACHI         {      Lord                  {p. 127, § 43 }
                       {B. This commandment is                    }
                              to _you_                 "     "    }

       SOUTHERN PORCH--_to the Virgin_.

                       {A. Daniel and the stone                   }
                       {      cut without hands      p. 133, § 51 }
29.    GABRIEL         {                                          }
                       {B. Moses and the burning bush  "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Gideon and the fleece       "     "    }
30.    VIRGIN          {                                          }
       ANNUNCIATE      {B. Moses and the law                      }
                            Aaron and his rod          "     "    }  13
                                                                  }
                       {A. The message to Zacharias!   "     "    }
31.    VIRGIN VISITANT {                                          }
                       {B. The dream of Joseph         "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. The silence of Zacharias    "     "    }
32.    ST. ELIZABETH   {                                          }
                       {B. "His name is John"          "     "    }

                       {A. Flight into Egypt           "     "    }
33.    VIRGIN IN       {                                          }
       PRESENTATION    {B. Christ with the Doctors     "     "    }  19
                                                                  }
                       {A. Fall of idols in Egypt      "     "    }
34.    ST. SIMEON      {                                          }
                       {B. The Return to Nazareth      "     "    }

                       {A. The Star in the East.     p. 134, § 51 }
35.    THE FIRST KING  {                                          }
                       {B. "Warned in a dream"         "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Adoration in Bethlehem (?)  "     "    }
36.    THE SECOND KING {                                          }
                       {B. The voyage of the Kings     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Herod inquires of the                  }  21
                       {      Kings                    "     "    }
37.    THE THIRD KING  {                                          }
                       {B. The burning of the ship     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Massacre of the Innocents   "     "    }
38.    HEROD           {                                          }
                       {B. Herod orders the ship                  }
                            to be burnt                "     "    }

                       {A. Solomon enthroned         p. 133, § 51 }
39.    SOLOMON         {                                          }
                       {B. Solomon in prayer           "     "    }
                                                                  }  20
                       {A. The Grace cup               "     "    }
40.    QUEEN OF SHEBA  {                                          }
                       {B. "God is above"              "     "    }


       NORTHERN PORCH--_to St. Firmin_ (p. 127, § 44).

                       {A. Capricorn                 p. 130, § 47 }
41.    ST. FIRMIN      {                                          }
        CONFESSOR      {                                          }
                       {B. December                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Aquarius                    "     "    }
42.    ST. DOMICE      {                                          }
                       {B. January                     "     "    }
                                                                  }  14
                       {A. Pisces                      "     "    }
43.    ST. HONORÉ      {                                          }
                       {B. February                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Aries.                      "     "    }
44.    ST. SALVE       {                                          }
                       {B. March                       "     "    }

                       {A. Taurus                      "     "    }
45.    ST. QUENTIN     {                                          }
                       {B. April                       "     "    }
                                                                  }  15
                       {A. Gemini                      "     "    }
46.    ST. GENTIAN     {                                          }
                       {B. May                         "     "    }

                       {A. Sagittarius               p. 131, § 47 }
47.    ST. GEOFFREY    {                                          }
                       {B. November                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Scorpio                     "     "    }
48.    AN ANGEL        {                                          }
                       {B. October                     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Libra                       "     "    }  17
49.    ST. FUSCIEN,    {                                          }
        MARTYR         {B. September                   "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Virgo                       "     "    }
50.    ST. VICTORIC,   {                                          }
        MARTYR         {B. August                      "     "    }

                       {A. Leo                       p. 130, § 47 }
51.    AN ANGEL        {                                          }
                       {B. July                        "     "    }
                                                                  }  16
                       {A. Cancer                      "     "    }
52.    ST. ULPHA       {                                          }
                       {B. June                        "     "    }




APPENDIX III.

_GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US.'_[71]


[Footnote 71: Reprinted from the "Advice," issued with Chap. III
(March, 1882).]

The first part of 'Our Fathers have told us,' now submitted to the
public, is enough to show the proposed character and tendencies of the
work, to which, contrary to my usual custom, I now invite
subscription, because the degree in which I can increase its
usefulness by engraved illustration must greatly depend on the known
number of its supporters.

I do not recognize, in the present state of my health, any reason to
fear more loss of general power, whether in conception or industry,
than is the proper and appointed check of an old man's enthusiasm: of
which, however, enough remains in me to warrant my readers against the
abandonment of a purpose entertained already for twenty years.

The work, if I live to complete it, will consist of ten parts, each
taking up some local division of Christian history, and gathering,
towards their close, into united illustration of the power of the
Church in the Thirteenth Century.

The present volume completes the first part, descriptive of the early
Frank power, and of its final skill, in the Cathedral of Amiens.

The second part, "Ponte della Pietra," will, I hope, do more for
Theodoric and Verona than I have been able to do for Clovis and the
first capital of France.

The third, "Ara Celi," will trace the foundations of the Papal power.

The fourth, "Ponte-a-Mare," and fifth, "Ponte Vecchio," will only with
much difficulty gather into brief form what I have by me of scattered
materials respecting Pisa and Florence.

The sixth, "Valle Crucis," will be occupied with the monastic
architecture of England and Wales.

The seventh, "The Springs of Eure," will be wholly given to the
cathedral of Chartres.

The eighth, "Domrémy," to that of Rouen and the schools of
architecture which it represents.

The ninth, "The Bay of Uri," to the Pastoral forms of Catholicism,
reaching to our own times.

And the tenth, "The Bells of Cluse," to the pastoral Protestantism of
Savoy, Geneva, and the Scottish border.

Each part will consist of four sections only; and one of them, the
fourth, will usually be descriptive of some monumental city or
cathedral, the resultant and remnant of the religious power examined
in the preparatory chapters.

One illustration at least will be given with each chapter, and
drawings made for others, which will be placed at once in the
Sheffield museum for public reference, and engraved as I find support,
or opportunity for binding with the completed work.

As in the instance of Chapter IV. of this first part, a smaller
edition of the descriptive chapters will commonly be printed in
reduced form for travellers and non-subscribers; but otherwise, I
intend this work to be furnished to subscribers only.




INDEX.

[_Except in the case of Chapter 1., which is not divided into numbered
sections, the references in this index are to both page and section.
Thus_ 206. iv. 51 _is to page_ 206, _Chapter_ IV., § 51.]


Aaron's rod, 133. iv. 51.

Adder, the deaf, 110. iv. 33-4.

Admiration, test of, 96. iv. 8.

Afghan war, 48. ii. 43.

Agricola, 67. iii. 21.

Aisles of aspen and of stone, 97. iv. 10.

Alaric (son-in-law of Theodoric), defeated and killed by Clovis at
           Poitiers, 9; 52. ii. 49.

---- the younger, 52, ii. 49.

Albofleda, sister of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Alemannia (Germany) 34. ii. 19.

Alexander III. and Barbarossa, 111. iv. 35.

Alfred, King, of England, religious feeling under, 21.

Algeria, 63. iii. 13.

Alphabet, the, and Moesia, 68. iii. 22.

Alps, the, and climbing, 72. iii. 29.

Amiens. (1) History; (2) Town; (3) Cathedral.

  (1) _History of_:--
         early people of, and Roman gods, 4.
         taken by the Franks under Clodion, 445 A.D., 7.
         manufactures of, early, 2, 3.
               "   swords, 124. iv. 43.
               "   woollen, 118, 120. iv. 41.
         religion, and Christianity:--
           the Beau Christ d'Amiens, 90, 111. iv. 3, 36.
           S. Firmin the first to preach there, 300 A.D., 5.
           the first bishopric of France, 6.
           the first church there, 350 A.D., 5, 6; 99. iv. 14.
           under S. Geoffroy, 1104-50 A.D., 128-9. iv. 45.

  (2) _The Town_:--
         country round, 2.
         highest land near, 14.
         manufactory chimneys, 3.
         railway station, 1, 3.
         Roman gate near, 15.
         S. Acheul, chimney of, 6, 14.
         streams and rivers of, 1.
         the "Venice of France," 1.

  (3) _The Cathedral_:--
         (a) History,--
               books on, 93 n. iv. 1. 2. n.
               building of, 89. iv. 1. 2.
                  "  by whom? 97-8, iv. 12.
               completion of, rhyme on the, 99. sq. iv. 12.
               history of successive churches on its site, 99. iv. 14.
         (b) General aspect of,--
               as compared with other cathedrals, 88. iv. 1.
               the consummation of Frankish character, 46. ii. 38.
               the "Parthenon of Gothic architecture," 88. iv. 1.
         (c) Detailed examination of,--
               approaches to, which best, 92. sq. iv. 6.
               apse, the, its height, 96. iv. 9
                 " the first perfect piece of Northern architecture, 97.
                       iv. 11.
               choir, the, and wood-carving, 91 & n. iv. 5 & n.
               façade, 108 sq. iv. 28 sq.
                 " the central porch,
                 "       " apostles of, 108. iv. 29.
                 "       " Christ-Immanuel, David, 108. iv. 28.
                 "       " prophets of, 108. iv. 29.
                 " the northern porch (S. Firmin), 127 sq. iv. 44.
                 " the southern porch (Madonna), 131 sq. iv. 48.
               flêche, from station, 3, 4; 94. iv. 7; 138. iv. 58.
               foundation steps, the old, removed, 107. iv. 27.
               restoration of, 107. iv. 27; 123. iv. 43.
               rose moulding of, 107. iv. 27.
               sculptures of, 133-4. iv. 51.
                   "  of virtues less good than of prophets, 121. iv. 42.
               transepts of; North, rose window, 95-6. iv. 8.
                   "           "  sculpture of, 125. n. iv. 43 n.
                   "         South, Madonna on, 94. iv. 7.

Amos, figure and quatrefoils, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Anchorites, early, 72, 73. iii. 29, 30.

Anderson, J. R., on purgatory, 136 n. iv. 55 n.

Angelico, scriptural teaching of, 81. iii. 46.

Anger, bides its time, 48. ii. 42.

Anger, a feminine vice, 118. iv. 41.
  "  sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Angoulême, legend of its walls falling, 50 n. ii. 47.

Aphrodite, 27. ii. 3.

Apocrypha, the, received by the Church, 78. iii. 40.

Apostles, the, and virtues, Amiens Cathedral, 112. iv. 37 sq.

Arab, Gothic and Classic, 63. iii. 13.

Arabia, 63. iii. 13.
  "  power of, 65. iii. 19.
  "  religion of, 66. iii. 19.
  "  Sir F. Palgrave's book on, 64-65. iii. 17-18.

Architecture, Egyptian, origin of, 71. iii. 27.
  "  literal character of early Christian, 90. iv. 4.
  "  and nature, 97. iv. 10.
  "  Northern gets as much light as possible, 89. iv. 2.
  "      "  passion of, 97. iv. 10.
  "  "Purity of style" in, 88. iv. 2.

Arianism of Visigoths, 9.

Arles, defeat of Clovis by Theodoric at, 50, 54. ii. 47, 53.

Armour, early Frankish, 43. ii. 33.

Art, the Bible as influencing and influenced by Christian, 80-81.
         iii. 45-6.
  "  all great, praise, pref. v.
  "  and literature, mental action of, 81. iii. 47.

Asceticism, our power of rightly estimating, 72. iii. 29.

Asia, seven churches of, 63. iii. 12.
  "  Minor, a misnomer, 62. iii. 12.
  "  religious feeling of Asiatics, 21 n.

Assyria, ancient kingdom of, and the Jews, 65. iii. 18.

Astronomy from Egypt, 71. iii. 27.

Atheism, barefoot figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
  "  very wise men may be idolaters, cannot be atheists, 119. iv. 41.
  "  Modern: see "Infidelity."

Athena, 86. iii. 53.

Athens, influence of, on Europe, 62. iii. 12.

Atlantic cable, 61. iii. 8.

Attila, defeated at Chalons, 7.

Attuarii, 34, 38 n. ii. 18, 28 n.

Augurs, college of, 70 n. iii. 26 n.

Aurelian, the Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Auroch herds, of Scythia, 31 n. ii. 11.

Author, the:--
        art teaching of, 85. iii. 52.
        Bible training of, 86. iii. 52.
        on his own books, 85. iii. 52.
        cathedrals, his love of, 88. iv. 1.
        conservative, pref. iii.

Author, the:
        discursiveness of, 47. ii. 40.
        on Greek myths, 86. iii. 52.
        on Homer and Horace, 86. iii. 52.
        religion of, 135 sq. iv. 55 sq.
        on Roman religion, 86. iii. 52.
        travels abroad; earliest tour on Continent, 99. iv. 13.
           "  at Amiens, in early life, 107. iv. 27.
           "  at Avallon, Aug. 28, 82. 87. iii. 54.
        books of quoted or referred to:--
        Ariadne Florentina, on "franchise," 39 n. ii. 28.
        Arrows of the Chace, letters to Glasgow, pref. iii.
        Fiction Fair and Foul, 111. iv. 35 n.
        Fors Clavigera, Letter 61, Vol. VI., p. --, 102 n. iv. 20 n.
          "    "          "    65, Vol. VI., p. --, 125 n. iv. 43 n.
        Laws of Fésolé, pref. v.
          "       "       "     60. iii. 7.
        Modern Painters, plate 73, 20.
        St. Mark's Rest, 27. ii. 2.
         "         "    83 n. iii. 48 n.
         "         "    113 n. iv. 36.
        Stones of Venice, 131 n. iv. 49 n.
        Two Paths, 95 n. iv. 8 n.
        Val d'Arno, 39 n. ii. 28 n.

Auvergnats, 10.

Avarice, modern, 111. iv. 35; 120. iv. 41.
  "  figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.


Bacteria, the, 13.

Baltic, tribes of the, 31. ii. 11, 12.

Baptism, not essential to salvation, 18.

Barbarossa, in the porch of St. Mark's, 111. iv. 35.

Batavians, 49. ii. 45.

Battle-axe, French, or Achon, 42. ii. 32.

Bayeux, Bishop of, surrender of Lord Salisbury to, 105. iv. 24.

Beauvais, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.

Beggars, how to give to, 95. iv. 8.

Belshazzar's feast, 122. iv. 42.

"Bible of Amiens," meaning of title, 127. iv. 44

----, the Holy--
  art, as influenced by, 80. iii. 45.
  and Clovis, 50. ii. 47.
  contents and matchless compass of, 85. iii. 51.
  disobedience of accepting only what we like in it, 79. iii. 41.
  history of, and acceptance by the Church, 77-8. iii. 39, 40.
  influence of, sentimental, intellectual, moral, 79. iii. 42.

Bible, inspiration of the, 82. iii. 48.
  the "library of Europe," 76. iii. 36.
  literature and, 80. iii. 44.
  St. Jerome's, 70. iii. 26.
  study of, by the author as a child, 86. iii. 52.
    "  honest and dishonest, 79. iii. 42.
    "  one-sided, and its results, 79. iii. 41.
  teaching of, general and special, 84. iii. 49.
  Ulphilas' Gothic, 68. iii. 22.
  the word 'Bible,' its meaning, 77. iii. 37.
  quoted or referred to:--[72]
    Gen. xviii. 25, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? 139.
        iv. 60.
    Ex. xiv. 15, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward,
        102 n. iv. 21 n.
    Deut. xxvi. 5, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, 63. iii. 14.
    1 Sam. xvii. 28, With whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
        wilderness? 70. iii. 26.
    Ps. xi. 4, The Lord is in His holy temple, 90. iv. 2.
    Ps. xiv. 1, The fool hath said (_Dixit insipiens_), 119, iv. 41.
    Ps. xxiv. Who is the King of Glory? 112. iv. 36.
    Ps. lxv. 12, The little hills rejoice on every side, 139. iv. 60.
    Song of Solomon vii. 1, How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, 119.
        iv. 41.
    Isa. xi. 9, Hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain, 87. iii. 54.
    Matt. x. 37, He that loveth father or mother more than me, 76. iii. 36.
      "  xvi. 24, Let him take up his cross and follow me, 79. iii. 43.
      "  xvii. 5, This is my beloved Son ... hear ye Him, 109, iv. 30.
      "  xviii. 20, Where two or three are gathered together, 90. iv, 3.
      "  xxi. 9, Hosanna to the Son of David, 109. iv. 31.
    Luke i. 80, The child grew ... and was in the deserts, 70. iii. 26.
      "  x. 5, Peace be to this house, 114. iv. 38.
      "  x. 28, This do, and thou shalt live, 135. iv. 54.
      "  xvi. 31, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, 177. iii. 38.
    John vi. 29, This is the work of God, that ye believe him, 4.
      "  vi. 55, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, 119. iv. 41.
      "  xvii. 23, I in them, and thou in me, 118. iv. 41.
      "  xxi. 16, Feed my sheep, 106. iv. 26.
    Rom. viii. 4, 6, 13, The righteousness of the law ... for to be
         carnally minded, is death, 84 n. iii. 48 n.
    1 Cor. xiii. 6, Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but in the truth, pref. v.
    2 Cor. vi. 16, I will be their God and they shall be my people, 90.
         iv. 3.
    Eph. iv. 26, Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, 48. iii. 42.
      "  vi. 15, Your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
         peace, 119. iv. 41.
    James v. 7, 8, Be ye also patient, 120. iv. 41.
    Rev. iii. 11, Hold fast that which thou hast, 119. iv. 41.
      "  xi. 15, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
         Lord and of his Christ, 139. iv. 60.

[Footnote 72: References merely descriptive of one of the sculptures of the
        façade of Amiens Cathedral are omitted in this index.]

Bibliotheca, 77. iii. 37.

Bishops, French, in battle, 105. iv. 24. _See_ Everard and S. Geoffrey.

Bittern and hedgehog, 126. iv. 43.

Black's atlas, 36. ii. 24.

Black Prince, the, his leopard coinage, 117. iv. 41.
  "    "       "  at Limoges, 118. iv. 41.

Blasphemy and slang, 105. iv. 25.

Blight, as a type of punishment, 123. iv. 43.

Boden see, the, 37. ii. 25.

Boulin, Arnold, carves choir of Amiens Cathedral, 92 n. iv. 5.

Bourges, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.

Bouvines, battle of, 105. iv. 24.

Bretons, in France, 6, 8, 11.

Britain, gives Christianity its first deeds and final legends, 32. ii. 15.
  "  divisions of, 69. iii. 24.
  "  and Roman Empire, 29-30. ii. 9.

Brocken summit, the, 35. ii. 22.

Bructeri, 34. ii. 18.

Bunyan, John, 16.

Burgundy, and France distinct, 6, 8, 11.
  "  extent of kingdom, _temp._ Clotilde, 52 n. ii 49.
  "  king of, uncle of Clotilde, 52. ii. 50.

Bussey and Gaspey's History of France, 52 n. ii. 50.

Butler, Colonel, "Far out Rovings retold," pref. iv., 35.

Byron's "Cain," 80. iii. 44.

Byzantine Madonna, 131. iv. 49.
  "  scheme of the virtues, 112 n. iv. 36.

Byzantium, influence of on Europe, 62. iii. 12.


Calais, road from, to Paris, 10.

Callousness of modern public opinion, 48. ii. 42.

Camels, disobedient and ill-tempered, 118. iv. 41.

Canary Islands, 63. iii. 13.

Cancan, the, 118. iv. 41.

Canterbury, S. Martin's church at, and S. Augustine, 18.

Canute, 64. iii. 16.

Carlyle, T., description of Poland and Prussia, 30 n. ii. 10.
  "          "Frederick the Great" quoted, 81. iii. 47.

Carpaccio, draperies in the pictures of, 2.

Carthage, 63. iii. 13.

Cary's Dante, 112 n. iv. 36.
  "      "    120. iv. 41.
  "      "    See "Dante," 120.

Cassel, 36. ii. 24.

Cathedrals, author's love of, 88. iv. 1.
  "  custodians of, 88. iv. 1.
  "  different, French and English, compared with that of Amiens, 88.
         iv. 1.
  "  plan of mediæval, and its religious meaning, 91. iv. 4.
  "  points of compass in, 107. iv. 28.

Catti, the, 34, 38. ii. 18, 27.

Cattle, huge, of nomad tribes, 31 n. ii. 11.

Centuries, division of the, into four periods, 26. ii. 1.

Chalons, defeat of Attila at, 7.

Chamavi, 34. ii. 18.

Chapman, George, his last prayer, 102. iv. 20-21.

Charity, giving to beggars, 95. iv. 8.
  "  indiscriminate, 121. iv. 41.

Charlemagne, religion under, 21 n.

Chartres cathedral, 88. iv. 1.

Chastity, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Chaucer, "Romaunt of Rose" quoted on franchise, 39 n. ii. 28.

Chauci, 34, 38. ii. 18, 27.

Childebert (son of Clovis), first Frank king of Paris, 51. ii. 48.
  "  meaning of the word, 51. ii. 48.

Childeric, son of Merovée, king of Franks, exiled 447 A.D., 7.

Chivalry, its dawn and darkening, 43 ii. 33.
  "  its Egyptian origin, 71. iii. 27.
  "  feudal, 54. ii. 54.

Chlodomir, second son of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Chlodowald, son of Chlodomir, 51. ii. 48.

Christ, the Beau Christ d'Amiens, 90. 111. iv. 3, 36.
  "  and the doctors, 133. iv. 51.
  "  His life, not His death, to be mainly contemplated, 134. iv. 52.
  "  His return to Nazareth, 133. iv. 51.
  "  realization of His presence by mediæval burghers, 90. iv. 3.
  "  statue of, Amiens Cathedral, 108. iv. 28.
  "    "          "      "        111. iv. 36.
  "    "          "      "        its conception and meaning, 134. iv. 52.

Christian," "The (newspaper), 83. iii. 48.

Christianity and the Bible, 70. iii. 26.
  "  of Clovis, 13.
  "  early, share of Britain, Gaul and Germany in, 33. ii. 15.
  "  fifth century, at end of, 54. ii. 54.
  "  Gentile, 77. iii 39.
  "  Gothic, Classic, Arab, 69. iii. 25.
  "  literature as influencing, 70. iii. 26.
  "  mediæval, Saxon and Frank, 21.
  "  modern, 17.
  "  modest minds, the best recipients of, 77. iii. 39.
  "  monastic life, 70. iii. 26.
  "  S. Jerome's Bible, and, 77. iii. 37.
  "  true, defined, 136. iv. 55.
  "    "      "     137. iv. 57.
  "  See "Religion."

Church, the first French, at Amiens, 5, 6.

Churlishness, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Cimabue's Madonna, 131. iv. 49.

Cincinnatus, 67. iii. 21.

Circumstances, man the creature of, 58, 59. iii. 1, 3.

Classic countries of Europe, (Gothic, and Arab,) 62 sq. iii. 11.
  "  literature, there is a _sacred_, 86. iii. 53.

Claudius, the Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Clergymen, modern, 17.
  "        protestant, 74. iii. 33.

Climate, and nationality, 9.
  "      races divided by, 61. iii. 9.
  "      and race, their influence on man, 61. iii. 9.

Cloak, legend of S. Martin's, 14, 15.

Clodion, leads Franks over Rhine and takes Amiens, 445 A.D., 7.

Clotaire, son of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Clotilde (wife of Clovis, daughter of Chilperic), 6, 21.
  "  education of, 52 n. ii. 49.
  "  the god of, 7, 9, 13.
  "    "  "  "   54. ii. 54.
  "  journeys to France, 52. ii. 50.
  "  marriage of, 13; 51. ii. 48.
  "  mother of, 52 n. ii. 49.
  "  name, meaning of the, 51. ii. 48.

----, daughter of Clovis and Clotilde, 51. ii. 48.

Clovis, King of the Franks, 7.
  "  birth of, 466 A.D., 52. ii. 49.
  "  character of, 13.
  "  death and last years of, 49 sq. ii. 44.
  "  family of, 51. ii. 48.
  "  name, meaning of the, 51. ii. 48.
  "  reign of, 13.
  "    crowned at Amiens, 481 A.D., 27. ii. 2.
  "      "     at Rheims, 9.
  "    defeat of by Ostrogoths, at Arles, 50. ii. 47.
  "    passes the Loire, at Tours, 20.
  "    and the Soissons vase, 47-8. ii. 41-3.
  "    summary of its events, 51. ii. 49.
  "    victories of, (Soissons, Poitiers, Tolbiac,) 9. 21. i. n.
  "       "      the Franks after his, 46. ii. 38.
  "  religion of:--
  "    prays to the God of Clotilde, 7, 9, 13; 54. ii. 54.
  "    conversion to Christianity by S. Remy, 13, 14.
  "    his previous respect for Christianity, 52 n. ii. 49 n.
  "    "      "        "    "   S. Martin's Abbey, 20.
  "    his Christianity, analysed, 50. ii. 47.
  "  Rheims enriched by, 52. ii. 49.
  "  S. Genevieve, Paris, founded by, 55. ii. 55.

----, son of Childeric, 7.
  "    "  "      "      invades Italy, 38 n. ii. 28 n.
  "    "  "      "      reign of, 7.

Cockatrice, sculpture of the, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 33-4.

Cockneyism, history writing and, 13.

Cockneyism, 'Mossoo,' 38. ii. 27.
  "  priests and, 119. iv. 41.

Coinage, the Black Prince's leopard, 117. iv. 41.

Colchos, tribes of the lake of, 31. ii. 11.

Cologne, battlefield of Tolbiac from, 54. ii. 54.

Commerce and protestantism, 79. iii. 43.

Competition will not produce art, 90 n. iv. 4.
     "           "      and the Franks, 41 n. ii. 31.

Constantine, Emperor, power of, 54. ii. 54.
     "           "      lascivious court of, 67. iii. 20.

Constantius, Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Courage, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Covetousness, and atheism, 119. iv. 41.

Cowardice, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Creasy, Sir E., "History of England," 59 iii. 5, 6.

Crecy, battle of, Edward II. fords the, 1.

Crime, the history of, its possible lessons, 12.

Cross, the power of the, in history, 79. iii. 42.
  "  protestant view of the, as a raft of salvation, 80. iii. 43.

Crown, the, of Hope, 119. iv. 41.

Cyrene, 63. iii. 13.


Dacia, contest of, with Rome, 30. ii. 9.
  "  five Roman emperors from, 32 n. ii. 15 n.

Dædalus, 101, iv. 19.

Dalmatia, 68. iii. 23.

Danes, the, 31. ii. 12.

Daniel, statue, etc., of, Amiens Cathedral, 114. iv. 38; 121. iv. 42.
        quatrefoils: 'traditional visit of Habakkuk to,' 125. iv. 43.
             "  the stone cut without hands, 133. iv. 51.

Dante, as a result of the Bible, 80. iii. 44.
  "  Christian-heathen poet, 102. iv. 20.
  "  Virgil's influence on, 86. iii. 53.
  "  quoted: "Paradise" (28), 111 n. iv. 36.
  "      "         "    (125), 120. iv. 41.

Danube, tribes of the, 31. ii. 1.

Darwinism, 40. ii. 30; 126. iv. 43.

Dates, recollection of exact, 26, 33. ii. 1, 2, 17.

David and monastic life, 70. iii. 26.
  "  statue of, Amiens Cathedral, 109 sq. iv. 31.

Dead, recognition of the, in a future life, 139. iv. 60.

Denmark, under Canute, 64. iii. 16.

Despair, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Devil, St. Martin's answer to the, 17.

Diocletian, retirement of, 66. iii. 20.

Discipline, essential to man, 108. iv. 29.

Dniester, importance of the, 61. iii. 9-10.

Doctor, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48 n.

Douglas, Bishop, translation of Virgil, 135; 86. iii. 53; 102. iv. 20.

Dove, the, a type of humility, 120. iv. 41.
 "     "   Isaac Walton's river, 1.

Dover cliff and parade, 96. iv. 9.

Drachenfels, district of the, 35. ii. 20, 22.

Dragon, under feet of the Christ, Amiens Cathedral, 111. iv. 34.

Druids, in France, 4.

Durham Cathedral, 89. iv. 1.

Dusevel's history of Amiens, 2 n.


East, geography of the, 64, 65. iii. 17, 18.

Eder, the, 36. ii. 24.

Egypt, 63. iii. 13.
  "    The Flight into, 132. iv. 51.
  "    Idols, the fall of, in, 133. iv. 51.
  "    influence of, 65. iii. 19.
  "    and the origin of learning, 71. iii. 27.
  "    theology of, and Greece, 71. iii. 27.

Eisenach, 36. ii. 24.

Elbe, tribes of the, 31. ii. 11.

Elijah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Engel-bach, 36. ii. 24.

England, dominions of (story of C. Fox and Frenchman), 59. iii. 5-6.
    "    modern politics of: Afghan war, 48. ii. 43.
    "      "         "       Ireland, pref. iii., iv.; 60. iii. 6.
    "      "         "       Scotch crofters, 6. iii. 6.
    "      "         "       Zulu land, 48. ii. 43; 60. iii. 6.
    "    pride of wealth, 60. iii. 7.
    "    St. Germain comes to, 28. ii. 5.
    "    streams of (Croydon, Guildford, Winchester), 3.

English cathedrals, 88. iv. 1.
    "   character, stolid, French active, 40. ii. 30.
    "   language, its virtues, nobler than Latin, 105. iv. 24.
    "   tourist, the, 72. iii. 29.
    "      "      "   initial-cutting by, 98. iv. 12.

Ethiopia, the Lord striking, 126. iv. 43.

Europe, condition and history of, 1-500 A.D., 31. 54. ii. 13, 54.
   "    countries of, twelve, 63. iii. 14.
   "    division of, into Gothic and Classic, 62 sq. iii. 11 sq.
   "       "     by Vistula and Dniester, 61. iii. 9-10.
   "    geography of, 61-65, 68, 69. iii. 9-18, 22-3 sq.
   "    Greek part of, 62. iii. 12.
   "       "  imagination, and Roman order, influence of, 66. iii. 20.
   "    nomad tribes of, 31 & n. ii. 11.

Europe, peasant life of early, 82. ii. 13.

Evangelical doctrine and commerce, 79. iii. 43.

Everard, Bishop of Amiens, his tomb, 104. iv. 24.

Executions, ancient and modern, 48. ii. 43.

Ezekiel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 122. iv. 42.


Faith, justification by, 137. iv. 56.
  "    mediæval, 90. iv. 3.
  "    sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
  "    "the substance of things hoped for," 138. iv. 60.
  "    symbolism of, with cup and cross, 119. iv. 41.
  "    and works, 134. iv. 52 sq.

Fanaticism, and the Bible, 79. iii. 41.

Fathers, the, Scriptural commentaries of, 81. iii. 46.
  "      theology of the, 135. iv. 55.

Faust, Goethe's, 8; 35. ii. 21; 80. iii. 44.

Favine, André (historian, 1620) on Frankish character, 40. ii. 30, 32.

Feud, etymology of, 101 n. iv. 17 n.

Florence, Duomo of, 88. iv. 1.

Folly, sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 121. iv. 41.

Fortitude, sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Fox, Charles, his boast of England, 59. iii. 5.
 "   Dr., quaker, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48.

France, Amiens and Calais, country between, 2.
  "     architecture of, no stone saw used, 89. iv. 2 n.
  "     books on: Pictorial History of, 48. ii. 43.
  "         "    "Villes de France," 52 n. ii. 50.
  "     cathedrals of, the, 88. iv. 1.
  "       their outside "the wrong side of the stuff," 96. iv. 8.
  "       restoration of, 130. iv. 47.
  "     churches of, the first, at Amiens, 6.
  "     colours of the shield of, 43. ii. 48.
  "     early tribes of, 6, 8.
  "     and the Franks, 7.
  "     geography and geology of northern, 10.
  "     the Isle of, Paris, 138. iv. 58.
  "     Kings of (Philip the Wise, Louis VIII., St. Louis), 100. iv. 16.
  "     map of, showing early divisions, 8.
  "     Merovingian dynasty, 21.
  "     peoples of, divided by climates, 10.
  "     provinces of, 10, 11.
  "     Prussia, war with, 33. ii. 17.
  "     rivers of, the five, 8.
                           (See below, "French").

Franchise, 38 n. ii. 28.

Francisca (Frankish weapon), 42. ii. 32.

Frank, meaning of the word, 'brave' rather than 'free,' 37-8. ii. 27-8.

Frankenberg, 36. ii. 24-5.

Frankness, meaning of, 6; 38. ii. 28.
  "        opposite of shyness, 39. ii. 28.

Franks, the, agriculture, sport, and trade of, 45. ii. 37.
  "     appearance of, 43. ii.
  "     character of, 32, 44, 45, ii. 15, 35, 38.
  "     etymology of word, 42. ii. 32.
  "     hair, manner of wearing the, by, 45, 125 n. ii. 36, iv. 43 n.
  "     and Holland, 40. ii. 30.
  "     and Julian (defeated by him, 358 A.D.), 41 n. 44. ii. 31, 35.
  "     Kings of the, 7.
  "     modern, 21.
  "     race of, originally German, from Waldeck, 33, 36. ii. 15, 17, 24.
  "     religion of, under S. Louis, 21.
  "     rise of, 250 A.D., 7, 8; 33. ii. 17.
  "       settled in France, 6.
  "       extension of power, to the Loire, 8.
  "          "          "    to the Pyrenees, 8.
  "       Gaul becomes France, 64. iii. 16.
  "       the Rhine refortified against them, 38 n., 41. ii. 28, 31.
  "     tribes of, Gibbon on the, 33-4. ii. 18.
  "     weapons of the, Achon and Francisca, 42. ii. 32, 33.

French character, early, 8.
  "        "      its activity, 40. ii. 29.
  "        "      its loyalty, "good subjects of a good king," 40. ii. 29.
  "        "      makes perfect servants, 39. ii. 28.
  "        "      its innate truth, 52. ii. 33.
  "  frogs, 41. ii. 30.
  "  liberty and activity, 30. ii. 29.
  "     "    equality, and fraternity, under Clovis, 47. ii. 42.
  "  politeness, 32. ii. 15.
  "  religion, old and new, 117. iv. 41.
  "  Revolution, "They may eat grass," 20.
  "     "       a revolt against lies, 33. ii. 16.
  "     "       and irreligion, 95-104. iv. 7, 23.

Froissart, quoted, 43. ii. 33.

Fulda, towns on the, 36. ii. 24.

Future life, recognition of the dead in a, 139. iv. 60.


Gabriel, the Angel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 132. iv. 50.

Gascons, the, not really French, 10.

Gauls, the, in France, 6.
  "  become French, 64. iii. 16.
  "  meaning of the word, 29 sq. ii. 8.
  "  and Rome, 29. ii. 9.

Gentillesse, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Geoffrey, Bishop (see "S. Geoffrey").

Geometry, from Egypt, 71. iii. 27.

Germany, Alemannia, 34. ii. 19.
   "     and the Franks, 9; 32 n. 33. ii. 15, 17.
   "     and Rome, 29. ii. 9.
   "     domestic manners of, 38. ii. 23.
   "     dukedoms of, small, 34. ii. 19.
   "     geography of, 35. ii. 20.
   "     geology of, 37. ii. 25.
   "     maps of, 34. ii. 19.
   "     mountains of, 36. ii. 23.
   "     railroads of, 34. ii. 19.
   "     S. Martin, and the Emperor of, 19
   "     tribes, Germanic, 33. ii. 18.

Gibbon's "Roman Empire." (_a_) its general character; (_b_) references
              to it
    (_a_) its general character:--
         contempt for Christianity, 49. ii. 44.
         its errors, 72 n. iii. 29 n.
         inaccurate generalization, 66 n. iii. 23-4.
         its epithets always gratis, 44. ii. 34.
         no fixed opinion on anything, 41 n. ii. 31 n.
         not always consistent, 45. ii. 38.
         satisfied moral serenity of, 37. ii. 27.
         sneers of, 50. ii. 48.
         style, rhetorical, 44, 45, 50; 67. ii. 35, 37; 47. iii. 21.
    (_b_) references to, in present book:--
         on Angoulême, its walls falling (xxxviii. 53),[73] 50 n. ii. 47.
         on asceticism (xxxvii. 72), 72 n. iii. 29.
         Christianity (xv. 23, 33), 77. iii. 39.
         Clovis (xxxviii. 17), 49, 51. ii. 45-6, 49.
         Egypt and monasticism (xxxvii. 6), 71. iii. 27.
         Europe, divisions of (xxv.), 68. iii. 23.
           "     nations of (lvi.), 65 n. iii. 19.
         Franks, the:--
           "     their armour (xxxv. 18), 43. ii. 34-5.
           "       "   aspect (xxxv. 18), 45-46. ii. 36-8.
           "       "   character (xix. 79, 80), 45-46. ii. 36-8.
           "       "   freemen (x. 73), 41 n. ii. 31.
           "       "   rise (x. 69), 33. ii. 17.
           "     crossing the Rhine (xix. 64), 41 n. ii. 31.
         after Tolbiac (xxxviii. 24), 50. ii. 52.
         Gnostics (xv. 23, 33), 78 n. iii. 39.

[Footnote 73: The references to Gibbon in this index are to the chapters of
             his history, together with the number of the note nearest to
             which the quotation occurs.]

Gibbon's Justinian (xl. 2), 32 n. ii. 15.
         miracles (xxxviii. 53), 50 n. ii. 47,
         monasticism (xxxvii.), 70 sq. iii. 26.
         monkish character (xxxvii. 72), 72 n. iii. 29.
         Roman Empire and its divisions (xxv. 29), 67. iii. 21-2.
         Scots and Celts (xxv. 109, 111), 69 n. iii. 24 n.
         Theodobert's death (xli. 103), 31 n. ii. 11 n.
         Theodoric, government of (xxxix. 43), 54. ii. 53.
             "  at Verona (xxxix. 19), 54. ii. 54.
         Tolbiac, battle of (xxxviii. 24), 53. ii. 52.

Gideon and the dewy fleece, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 133. iv. 51.

Gilbert, Mons., on Amiens Cathedral, 99. iv. 14.
   "       "         "        "  the bronze tombs in, 103. iv. 23.

Ginevra and Imogen, 27. ii. 3.

Giotto, scriptural teaching of, 81. iii. 46.

Globe, divisions of the, 61. iii. 8.

Gnostics, 78. iii. 39.

God's kingdom in our hearts, 87. iii. 54.

Godfrey (see "S. Geoffroy").

Gonfalon standard, the, 119. iv. 41.

Gothic architecture, aim of a builder of, 89. iv. 2.
   " cathedral, the five doors of a, 107. iv. 28.
   " classic and Arab, 63. iii. 19.
   " and Classic Europe, 62. iii. 11.
   " wars with Rome, 66. iii. 20.

Goths, the: see "Ostrogoths," "Visigoths."

Gourds, of Amiens, 124. iv. 43.

Government, and nationality, 64. iii. 15.

Goyer, Mons. (bookseller), Amiens, 120. iv. 41.

Grass, pillage of, and Clovis, 20.

Greek, the alphabet how far, 68. iii. 22.
  " all Europe south of Danube is, 62, 68. iii. 12, 22.
  " imagination in Europe, 66. iii. 20.
  " myths and Christian legends, 86. iii. 53.

Greeks, the, and Roman Empire, 31. ii. 12.

Greta and Tees, 36. ii. 24.

Guards, the Queen's (in Ireland, 1880), pref. i.

Guelph, etymology of, 129. iv. 46.

Guinevere, 27. ii. 3.


Habakkuk, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 125. iv. 43.

Haggai,     "          "        "   126. iv. 43.

Hair, Frankish manner of wearing the, 45. ii. 36; 125 n. iv. 43.

Hartz mountains, 35. ii. 20.

Hedgehog and bittern, 126. iv. 43.

Heligoland, 31. ii. 12.

Henry VIII. and the Pope, 119. iv. 41.

Heraldry, English leopard from France, 42. ii. 31.
   "      Frankish, early, 40, ii. 30
   "      French colours, 27. ii. 3.
   "        "       "     42. ii. 32.
   "      Uri, shield of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Hercules and the Nemean Lion, 87. iii. 54.

Herod, and the three Kings (Amiens Cathedral), 132 sq. iv. 50-1.

Herodotus on Egyptian influence in Greece, 71. iii. 27.

Hilda, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

Hildebert, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

Hildebrandt, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

History, division of, into four periods of 500 years each, 26. ii. 1.
   "     how it is usually written, 12-13.
   "     how it should be written, pref. i. 12.
   "     popular, its effect on youthful minds, 12.
   "     should record facts, not make reflections, 70. iii. 26.
   "       "      "     "      "   or suppositions, 74 n. iii. 33.

Holy Land, 63. iii. 14.

Honour, of son to father, 101. iv. 17.

Hope, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Hosea,   "          "       "      122. iv. 43.

Huet. Alexander, and Amiens Cathedral choir, 91 n. iv. 5.

Humanity, its essentials (love, sense, discipline), 138. iv. 59.

Humility, no longer a virtue, 59. iii. 4.
    "     sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 121. iv. 41.

Huns, the, in France, 10.


Idolatry and Atheism, 119. iv. 41.
    "    figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
    "    and symbolism, distinct, 112. iv. 36.

Illyria, 68. iii. 23.

Immortality, 32. ii. 13.

India and England, 64. iii. 16.

Indians, North American, 51. ii. 48.

Infidelity, modern, 20, 39. ii. 28.
     "         "    58. iii. 2.

Ingelow, Miss, quoted, "Songs of Seven," 28. ii. 4.

Innocents, the Holy (Amiens Cathedral), 134. iv. 51.

Inscription on tombs of Bishops Everard and Geoffroy, 104. iv. 24, 26.

Inspiration of acts and words, not distinct, 83. iii. 48.
    "       of Scripture, modern views of, 83. iii. 48.

Invasion is not possession of a country, 66. iii. 16.

Ireland and England, 1880, pref. iii., iv.; 60. iii 6.
    "   tribes of, in early Britain, 69 n. iii. 24.

Isaiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 115, 121. iv. 38, 42.

Italy, under the Ostrogoths, 64. iii. 16.


Jacob's pillow, 70. iii. 26.

Jameson, Mrs., "Legendary Art" quoted, 17, 20.

Jeremiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 115, 121. iv. 38, 42.

Jerusalem, fall of, 77. iii. 39.

Jews, the, and Assyria, 65. iii. 18.

Jews, the, return to Jerusalem, 77, iii. 39.
  "    "   substitute usury for prophecy, 66. iii. 19.

Joan of Arc, 29. ii. 7; 55. ii. 55; 95. iv. 7.

Joel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Johnson, Dr., 101 n. iv. 17.

Jonah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Julian, the Emperor, rejects auguries, 70 n. iii. 26.
  "      "  and Constantius, 41 n. ii. 31.
  "      "  death of, 363 A.D., 75, 76. iii. 34, 36.
  "      "  defeats the Franks, 358 A.D., 44. ii. 35.
  "      "  refortifies the Rhine against the Franks, 38 n. ii. 28.
  "      "  and S. Martin, 16.
  "      victory of, at Strasbourg, 44. ii. 35.

Justinian, a Dacian by birth, 32 n. ii. 15.
  "        means "upright," 32 n. ii. 15.


Kaltenbacher, Mons., photographs of Amiens Cathedral, 130. iv. 47.

Karr, Alphonse, his work and the author's sympathy with it, 22.
  "       "     his 'Grains de Bons Sens,' 'Bourdonnements,' 33.

Kempis, Thomas à, 80. iii, 44.

Kingliness, 48. ii. 43.

Kings, the three (Amiens Cathedral), 132-4. iv. 50-51.

Knighthood, belted, meaning of, 44. ii. 34.

Knowledge, true, is of virtue, pref. v.


Laon cathedral, legend of, and oxen, 118 n. iv. 41. n.

Latin and English compared, 104. iv. 24 sq.

Law, the force of, and government, 64. iii. 15.
 "   old and new forms of, 48. ii. 43.

Lear, King, story of, reduced to its bare facts, 11-12.

Legends, whether true or not, immaterial, 15, 16, 18; 86-87. iii. 54.
   "     modern contempt for, 129. iv. 46.
   "     rationalization of, its value, 50. n. ii. 47.

Leopard, English heraldic, 42. ii. 31.

Leucothea, 27. ii. 3.

Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité, 47. ii, 42.

Liberty, and activity, 40. ii. 29.
   "     and "franchise," 38, 38 n. ii. 27, 28 n.

Libya, 63. iii. 13.
  "    and Vandal invasion, 64. iii. 16.

Lily on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 32.

Limousins, 10.

Lion, under feet of Christ, Amiens Cathedral, 111. iv. 34.

Literature and art, distinct mental actions, 82. iii. 47.
    "      and the Bible, 85. iii. 51.
    "      cheap (penny edition of Scott), 60. iii. 7.

Louis, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

---- I., of France, 47. ii. 40.

---- VIII., 100. iv. 16.
                 (See "St. Louis.")

Love, divine and human (Amiens Cathedral), 118. iv. 41.
  "   no humanity without it, 138. iv. 59.

Luca della Robbia, 81. iii. 46.

Luini, 81. iii. 46.

Lune, the river, 2.

Lust (Amiens Cathedral), 120. iv. 41.

Lydia, 62. iii. 12.


Madonna, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 94. iv. 7.
   "     porch to,     "       "   107. iv. 28.
   "     three types of (Dolorosa, Reine, Nourrice), 131. iv. 49.
   "     worship of, and its modern substitutes, 131. iv. 48.

Malachi, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 127. iv. 43.

Man, races of, divided by climate, 61. iii. 8.

Man's nature, 58. iii. 1.

Manchester, 59. iii. 3.

Map-drawing, 60. iii 7.
 "  of English dominions (Sir E. Creasy), 59-60. iii. 5-6.
 "  of France, 8.
 "  on Mercator's projection, 59-60. iii. 6.

Marquise, village near Calais, 10.

Martin's, John, "Belshazzar's feast," 122. iv. 42.

Martinmas, 18.

Martyrdom, the lessons of, 135. iv. 53.

Martyrs, female, many not in calendar, 29. ii. 7.

Meleager, 31. ii. 11.

Memory, "Memoria technica," 26. ii. 1.

Mercator, 60. iii. 6.

Merovée, seizes Amiens, on death of Clodion, 447 A.D., 7, 21.

Micah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Millennium, the, 86. iii. 54.

Milman's History of Christianity, 68-70 n., 73. iii. 22, 26, 32.
   "        "            "        on Rome in time of St. Jerome, 75-76.
                                      iii. 35.

Milton's "Paradise Lost," and the Bible, 80. iii. 44.
   "         "       "    quoted, 118. iv. 41.

Mind, disease of, noble and ignoble passion, 72. iii. 29.

Mines, coal, Plimsoll on, 48. ii. 42.

Missals, atheism represented as barefoot in, of 1100-1300, 119. ii. 41.

Modernism, avarice and pride of, 111. iv. 35. See "Christianity,"
  "Commerce," "England," "History," "Humility," "Infidelity,"
  "Philosophy," "Public Opinion," "Science."

Moesia, and the alphabet, 68. iii. 22.

Monasteries of Italy, made barracks of, 72 n. iii. 29.

Monasticism, its rise, 70-71. iii. 26-8.

Monks, type of character of, 72 n. iii. 29; 137. iv. 56.
  "    orders of, the main, 137. iii. 26.

Months, the, quatrefoils illustrative of (Amiens Cathedral), 130. iv. 47.

Morality, natural to man, 138. iv. 59.
   "      and religion, 138. iv. 58.

More, Sir Thomas, execution of, 48. ii. 43.

Morocco, extent of, 63. iii. 13.

Moses, 70. iii. 26.
  "    and Aaron, 133. iv. 51.
  "    and the burning bush, 133. iv. 51.

"Mysteries of Paris," 28. ii. 5.


Nahum, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 125. & n. iv. 43 & n.

Names, Frankish, etymology of, 51. ii. 48.

Nanterre, village of S. Genevieve, 28, 29. ii. 5, 8.

Nationality, depends on race and climate, not on rule, 64. iii. 15-16.

Nemean Lion, 86. iii. 53.

Netherlands, the, 37. ii. 26.

Nineveh, the beasts in, 126. iv. 43.
   "     the burden of, 125. iv. 43.

Nitocris, 29. ii. 6.

Nogent, Benedictine abbey of, 52. ii. 49.

Nomad tribes of northern Europe, 30. ii. 10.

Normans, rise of the, 31. ii. 12.

[Greek: Nous], 138 n. iv. 59 n.


Obadiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Obedience, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Odoacer, ends Roman Empire in Italy, 8; 67. iii. 21.

Orcagna, 81. iii. 46.

Origen, 81. iii. 47.

Ostrogoths, 3. ii. 12.
    "       defeat Clovis at Aries, 50. ii. 47.

"Our Fathers have told us," how begun, its aim and plan, pref. iii.
        "        "          general plan of, Appendix iii.
        "        "          plan for notes to, 21.

Oxen, story of, and Laon Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.
  "   patience of, 118. iv. 41.

Oxford, the "happy valley," 92-93. iv. 6.


Palestine, 63. iii. 14.

Palgrave, Sir F., on Arabia, 64-65 & n. iii. 17-18 & n.
    "        "    on the camel, 118-119. iv. 41.

Papacy, origin of the, 76. n. iii. 35.

Paris, church of S. Genevieve at, 55. ii. 55.
  "    the Isle of France, 138. iv. 58.
  "    the model of manners, 138. iv. 58.
  "    print-shops at, 118. iv. 41.

Patience, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Peasant life of early Europe, 32, sq. ii. 13.

Perseverance, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Persia, the real power of the East, 65. iii. 18.

Philip the Wise, of France, 100-101. iv. 16-17.

Philistia, 63. iii. 14.

Philosophy, modern, its manner of history, 12.

Phoenix, the, and chastity, 120. iv. 41.

Photographs of Amiens Cathedral, 117 n. iv. 41 n.; 122 n. iv. 43 n.; 130.
      iv. 130. And see Appendix II.

"Pilgrim's Progress," 16.

Pillage of subjects, to punish kings, 53. ii. 51.

Plimsoll, on coal mines, 48. ii. 42.

Poets, the three Christian-heathen, 102. iv. 20.

Poitiers, battle of, 508 A.D., Clovis and Alaric, 9, 21.
    "        "       and the walls of Angoulême, 50 n. ii. 47.
    "        "       1356 A.D., Froissart on, 43. ii. 33.

Polacks, the, 31. ii. 12.

Politicians, their proper knowledge, pref. v.

Politics: see "England."

Posting days, Calais to Paris, 10.

Power, motive of desire for, 74. iii. 33.

Praise, all great art, act, and thought is, pref. v.

Prayer, George Chapman's last, 102. iv. 20.

Pride, and avarice, 111. iv. 35.
  "    faults and virtues of, 104-105. iv. 24.
  "    infidelity of, and the cockatrice, 110. iv. 33; 121. iv. 41.

Priestly ambition, 74. iii. 33.

Probus, the Emperor, 32 n. ii. 15; 67. iii, 21.

Prophets, figures of the, Amiens Cathedral, general view of, 114. iv. 39.
   "             "           "       "      in detail, 121-122. iv. 42-3.

Protestantism, and the study of the Bible, 80. iii. 45.
       "       and popular histories, 12.
       "       and priestly ambition, 74. iii. 33.
       "       and Roman Catholicism, 137. iv. 57.
       "       views of S. Jerome, 73. iii. 31.

Provence, early, 8, 9.

Providence, God's, and history, 13.

Psalms, the scope of the, 85, iii. 50.

Public opinion, callousness of modern, 48. ii. 42.

Purgatory, doctrine of, 136 n. iv. 55 n.

Puritan malice, 34. ii. 19.


Quaker, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48.

Queen's Guards, in Ireland, 1880, pref. iii.


Races of Europe, divided by climate, 61. iii. 9. See "Climate."

Rachel, the Syrian, 63. iii. 14.

Railroads, modern, of Germany, 59. iii. 4.
    "      travelling by, I, 3.

Raphael's Madonnas, 131. iv. 49.

Rebellion, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Religion, definition of true, 138-139. iv. 60. (And see "Bible,"
          "Christianity,"  "Inspiration," "Protestantism.")
    "     to desire the right, 82. iii. 48.
    "     common idea that our own enemies are God's also, 14.
    "     and morality, 138. iv. 58.
    "     natural, 102. iv. 20.
    "     of Arabia, 65. iii. 19.
    "     of Egypt, 63. iii. 13.
    "     Eastern and Western, Col. Butler on, 21 n.

Restoration, modern, 107 n. iv. 27 n.

Rheims, Clovis crowned at, 9.
   "       "   enriches church of, 52. ii. 49.

Rheims Cathedral, 88. iv. 1.
   "       "      its traceries, 97. iv. 11.

Rhine, the, refortified by Julian, 38 n., 41. ii. 31.
  "     "   tribes from Vistula to, 30. ii. 10.

Right and left, in description of cathedrals, 107. iv. 28.

Rivers, strength and straightness, 61 n. iii. 10.

Robert, of Luzarches, builder of Amiens Cathedral, 97. iv. 12.

Roman Catholics, half Wellington's army Irish, pref. iv.
  "      "       and Protestantism, 137. iv. 57.
  "      "       servants, 72. iii. 29.

Roman Emperors, five, from Dacia, 32 n. ii. 15.
  "      "      as supreme Pontiffs, 75. iii. 35.

Roman Empire, divisions of (Illyria, Italy, Gaul), 67. iii. 21-2.
  "     "     Eastern and Western division, 67. iii. 21.
  "     "     end of the, 66-67. iii. 20-21.
  "     "     fall of, 31. ii. 12.
  "     "         "    and Julian and the augurs, 70. iii. 26.
  "     "     its main foes, 30. ii. 9.
  "     "     its true importance, 66. iii. 20.
  "     "     a power, not a nation, 65. iii. 19 n.

Roman Empire, power of, in France, ended, 481 A.D., 4, 6-8 sq.
  "     "        "      in Italy, ended, 476 A.D., 8.

Roman gate of Twins, at Amiens, 14.

"Romaunt of Rose," quoted, 39. ii. 28 n.

Rome, aspect of the city, in time of S. Jerome, 75. iii. 35.
  "   gives order to Europe, as Greece imagination, 66. iii. 20.
  "   wild nations opposed to, 30. ii. 9.

Romsey, 3.

Rose, on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 109-110. iv. 32.

Rosin forest, 35. ii. 20-1.

Royalties, taxes and, 47. ii. 41.

Rozé, Père, on Amiens Cathedral, 98. iv. 13; 104 n. iv. 24 n.; 125. iv. 43.


S. Acheul, near Amiens, 128-129. iv. 45-6.

S. Agnes, character of, 27. ii. 3.

S. Ambrogio, Verona, plain of, 54, ii. 54.

S. Augustine, his first converts, 18.
      "       and S. Jerome, 81. iii. 47.
      "       town of Hippo, 63. iii. 13.

S. Benedict, born 481 A.D., 27. ii. 3; 70. iii. 26.

S. Clotilde, of France, 51. ii. 48.

S. Cloud, etymology of, 51. ii. 48.

S. Domice, 128. iv. 44.

S. Elizabeth, 132. iv. 50.

S. Elizabeth, of Marburg, 35-6. ii. 21-3.

S. Firmin, his history, 5; 99. iv. 14; 128. iv. 45.
     "     beheaded and buried, 5.
     "     his Roman disciple, 5.
     "     his grave, 5-6; 129. iv. 46.
     "     and S. Martin, compared, 17, 18.
     "     porch to, Amiens Cathedral, 107. iv. 28; 127 sq. iv. 44.
     "     sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 5.

---- Confessor, 128. iv. 44-6.

S. Fuscien, 128. iv. 44.

S. Genevieve, actually existed, 29. ii. 7.
      "       biographies of her, numerous, 29. ii. 7.
      "       birth of, 421 A.D., 27. ii. 3.
      "       birthplace of, Nanterre, 28. ii. 5.
      "       character of, 28, 29. ii. 5-7.
      "       church to, at Paris, 55. ii. 55.
      "       and Clovis and his father, 55. ii. 55.
      "       conversion of, by S. Germain, 28. ii. 5.
      "       a pure Gaul, 29, 33. ii. 8, 15.
      "       of what typical, 27. ii. 3.
      "           peacefulness, 29. ii. 6.
      "           quiet force, 29. ii. 7.

S. Genevieve, S. Phyllis, 28. ii. 5.

S. Gentian, 128. iv. 44.

S. Geoffroy, Bishop of Amiens, history of, 128. iv. 44-5.
       "        "         "    tomb of (Amiens), 104-105; iv. 24, 26.

S. Germain converts S. Genevieve, on his way to England, 28. ii. 6.

S. Hilda (Whitby Cliff), 51. ii. 48.

S. Honoré, 128. iv. 44-5.
     "     porch to, Amiens Cathedral, 95. iv. 7.

S. James, apostle of hope, 120. iv. 41.

S. Jerome, his Bible, 70, 76, 77, 78. iii. 26, 36, 37-40.
      "    gives the Bible to the West, 50. ii. 47.
      "    Galatians, commentary on Epistle to the, 81. iii. 47.
      "    character of, candour its basis, 76. iii. 36.
      "    childhood and early studies, 75. iii. 34-5.
      "    death of, at Bethlehem, 78. iii. 40.
      "    Hebrew, studied by, 77. iii. 38.
      "    not a mere hermit, 73. iii. 31.
      "    his lion, 86. iii. 53.
      "    Milman, Dean, on, 74. iii. 32 sq.
      "    protestant view of, 73. iii. 31.
      "    Queen Sophia's letter to Vota on, 81. iii. 47.
      "    scholarship, will not give up his, 76. iii. 36.
      "    style of writing shown, 81. iii. 47.

S. John, the apostle of love, 112. iv. 37.
     "   his greatness, 101. iv. 16.

S. Louis, religion under, 21 n.

S. Mark's, Venice, Baptistery of and the virtues, 112 n. iv. 36 n.

S. Martin, baptism and conversion of, 15.
     "     character of, gentle and cheerful, 17, 19.
     "         "         patient, 29. ii. 7.
     "         "         serene and sweet, 17.
     "     cloak given to the beggar by, 332 A.D., 15.
     "     Clovis and, 20.
     "     Devil, answer to the, 17.
     "     drinks to a beggar, 19.
     "     fame of, universal (places called after), 18.
     "     history of, how relevant to this book, 20.
     "     's Lane, London, 18.
     "     and Julian, 16.
     "     Tours, his abbey there, 20.
     "       "    and bishopric, 16, 20.
     "     vision of, 15.
     "     wine, the patron of, 18, 19.

S. Nicholas," "Journal de, 120 n. iv. 41.

S. Peter, Apostle of courage, 112. iv. 37.

S. Quentin, 128. iv. 44.

S. Remy crowns Clovis, 9.
    "   preaches to Clovis, 13.
    "   and the Soissons vase, 47. ii. 41.

S. Sauve 100, 128. iv. 14, 44.

S. Simeon, 132. iv. 50.

S. Ulpha, 128, 129. iv. 44, 46.

S. Victoric, 128. iv. 44.

Salian, epithet of the French, 40, 41. ii. 30-31.

Salii, the, 40. ii. 30.

Salique law, 40. ii. 30.

Salisbury Cathedral, 88. iv. 1.

"Salts," old and young, 41. ii. 31.

Salvation, Protestant theory of, 79. iii. 43.

Sands, English, 2.

Savage races, love of war in, 51. ii. 48.
   "   women, endurance a point of honour with, 51. ii. 48.

Saxons, the, 31, ii. 12.
   "    religion of, 21.

Scandinavia, 61. iii. 10.
      "      becomes Norman, 31. ii. 12.

Scepticism, modern, 13. See "Infidelity."

Science, modern, its view of man, 58. iii. 1.

Scotch crofters and England, 60. iii. 6.

Scots, Picts and, 69 n. iii. 24.

Scott, Sir Walter, his nomenclature deeply founded, 34. ii. 18.
  "         "      novels of, "Antiquary" (Martin Waldeck), 34. ii. 18.
  "         "      "Monastery," 72 n. iii. 29.
  "         "      penny edition of, 60. iii. 7.

Sculpture, of a Gothic cathedral, 89. iv. 2.
    "      no pathos in primary, 101 n. iv. 19 n.

Scythia, tribes of, 61, 65. iii. 10, 17.

Semiramis, 29. ii. 6.

Sense ([Greek: nous]), essential to humanity, 138. iv. 59.

Servants, catholic, character of, 72 n. iii. 29.
    "     French, perfect, 39. ii. 28.

Severn, the, 2.

Shakspeare's Imogen, 27. ii. 3.
      "      "King Lear," reduced to its bare facts, 11.
      "      "Winter's Tale"--"lilies of all kinds," 110. iv. 32.

Sheba, Queen of, and Solomon, Amiens sculptures, 132 sq. iv. 50-51.

Shield, the, of the Franks, 44. ii. 35. See "Heraldry," "Uri."

Shyness and frankness, 39 & n. ii. 28.

Siberian wilderness, 61. iii. 9, 10.

Sicambri, 34, 38. ii. 18. 27.

Sidney, Sir Philip, 15.

Sin, carnal, the most distinctly human, 111. iv. 34.

Sin, deceit, its essence, 49. ii. 44.
 "   pardon of, doctrine of, 135. iv. 55.

Slang, 105. iv. 25.
  "    Greek, 138. iv. 59.

Smith's Dictionary, _s_, "Gallia," 29. ii. 9.

Soissons, battle of, 485 A.D., 7 n.; 9, 20, 52. ii. 49.
    "     vase of, 47 sq. ii. 40 sq.
    "        "     and Clovis' revenge, 48. ii. 43.

Solomon and Queen of Sheba (Amiens Cathedral), 132 sq. iv. 50-1.

Solway, the, 2.

Sons, honour of fathers by, 101. iv. 17.

Spain, Theodoric in, 54. ii. 53.

Spiritual world, the, 138. iv. 59.

Staubbach, the, 96. iv. 9.

Stone saw, not used in France, 88 n. iv. 2 n.

Strigi, S. Jerome born at, 75. iii. 34.

Suicide and heroism, 120. iv. 41.

"Suisse Historique" quoted, 53 n. ii. 49.

Sword, belted, meaning of, 43. ii. 34.
  "    manufacture, Amiens, 124. iv. 43.

Syagrius defeated by Clovis, 52. ii. 49.
    "    dies, 486 A.D., 52. ii. 49.

Syria, 63. iii. 14.


Temperance, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Teutonic nations and Roman Empire, 68. iii. 22.

Theodobert, the death of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Theodoric, king of Ostrogoths, 51. ii. 48.
    "      defeats Franks at Aries, 54. ii. 53.
    "      power of, in Europe, 54. ii. 53.
    "      at Verona, 54. ii. 54.

Thrace, 68. iii. 23.

Thuringia, 7.

Tolbiac, battle of, 9, 21 n.
   "     field of, 54. ii. 54.
   "     its real importance, 53. ii. 52.

Tombs, bronze, Amiens Cathedral, 103 sq. iv. 23.
  "       "    only two left in France, 103. iv. 23.

Tours, archbishop of, on war, 43. ii. 33.
  "    S. Martin, bishop of, 16.

Town, a modern, defined, 90. iv. 3.

Tripoli, 63. iii. 13.

Troy, 62. iii. 12.

Trupin, Jean, and choir of Amiens Cathedral, 91 n. iv. 5 n.

Truth, only, can be polished, 33. ii, 16.
  "    of French character, 33. ii. 16.

Tunis, 63. iii. 13.

Turner's "Loire side," 20.

Tyre, 63. iii. 13.


Ulphilas, Bible of, 68. iii. 22.

Ulverstone, etymology of, 129. iv. 46.

Uri, shield of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Usury and the church, 12.
  "   and the Jews, 66. iii. 19.

Utilitas, 8.


Valens, his prefecture of the East, 67. iii. 21.

Valentinian, and the division of the Empire, 67. iii. 21.

Vandals, invasion of Libya by, 64. iii. 16.

Venice, founded 421 A.D., 2.

Verona, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.
   "    battle of, Theodoric defeats Odoacer, 490 A.D., 54. ii. 54.
   "    field of, from Fra Giocondo's bridge, 54. ii. 54.

Vestal Virgins, 70. iii. 26.

Violence, expression of, in sculptures of Amiens, 126. iv. 43.

Viollet le Duc, quoted, 88 n. iv. 1; 88 & n. iv. 2; 97. iv. 11; 103 n.
  iv. 23. n.; 111. iv. 36; 118 n. iv. 41 n.; 132. iv. 49.

Vine, on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 32.

Virgil's influence on Dante, 110. iii. 53.

Virgil quoted (Æneid vi. 27 sq.), 101 n. iv. 18-19 n.

Virgin, the: _see_ Madonna.

Virtue, to be known and recognized, pref. v.

Virtues, of Apostles (Amiens Cathedral), 112 sq. iv. 37 sq.
   "     Byzantine, rank of, 111. iv. 36 n.

Visigoths, the, 31. ii. 12.
     "      "   in France, 9, 10.
     "      "   at Poitiers, defeated by Clovis, 9.

Vistula, the, its importance, 61. iii. 9, 10.
   "       "  tribes of, from Rhine to, 30, 31. ii. 10, 12.
   "       "    "          "  Weser to, 37. ii. 26.

Vobiscum," a "Pax, 114 n. iv. 38 n.

Vota, the Jesuit, letter of Queen Sophia of Prussia to, on S. Jerome,
      81. iii. 47. (See Carlyle's "Frederick," Bk. I., cap. iv.)

Vulgate, Ps. xci. 13, "Inculcabis super leonem," 111. iv. 34.


Waldeck, 34, ii. 18.

Walter's houses, Germany, 37. ii. 25.

Walton, Isaac, 1.

Wandle, the, 1.

War, savage love of, 51. ii. 48.

Wartzburg, 37. ii. 24.

Wellington, Duke of, on Roman Catholic valour, pref. iv.

Weser, the course of the, 34, 37. ii. 19, 26.
  "    sources of the (Eder, Fulda, Werra), 36. ii. 24.
  "    tribes of the, up to Rhine and Vistula, 37. ii. 26.

Whitby Cliff, 51. ii. 48.

Wisdom, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Women, endurance a point of honour with savage, 51. ii. 48.
  "    respect for, by Franks and Goths, 54. ii. 54.

Wood-carving of Picardy (Amiens Cathedral), 91 sq. iv. 5 sq.

Wool manufacture, Amiens, see _s_. "Amiens."

Wordsworth quoted, "Filling more and more with crystal light," 55. ii. 55.


Yonge, Miss, "History of Christian Names," Franks, 38. ii. 27.
  "      "      "            "       "     Ulpha, 129. iv. 46.


Zacharias, 133, iv. 51.

Zechariah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 127. iv. 43.

Zenobia, 29. ii. 6.

Zephaniah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 126. iv. 43.

Zodiac, signs of, sculptures, Amiens Cathedral, 130. iv. 47.

Zulu war, the, 48. ii. 43; 60. iii. 6.


THE END.




PROSERPINA.

STUDIES OF WAYSIDE FLOWERS,

WHILE THE AIR WAS YET PURE

_AMONG THE ALPS, AND IN THE SCOTLAND AND
ENGLAND WHICH MY FATHER KNEW_.

BY

JOHN RUSKIN, LL.D.,

HONORARY STUDENT OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND SLADE PROFESSOR OF FINE ART.

                     "Oh--Prosérpina!
  For the flowers now, which frighted, thou let'st fall
  From Dis's waggon."

VOLUME I.

New York:
JOHN WILEY & SONS,
15 Astor Place.

1888.

       *       *       *       *       *


Press of J. J. Little & Co.,
Astor Place, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS OF VOL. I

  PAGE
  INTRODUCTION,                 1

  CHAPTER I.
  MOSS,                        12

  CHAPTER II.
  THE ROOT,                    26

  CHAPTER III.
  THE LEAF,                    40

  CHAPTER IV.
  THE FLOWER,                  64

  CHAPTER V.
  PAPAVER RHOEAS,              86

  CHAPTER VI.
  THE PARABLE OF JOASH,       106

  CHAPTER VII.
  THE PARABLE OF JOTHAM,      117

  CHAPTER VIII.
  THE STEM,                   127

  CHAPTER IX.
  OUTSIDE AND IN,             151

  CHAPTER X.
  THE BARK,                   170

  CHAPTER XI.
  GENEALOGY,                  176

  CHAPTER XII.
  CORA AND KRONOS,            205

  CHAPTER XIII.
  THE SEED AND HUSK,          219

  CHAPTER XIV.
  THE FRUIT GIFT,             227

  INDEX I.
  DESCRIPTIVE NOMENCLATURE,   239

  INDEX II.
  ENGLISH NAMES,              255

  INDEX III.
  LATIN OR GREEK NAMES,       258

       *       *       *       *       *


{1}

PROSERPINA.

INTRODUCTION.

BRANTWOOD, _14th March, 1874._

Yesterday evening I was looking over the first book in which I studied
Botany,--Curtis's Magazine, published in 1795 at No. 3, St. George's
Crescent, Blackfriars Road, and sold by the principal booksellers in Great
Britain and Ireland. Its plates are excellent, so that I am always glad to
find in it the picture of a flower I know. And I came yesterday upon what I
suppose to be a variety of a favourite flower of mine, called, in Curtis,
"the St. Bruno's Lily."

I am obliged to say "what I suppose to be a variety," because my pet lily
is branched,[1] while this is drawn as unbranched, and especially stated to
be so. And the page of text, in which this statement is made, is so
characteristic of botanical books, and botanical science, not to say all
science as hitherto taught for the blessing of mankind; {2} and of the
difficulties thereby accompanying its communication, that I extract the
page entire, printing it, opposite, as nearly as possible in facsimile.

Now you observe, in this instructive page, that you have in the first
place, nine names given you for one flower; and that among these nine
names, you are not even at liberty to make your choice, because the united
authority of Haller and Miller may be considered as an accurate balance to
the single authority of Linnæus; and you ought therefore for the present to
remain, yourself, balanced between the sides. You may be farther
embarrassed by finding that the Anthericum of Savoy is only described as
growing in Switzerland. And farther still, by finding that Mr. Miller
describes two varieties of it, which differ only in size, while you are
left to conjecture whether the one here figured is the larger or smaller;
and how great the difference is.

Farther, If you wish to know anything of the habits of the plant, as well
as its nine names, you are informed that it grows both at the bottoms of
the mountains, and the tops; and that, with us, it flowers in May and
June,--but you are not told when, in its native country.

The four lines of the last clause but one, may indeed be useful to
gardeners; but--although I know my good father and mother did the best they
could for me in buying this beautiful book; and though the admirable plates
of it did their work, and taught me much, I cannot wonder that neither my
infantine nor boyish mind was irresistibly attracted by the text of which
this page is one of the most favourable specimens; nor, in consequence,
that my botanical studies were--when I had attained the age of fifty--no
farther advanced than the reader will find them in the opening chapter of
this book.

{3}

       *       *       *       *       *

                  [318]

    ANTHERICUM LILIASTRUM, SAVOY ANTHERICUM,
    or ST. BRUNO'S LILY.

    _Class and Order._

    HEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA.

    _Generic Character._

    _Cor._ 6-petala, patens. _Caps._ ovata.

    _Specific Character and Synonyms._

    ANTHERICUM _Liliastrum_ foliis planis, scapo simplicissimo, corollis
    campanulatis, staminibus declinatis. _Linn.    Syst. Vegetab. ed. 14.
    Murr. p. 330._ _Ait. Kew. v. _I._    p. 449._

    HEMEROCALLIS floribus patulis secundis. _Hall. Hist. n. 1230._

    PHALANGIUM magno flore. _Bauh. Pin. 29._

    PHALANGIUM Allobrogicum majus. _Clus. cur. app. alt._

    PHALANGIUM Allobrogicum. The Savoye Spider-wort. _Park.    Parad. p.
    150. tab. 151. f. 1._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Botanists are divided in their opinions respecting the genus of this
    plant; LINNÆUS considers it as an _Anthericum_, HALLER and MILLER make
    it an _Hemerocallis_.

    It is a native of Switzerland, where, HALLER informs us it grows
    abundantly in the Alpine meadows, and even on the summits of the
    mountains; with us it flowers in May and June.

    It is a plant of great elegance, producing on an unbranched stem about
    a foot and a half high, numerous flowers of a delicate white colour,
    much smaller but resembling in form those of the common white lily,
    possessing a considerable degree of fragrance, their beauty is
    heightened by the rich orange colour of their antheræ; unfortunately
    they are but of short duration.

    MILLER describes two varieties of it differing merely in size.

    A loamy soil, a situation moderately moist, with an eastern or western
    exposure, suits this plant best; so situated, it will increase by its
    roots, though not very fast, and by parting of these in the autumn, it
    is usually propagated.

    PARKINSON describes and figures it in his _Parad. Terrest._, observing
    that "divers allured by the beauty of its flowers, had brought it into
    these parts."

       *       *       *       *       *

{4}

Which said book was therefore undertaken, to put, if it might be, some
elements of the science of botany into a form more tenable by ordinary
human and childish faculties; or--for I can scarcely say I have yet any
tenure of it myself--to make the paths of approach to it more pleasant. In
fact, I only know, of it, the pleasant distant effects which it bears to
simple eyes; and some pretty mists and mysteries, which I invite my young
readers to pierce, as they may, for themselves,--my power of guiding them
being only for a little way.

Pretty mysteries, I say, as opposed to the vulgar and ugly mysteries of the
so-called science of botany,--exemplified sufficiently in this chosen page.
Respecting which, please observe farther;--Nobody--I can say this very
boldly--loves Latin more dearly than I; but, precisely because I do love it
(as well as for other reasons), I have always insisted that books, whether
scientific or not, ought to be written either in Latin, or English; and not
in a doggish mixture of the refuse of both.

Linnæus wrote a noble book of universal Natural History in Latin. It is one
of the permanent classical treasures of the world. And if any scientific
man thinks his labors are worth the world's attention, let him, also, write
{5} what he has to say in Latin, finishedly and exquisitely, if it take him
a month to a page.[2]

But if--which, unless he be one chosen of millions, is assuredly the
fact--his lucubrations are only of local and temporary consequence, let him
write, as clearly as he can, in his native language.

This book, accordingly, I have written in English; (not, by the way, that I
_could_ have written it in anything else--so there are small thanks to me);
and one of its purposes is to interpret, for young English readers, the
necessary European Latin or Greek names of flowers, and to make them vivid
and vital to their understandings. But two great difficulties occur in
doing this. The first, that there are generally from three or four, up to
two dozen, Latin names current for every flower; and every new botanist
thinks his eminence only to be properly asserted by adding another.

The second, and a much more serious one, is of the Devil's own
contriving--(and remember I am always quite serious when I speak of the
Devil,)--namely, that the most current and authoritative names are apt to
be founded on some unclean or debasing association, so that to interpret
them is to defile the reader's mind. I will give no instance; too many will
at once occur to any {6} learned reader, and the unlearned I need not vex
with so much as one: but, in such cases, since I could only take refuge in
the untranslated word by leaving other Greek or Latin words also
untranslated, and the nomenclature still entirely senseless,--and I do not
choose to do this,--there is only one other course open to me, namely, to
substitute boldly, to my own pupils, other generic names for the plants
thus faultfully hitherto titled.

As I do not do this for my own pride, but honestly for my reader's service,
I neither question nor care how far the emendations I propose may be now or
hereafter adopted. I shall not even name the cases in which they have been
made for the serious reason above specified; but even shall mask those
which there was real occasion to alter, by sometimes giving new names in
cases where there was no necessity of such kind. Doubtless I shall be
accused of doing myself what I violently blame in others. I do so; but with
a different motive--of which let the reader judge as he is disposed. The
practical result will be that the children who learn botany on the system
adopted in this book will know the useful and beautiful names of plants
hitherto given, in all languages; the useless and ugly ones they will not
know. And they will have to learn one Latin name for each plant, which,
when differing from the common one, I trust may yet by some scientific
persons be accepted, and with ultimate advantage.

The learning of the one Latin name--as, for instance, Gramen striatum--I
hope will be accurately enforced {7} always;--but not less carefully the
learning of the pretty English one--"Ladielace Grass"--with due observance
that "Ladies' laces hath leaves like unto Millet in fashion, with many
white vaines or ribs, and silver strakes running along through the middest
of the leaves, fashioning the same like to laces of white and green silk,
very beautiful and faire to behold."

I have said elsewhere, and can scarcely repeat too often, that a day will
come when men of science will think their names disgraced, instead of
honoured, by being used to barbarise nomenclature; I hope therefore that my
own name may be kept well out of the way; but, having been privileged to
found the School of Art in the University of Oxford, I think that I am
justified in requesting any scientific writers who may look kindly upon
this book, to add such of the names suggested in it as they think deserving
of acceptance, to their own lists of synonyms, under the head of "Schol.
Art. Oxon."

The difficulties thrown in the way of any quiet private student by existing
nomenclature may be best illustrated by my simply stating what happens to
myself in endeavouring to use the page above facsimile'd. Not knowing how
far St. Bruno's Lily might be connected with my own pet one, and not having
any sufficient book on Swiss botany, I take down Loudon's Encyclopædia of
Plants, (a most useful book, as far as any book in the present state of the
science _can_ be useful,) and find, under the head of Anthericum, the Savoy
Lily indeed, but only the {8} following general information:--"809.
Anthericum. A name applied by the Greeks to the stem of the asphodel, and
not misapplied to this set of plants, which in some sort resemble the
asphodel. Plants with fleshy leaves, and spikes of bright _yellow_ flowers,
easily cultivated if kept dry."

Hunting further, I find again my Savoy lily called a spider-plant, under
the article Hemerocallis, and the only information which the book gives me
under Hemerocallis, is that it means 'beautiful day' lily; and then, "This
is an ornamental genus of the easiest culture. The species are remarkable
among border flowers for their fine _orange_, _yellow_, or _blue_ flowers.
The Hemerocallis coerulea has been considered a distinct genus by Mr.
Salisbury, and called Saussurea." As I correct this sheet for press,
however, I find that the Hemerocallis is now to be called 'Funkia,' "in
honour of Mr. Funk, a Prussian apothecary."

All this while, meantime, I have a suspicion that my pet Savoy Lily is not,
in existing classification, an Anthericum, nor a Hemerocallis, but a
Lilium. It is, in fact, simply a Turk's cap which doesn't curl up. But on
trying 'Lilium' in Loudon, I find no mention whatever of any wild branched
white lily.

I then try the next word in my specimen page of Curtis; but there is no
'Phalangium' at all in Loudon's index. And now I have neither time nor mind
for more search, but will give, in due place, such account as I can {9} of
my own dwarf branched lily, which I shall call St. Bruno's, as well as this
Liliastrum--no offence to the saint, I hope. For it grows very gloriously
on the limestones of Savoy, presumably, therefore, at the Grande
Chartreuse; though I did not notice it there, and made a very unmonkish use
of it when I gathered it last:--There was a pretty young English lady at
the table-d'hôte, in the Hotel du Mont Blanc at St. Martin's,[3] and I
wanted to get speech of her, and didn't know how. So all I could think of
was to go half-way up the Aiguille de Varens, to gather St. Bruno's lilies;
and I made a great cluster of them, and put wild roses all around them as I
came down. I never saw anything so lovely; and I thought to present this to
her before dinner,--but when I got down, she had gone away to Chamouni. My
Fors always treated me like that, in affairs of the heart.

I had begun my studies of Alpine botany just eighteen years before, in
1842, by making a careful drawing of wood-sorrel at Chamouni; and bitterly
sorry I am, now, that the work was interrupted. For I drew, then, very
delicately; and should have made a pretty book if I could have got peace.
Even yet, I can manage my point a little, and would far rather be making
outlines of flowers, than writing; and I meant to have drawn every English
and Scottish wild flower, like this cluster of bog heather
opposite,[4]--back, and profile, and front. But 'Blackwood's {10}
Magazine,' with its insults to Turner, dragged me into controversy; and I
have not had, properly speaking, a day's peace since; so that in 1868 my
botanical studies were advanced only as far as the reader will see in next
chapter; and now, in 1874, must end altogether, I suppose, heavier thoughts
and work coming fast on me. So that, finding among my notebooks, two or
three, full of broken materials for the proposed work on flowers; and,
thinking they may be useful even as fragments, I am going to publish them
in their present state,--only let the reader note that while my other books
endeavour, and claim, so far as they reach, to give trustworthy knowledge
of their subjects, this one only shows how such knowledge may be obtained;
and it is little more than a history of efforts and plans,--but of both, I
believe, made in right methods.

One part of the book, however, will, I think, be found of permanent value.
Mr. Burgess has engraved on wood, in reduced size, with consummate skill,
some of the excellent old drawings in the Flora Danica, and has
interpreted, and facsimile'd, some of his own and my drawings from nature,
with a vigour and precision unsurpassed in woodcut illustration, which
render these outlines the best exercises in black and white I have yet been
able to {11} prepare for my drawing pupils. The larger engravings by Mr.
Allen may also be used with advantage as copies for drawings with pen or
sepia.

ROME, _10th May_ (_my father's birthday_).

I found the loveliest blue asphodel I ever saw in my life, yesterday, in
the fields beyond Monte Mario,--a spire two feet high, of more than two
hundred stars, the stalks of them all deep blue, as well as the flowers.
Heaven send all honest people the gathering of the like, in Elysian fields,
some day!

       *       *       *       *       *

{12}

CHAPTER I.

MOSS.

DENMARK HILL, _3rd November, 1868._

1. It is mortifying enough to write,--but I think thus much ought to be
written,--concerning myself, as 'the author of Modern Painters.' In three
months I shall be fifty years old: and I don't at this hour--ten o'clock in
the morning of the two hundred and sixty-eighth day of my forty-ninth
year--know what 'moss' is.

There is nothing I have more _intended_ to know--some day or other. But the
moss 'would always be there'; and then it was so beautiful, and so
difficult to examine, that one could only do it in some quite separated
time of happy leisure--which came not. I never was like to have less
leisure than now, but I _will_ know what moss is, if possible, forthwith.

2. To that end I read preparatorily, yesterday, what account I could find
of it in all the botanical books in the house. Out of them all, I get this
general notion of a moss,--that it has a fine fibrous root,--a stem
surrounded with spirally set leaves,--and produces its fruit in a small
case, under a cap. I fasten especially, however, on a {13} sentence of
Louis Figuier's, about the particular species, Hypnum:--

"These mosses, which often form little islets of verdure at the feet of
poplars and willows, are robust vegetable organisms, which do not
decay."[5]

3. "Qui ne pourrissent point." What do they do with themselves, then?--it
immediately occurs to me to ask. And, secondly,--If this immortality
belongs to the Hypnum only?

It certainly does not, by any means: but, however modified or limited, this
immortality is the first thing we ought to take note of in the mosses. They
are, in some degree, what the "everlasting" is in flowers. Those minute
green leaves of theirs do not decay, nor fall.

But how do they die, or how stop growing, then?--it is the first thing I
want to know about them. And from all the books in the house, I can't as
yet find out this. Meanwhile I will look at the leaves themselves.

4. Going out to the garden, I bring in a bit of old brick, emerald green on
its rugged surface,[6] and a thick piece of mossy turf.

First, for the old brick: To think of the quantity of pleasure one has had
in one's life from that emerald green velvet,--and yet that for the first
time to-day I am verily going to look at it! Doing so, through a pocket
{14} lens of no great power, I find the velvet to be composed of small
star-like groups of smooth, strong, oval leaves,--intensely green, and much
like the young leaves of any other plant, except in this;--they all have a
long brown spike, like a sting, at their ends.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

5. Fastening on that, I take the Flora Danica,[7] and look through its
plates of mosses, for their leaves only; and I find, first, that this
spike, or strong central rib, is characteristic;--secondly, that the said
leaves are apt to be not only spiked, but serrated, and otherwise
angry-looking at the points;--thirdly, that they have a tendency to fold
together in the centre (Fig. 1[8]); and at last, after an hour's work at
them, it strikes me suddenly that they are more like pineapple leaves than
anything else.

And it occurs to me, very unpleasantly, at the same time, that I don't know
what a pineapple is!

Stopping to ascertain that, I am told that a pineapple belongs to the
'Bromeliaceæ'--(can't stop to find out what that means)--nay, that of these
plants "the pineapple is the representative" (Loudon); "their habit is
acid, their leaves rigid, and toothed with spines, their {15} bracteas
often coloured with scarlet, and their flowers either white or blue"--(what
are their flowers like?) But the two sentences that most interest me, are,
that in the damp forests of Carolina, the Tillandsia, which is an
'epiphyte' (_i.e._, a plant growing on other plants,) "forms dense festoons
among the branches of the trees, vegetating among the black mould that
collects upon the bark of trees in hot damp countries; other species are
inhabitants of deep and gloomy forests, and others form, with their spring
leaves, an impenetrable herbage in the Pampas of Brazil." So they really
seem to be a kind of moss, on a vast scale.

6. Next, I find in Gray,[9] Bromeliaceæ, and--the very thing I
want--"Tillandsia, the black _moss_, or long moss, which, _like most
Bromelias_, grows on the branches of trees." So the pineapple is really a
moss; only it is a moss that flowers but 'imperfectly.' "The fine fruit is
caused by the consolidation of the imperfect flowers." (I wish we could
consolidate some imperfect English moss-flowers into little pineapples
then,--though they were only as big as filberts.) But we cannot follow that
farther now; nor consider when a flower is perfect, and when it is not, or
we should get into morals, and I don't know where else; we will go back to
the moss I have gathered, for I begin to see my way, a little, to
understanding it.

{16}

7. The second piece I have on the table is a cluster--an inch or two
deep--of the moss that grows everywhere, and that the birds use for
nest-building, and we for packing, and the like. It is dry, since
yesterday, and its fibres define themselves against the dark ground in warm
green, touched with a glittering light. Note that burnished lustre of the
minute leaves; they are necessarily always relieved against dark hollows,
and this lustre makes them much clearer and brighter than if they were of
dead green. In that lustre--and it is characteristic of them--they differ
wholly from the dead, aloe-like texture of the pineapple leaf; and remind
me, as I look at them closely, a little of some conditions of chaff, as on
heads of wheat after being threshed. I will hunt down that clue presently;
meantime there is something else to be noticed on the old brick.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

8. Out of its emerald green cushions of minute leaves, there rise, here and
there, thin red threads, each with a little brown cap, or something like a
cap, at the top of it. These red threads shooting up out of the green
tufts, are, I believe, the fructification of the moss; fringing its surface
in the woods, and on the rocks, with the small forests of brown stems, each
carrying its pointed cap or crest--of infinitely varied 'mode,' as we shall
see presently; and, which is one of their most blessed functions, carrying
high the dew in the morning; every spear balancing its own crystal globe.

9. And now, with my own broken memories of moss {17} and this unbroken,
though unfinished, gift of the noble labour of other people, the Flora
Danica, I can generalize the idea of the precious little plant, for myself,
and for the reader.

All mosses, I believe, (with such exceptions and collateral groups as we
may afterwards discover, but they are not many,) that is to say, some
thousands of species, are, in their strength of existence, composed of
fibres surrounded by clusters of dry _spinous_ leaves, set close to the
fibre they grow on. Out of this leafy stern descends a fibrous root, and
ascends in its season, a capped seed.

We must get this very clearly into our heads. Fig. 2, A, is a little tuft
of a common wood moss of Norway,[10] in its fruit season, of its real size;
but at present I want to look at the central fibre and its leaves
accurately, and understand that first.

10. Pulling it to pieces, we find it composed of seven little
company-keeping fibres, each of which, by itself, appears as in Fig. 2, B:
but as in this, its real size, it {18} is too small, not indeed for our
respect, but for our comprehension, we magnify it, Fig. 2, C, and thereupon
perceive it to be indeed composed of, _a_, the small fibrous root which
sustains the plant; _b_, the leaf-surrounded stem which is the actual
being, and main creature, moss; and, _c_, the aspirant pillar, and cap, of
its fructification.

11. But there is one minor division yet. You see I have drawn the central
part of the moss plant (_b_, Fig. 2,) half in outline and half in black;
and that, similarly, in the upper group, which is too small to show the
real roots, the base of the cluster is black. And you remember, I doubt
not, how often in gathering what most invited gathering, of deep green,
starry, perfectly soft and living wood-moss, you found it fall asunder in
your hand into multitudes of separate threads, each with its bright green
crest, and long root of blackness.

That blackness at the root--though only so notable in this wood-moss and
collateral species, is indeed a general character of the mosses, with rare
exceptions. It is their funeral blackness;--that, I perceive, is the way
the moss leaves die. They do not fall--they do not visibly decay. But they
decay _in_visibly, in continual secession, beneath the ascending crest.
They rise to form that crest, all green and bright, and take the light and
air from those out of which they grew;--and those, their ancestors, darken
and die slowly, and at last become a mass of mouldering ground. In fact, as
I perceive farther, their final duty is so to die. The main work of other
leaves is {19} in their life,--but these have to form the earth out of
which all other leaves are to grow. Not to cover the rocks with golden
velvet only, but to fill their crannies with the dark earth, through which
nobler creatures shall one day seek their being.

12. "Grant but as many sorts of mind as moss." Pope could not have known
the hundredth part of the number of 'sorts' of moss there are; and I
suppose he only chose the word because it was a monosyllable beginning with
m, and the best English general expression for despised and minute
structures of plants. But a fate rules the words of wise men, which makes
their words truer, and worth more, than the men themselves know. No other
plants have so endless variety on so similar a structure as the mosses; and
none teach so well the humility of Death. As for the death of our bodies,
we have learned, wisely, or unwisely, to look the fact of that in the face.
But none of us, I think, yet care to look the fact of the death of our
minds in the face. I do not mean death of our souls, but of our mental
work. So far as it is good _art_, indeed, and done in realistic form, it
may perhaps not die; but so far as it was only good _thought_--good, for
its time, and apparently a great achievement therein--that good, useful
thought may yet in the future become a foolish thought, and then die quite
away,--it, and the memory of it,--when better thought and knowledge come.
But the better thought could not have come if the weaker thought had not
come first, and died in sustaining the {20} better. If we think honestly,
our thoughts will not only live usefully, but even perish usefully--like
the moss--and become dark, not without due service. But if we think
dishonestly, or malignantly, our thoughts will die like evil
fungi,--dripping corrupt dew.

13. But farther. If you have walked moorlands enough to know the look of
them, you know well those flat spaces or causeways of bright green or
golden ground between the heathy rock masses; which signify winding pools
and inlets of stagnant water caught among the rocks;--pools which the deep
moss that covers them--_blanched_, not black, at the root,--is slowly
filling and making firm; whence generally the unsafe ground in the moorland
gets known by being _mossy_ instead of heathy; and is at last called by its
riders, briefly, 'the Moss': and as it is mainly at these same mossy places
that the riding is difficult, and brings out the gifts of horse and rider,
and discomfits all followers not similarly gifted, the skilled crosser of
them got his name, naturally, of 'moss-rider,' or moss-trooper. In which
manner the moss of Norway and Scotland has been a taskmaster and Maker of
Soldiers, as yet, the strongest known among natural powers. The lightning
may kill a man, or cast down a tower, but these little tender leaves of
moss--they and their progenitors--have trained the Northern Armies.

14. So much for the human meaning of that decay of the leaves. Now to go
back to the little creatures themselves. It seems that the upper part of
the moss fibre is {21} especially _un_decaying among leaves; and the lower
part, especially decaying. That, in fact, a plant of moss-fibre is a kind
of persistent state of what is, in other plants, annual. Watch the year's
growth of any luxuriant flower. First it comes out of the ground all fresh
and bright; then, as the higher leaves and branches shoot up, those first
leaves near the ground get brown, sickly, earthy,--remain for ever degraded
in the dust, and under the dashed slime in rain, staining, and grieving,
and loading them with obloquy of envious earth, half-killing them,--only
life enough left in them to hold on the stem, and to be guardians of the
rest of the plant from all they suffer;--while, above them, the happier
leaves, for whom they are thus oppressed, bend freely to the sunshine, and
drink the rain pure.

The moss strengthens on a diminished scale, intensifies, and makes
perpetual, these two states,--bright leaves above that never wither, leaves
beneath that exist only to wither.

15. I have hitherto spoken only of the fading moss as it is needed for
change into earth. But I am not sure whether a yet more important office,
in its days of age, be not its use as a colour.

We are all thankful enough--as far as we ever are so--for green moss, and
yellow moss. But we are never enough grateful for black moss. The golden
would be nothing without it, nor even the grey.

It is true that there are black lichens enough, and {22} brown ones:
nevertheless, the chief use of lichens is for silver and gold colour on
rocks; and it is the dead moss which gives the leopard-like touches of
black. And yet here again--as to a thing I have been looking at and
painting all my life--I am brought to pause, the moment I think of it
carefully. The black moss which gives the precious Velasquez touches, lies,
much of it, flat on the rocks; radiating from its centres--powdering in the
fingers, if one breaks it off, like dry tea. Is it a black species?--or a
black-parched state of other species, perishing for the sake of Velasquez
effects, instead of accumulation of earth? and, if so, does it die of
drought, accidentally, or, in a sere old age, naturally? and how is it
related to the rich green bosses that grow in deep velvet? And there again
is another matter not clear to me. One calls them 'velvet' because they are
all brought to an even surface at the top. Our own velvet is reduced to
such trimness by cutting. But how is the moss trimmed? By what scissors?
Carefullest Elizabethan gardener never shaped his yew hedge more daintily
than the moss fairies smooth these soft rounded surfaces of green and gold.
And just fancy the difference, if they were ragged! If the fibres had every
one of them leave to grow at their own sweet will, and to be long or short
as they liked, or, worse still, urged by fairy prizes into laboriously and
agonizingly trying which could grow longest. Fancy the surface of a spot of
competitive moss!

16. But how is it that they are subdued into that {23} spherical obedience,
like a crystal of wavellite?[11] Strange--that the vegetable creatures
growing so fondly on rocks should form themselves in that mineral-like
manner. It is true that the tops of all well-grown trees are rounded, on a
large scale, as equally; but that is because they grow from a central stem,
while these mossy mounds are made out of independent filaments, each
growing to exactly his proper height in the sphere--short ones outside,
long in the middle. Stop, though; _is_ that so? I am not even sure of that;
perhaps they are built over a little dome of decayed moss below.[12] I must
find out how every {24} filament grows, separately--from root to cap,
through the spirally set leaves. And meanwhile I don't know very clearly so
much as what a root is--or what a leaf is. Before puzzling myself any
farther in examination either of moss or any other grander vegetable, I had
better define these primal forms of all vegetation, as well as I can--or
rather begin the definition of them, for future completion and correction.
For, as my reader must already sufficiently perceive, this book is
literally to be one of studies--not of statements. Some one said of me
once, very shrewdly, When he wants to work out a subject, he writes a book
on it. That is a very true saying in the main,--I work down or up to my
mark, and let the reader see process and progress, not caring to conceal
them. But this book will be nothing but process. I don't mean to assert
anything positively in it from the first page to the last. Whatever I say,
is to be understood only as a conditional statement--liable to, and
inviting, correction. And this the more because, as on the whole, I am at
war with the botanists, I can't ask them to help me, and then {25} call
them names afterwards. I hope only for a contemptuous heaping of coals on
my head by correction of my errors from them;--in some cases, my scientific
friends will, I know, give me forgiving aid;--but, for many reasons, I am
forced first to print the imperfect statement, as I can independently shape
it; for if once I asked for, or received help, every thought would be
frostbitten into timid expression, and every sentence broken by apology. I
should have to write a dozen of letters before I could print a line, and
the line, at last, would be only like a bit of any other botanical
book--trustworthy, it might be, perhaps; but certainly unreadable. Whereas
now, it will rather put things more forcibly in the reader's mind to have
them retouched and corrected as we go on; and our natural and honest
mistakes will often be suggestive of things we could not have discovered
but by wandering.

On these guarded conditions, then, I proceed to study, with my reader, the
first general laws of vegetable form.

       *       *       *       *       *

{26}

CHAPTER II.

THE ROOT.

1. Plants in their perfect form consist of four principal parts,--the Root,
Stem, Leaf, and Flower. It is true that the stem and flower are parts, or
remnants, or altered states, of the leaves; and that, speaking with close
accuracy, we might say, a perfect plant consists of leaf and root. But the
division into these four parts is best for practical purposes, and it will
be desirable to note a few general facts about each, before endeavouring to
describe any one kind of plant. Only, because the character of the stem
depends on the nature of the leaf and flower, we must put it last in order
of examination; and trace the development of the plant first in root and
leaf; then in the flower and its fruit; and lastly in the stem.

2. First, then, the Root.

Every plant is divided, as I just said, in the main, into two parts, and
these have opposite natures. One part seeks the light; the other hates it.
One part feeds on the air; the other on the dust.

The part that loves the light is called the Leaf. It is an old Saxon word;
I cannot get at its origin. The part that hates the light is called the
Root. {27}

In Greek, [Greek: rhiza], Rhiza.[13]

In Latin, Radix, "the growing thing," which shortens, in French, into Race,
and then they put on the diminutive 'ine,' and get their two words, Race,
and Racine, of which we keep Race for animals, and use for vegetables a
word of our own Saxon (and Dutch) dialect,--'root'; (connected with
Rood--an image of wood; whence at last the Holy Rood, or Tree).

3. The Root has three great functions:

  1st. To hold the plant in its place.
  2nd. To nourish it with earth.
  3rd. To receive vital power for it from the earth.

With this last office is in some degree,--and especially in certain
plants,--connected, that of reproduction.

But in all plants the root has these three essential functions.

First, I said, to hold the Plant in its place. The Root is its Fetter.

You think it, perhaps, a matter of course that a plant is not to be a
crawling thing? It is not a matter of course at all. A vegetable might be
just what it is now, as compared with an animal;--might live on earth and
water instead of on meat,--might be as senseless in life, as calm in death,
and in all its parts and apparent structure {28} unchanged; and yet be a
crawling thing. It is quite as easy to conceive plants moving about like
lizards, putting forward first one root and then another, as it is to think
of them fastened to their place. It might have been well for them, one
would have thought, to have the power of going down to the streams to
drink, in time of drought;--of migrating in winter with grim march from
north to south of Dunsinane Hill side. But that is not their appointed
Fate. They are--at least all the noblest of them, rooted to their spot.
Their honour and use is in giving immoveable shelter,--in remaining
landmarks, or lovemarks, when all else is changed:

 "The cedars wave on Lebanon,
  But Judah's statelier maids are gone."

4. Its root is thus a form of fate to the tree. It condemns, or indulges
it, in its place. These semi-living creatures, come what may, shall abide,
happy, or tormented. No doubt concerning "the position in which Providence
has placed _them_" is to trouble their minds, except so far as they can
mend it by seeking light, or shrinking from wind, or grasping at support,
within certain limits. In the thoughts of men they have thus become twofold
images,--on the one side, of spirits restrained and half destroyed, whence
the fables of transformation into trees; on the other, of spirits patient
and continuing, having root in themselves and in good ground, capable of
all persistent {29} effort and vital stability, both in themselves, and for
the human States they form.

5. In this function of holding fast, roots have a power of grasp quite
different from that of branches. It is not a grasp, or clutch by
contraction, as that of a bird's claw, or of the small branches we call
'tendrils' in climbing plants. It is a dead, clumsy, but inevitable grasp,
by swelling, _after_ contortion. For there is this main difference between
a branch and root, that a branch cannot grow vividly but in certain
directions and relations to its neighbour branches; but a root can grow
wherever there is earth, and can turn in any direction to avoid an
obstacle.[14]

6. In thus contriving access for itself where it chooses, a root contorts
itself into more serpent-like writhing than branches can; and when it has
once coiled partly round a rock, or stone, it grasps it tight, necessarily,
merely by swelling. Now a root has force enough sometimes to split rocks,
but not to crush them; so it is compelled to grasp by _flattening_ as it
thickens; and, as it must have room somewhere, it alters its own shape as
if it were made of {30} dough, and holds the rock, not in a claw, but in a
wooden cast or mould, adhering to its surface. And thus it not only finds
its anchorage in the rock, but binds the rocks of its anchorage with a
constrictor cable.

7. Hence--and this is a most important secondary function--roots bind
together the ragged edges of rocks as a hem does the torn edge of a dress:
they literally stitch the stones together; so that, while it is always
dangerous to pass under a treeless edge of overhanging crag, as soon as it
has become beautiful with trees, it is safe also. The rending power of
roots on rocks has been greatly overrated. Capillary attraction in a willow
wand will indeed split granite, and swelling roots sometimes heave
considerable masses aside, but on the whole, roots, small and great, bind,
and do not rend.[15] The surfaces of mountains are dissolved and
disordered, by rain, and frost, and chemical decomposition, into mere heaps
of loose stones on their desolate summits; but, where the forests grow,
soil accumulates and disintegration ceases. And by cutting down forests on
great mountain slopes, not only is the climate destroyed, but the danger of
superficial landslip fearfully increased.

8. The second function of roots is to gather for the plant the nourishment
it needs from the ground. This is {31} partly water, mixed with some kinds
of air (ammonia, etc.,) but the plant can get both water and ammonia from
the atmosphere; and, I believe, for the most part does so; though, when it
cannot get water from the air, it will gladly drink by its roots. But the
things it cannot receive from the air at all are certain earthy salts,
essential to it (as iron is essential in our own blood), and of which when
it has quite exhausted the earth, no more such plants can grow in that
ground. On this subject you will find enough in any modern treatise on
agriculture; all that I want you to note here is that this feeding function
of the root is of a very delicate and discriminating kind, needing much
searching and mining among the dust, to find what it wants. If it only
wanted water, it could get most of that by spreading in mere soft senseless
limbs, like sponge, as far, and as far down, as it could--but to get the
_salt_ out of the earth it has to _sift_ all the earth, and taste and touch
every grain of it that it can, with fine fibres. And therefore a root is
not at all a merely passive sponge or absorbing thing, but an infinitely
subtle tongue, or tasting and eating thing. That is why it is always so
fibrous and divided and entangled in the clinging earth.

9. "Always fibrous and divided"? But many roots are quite hard and solid!

No; the active part of the root is always, I believe, a fibre. But there is
often a provident and passive part--a savings bank of root--in which
nourishment is laid up for the plant, and which, though it may be
underground, is no {32} more to be considered its real root than the kernel
of a seed is. When you sow a pea, if you take it up in a day or two, you
will find the fibre below, which is root; the shoot above, which is plant;
and the pea as a now partly exhausted storehouse, looking very woful, and
like the granaries of Paris after the fire. So, the round solid root of a
cyclamen, or the conical one which you know so well as a carrot, are not
properly roots, but permanent storehouses,--only the fibres that grow from
them are roots. Then there are other apparent roots which are not even
storehouses, but refuges; houses where the little plant lives in its
infancy, through winter and rough weather. So that it will be best for you
at once to limit your idea of a root to this,--that it is a group of
growing fibres which taste and suck what is good for the plant out of the
ground, and by their united strength hold it in its place; only remember
the thick limbs of roots do not feed, but only the fine fibres at the ends
of them which are something between tongues and sponges, and while they
absorb moisture readily, are yet as particular about getting what they
think nice to eat as any dainty little boy or girl; looking for it
everywhere, and turning angry and sulky if they don't get it.

10. But the root has, it seems to me, one more function, the most important
of all. I say, it seems to me, for observe, what I have hitherto told you
is all (I believe) ascertained and admitted; this that I am going to tell
you has not yet, as far as I know, been asserted by men of {33} science,
though I believe it to be demonstrable. But you are to examine into it, and
think of it for yourself.

There are some plants which appear to derive all their food from the
air--which need nothing but a slight grasp of the ground to fix them in
their place. Yet if we were to tie them into that place, in a framework,
and cut them from their roots, they would die. Not only in these, but in
all other plants, the vital power by which they shape and feed themselves,
whatever that power may be, depends, I think, on that slight touch of the
earth, and strange inheritance of its power. It is as essential to the
plant's life as the connection of the head of an animal with its body by
the spine is to the animal. Divide the feeble nervous thread, and all life
ceases. Nay, in the tree the root is even of greater importance. You will
not kill the tree, as you would an animal, by dividing its body or trunk.
The part not severed from the root will shoot again. But in the root, and
its touch of the ground, is the life of it. My own definition of a plant
would be "a living creature whose source of vital energy is in the earth"
(or in the water, as a form of the earth; that is, in inorganic substance).
There is, however, one tribe of plants which seems nearly excepted from
this law. It is a very strange one, having long been noted for the
resemblance of its flowers to different insects; and it has recently been
proved by Mr. Darwin to be dependent on insects for its existence. Doubly
strange therefore, it seems, that in some cases this race of plants all but
reaches the independent life of {34} insects. It rather _settles_ upon
boughs than roots itself in them; half of its roots may wave in the air.

11. What vital power is, men of science are not a step nearer knowing than
they were four thousand years ago. They are, if anything, farther from
knowing now than then, in that they imagine themselves nearer. But they
know more about its limitations and manifestations than they did. They have
even arrived at something like a proof that there is a fixed quantity of it
flowing out of things and into them. But, for the present, rest content
with the general and sure knowledge that, fixed or flowing, measurable or
immeasurable--one with electricity or heat or light, or quite distinct from
any of them--life is a delightful, and its negative, death, a dreadful
thing, to human creatures; and that you can give or gather a certain
quantity of life into plants, animals, and yourself by wisdom and courage,
and by their reverses can bring upon them any quantity of death you please,
which is a much more serious point for you to consider than what life and
death are.

12. Now, having got a quite clear idea of a root properly so called, we may
observe what those storehouses, refuges, and ruins are, which we find
connected with roots. The greater number of plants feed and grow at the
same time; but there are some of them which like to feed first and grow
afterwards. For the first year, or, at all events, the first period of
their life, they gather material for their future life out of the ground
and out {35} of the air, and lay it up in a storehouse as bees make combs.
Of these stores--for the most part rounded masses tapering downwards into
the ground--some are as good for human beings as honeycombs are; only not
so sweet. We steal them from the plants, as we do from the bees, and these
conical upside-down hives or treasuries of Atreus, under the names of
carrots, turnips, and radishes, have had important influence on human
fortunes. If we do not steal the store, next year the plant lives upon it,
raises its stem, flowers and seeds out of that abundance, and having
fulfilled its destiny, and provided for its successor, passes away, root
and branch together.

13. There is a pretty example of patience for us in this; and it would be
well for young people generally to set themselves to grow in a carrotty or
turnippy manner, and lay up secret store, not caring to exhibit it until
the time comes for fruitful display. But they must not, in after-life,
imitate the spendthrift vegetable, and blossom only in the strength of what
they learned long ago; else they soon come to contemptible end. Wise people
live like laurels and cedars, and go on mining in the earth, while they
adorn and embalm the air.

14. Secondly, Refuges. As flowers growing on trees have to live for some
time, when they are young in their buds, so some flowers growing on the
ground have to live for a while, when they are young, _in_ what we call
their {36} roots. These are mostly among the Drosidæ[16] and other humble
tribes, loving the ground; and, in their babyhood, liking to live quite
down in it. A baby crocus has literally its own little dome--domus, or
duomo--within which in early spring it lives a delicate convent life of its
own, quite free from all worldly care and dangers, exceedingly ignorant of
things in general, but itself brightly golden and perfectly formed before
it is brought out. These subterranean palaces and vaulted cloisters, which
we call bulbs, are no more roots than the blade of grass is a root, in
which the ear of corn forms before it shoots up.

15. Thirdly, Ruins. The flowers which have these subterranean homes form
one of many families whose roots, as well as seeds, have the power of
reproduction. The succession of some plants is trusted much to their seeds:
a thistle sows itself by its down, an oak by its acorns; the companies of
flying emigrants settle where they may; and the shadowy tree is content to
cast down its showers of nuts for swines' food with the chance that here
and there one may become a ship's bulwark. But others among plants are less
careless, or less proud. Many are anxious for their children to grow in the
place where they grew themselves, and secure this not merely by letting
their fruit fall at their feet, on the chance of its growing up {37} beside
them, but by closer bond, bud springing forth from root, and the young
plant being animated by the gradually surrendered life of its parent.
Sometimes the young root is formed above the old one, as in the crocus, or
beside it, as in the amaryllis, or beside it in a spiral succession, as in
the orchis; in these cases the old root always perishes wholly when the
young one is formed; but in a far greater number of tribes, one root
connects itself with another by a short piece of intermediate stem; and
this stem does not at once perish when the new root is formed, but grows on
at one end indefinitely, perishing slowly at the other, the scars or ruins
of the past plants being long traceable on its sides. When it grows
entirely underground it is called a root-stock. But there is no essential
distinction between a root-stock and a creeping stem, only the root-stock
may be thought of as a stem which shares the melancholy humour of a root in
loving darkness, while yet it has enough consciousness of better things to
grow towards, or near, the light. In one family it is even fragrant where
the flower is not, and a simple houseleek is called 'rhodiola rosea,'
because its root-stock has the scent of a rose.

16. There is one very unusual condition of the root-stock which has become
of much importance in economy, though it is of little in botany; the
forming, namely, of knots at the ends of the branches of the underground
stem, where the new roots are to be thrown out. Of these knots, or
'tubers,' (swollen things,) one kind, belonging to {38} the tobacco tribe,
has been singularly harmful, together with its pungent relative, to a
neighbouring country of ours, which perhaps may reach a higher destiny than
any of its friends can conceive for it, if it can ever succeed in living
without either the potato, or the pipe.

17. Being prepared now to find among plants many things which are like
roots, yet are not; you may simplify and make fast your true idea of a root
as a fibre or group of fibres, which fixes, animates, and partly feeds the
leaf. Then practically, as you examine plants in detail, ask first
respecting them: What kind of root have they? Is it large or small in
proportion to their bulk, and why is it so? What soil does it like, and
what properties does it acquire from it? The endeavour to answer these
questions will soon lead you to a rational inquiry into the plant's
history. You will first ascertain what rock or earth it delights in, and
what climate and circumstances; then you will see how its root is fitted to
sustain it mechanically under given pressures and violences, and to find
for it the necessary sustenance under given difficulties of famine or
drought. Lastly you will consider what chemical actions appear to be going
on in the root, or its store; what processes there are, and elements, which
give pungency to the radish, flavour to the onion, or sweetness to the
liquorice; and of what service each root may be made capable under
cultivation, and by proper subsequent treatment, either to animals or men.

18. I shall not attempt to do any of this for you; I {39} assume, in giving
this advice, that you wish to pursue the science of botany as your chief
study; I have only broken moments for it, snatched from my chief
occupations, and I have done nothing myself of all this I tell you to do.
But so far as you can work in this manner, even if you only ascertain the
history of one plant, so that you know that accurately, you will have
helped to lay the foundation of a true science of botany, from which the
mass of useless nomenclature,[17] now mistaken for science, will fall away,
as the husk of a poppy falls from the bursting flower.

       *       *       *       *       *

{40}

CHAPTER III.

THE LEAF.

1. In the first of the poems of which the English Government has appointed
a portion to be sung every day for the instruction and pleasure of the
people, there occurs this curious statement respecting any person who will
behave himself rightly: "He shall be like a tree planted by the river side,
that bears its fruit in its season. His leaf also shall not wither; and you
will see that whatever he does will prosper."

I call it a curious statement, because the conduct to which this prosperity
is promised is not that which the English, as a nation, at present think
conducive to prosperity: but whether the statement be true or not, it will
be easy for you to recollect the two eastern figures under which the
happiness of the man is represented,--that he is like a tree bearing fruit
"in its season;" (not so hastily as that the frost pinch it, nor so late
that no sun ripens it;) and that "his leaf shall not fade." I should like
you to recollect this phrase in the Vulgate--"folium ejus non
defluet"--shall not fall _away_,--that is to say, shall not fall so as to
leave any visible bareness in winter time, but {41} only that others may
come up in its place, and the tree be always green.

2. Now, you know, the fruit of the tree is either for the continuance of
its race, or for the good, or harm, of other creatures. In no case is it a
good to the tree itself. It is not indeed, properly, a part of the tree at
all, any more than the egg is part of the bird, or the young of any
creature part of the creature itself. But in the leaf is the strength of
the tree itself. Nay, rightly speaking, the leaves _are_ the tree itself.
Its trunk sustains; its fruit burdens and exhausts; but in the leaf it
breathes and lives. And thus also, in the eastern symbolism, the fruit is
the labour of men for others; but the leaf is their own life. "He shall
bring forth fruit, in his time; and his own joy and strength shall be
continual."

3. Notice next the word 'folium.' In Greek, [Greek: phullon], 'phyllon.'

"The thing that is born," or "put forth." "When the branch is tender, and
putteth forth her leaves, ye know that summer is nigh." The botanists say,
"The leaf is an expansion of the bark of the stem." More accurately, the
bark is a contraction of the tissue of the leaf. For every leaf is born out
of the earth, and breathes out of the air; and there are many leaves that
have no stems, but only roots. It is 'the springing thing'; this thin film
of life; rising, with its _edge_ out of the ground--infinitely feeble,
infinitely fair. With Folium, in Latin, is rightly associated the word
Flos; for the flower is only a group of {42} singularly happy leaves. From
these two roots come foglio, feuille, feuillage, and fleur;--blume,
blossom, and bloom; our foliage, and the borrowed foil, and the connected
technical groups of words in architecture and the sciences.

4. This _thin_ film, I said. That is the essential character of a leaf; to
be thin,--widely spread out in proportion to its mass. It is the opening of
the substance of the earth to the air, which is the giver of life. The
Greeks called it, therefore, not only the born or blooming thing, but the
spread or expanded thing--"[Greek: petalon]." Pindar calls the beginnings
of quarrel, "petals of quarrel." Recollect, therefore, this form, Petalos;
and connect it with Petasos, the expanded cap of Mercury. For one great use
of both is to give shade. The root of all these words is said to be [GREEK:
PET] (Pet), which may easily be remembered in Greek, as it sometimes occurs
in no unpleasant sense in English.

5. But the word 'petalos' is connected in Greek with another word, meaning,
to fly,--so that you may think of a bird as spreading its petals to the
wind; and with another, signifying Fate in its pursuing flight, the
overtaking thing, or overflying Fate. Finally, there is another Greek word
meaning 'wide,' [Greek: platus] (platys); whence at last our 'plate'--a
thing made broad or extended--but especially made broad or 'flat' out of
the solid, as in a lump of clay extended on the wheel, or a lump of metal
extended by the hammer. So the first we call Platter; the second Plate,
when of the precious metals. Then putting _b_ for {43} _p_, and _d_ for
_t_, we get the blade of an oar, and blade of grass.

6. Now gather a branch of laurel, and look at it carefully. You may read
the history of the being of half the earth in one of those green oval
leaves--the things that the sun and the rivers have made out of dry ground.
Daphne--daughter of Enipeus, and beloved by the Sun,--that fable gives you
at once the two great facts about vegetation. Where warmth is, and
moisture--there, also, the leaf. Where no warmth--there is no leaf; where
there is no dew--no leaf.

7. Look, then, to the branch you hold in your hand. That you _can_ so hold
it, or make a crown of it, if you choose, is the first thing I want you to
note of it;--the proportion of size, namely, between the leaf and _you_.
Great part of your life and character, as a human creature, has depended on
that. Suppose all leaves had been spacious, like some palm leaves; solid,
like cactus stem; or that trees had grown, as they might of course just as
easily have grown, like mushrooms, all one great cluster of leaf round one
stalk. I do not say that they are divided into small leaves only for your
delight, or your service, as if you were the monarch of everything--even in
this atom of a globe. You are made of your proper size; and the leaves of
theirs: for reasons, and by laws, of which neither the leaves nor you know
anything. Only note the harmony between both, and the joy we may have in
this division and mystery of the frivolous and tremulous petals, {44} which
break the light and the breeze,--compared to what with the frivolous and
tremulous mind which is in us, we could have had out of domes, or
penthouses, or walls of leaf.

8. Secondly; think awhile of its dark clear green, and the good of it to
you. Scientifically, you know green in leaves is owing to 'chlorophyll,'
or, in English, to 'greenleaf.' It may be very fine to know that; but my
advice to you, on the whole, is to rest content with the general fact that
leaves are green when they do not grow in or near smoky towns; and not by
any means to rest content with the fact that very soon there will not be a
green leaf in England, but only greenish-black ones. And thereon resolve
that you will yourself endeavour to promote the growing of the green wood,
rather than of the black.

9. Looking at the back of your laurel-leaves, you see how the central rib
or spine of each, and the lateral branchings, strengthen and carry it. I
find much confused use, in botanical works, of the words Vein and Rib. For,
indeed, there are veins _in_ the ribs of leaves, as marrow in bones; and
the projecting bars often gradually depress themselves into a transparent
net of rivers. But the _mechanical_ force of the framework in carrying the
leaf-tissue is the point first to be noticed; it is that which admits,
regulates, or restrains the visible motions of the leaf; while the system
of circulation can only be studied through the microscope. But the ribbed
leaf bears itself to the wind, as the webbed foot of a bird does to the
{45} water, and needs the same kind, though not the same strength, of
support; and its ribs always are partly therefore constituted of strong
woody substance, which is knit out of the tissue; and you can extricate
this skeleton framework, and keep it, after the leaf-tissue is dissolved.
So I shall henceforward speak simply of the leaf and its ribs,--only
specifying the additional veined structure on necessary occasions.

10. I have just said that the ribs--and might have said, farther, the stalk
that sustains them--are knit out of the _tissue_ of the leaf. But what is
the leaf tissue itself knit out of? One would think that was nearly the
first thing to be discovered, or at least to be thought of, concerning
plants,--namely, how and of what they are made. We say they 'grow.' But you
know that they can't grow out of nothing;--this solid wood and rich tracery
must be made out of some previously existing substance. What is the
substance?--and how is it woven into leaves.--twisted into wood?

11. Consider how fast this is done, in spring. You walk in February over a
slippery field, where, through hoar-frost and mud, you perhaps hardly see
the small green blades of trampled turf. In twelve weeks you wade through
the same field up to your knees in fresh grass; and in a week or two more,
you mow two or three solid haystacks off it. In winter you walk by your
currant-bush, or your vine. They are shrivelled sticks--like bits of black
tea in the canister. You pass again in May, and {46} the currant-bush looks
like a young sycamore tree; and the vine is a bower: and meanwhile the
forests, all over this side of the round world, have grown their foot or
two in height, with new leaves--so much deeper, so much denser than they
were. Where has it all come from? Cut off the fresh shoots from a single
branch of any tree in May. Weigh them; and then consider that so much
weight has been added to every such living branch, everywhere, this side
the equator, within the last two months. What is all that made of?

12. Well, this much the botanists really know, and tell us,--It is made
chiefly of the breath of animals: that is to say, of the substance which,
during the past year, animals have breathed into the air; and which, if
they went on breathing, and their breath were not made into trees, would
poison them, or rather suffocate them, as people are suffocated in
uncleansed pits, and dogs in the Grotta del Cane. So that you may look upon
the grass and forests of the earth as a kind of green hoar-frost, frozen
upon it from our breath, as, on the window-panes, the white arborescence of
ice.

13. But how is it made into wood?

The substances that have been breathed into the air are charcoal, with
oxygen and hydrogen,--or, more plainly, charcoal and water. Some necessary
earths,--in smaller quantity, but absolutely essential,--the trees get from
the ground; but, I believe all the charcoal they want, and most of the
water, from the air. Now the question is, where and how do they take it in,
and digest it into wood? {47}

14. You know, in spring, and partly through all the year, except in frost,
a liquid called 'sap' circulates in trees, of which the nature, one should
have thought, might have been ascertained by mankind in the six thousand
years they have been cutting wood. Under the impression always that it _had
been_ ascertained, and that I could at any time know all about it, I have
put off till to-day, 19th October, 1869, when I am past fifty, the knowing
anything about it at all. But I will really endeavour now to ascertain
something, and take to my botanical books, accordingly, in due order.

(1) Dresser's "Rudiments of Botany." 'Sap' not in the index; only Samara,
and Sarcocarp,--about neither of which I feel the smallest curiosity. (2)
Figuier's "Histoire des Plantes."[18] 'Sêve,' not in index; only Serpolet,
and Sherardia arvensis, which also have no help in them for me. (3)
Balfour's "Manual of Botany." 'Sap,'--yes, at last. "Article 257. Course of
fluids in exogenous stems." I don't care about the course just now: I want
to know where the fluids come from. "If a plant be plunged into a weak
solution of acetate of lead,"--I don't in the least want to know what
happens. "From the minuteness of the tissue, it is not easy to determine
the vessels through which the sap moves." Who said it was? If it had been
easy, I should have done it myself. "Changes take place in the composition
of the {48} sap in its upward course." I dare say; but I don't know yet
what its composition is before it begins going up. "The Elaborated Sap by
Mr. Schultz has been called 'latex.'" I wish Mr. Schultz were in a hogshead
of it, with the top on. "On account of these movements in the latex, the
laticiferous vessels have been denominated cinenchymatous." I do not
venture to print the expressions which I here mentally make use of.

15. Stay,--here, at last, in Article 264, is something to the purpose: "It
appears then that, in the case of Exogenous plants, the fluid matter in the
soil, containing different substances in solution, is sucked up by the
extremities of the roots." Yes, but how of the pine trees on yonder
rock?--Is there any sap in the rock, or water either? The moisture must be
seized during actual rain on the root, or stored up from the snow; stored
up, any way, in a tranquil, not actively sappy, state, till the time comes
for its change, of which there is no account here.

16. I have only one chance left now. Lindley's "Introduction to Botany."
'Sap,'--yes,--'General motion of.' II. 325. "The course which is taken by
the sap, after entering a plant, is the first subject for consideration."
My dear doctor, I have learned nearly whatever I know of plant structure
from you, and am grateful; and that it is little, is not your fault, but
mine. But this--let me say it with all sincere respect--is not what you
should have told me here. You know, far better than I, that 'sap' never
does enter a plant at all; but only salt, or earth and water, {49} and that
the roots alone could not make it; and that, therefore, the course of it
must be, in great part, the result or process of the actual making. But I
will read now, patiently; for I know you will tell me much that is worth
hearing, though not perhaps what I want.

Yes; now that I have read Lindley's statement carefully, I find it is full
of precious things; and this is what, with thinking over it, I can gather
for you.

17. First, towards the end of January,--as the light enlarges, and the
trees revive from their rest,--there is a general liquefaction of the blood
of St. Januarius in their stems; and I suppose there is really a great deal
of moisture rapidly absorbed from the earth in most cases; and that this
absorption is a great help to the sun in drying the winter's damp out of it
for us: then, with that strange vital power,--which scientific people are
usually as afraid of naming as common people are afraid of naming
Death,--the tree gives the gathered earth and water a changed existence;
and to this new-born liquid an upward motion from the earth, as our blood
has from the heart; for the life of the tree is out of the earth; and this
upward motion has a mechanical power in pushing on the growth. "_Forced
onward_ by the current of sap, the plumule ascends," (Lindley, p.
132,)--this blood of the tree having to supply, exactly as our own blood
has, not only the forming powers of substance, but a continual evaporation,
"approximately seventeen times more than that of the human body," while the
force of motion in the sap "is {50} sometimes five times greater than that
which impels the blood in the crural artery of the horse."

18. Hence generally, I think we may conclude thus much,--that at every pore
of its surface, under ground and above, the plant in the spring absorbs
moisture, which instantly disperses itself through its whole system "by
means of some permeable quality of the membranes of the cellular tissue
invisible to our eyes even by the most powerful glasses" (p. 326); that in
this way subjected to the vital power of the tree, it becomes sap, properly
so called, which passes downwards through this cellular tissue, slowly and
secretly; and then upwards, through the great vessels of the tree,
violently, stretching out the supple twigs of it as yon see a flaccid
waterpipe swell and move when the cock is turned to fill it. And the tree
becomes literally a fountain, of which the springing streamlets are clothed
with new-woven garments of green tissue, and of which the silver spray
stays in the sky,--a spray, now, of leaves.

19. That is the gist of the matter; and a very wonderful gist it is, to my
mind. The secret and subtle descent--the violent and exulting resilience of
the tree's blood,--what guides it?--what compels? The creature has no heart
to beat like ours; one cannot take refuge from the mystery in a 'muscular
contraction.' Fountain without supply--playing by its own force, for ever
rising and falling all through the days of Spring, spending itself at last
in gathered clouds of leaves, and iris of blossom.

Very wonderful; and it seems, for the present, that {51} we know nothing
whatever about its causes;--nay, the strangeness of the reversed arterial
and vein motion, without a heart, does not seem to strike anybody. Perhaps,
however, it may interest you, as I observe it does the botanists, to know
that the cellular tissue through which the motion is effected is called
Parenchym, and the woody tissue, Bothrenchym; and that Parenchym is
divided, by a system of nomenclature which "has some advantages over that
more commonly in use,"[19] into merenchyma, conenchyma, ovenchyma,
atractenchyma, cylindrenchyma, colpenchyma, cladenchyma, and prismenchyma.

20. Take your laurel branch into your hand again. There are, as you must
well know, innumerable shapes and orders of leaves;--there are some like
claws; some like fingers, and some like feet; there are endlessly cleft
ones, and endlessly clustered ones, and inscrutable divisions within
divisions of the fretted verdure; and wrinkles, and ripples, and
stitchings, and hemmings, and pinchings, and gatherings, and crumplings,
and clippings, and what not. But there is nothing so constantly noble as
the pure leaf of the laurel, bay, orange, and olive; numerable, sequent,
perfect in setting, divinely simple and serene. I shall call these noble
leaves 'Apolline' leaves. They characterize many orders of plants, great
and small,--from the magnolia to the myrtle, and exquisite 'myrtille' {52}
of the hills, (bilberry); but wherever you find them, strong, lustrous,
dark green, simply formed, richly scented or stored,--you have nearly
always kindly and lovely vegetation, in healthy ground and air.

21. The gradual diminution in rank beneath the Apolline leaf, takes place
in others by the loss of one or more of the qualities above named. The
Apolline leaf, I said, is strong, lustrous, full in its green, rich in
substance, simple in form. The inferior leaves are those which have lost
strength, and become thin, like paper; which have lost lustre, and become
dead by roughness of surface, like the nettle,--(an Apolline leaf may
become dead by _bloom_, like the olive, yet not lose beauty); which have
lost colour and become feeble in green, as in the poplar, or _crudely_
bright, like rice; which have lost substance and softness, and have nothing
to give in scent or nourishment; or become flinty or spiny; finally, which
have lost simplicity, and become cloven or jagged. Many of these losses are
partly atoned for by gain of some peculiar loveliness. Grass and moss, and
parsley and fern, have each their own delightfulness; yet they are all of
inferior power and honour, compared to the Apolline leaves.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

22. You see, however, that though your laurel leaf has a central stem, and
traces of ribs branching from it, in a vertebrated manner, they are so
faint that we cannot take it for a type of vertebrate structure. But the
two figures of elm and alisma leaf, given in Modern Painters (vol. iii.),
and now here repeated, Fig. 3, will clearly enough {53} show the opposition
between this vertebrate form, branching again usually at the edges, _a_,
and the softly opening lines diffused at the stem, and gathered at the
point of the leaf _b_, which, as you almost without doubt know already are
characteristic of a vast group of plants, including especially all the
lilies, grasses, and palms, which for the most part are the signs of local
or temporary moisture in hot countries;--local, as of fountains and
streams; temporary, as of rain or inundation.

But temporary, still more definitely in the day, than in the year. When you
go out, delighted, into the dew of the morning, have you ever considered
why it is so rich upon the grass;--why it is _not_ upon the trees? It _is_
partly on the trees, but yet your memory of it will be always chiefly of
its gleam upon the lawn. On many {54} trees you will find there is none at
all. I cannot follow out here the many inquiries connected with this
subject, but, broadly, remember the branched trees are fed chiefly by
rain,--the unbranched ones by dew, visible or invisible; that is to say, at
all events by moisture which they can gather for themselves out of the air;
or else by streams and springs. Hence the division of the verse of the song
of Moses: "My doctrine shall drop as the rain; my speech shall distil as
the dew: as the _small_ rain upon the tender _herb_, and as the showers
upon the grass."

23. Next, examining the direction of the veins in the leaf of the alisma,
_b_, Fig. 3, you see they all open widely, as soon as they can, towards the
thick part of the leaf; and then taper, apparently with reluctance, pushing
each other outwards, to the point. If the leaf were a lake of the same
shape, and its stem the entering river, the lines of the currents passing
through it would, I believe, be nearly the same as that of the veins in the
aquatic leaf. I have not examined the fluid law accurately, and I do not
suppose there is more real correspondence than may be caused by the leaf's
expanding in every permitted direction, as the water would, with all the
speed it can; but the resemblance is so close as to enable you to fasten
the relation of the unbranched leaves to streams more distinctly in your
mind,--just as the toss of the palm leaves from their stem may, I think, in
their likeness to the springing of a fountain, remind you of their relation
to the desert, and their necessity, therein, to life of man and beast. {55}

24. And thus, associating these grass and lily leaves always with
fountains, or with dew, I think we may get a pretty general name for them
also. You know that Cora, our Madonna of the flowers, was lost in Sicilian
Fields: you know, also, that the fairest of Greek fountains, lost in
Greece, was thought to rise in a Sicilian islet; and that the real
springing of the noble fountain in that rock was one of the causes which
determined the position of the greatest Greek city of Sicily. So I think,
as we call the fairest branched leaves 'Apolline,' we will call the fairest
flowing ones 'Arethusan.' But remember that the Apolline leaf represents
only the central type of land leaves, and is, within certain limits, of a
fixed form; while the beautiful Arethusan leaves, alike in flowing of their
lines, change their forms indefinitely,--some shaped like round pools, and
some like winding currents, and many like arrows, and many like hearts, and
otherwise varied and variable, as leaves ought to be,--that rise out of the
waters, and float amidst the pausing of their foam.

25. Brantwood, _Easter Day_, 1875.--I don't like to spoil my pretty
sentence, above; but on reading it over, I suspect I wrote it confusing the
water-lily leaf, and other floating ones of the same kind, with the
Arethusan forms. But the water-lily and water-ranunculus leaves, and such
others, are to the orders of earth-loving leaves what ducks and swans are
to birds; (the swan is the water-lily of birds;) they are _swimming_
leaves; not properly watery creatures, or able to live under water like
fish, (unless {56} when dormant), but just like birds that pass their lives
on the surface of the waves--though they must breathe in the air.

And these natant leaves, as they lie on the water surface, do not want
strong ribs to carry them,[20] but have very delicate ones beautifully
branching into the orbed space, to keep the tissue nice and flat; while, on
the other hand, leaves that really have to grow under water, sacrifice
their tissue, and keep only their ribs, like coral animals; ('Ranunculus
heterophyllus,' 'other-leaved Frog-flower,' and its like,) just as, if you
keep your own hands too long in water, they shrivel at the finger-ends.

26. So that you must not attach any great botanical importance to the
characters of contrasted aspects in leaves, which I wish you to express by
the words 'Apolline' and 'Arethusan'; but their mythic importance is very
great, and your careful observance of it will help you completely to
understand the beautiful Greek fable of Apollo and Daphne. There are indeed
several Daphnes, and the first root of the name is far away in another
field of thought altogether, connected with the Gods of Light. But
etymology, the best of servants, is an unreasonable master; and Professor
Max Müller trusts his deep-reaching knowledge of the first ideas connected
with the names of Athena {57} and Daphne, too implicitly, when he supposes
this idea to be retained in central Greek theology. 'Athena' originally
meant only the dawn, among nations who knew nothing of a Sacred Spirit. But
the Athena who catches Achilles by the hair, and urges the spear of Diomed,
has not, in the mind of Homer, the slightest remaining connection with the
mere beauty of daybreak. Daphne chased by Apollo, may perhaps--though I
doubt even this much of consistence in the earlier myth--have meant the
Dawn pursued by the Sun. But there is no trace whatever of this first idea
left in the fable of Arcadia and Thessaly.

27. The central Greek Daphne is the daughter of one of the great _river_
gods of Arcadia; her mother is the Earth. Now Arcadia is the Oberland of
Greece; and the crests of Cyllene, Erymanthus, and Mænalus[21] surround it,
like the Swiss forest cantons, with walls of rock, and shadows of pine. And
it divides itself, like the Oberland, into three regions: first, the region
of rock and snow, sacred to Mercury and Apollo, in which Mercury's birth on
Cyllene, his construction of the lyre, and his stealing the oxen of Apollo,
are all expressions of the enchantments of cloud and sound, mingling with
the sunshine, on the cliffs of Cyllene.

                 "While the mists
  Flying, and rainy vapours, call out shapes
  {58}
  And phantoms from the crags and solid earth
  As fast as a musician scatters sounds
  Out of his instrument."

Then came the pine region, sacred especially to Pan and Mænalus, the son of
Lycaon and brother of Callisto; and you had better remember this
relationship carefully, for the sake of the meaning of the constellations
of Ursa Major and the Mons Mænalius, and of their wolf and bear traditions;
(compare also the strong impression on the Greek mind of the wild
leafiness, nourished by snow, of the Boeotian Cithæron,--"Oh, thou
lake-hollow, full of divine leaves, and of wild creatures, nurse of the
snow, darling of Diana," (Phoenissæ, 801)). How wild the climate of this
pine region is, you may judge from the pieces in the note below[22] out of
Colonel Leake's diary in {59} crossing the Mænalian range in spring. And
then, lastly, you have the laurel and vine region, full of sweetness and
Elysian beauty.

28. Now as Mercury is the ruling power of the hill enchantment, so Daphne
of the leafy peace. She is, in her first life, the daughter of the mountain
river, the mist of it filling the valley; the Sun, pursuing, and effacing
it, from dell to dell, is, literally, Apollo pursuing Daphne, and _adverse_
to her; (not, as in the earlier tradition, the Sun pursuing only his own
light). Daphne, thus hunted, cries to her mother, the Earth, which opens,
and receives her, causing the laurel to spring up in her stead. That is to
say, wherever the rocks protect the mist from the sunbeam, and suffer it to
water the earth, there the laurel and other richest vegetation fill the
hollows, giving a better glory to the sun itself. For sunshine, on the
torrent spray, {60} on the grass of its valley, and entangled among the
laurel stems, or glancing from their leaves, became a thousandfold lovelier
and more sacred than the same sunbeams, burning on the leafless
mountain-side.

And farther, the leaf, in its connection with the river, is typically
expressive, not, as the flower was, of human fading and passing away, but
of the perpetual flow and renewal of human mind and thought, rising "like
the rivers that run among the hills"; therefore it was that the youth of
Greece sacrificed their hair--the sign of their continually renewed
strength,--to the rivers, and to Apollo. Therefore, to commemorate Apollo's
own chief victory over death--over Python, the corrupter,--a laurel branch
was gathered every ninth year in the vale of Tempe; and the laurel leaf
became the reward or crown of all beneficent and enduring work of man--work
of inspiration, born of the strength of the earth, and of the dew of
heaven, and which can never pass away.

29. You may doubt at first, even because of its grace, this meaning in the
fable of Apollo and Daphne; you will not doubt it, however, when you trace
it back to its first eastern origin. When we speak carelessly of the
traditions respecting the Garden of Eden, (or in Hebrew, remember, Garden
of Delight,) we are apt to confuse Milton's descriptions with those in the
book of Genesis. Milton fills his Paradise with flowers; but no flowers are
spoken of in Genesis. We may indeed conclude that in speaking of every herb
of the field, flowers are included. But they {61} are not named. The things
that are _named_ in the Garden of Delight are trees only.

The words are, "every tree that was pleasant to the sight and good for
food;" and as if to mark the idea more strongly for us in the Septuagint,
even the ordinary Greek word for tree is not used, but the word [Greek:
xulon],--literally, every 'wood,' every piece of _timber_ that was pleasant
or good. They are indeed the "vivi travi,"--living rafters, of Dante's
Apennine.

Do you remember how those trees were said to be watered? Not by the four
rivers only. The rivers could not supply the place of rain. No rivers do;
for in truth they are the refuse of rain. No storm-clouds were there, nor
hidings of the blue by darkening veil; but there went up a _mist_ from the
earth, and watered the face of the ground,--or, as in Septuagint and
Vulgate, "There went forth a fountain from the earth, and gave the earth to
drink."

30. And now, lastly, we continually think of that Garden of Delight, as if
it existed, or could exist, no longer; wholly forgetting that it is spoken
of in Scripture as perpetually existent; and some of its fairest trees as
existent also, or only recently destroyed. When Ezekiel is describing to
Pharaoh the greatness of the Assyrians, do you remember what image he gives
of them? "Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches;
and his top was among the thick boughs; the waters nourished him, and the
deep brought him up, with her rivers {62} running round about his plants.
Under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young;
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations."

31. Now hear what follows. "The cedars _in the Garden of God_ could not
hide _him_. The fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees
were not like his branches; nor any tree in the Garden of God was like unto
him in beauty."

So that you see, whenever a nation rises into consistent, vital, and,
through many generations, enduring power, _there_ is still the Garden of
God; still it is the water of life which feeds the roots of it; and still
the succession of its people is imaged by the perennial leafage of trees of
Paradise. Could this be said of Assyria, and shall it not be said of
England? How much more, of lives such as ours should be,--just, laborious,
united in aim, beneficent in fulfilment, may the image be used of the
leaves of the trees of Eden! Other symbols have been given often to show
the evanescence and slightness of our lives--the foam upon the water, the
grass on the housetop, the vapour that vanishes away; yet none of these are
images of true human life. That life, when it is real, is _not_ evanescent;
is _not_ slight; does _not_ vanish away. Every noble life leaves the fibre
of it interwoven for ever in the work of the world; by so much, evermore,
the strength of the human race has gained; more stubborn in the root,
higher towards heaven in the branch; and, "as a teil tree, and as an
oak,--whose substance is in them {63} when they cast their leaves,--so the
holy seed is in the midst thereof."

32. Only remember on what conditions. In the great Psalm of life, we are
told that everything that a man doeth shall prosper, so only that he
delight in the law of his God, that he hath not walked in the counsel of
the wicked, nor sat in the seat of the scornful. Is it among these leaves
of the perpetual Spring,--helpful leaves for the healing of the
nations,--that we mean to have our part and place, or rather among the
"brown skeletons of leaves that lag, the forest brook along"? For other
leaves there are, and other streams that water them,--not water of life,
but water of Acheron. Autumnal leaves there are that strew the brooks, in
Vallombrosa. Remember you how the name of the place was changed: "Once
called 'Sweet water' (Aqua bella), now, the Shadowy Vale." Portion in one
or other name we must choose, all of us,--with the living olive, by the
living fountains of waters, or with the wild fig trees, whose leafage of
human soul is strewed along the brooks of death, in the eternal
Vallombrosa.

       *       *       *       *       *

{64}

CHAPTER IV.

THE FLOWER.

ROME, _Whit Monday, 1874_.

1. On the quiet road leading from under the Palatine to the little church
of St. Nereo and Achilleo, I met, yesterday morning, group after group of
happy peasants heaped in pyramids on their triumphal carts, in Whit-Sunday
dress, stout and clean, and gay in colour; and the women all with bright
artificial roses in their hair, set with true natural taste, and well
becoming them. This power of arranging wreath or crown of flowers for the
head, remains to the people from classic times. And the thing that struck
me most in the look of it was not so much the cheerfulness, as the
dignity;--in a true sense, the _becomingness_ and decorousness of the
ornament. Among the ruins of the dead city, and the worse desolation of the
work of its modern rebuilders, here was one element at least of honour, and
order;--and, in these, of delight.

And these are the real significances of the flower itself. It is the utmost
purification of the plant, and the utmost discipline. Where its tissue is
blanched fairest, dyed purest, set in strictest rank, appointed to most
chosen office, {65} there--and created by the fact of this purity and
function--is the flower.

2. But created, observe, by the purity and order, more than by the
function. The flower exists for its own sake,--not for the fruit's sake.
The production of the fruit is an added honour to it--is a granted
consolation to us for its death. But the flower is the end of the
seed,--not the seed of the flower. You are fond of cherries, perhaps; and
think that the use of cherry blossom is to produce cherries. Not at all.
The use of cherries is to produce cherry blossoms; just as the use of bulbs
is to produce hyacinths,--not of hyacinths to produce bulbs. Nay, that the
flower can multiply by bulb, or root, or slip, as well as by seed, may show
you at once how immaterial the seed-forming function is to the flower's
existence. A flower is to the vegetable substance what a crystal is to the
mineral. "Dust of sapphire," writes my friend Dr. John Brown to me, of the
wood hyacinths of Scotland in the spring. Yes, that is so,--each bud more
beautiful, itself, than perfectest jewel--_this_, indeed, jewel "of purest
ray serene;" but, observe you, the glory is in the purity, the serenity,
the radiance,--not in the mere continuance of the creature.

3. It is because of its beauty that its continuance is worth Heaven's
while. The glory of it is in being,--not in begetting; and in the spirit
and substance,--not the change. For the earth also has its flesh and
spirit. Every day of spring is the earth's Whit Sunday--Fire {66} Sunday.
The falling fire of the rainbow, with the order of its zones, and the
gladness of its covenant,--you may eat of it, like Esdras; but you feed
upon it only that you may see it. Do you think that flowers were born to
nourish the blind?

Fasten well in your mind, then, the conception of order, and purity, as the
essence of the flower's being, no less than of the crystal's. A ruby is not
made bright to scatter round it child-rubies; nor a flower, but in
collateral and added honour, to give birth to other flowers.

Two main facts, then, you have to study in every flower: the symmetry or
order of it, and the perfection of its substance; first, the manner in
which the leaves are placed for beauty of form; then the spinning and
weaving and blanching of their tissue, for the reception of purest colour,
or refining to richest surface.

4. First, the order: the proportion, and answering to each other, of the
parts; for the study of which it becomes necessary to know what its parts
are; and that a flower consists essentially of--Well, I really don't know
what it consists essentially of. For some flowers have bracts, and stalks,
and toruses, and calices, and corollas, and discs, and stamens, and
pistils, and ever so many odds and ends of things besides, of no use at
all, seemingly; and others have no bracts, and no stalks, and no toruses,
and no calices, and no corollas, and nothing recognizable for stamens or
pistils,--only, when they come to be reduced to this kind of poverty, one
doesn't call {67} them flowers; they get together in knots, and one calls
them catkins, or the like, or forgets their existence altogether;--I
haven't the least idea, for instance, myself, what an oak blossom is like;
only I know its bracts get together and make a cup of themselves
afterwards, which the Italians call, as they do the dome of St. Peter's,
'cupola'; and that it is a great pity, for their own sake as well as the
world's, that they were not content with their ilex cupolas, which were
made to hold something, but took to building these big ones upside-down,
which hold nothing--_less_ than nothing,--large extinguishers of the flame
of Catholic religion. And for farther embarrassment, a flower not only is
without essential consistence of a given number of parts, but it rarely
consists, alone, of _itself_. One talks of a hyacinth as of a flower; but a
hyacinth is any number of flowers. One does not talk of 'a heather'; when
one says 'heath,' one means the whole plant, not the blossom,--because
heath-bells, though they grow together for company's sake, do so in a
voluntary sort of way, and are not fixed in their places; and yet, they
depend on each other for effect, as much as a bunch of grapes.

5. And this grouping of flowers, more or less waywardly, is the most subtle
part of their order, and the most difficult to represent. Take that cluster
of bog-heather bells, for instance, Line-study 1. You might think at first
there were no lines in it worth study; but look at it more carefully. There
are twelve bells in the {68} cluster. There may be fewer, or more; but the
bog-heath is apt to run into something near that number. They all grow
together as close as they can, and on one side of the supporting branch
only. The natural effect would be to bend the branch down; but the branch
won't have that, and so leans back to carry them. Now you see the use of
drawing the profile in the middle figure: it shows you the exactly balanced
setting of the group,--not drooping, nor erect; but with a disposition to
droop, tossed up by the leaning back of the stem. Then, growing as near as
they can to each other, those in the middle get squeezed. Here is another
quite special character. Some flowers don't like being squeezed at all
(fancy a squeezed convolvulus!); but these heather bells like it, and look
all the prettier for it,--not the squeezed ones exactly, by themselves, but
the cluster altogether, by their patience.

Then also the outside ones get pushed into a sort of star-shape, and in
front show the colour of all their sides, and at the back the rich green
cluster of sharp leaves that hold them; all this order being as essential
to the plant as any of the more formal structures of the bell itself.

6. But the bog-heath has usually only one cluster of flowers to arrange on
each branch. Take a spray of ling (Frontispiece), and you will find that
the richest piece of Gothic spire-sculpture would be dull and graceless
beside the grouping of the floral masses in their various life. But it is
difficult to give the accuracy of attention {69} necessary to see their
beauty without drawing them; and still more difficult to draw them in any
approximation to the truth before they change. This is indeed the fatallest
obstacle to all good botanical work. Flowers, or leaves,--and especially
the last,--can only be rightly drawn as they grow. And even then, in their
loveliest spring action, they grow as you draw them, and will not stay
quite the same creatures for half an hour.

7. I said in my inaugural lectures at Oxford, § 107, that real botany is
not so much the description of plants as their biography. Without entering
at all into the history of its fruitage, the life and death of the blossom
_itself_ is always an eventful romance, which must be completely told, if
well. The grouping given to the various states of form between bud and
flower is always the most important part of the design of the plant; and in
the modes of its death are some of the most touching lessons, or
symbolisms, connected with its existence. The utter loss and far-scattered
ruin of the cistus and wild rose,--the dishonoured and dark contortion of
the convolvulus,--the pale wasting of the crimson heath of Apennine, are
strangely opposed by the quiet closing of the brown bells of the ling, each
making of themselves a little cross as they die; and so enduring into the
days of winter. I have drawn the faded beside the full branch, and know not
which is the more beautiful.

8. This grouping, then, and way of treating each other in their gathered
company, is the first and most subtle {70} condition of form in flowers;
and, observe, I don't mean, just now, the appointed and disciplined
grouping, but the wayward and accidental. Don't confuse the beautiful
consent of the cluster in these sprays of heath with the legal strictness
of a foxglove,--though that also has its divinity; but of another kind.
That legal order of blossoming--for which we may wisely keep the accepted
name, 'inflorescence,'--is itself quite a separate subject of study, which
we cannot take up until we know the still more strict laws which are set
over the flower itself.

9. I have in my hand a small red poppy which I gathered on Whit Sunday on
the palace of the Cæsars. It is an intensely simple, intensely floral,
flower. All silk and flame: a scarlet cup, perfect-edged all round, seen
among the wild grass far away, like a burning coal fallen from Heaven's
altars. You cannot have a more complete, a more stainless, type of flower
absolute; inside and outside, _all_ flower. No sparing of colour
anywhere--no outside coarsenesses--no interior secrecies; open as the
sunshine that creates it; fine-finished on both sides, down to the
extremest point of insertion on its narrow stalk; and robed in the purple
of the Cæsars.

Literally so. That poppy scarlet, so far as it could be painted by mortal
hand, for mortal King, stays yet, against the sun, and wind, and rain, on
the walls of the house of Augustus, a hundred yards from the spot where I
gathered the weed of its desolation.

10. A pure _cup_, you remember it is; that much at least {71} you cannot
but remember, of poppy-form among the cornfields; and it is best, in
beginning, to think of every flower as essentially a cup. There are flat
ones, but you will find that most of these are really groups of flowers,
not single blossoms; and there are out-of-the-way and quaint ones, very
difficult to define as of any shape; but even these have a cup to begin
with, deep down in them. You had better take the idea of a cup or vase, as
the first, simplest, and most general form of true flower.

The botanists call it a corolla, which means a garland, or a kind of crown;
and the word is a very good one, because it indicates that the flower-cup
is made, as our clay cups are, on a potter's wheel; that it is essentially
a _revolute_ form--a whirl or (botanically) 'whorl' of leaves; in reality
successive round the base of the urn they form.

11. Perhaps, however, you think poppies in general are not much like cups.
But the flower in my hand is a--poverty-_stricken_ poppy, I was going to
write,--poverty-_strengthened_ poppy, I mean. On richer ground, it would
have gushed into flaunting breadth of untenable purple--flapped its
inconsistent scarlet vaguely to the wind--dropped the pride of its petals
over my hand in an hour after I gathered it. But this little rough-bred
thing, a Campagna pony of a poppy, is as bright and strong to-day as
yesterday. So that I can see exactly where the leaves join or lap over each
other; and when I look down into the cup, find it to be composed of four
leaves altogether,--two smaller, set within two larger. {72}

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

12. Thus far (and somewhat farther) I had written in Rome; but now, putting
my work together in Oxford, a sudden doubt troubles me, whether all poppies
have two petals smaller than the other two. Whereupon I take down an
excellent little school-book on botany--the best I've yet found, thinking
to be told quickly; and I find a great deal about opium; and, apropos of
opium, that the juice of common celandine is of a bright orange colour; and
I pause for a bewildered five minutes, wondering if a celandine is a poppy,
and how many petals _it_ has: going on again--because I must, without
making up my mind, on either question--I am told to "observe the floral
receptacle of the Californian genus Eschscholtzia." Now I can't observe
anything of the sort, and I don't want to; and I wish California and all
that's in it were at the deepest bottom of the Pacific. Next I am told to
compare the poppy and waterlily; and I can't do that, neither--though I
should like to; and there's the end of the article; and it never tells me
whether one pair of petals is always smaller than the other, or not. Only I
see it says the corolla has four petals. Perhaps a celandine may be a
double poppy, and have eight, I know they're tiresome irregular things, and
I mustn't be stopped by them;[23]--at {73} any rate, my Roman poppy knew
what it was about, and had its two couples of leaves in clear
subordination, of which at the time I went on to inquire farther, as
follows.

13. The next point is, what shape are the petals of? And that is easier
asked than answered; for when you pull them off, you find they won't lie
flat, by any means, but are each of them cups, or rather shells,
themselves; and that it requires as much conchology as would describe a
cockle, before you can properly give account of a single poppy leaf. Or of
a single _any_ leaf--for all leaves are either shells, or boats, (or solid,
if not hollow, masses,) and cannot be represented in flat outline. But,
laying these as flat as they will lie on a sheet of paper, you will find
the piece they hide of the paper they lie on can be drawn; giving
approximately the shape of the outer leaf as at A, that of the inner as at
B, Fig. 4; which you will find very difficult lines to draw, for they are
each composed of two curves, joined, as in Fig. 5; all above the line _a b_
being the outer edge of the leaf, but joined so subtly to the side that the
least break in drawing the line spoils the form.

14. Now every flower petal consists essentially of these two parts,
variously proportioned and outlined. It {74} expands from C to _a b_; and
closes in the external line, and for this reason.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Considering every flower under the type of a cup, the first part of the
petal is that in which it expands from the bottom to the rim; the second
part, that in which it terminates itself on reaching the rim. Thus let the
three circles, A B C, Fig 6., represent the undivided cups of the three
great geometrical orders of flowers--trefoil, quatrefoil and cinquefoil.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

Draw in the first an equilateral triangle, in the second a square, in the
third a pentagon; draw the dark lines from centres to angles; (D E F): then
(_a_) the third part of D; (_b_) the fourth part of E, (_c_) the fifth part
of F, are the normal outline forms of the petals of the three {75}
families; the relations between the developing angle and limiting curve
being varied according to the depth of cup, and the degree of connection
between the petals. Thus a rose folds them over one another, in the bud; a
convolvulus twists them,--the one expanding into a flat cinquefoil of
separate petals, and the other into a deep-welled cinquefoil of connected
ones.

I find an excellent illustration in Veronica Polita, one of the most
perfectly graceful of field plants because of the light alternate flower
stalks, each with its leaf at the base; the flower itself a quatrefoil, of
which the largest and least petals are uppermost. Pull one off its calyx
(draw, if you can, the outline of the striped blue upper petal with the
jagged edge of pale gold below), and then examine the relative shapes of
the lateral, and least upper {76} petal. Their under surface is very
curious, as if covered with white paint; the blue stripes above, in the
direction of their growth, deepening the more delicate colour with
exquisite insistence.

A lilac blossom will give you a pretty example of the expansion of the
petals of a quatrefoil above the edge of the cup or tube; but I must get
back to our poppy at present.

15. What outline its petals really have, however, is little shown in their
crumpled fluttering; but that very crumpling arises from a fine floral
character which we do not enough value in them. We usually think of the
poppy as a coarse flower; but it is the most transparent and delicate of
all the blossoms of the field. The rest--nearly all of them--depend on the
_texture_ of their surfaces for colour. But the poppy is painted _glass_;
it never glows so brightly as when the sun shines through it. Wherever it
is seen--against the light or with the light--always, it is a flame, and
warms the wind like a blown ruby.

In these two qualities, the accurately balanced form, and the perfectly
infused colour of the petals, you have, as I said, the central being of the
flower. All the other parts of it are necessary, but we must follow them
out in order.

16. Looking down into the cup, you see the green boss divided by a black
star,--of six rays only,--and surrounded by a few black spots. My
rough-nurtured poppy contents itself with these for its centre; a rich one
would have had the green boss divided by a dozen of rays, and surrounded by
a dark crowd of crested threads. {77}

This green boss is called by botanists the pistil, which word consists of
the two first syllables of the Latin pistillum, otherwise more familiarly
Englished into 'pestle.' The meaning of the botanical word is of course,
also, that the central part of a flower-cup has to it something of the
relations that a pestle has to a mortar! Practically, however, as this
pestle has no pounding functions, I think the word is misleading as well as
ungraceful; and that we may find a better one after looking a little closer
into the matter. For this pestle is divided generally into three very
distinct parts: there is a storehouse at the bottom of it for the seeds of
the plant; above this, a shaft, often of considerable length in deep cups,
rising to the level of their upper edge, or above it; and at the top of
these shafts an expanded crest. This shaft the botanists call 'style,' from
the Greek word for a pillar; and the crest of it--I do not know
why--stigma, from the Greek word for 'spot.' The storehouse for the seeds
they call the 'ovary,' from the Latin ovum, an egg. So you have two-thirds
of a Latin word, (pistil)--awkwardly and disagreeably edged in between
pestle and pistol--for the whole thing; you have an English-Latin word
(ovary) for the bottom of it; an English-Greek word (style) for the middle;
and a pure Greek word (stigma) for the top.

17. This is a great mess of language, and all the worse that the words
style and stigma have both of them quite different senses in ordinary and
scholarly English from this forced botanical one. And I will venture
therefore, {78} for my own pupils, to put the four names altogether into
English. Instead of calling the whole thing a pistil, I shall simply call
it the pillar. Instead of 'ovary,' I shall say 'Treasury' (for a seed isn't
an egg, but it _is_ a treasure). The style I shall call the 'Shaft,' and
the stigma the 'Volute.' So you will have your entire pillar divided into
the treasury, at its base, the shaft, and the volute; and I think you will
find these divisions easily remembered, and not unfitted to the sense of
the words in their ordinary use.

18. Round this central, but, in the poppy, very stumpy, pillar, you find a
cluster of dark threads, with dusty pendants or cups at their ends. For
these the botanists' name 'stamens,' may be conveniently retained, each
consisting of a 'filament,' or thread, and an 'anther,' or blossoming part.

And in this rich corolla, and pillar, or pillars, with their treasuries,
and surrounding crowd of stamens, the essential flower consists. Fewer than
these several parts, it cannot have, to be a flower at all; of these, the
corolla leads, and is the object of final purpose. The stamens and the
treasuries are only there in order to produce future corollas, though often
themselves decorative in the highest degree.

These, I repeat, are all the essential parts of a flower. But it would have
been difficult, with any other than the poppy, to have shown you them
alone; for nearly all other flowers keep with them, all their lives, their
nurse {79} or tutor leaves,--the group which, in stronger and humbler
temper, protected them in their first weakness, and formed them to the
first laws of their being. But the poppy casts these tutorial leaves away.
It is the finished picture of impatient and luxury-loving youth,--at first
too severely restrained, then casting all restraint away,--yet retaining to
the end of life unseemly and illiberal signs of its once compelled
submission to laws which were only pain,--not instruction.

19. Gather a green poppy bud, just when it shows the scarlet line at its
side; break it open and unpack the poppy. The whole flower is there
complete in size and colour,--its stamens full-grown, but all packed so
closely that the fine silk of the petals is crushed into a million of
shapeless wrinkles. When the flower opens, it seems a deliverance from
torture: the two imprisoning green leaves are shaken to the ground; the
aggrieved corolla smooths itself in the sun, and comforts itself as it can;
but remains visibly crushed and hurt to the end of its days.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

20. Not so flowers of gracious breeding. Look at these four stages in the
young life of a primrose, Fig. 7. First confined, as strictly as the poppy
within five pinching green leaves, whose points close over it, the little
thing is content to remain a child, and finds its nursery large enough. The
green leaves unclose their points,--the little yellow ones peep out, like
ducklings. They find the light delicious, and open wide to it; and grow,
and grow, {80} and throw themselves wider at last into their perfect rose.
But they never leave their old nursery for all that; it and they live on
together; and the nursery seems a part of the flower.

21. Which is so, indeed, in all the loveliest flowers; and, in usual
botanical parlance, a flower is said to consist of its calyx, (or _hiding_
part--Calypso having rule over it,) and corolla, or garland part,
Proserpina having rule over it. But it is better to think of them always as
separate; for this calyx, very justly so named from its main function of
concealing the flower, in its youth is usually green, not coloured, and
shows its separate nature by pausing, or at least greatly lingering, in its
growth, and modifying itself very slightly, while the corolla is forming
{81} itself through active change. Look at the two, for instance, through
the youth of a pease blossom, Fig. 8.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

The entire cluster at first appears pendent in this manner, the stalk
bending round on purpose to put it into that position. On which all the
little buds, thinking themselves ill-treated, determine not to submit to
anything of the sort, turn their points upward persistently, and determine
that--at any cost of trouble--they will get nearer the sun. Then they begin
to open, and let out their corollas. I give the process of one only (Fig.
9).[24] It chances to be engraved the reverse way from the bud; but that is
of no consequence.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

At first, you see the long lower point of the calyx thought that _it_ was
going to be the head of the family, and curls upwards eagerly. Then the
little corolla steals out; and soon does away with that impression on the
mind of the calyx. The corolla soars up with widening wings, the abashed
calyx retreats beneath; and finally the great upper leaf of corolla--not
pleased at having its back still {82} turned to the light, and its face
down--throws itself entirely back, to look at the sky, and nothing
else;--and your blossom is complete.

Keeping, therefore, the ideas of calyx and corolla entirely distinct, this
one general point you may note of both: that, as a calyx is originally
folded tight over the flower, and has to open deeply to let it out, it is
nearly always composed of sharp pointed leaves like the segments of a
balloon; while corollas, having to open out as wide as possible to show
themselves, are typically like cups or plates, only cut into their edges
here and there, for ornamentation's sake.

22. And, finally, though the corolla is essentially the floral group of
leaves, and usually receives the glory of colour for itself only, this
glory and delight may be given to any other part of the group; and, as if
to show us that there is no really dishonoured or degraded membership, the
stalks and leaves in some plants, near the blossom, flush in sympathy with
it, and become themselves a part of the {83} effectively visible
flower;--Eryngo--Jura hyacinth, (comosus,) and the edges of upper stems and
leaves in many plants; while others, (Geranium lucidum,) are made to
delight us with their leaves rather than their blossoms; only I suppose, in
these, the scarlet leaf colour is a kind of early autumnal glow,--a
beautiful hectic, and foretaste, in sacred youth, of sacred death.

I observe, among the speculations of modern science, several, lately, not
uningenious, and highly industrious, on the subject of the relation of
colour in flowers, to insects--to selective development, etc., etc. There
_are_ such relations, of course. So also, the blush of a girl, when she
first perceives the faltering in her lover's step as he draws near, is
related essentially to the existing state of her stomach; and to the state
of it through all the years of her previous existence. Nevertheless,
neither love, chastity, nor blushing, are merely exponents of digestion.

All these materialisms, in their unclean stupidity, are essentially the
work of human bats; men of semi-faculty or semi-education, who are more or
less incapable of so much as seeing, much less thinking about, colour;
among whom, for one-sided intensity, even Mr. Darwin must be often ranked,
as in his vespertilian treatise on the ocelli of the Argus pheasant, which
he imagines to be artistically gradated, and perfectly imitative of a ball
and socket. If I had him here in Oxford for a week, and could force him to
try to copy a feather by Bewick, or to draw for himself a boy's thumbed
marble, his notions of feathers, and balls, {84} would be changed for all
the rest of his life. But his ignorance of good art is no excuse for the
acutely illogical simplicity of the rest of his talk of colour in the
"Descent of Man." Peacocks' tails, he thinks, are the result of the
admiration of blue tails in the minds of well-bred peahens,--and similarly,
mandrills' noses the result of the admiration of blue noses in well-bred
baboons. But it never occurs to him to ask why the admiration of blue noses
is healthy in baboons, so that it develops their race properly, while
similar maidenly admiration either of blue noses or red noses in men would
be improper, and develop the race improperly. The word itself 'proper'
being one of which he has never asked, or guessed, the meaning. And when he
imagined the gradation of the cloudings in feathers to represent successive
generation, it never occurred to him to look at the much finer cloudy
gradations in the clouds of dawn themselves; and explain the modes of
sexual preference and selective development which had brought _them_ to
their scarlet glory, before the cock could crow thrice. Putting all these
vespertilian speculations out of our way, the human facts concerning colour
are briefly these. Wherever men are noble, they love bright colour; and
wherever they can live healthily, bright colour is given them--in sky, sea,
flowers, and living creatures.

On the other hand, wherever men are ignoble and sensual, they endure
without pain, and at last even come to like (especially if artists,)
mud-colour and black, and to dislike rose-colour and white. And wherever it
is unhealthy for {85} them to live, the poisonousness of the place is
marked by some ghastly colour in air, earth, or flowers.

There are, of course, exceptions to all such widely founded laws; there are
poisonous berries of scarlet, and pestilent skies that are fair. But, if we
once honestly compare a venomous wood-fungus, rotting into black
dissolution of dripped slime at its edges, with a spring gentian; or a puff
adder with a salmon trout, or a fog in Bermondsey with a clear sky at
Berne, we shall get hold of the entire question on its right side; and be
able afterwards to study at our leisure, or accept without doubt or
trouble, facts of apparently contrary meaning. And the practical lesson
which I wish to leave with the reader is, that lovely flowers, and green
trees growing in the open air, are the proper guides of men to the places
which their Maker intended them to inhabit; while the flowerless and
treeless deserts--of reed, or sand, or rock,--are meant to be either
heroically invaded and redeemed, or surrendered to the wild creatures which
are appointed for them; happy and wonderful in their wild abodes.

Nor is the world so small but that we may yet leave in it also unconquered
spaces of beautiful solitude; where the chamois and red deer may wander
fearless,--nor any fire of avarice scorch from the Highlands of Alp, or
Grampian, the rapture of the heath, and the rose.

       *       *       *       *       *

{86}

CHAPTER V.

PAPAVER RHOEAS.

BRANTWOOD, _July 11th, 1875_.

1. Chancing to take up yesterday a favourite old book, Mavor's British
Tourists, (London, 1798,) I found in its fourth volume a delightful diary
of a journey made in 1782 through various parts of England, by Charles P.
Moritz of Berlin.

And in the fourteenth page of this diary I find the following passage,
pleasantly complimentary to England:--

"The slices of bread and butter which they give you with your tea are as
thin as poppy leaves. But there is another kind of bread and butter usually
eaten with tea, which is toasted by the fire, and is incomparably good.
This is called 'toast.'"

I wonder how many people, nowadays, whose bread and butter was cut too thin
for them, would think of comparing the slices to poppy leaves? But this was
in the old days of travelling, when people did not whirl themselves past
corn-fields, that they might have more time to walk on paving-stones; and
understood that {87} poppies did not mingle their scarlet among the gold,
without some purpose of the poppy-Maker that they should be looked at.

Nevertheless, with respect to the good and polite German's
poetically-contemplated, and finely æsthetic, tea, may it not be asked
whether poppy leaves themselves, like the bread and butter, are not, if we
may venture an opinion--_too_ thin,--im-_properly_ thin? In the last
chapter, my reader was, I hope, a little anxious to know what I meant by
saying that modern philosophers did not know the meaning of the word
'proper,' and may wish to know what I mean by it myself. And this I think
it needful to explain before going farther.

2. In our English prayer-book translation, the first verse of the
ninety-third Psalm runs thus: "The Lord is King; and hath put on glorious
apparel." And although, in the future republican world, there are to be no
lords, no kings, and no glorious apparel, it will be found convenient, for
botanical purposes, to remember what such things once were; for when I said
of the poppy, in last chapter, that it was "robed in the purple of the
Cæsars," the words gave, to any one who had a clear idea of a Cæsar, and of
his dress, a better, and even _stricter_, account of the flower than if I
had only said, with Mr. Sowerby, "petals bright scarlet;" which might just
as well have been said of a pimpernel, or scarlet geranium;--but of neither
of these latter should I have said "robed in purple of Cæsars." What I
meant was, first, that the poppy leaf {88} looks dyed through and through,
like glass, or Tyrian tissue; and not merely painted: secondly, that the
splendour of it is proud,--almost insolently so. Augustus, in his glory,
might have been clothed like one of these; and Saul; but not David, nor
Solomon; still less the teacher of Solomon, when He puts on 'glorious
apparel.'

3. Let us look, however, at the two translations of the same verse.

In the vulgate it is "Dominus regnavit; decorem indutus est;" He has put on
'becomingness,'--decent apparel, rather than glorious.

In the Septuagint it is [Greek: euprepeia]--_well_-becomingness; an
expression which, if the reader considers, must imply certainly the
existence of an opposite idea of possible '_ill_-becomingness,'--of an
apparel which should, in just as accurate a sense, belong appropriately to
the creature invested with it, and yet not be glorious, but inglorious, and
not well-becoming, but ill-becoming. The mandrill's blue nose, for
instance, already referred to,--can we rightly speak of this as '[Greek:
euprepeia]'? Or the stings, and minute, colourless blossoming of the
nettle? May we call these a glorious apparel, as we may the glowing of an
alpine rose?

You will find on reflection, and find more convincingly the more accurately
you reflect, that there is an absolute sense attached to such words as
'decent,' 'honourable,' 'glorious,' or '[Greek: kalos],' contrary to
another absolute sense in the words 'indecent,' 'shameful,' 'vile,' or
'[Greek: aischros].' {89}

And that there is every degree of these absolute qualities visible in
living creatures; and that the divinity of the Mind of man is in its
essential discernment of what is [Greek: kalon] from what is [Greek:
aischron], and in his preference of the kind of creatures which are decent,
to those which are indecent; and of the kinds of thoughts, in himself,
which are noble, to those which are vile.

4. When therefore I said that Mr. Darwin, and his school,[25] had no
conception of the real meaning of the word 'proper,' I meant that they
conceived the qualities of things only as their 'properties,' but not as
their becomingnesses;' and seeing that dirt is proper to a swine, malice to
a monkey, poison to a nettle, and folly to a fool, they called a nettle
_but_ a nettle, and the faults of fools but folly; and never saw the
difference between ugliness and beauty absolute, decency and indecency
absolute, glory or shame absolute, and folly or sense absolute.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

Whereas, the perception of beauty, and the power of defining physical
character, are based on moral instinct, and on the power of defining animal
or human character. Nor is it possible to say that one flower is more
highly developed, or one animal of a higher order, than another, without
the assumption of a divine law of perfection to which the one more conforms
than the other.

5. Thus, for instance. That it should ever have been an open question with
me whether a poppy had always {90} two of its petals less than the other
two, depended wholly on the hurry and imperfection with which the poppy
carries out its plan. It never would have occurred to me to {91} doubt
whether an iris had three of its leaves smaller than the other three,
because an iris always completes itself to its own ideal. Nevertheless, on
examining various poppies, as I have walked, this summer, up and down the
hills between Sheffield and Wakefield, I find the subordination of the
upper and lower petals entirely necessary and normal; and that the result
of it is to give two distinct profiles to the poppy cup, the difference
between which, however, we shall see better in the yellow Welsh poppy, at
present called Meconopsis Cambrica; but which, in the Oxford schools, will
be 'Papaver cruciforme'--'Crosslet Poppy,'--first, because all our
botanical names must be in Latin if possible; Greek only allowed when we
can do no better; secondly, because meconopsis is barbarous Greek; thirdly,
and chiefly, because it is little matter whether this poppy be Welsh or
English; but very needful that we should observe, wherever it grows, that
the petals are arranged in what used to be, in my young days, called a
diamond shape,[26] as at A, Fig. 10, the two narrow inner ones at right
angles to, and projecting farther than, the two outside broad ones; and
that the two broad ones, when the flower is seen in profile, as at B, show
their margins folded back, as indicated by the thicker lines, and have a
profile curve, which is only the softening, or melting away into each
other, of two straight lines. Indeed, when the flower is younger, and quite
strong, both its {92} profiles, A and B, Fig. 11, are nearly
straight-sided; and always, be it young or old, one broader than the other,
so as to give the flower, seen from above, the shape of a contracted cross,
or crosslet.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

6. Now I find no notice of this flower in Gerarde; and in Sowerby, out of
eighteen lines of closely printed descriptive text, no notice of its
crosslet form, while the petals are only stated to be "roundish-concave,"
terms equally applicable to at least one-half of all flower petals in the
{93} world. The leaves are _said_ to be very deeply pinnately partite; but
_drawn_--as neither pinnate nor partite!

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

And this is your modern cheap science, in ten volumes. Now I haven't a
quiet moment to spare for drawing this morning; but I merely give the main
relations of the petals, A, and blot in the wrinkles of one of the lower
ones, B, Fig. 12; and yet in this rude sketch you will feel, I believe,
there is something specific which could not belong to any other flower. But
all proper description is {94} impossible without careful profiles of each
petal laterally and across it. Which I may not find time to draw for any
poppy whatever, because they none of them have well-becomingness enough to
make it worth my while, being all more or less weedy, and ungracious, and
mingled of good and evil. Whereupon rises before me, ghostly and untenable,
the general question, 'What is a weed?' and, impatient for answer, the
particular question, What is a poppy? I choose, for instance, to call this
yellow flower a poppy, instead of a "likeness to poppy," which the
botanists meant to call it, in their bad Greek. I choose also to call a
poppy, what the botanists have called "glaucous thing," (glaucium). But
where and when shall I stop calling things poppies? This is certainly a
question to be settled at once, with others appertaining to it.

7. In the first place, then, I mean to call every flower either one thing
or another, and not an 'aceous' thing, only half something or half another.
I mean to call this plant now in my hand, either a poppy or not a poppy;
but not poppaceous. And this other, either a thistle or not a thistle; but
not thistlaceous. And this other, either a nettle or not a nettle; but not
nettlaceous. I know it will be very difficult to carry out this principle
when tribes of plants are much extended and varied in type: I shall persist
in it, however, as far as possible; and when plants change so much that one
cannot with any conscience call them by their family name any more, I shall
put them aside somewhere among families of poor relations, not {95} to be
minded for the present, until we are well acquainted with the better bred
circles; I don't know, for instance, whether I shall call the Burnet
'Grass-rose,' or put it out of court for having no petals; but it certainly
shall not be called rosaceous; and my first point will be to make sure of
my pupils having a clear idea of the central and unquestionable forms of
thistle, grass, or rose, and assigning to them pure Latin, and pretty
English, names,--classical, if possible; and at least intelligible and
decorous.

8. I return to our present special question, then, What is a poppy? and
return also to a book I gave away long ago, and have just begged back
again, Dr. Lindley's 'Ladies' Botany.' For without at all looking upon
ladies as inferior beings, I dimly hope that what Dr. Lindley considers
likely to be intelligible to _them_, may be also clear to their very humble
servant.

The poppies, I find, (page 19, vol. i.) differ from crowfeet in being of a
stupifying instead of a burning nature, and in generally having two sepals
and twice two petals; "but as some poppies have three sepals, and twice
three petals, the number of these parts is not sufficiently constant to
form an essential mark." Yes, I know that, for I found a superb six-petaled
poppy, spotted like a cistus, the other day in a friend's garden. But then,
what makes it a poppy still? That it is of a stupifying nature, and itself
so stupid that it does not know how many petals it should have, is surely
not enough distinction?

9. Returning to Lindley, and working the matter {96} farther out with his
help, I think this definition might stand. "A poppy is a flower which has
either four or six petals, and two or more treasuries, united into one;
containing a milky, stupifying fluid in its stalks and leaves, and always
throwing away its calyx when it blossoms."

And indeed, every flower which unites all these characters, we shall, in
the Oxford schools, call 'poppy,' and 'Papaver;' but when I get fairly into
work, I hope to fix my definitions into more strict terms. For I wish all
my pupils to form the habit of asking, of every plant, these following four
questions, in order, corresponding to the subject of these opening
chapters, namely, "What root has it? what leaf? what flower? and what
stem?" And, in this definition of poppies, nothing whatever is said about
the root; and not only I don't know myself what a poppy root is like, but
in all Sowerby's poppy section, I find no word whatever about that matter.

10. Leaving, however, for the present, the root unthought of, and
contenting myself with Dr. Lindley's characteristics, I shall place, at the
head of the whole group, our common European wild poppy, Papaver Rhoeas,
and, with this, arrange the nine following other flowers thus,--opposite.

I must be content at present with determining the Latin names for the
Oxford schools; the English ones I shall give as they chance to occur to
me, in Gerarde and the classical poets who wrote before the English
revolution. When no satisfactory name is to be found, I must try to invent
one; as, for instance, just now, I don't like Gerarde's 'Corn-rose' for
Papaver Rhoeas, and must coin another; but this can't be done by thinking;
it will come into my head some day, by chance. I might try at it
straightforwardly for a week together, and not do it.

{97}

  NAME IN OXFORD CATALOGUE.  DIOSCORIDES.         In present Botany.
   1. Papaver Rhoeas     [Greek: mêkôn rhoias]       Papaver Rhoeas
   2. P. Hortense        [Greek: m. kêpeutê][27]     P. Hortense
   3. P. Elatum          [Greek: m. thulakitis][28]  P. Lamottei
   4. P. Argemone                                    P. Argemone
   5. P. Echinosum                                   P. Hybridum
   6. P. Violaceum                                   Roemeria Hybrida
   7. P. Cruciforme                                  Meconopsis Cambrica
   8. P. Corniculatum    [Greek: m. keratitis]       Glaucium Corniculatum
   9. P. Littorale       [Greek: m. paralios]        Glaucium Luteum
  10. P. Chelidonium                                 Chelidonium Majus

{98} The Latin names must be fixed at once, somehow; and therefore I do the
best I can, keeping as much respect for the old nomenclature as possible,
though this involves the illogical practice of giving the epithet sometimes
from the flower, (violaceum, cruciforme), and sometimes from the seed
vessel, (elatum, echinosum, corniculatum). Guarding this distinction,
however, we may perhaps be content to call the six last of the group, in
English, Urchin Poppy, Violet Poppy, Crosslet Poppy, Horned Poppy, Beach
Poppy, and Welcome Poppy. I don't think the last flower pretty enough to be
connected more directly with the swallow, in its English name.

11. I shall be well content if my pupils know these ten poppies rightly;
all of them at present wild in our own country, and, I believe, also
European in range: the head and type of all being the common wild poppy of
our cornfields for which the name 'Papaver Rhoeas,' given it by
Dioscorides, Gerarde, and Linnæus, is entirely authoritative, and we will
therefore at once examine the meaning, and reason, of that name.

12. Dioscorides says the name belongs to it "[Greek: dia to tacheôs to
anthos apoballein]," "because it casts off its bloom {99} quickly," from
[Greek: rheô,] (rheo) in the sense of shedding.[29] And this indeed it
does,--first calyx, then corolla;--you may translate it 'swiftly ruinous'
poppy, but notice, in connection with this idea, how it droops its head
_before_ blooming; an action which, I doubt not, mingled in Homer's thought
with the image of its depression when filled by rain, in the passage of the
Iliad, which, as I have relieved your memory of three unnecessary names of
poppy families, you have memory to spare for learning.

 "[Greek: mêkôn d' hôs heterôse karê balen, hêt' eni kêpôi]
  [Greek: karpôi brithomenê, notiêisi te eiarinêisin]
  [Greek: hôs heterôs' êmuse karê pêlêki barunthen.]"

"And as a poppy lets its head fall aside, which in a garden is loaded with
its fruit, and with the soft rains of spring, so the youth drooped his head
on one side; burdened with the helmet."

And now you shall compare the translations of this passage, with its
context, by Chapman and Pope--(or the school of Pope), the one being by a
man of pure English temper, and able therefore to understand pure Greek
temper; the other infected with all the faults of the falsely classical
school of the Renaissance.

First I take Chapman:--

 "His shaft smit fair Gorgythion of Priam's princely race
  Who in Æpina was brought forth, a famous town in Thrace,
  {100}
  By Castianeira, that for form was like celestial breed.
  And as a crimson poppy-flower, surcharged with his seed,
  And vernal humours falling thick, declines his heavy brow,
  So, a-oneside, his helmet's weight his fainting head did bow."

Next, Pope:--

 "He missed the mark; but pierced Gorgythio's heart,
  And drenched in royal blood the thirsty dart:
  (Fair Castianeira, nymph of form divine,
  This offspring added to King Priam's line).
  As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,
  Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain,
  So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depressed
  Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast."

13. I give you the two passages in full, trusting that you may so feel the
becomingness of the one, and the gracelessness of the other. But note
farther, in the Homeric passage, one subtlety which cannot enough be marked
even in Chapman's English, that his second word, [Greek: êmuse], is
employed by him both of the stooping of ears of corn, under wind, and of
Troy stooping to its ruin;[30] and otherwise, in good Greek writers, the
word is marked as having such specific sense of men's drooping under
weight; or towards death, under the burden of fortune which they have no
more strength to sustain;[31] compare the passage {101} I quoted from
Plato, ('Crown of Wild Olive,' p. 95): "And bore lightly the burden of gold
and of possessions." {102} And thus you will begin to understand how the
poppy became in the heathen mind the type at once of power, or pride, and
of its loss; and therefore, both why Virgil represents the white nymph
Nais, "pallentes violas, et summa papavera carpens,"--gathering the pale
flags, and the highest poppies,--and the reason for the choice of this
rather than any other flower, in the story of Tarquin's message to his son.

14. But you are next to remember the word Rhoeas in another sense. Whether
originally intended or afterwards caught at, the resemblance of the word to
'Rhoea,' a pomegranate, mentally connects itself with the resemblance of
the poppy head to the pomegranate fruit.

And if I allow this flower to be the first we take up for careful study in
Proserpina, on account of its simplicity of form and splendour of colour, I
wish you also to remember, in connection with it, the cause of Proserpine's
eternal captivity--her having tasted a pomegranate seed,--the pomegranate
being in Greek mythology what the apple is in the Mosaic legend; and, in
the whole {103} worship of Demeter, associated with the poppy by a
multitude of ideas which are not definitely expressed, but can only be
gathered out of Greek art and literature, as we learn their symbolism. The
chief character on which these thoughts are founded is the fulness of seed
in the poppy and pomegranate, as an image of life: then the forms of both
became adopted for beads or bosses in ornamental art; the pomegranate
remains more distinctly a Jewish and Christian type, from its use in the
border of Aaron's robe, down to the fruit in the hand of Angelico's and
Botticelli's Infant Christs; while the poppy is gradually confused by the
Byzantine Greeks with grapes; and both of these with palm fruit. The palm,
in the shorthand of their art, gradually becomes a symmetrical branched
ornament with two pendent bosses; this is again confused with the Greek
iris, (Homer's blue iris, and Pindar's water-flag,)--and the Florentines,
in adopting Byzantine ornament, read it into their own Fleur-de-lys; but
insert two poppyheads on each side of the entire foil, in their finest
heraldry.

15. Meantime the definitely intended poppy, in late Christian Greek art of
the twelfth century, modifies the form of the Acanthus leaf with its own,
until the northern twelfth century workman takes the thistle-head for the
poppy, and the thistle-leaf for acanthus. The true poppy-head remains in
the south, but gets more and more confused with grapes, till the
Renaissance carvers are content with any kind of boss full of seed, but
insist on such boss {104} or bursting globe as some essential part of their
ornament;--the bean-pod for the same reason (not without Pythagorean
notions, and some of republican election) is used by Brunelleschi for main
decoration of the lantern of Florence duomo; and, finally, the
ornamentation gets so shapeless, that M. Violet-le-Duc, in his 'Dictionary
of Ornament,' loses trace of its origin altogether, and fancies the later
forms were derived from the spadix of the arum.

16. I have no time to enter into farther details; but through all this vast
range of art, note this singular fact, that the wheat-ear, the vine, the
fleur-de-lys, the poppy, and the jagged leaf of the acanthus-weed, or
thistle, occupy the entire thoughts of the decorative workmen trained in
classic schools, to the exclusion of the rose, true lily, and the other
flowers of luxury. And that the deeply underlying reason of this is in the
relation of weeds to corn, or of the adverse powers of nature to the
beneficent ones, expressed for us readers of the Jewish scriptures,
centrally in the verse, "thorns also, and thistles, shall it bring forth to
thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field" ([Greek: chortos], grass or
corn), and exquisitely symbolized throughout the fields of Europe by the
presence of the purple 'corn-flag,' or gladiolus, and 'corn-rose'
(Gerarde's name for Papaver Rhoeas), in the midst of carelessly tended
corn; and in the traditions of the art of Europe by the springing of the
acanthus round the basket of the canephora, strictly the basket _for
bread_, the idea of bread {105} including all sacred things carried at the
feasts of Demeter, Bacchus, and the Queen of the Air. And this springing of
the thorny weeds round the basket of reed, distinctly taken up by the
Byzantine Italians in the basketwork capital of the twelfth century, (which
I have already illustrated at length in the 'Stones of Venice,') becomes
the germ of all capitals whatsoever, in the great schools of Gothic, to the
end of Gothic time, and also of all the capitals of the pure and noble
Renaissance architecture of Angelico and Perugino, and all that was learned
from them in the north, while the introduction of the rose, as a primal
element of decoration, only takes place when the luxury of English
decorated Gothic, the result of that licentious spirit in the lords which
brought on the Wars of the Roses, indicates the approach of destruction to
the feudal, artistic, and moral power of the northern nations.

For which reason, and many others, I must yet delay the following out of
our main subject, till I have answered the other question, which brought me
to pause in the middle of this chapter, namely, 'What is a weed?'

       *       *       *       *       *

{106}

CHAPTER VI.

THE PARABLE OF JOASH.

1. Some ten or twelve years ago, I bought--three times twelve are
thirty-six--of a delightful little book by Mrs. Gatty, called 'Aunt Judy's
Tales'--whereof to make presents to my little lady friends. I had, at that
happy time, perhaps from four-and-twenty to six-and-thirty--I forget
exactly how many--very particular little lady friends; and greatly wished
Aunt Judy to be the thirty-seventh,--the kindest, wittiest, prettiest girl
one had ever read of, at least in so entirely proper and orthodox
literature.

2. Not but that it is a suspicious sign of infirmity of faith in our modern
moralists to make their exemplary young people always pretty; and dress
them always in the height of the fashion. One may read Miss Edgeworth's
'Harry and Lucy,' 'Frank and Mary,' 'Fashionable Tales,' or 'Parents'
Assistant,' through, from end to end, with extremest care; and never find
out whether Lucy was tall or short, nor whether Mary was dark or fair, nor
how Miss Annaly was dressed, nor--which was my own chief point of
interest--what was the colour of {107} Rosamond's eyes. Whereas Aunt Judy,
in charming position after position, is shown to have expressed all her
pure evangelical principles with the prettiest of lips; and to have had her
gown, though puritanically plain, made by one of the best modistes in
London.

3. Nevertheless, the book is wholesome and useful; and the nicest story in
it, as far as I recollect, is an inquiry into the subject which is our
present business, 'What is a weed?'--in which, by many pleasant devices,
Aunt Judy leads her little brothers and sisters to discern that a weed is
'a plant in the wrong place.'

'Vegetable' in the wrong place, by the way, I think Aunt Judy says, being a
precisely scientific little aunt. But I can't keep it out of my own less
scientific head that 'vegetable' means only something going to be boiled. I
like 'plant' better for general sense, besides that it's shorter.

Whatever we call them, Aunt Judy is perfectly right about them as far as
she has gone; but, as happens often even to the best of evangelical
instructresses, she has stopped just short of the gist of the whole matter.
It is entirely true that a weed is a plant that has got into a wrong place;
but it never seems to have occurred to Aunt Judy that some plants never
_do_!

Who ever saw a wood anemone or a heath blossom in the wrong place? Who ever
saw nettle or hemlock in a right one? And yet, the difference between
flower and weed, (I use, for convenience sake, these words in their {108}
familiar opposition,) certainly does not consist merely in the flowers
being innocent, and the weed stinging and venomous. We do not call the
nightshade a weed in our hedges, nor the scarlet agaric in our woods. But
we do the corncockle in our fields.

4. Had the thoughtful little tutoress gone but one thought farther, and
instead of "a vegetable in a wrong place," (which it may happen to the
innocentest vegetable sometimes to be, without turning into a weed,
therefore,) said, "A vegetable which has an innate disposition to _get_
into the wrong place," she would have greatly furthered the matter for us;
but then she perhaps would have felt herself to be uncharitably dividing
with vegetables her own little evangelical property of original sin.

5. This, you will find, nevertheless, to be the very essence of weed
character--in plants, as in men. If you glance through your botanical
books, you will see often added certain names--'a troublesome weed.' It is
not its being venomous, or ugly, but its being impertinent--thrusting
itself where it has no business, and hinders other people's business--that
makes a weed of it. The most accursed of all vegetables, the one that has
destroyed for the present even the possibility of European civilization, is
only called a weed in the slang of its votaries;[32] but in the finest and
truest English we call so the plant which {109} has come to us by chance
from the same country, the type of mere senseless prolific activity, the
American water-plant, choking our streams till the very fish that leap out
of them cannot fall back, but die on the clogged surface; and indeed, for
this unrestrainable, unconquerable insolence of uselessness, what name can
be enough dishonourable?

6. I pass to vegetation of nobler rank.

You remember, I was obliged in the last chapter to leave my poppy, for the
present, without an English specific name, because I don't like Gerarde's
'Corn-rose,' and can't yet think of another. Nevertheless, I would have
used Gerarde's name, if the corn-rose were as much a rose as the corn-flag
is a flag. But it isn't. The rose and lily have quite different relations
to the corn. The lily is grass in loveliness, as the corn is grass in use;
and both grow together in peace--gladiolus in the wheat, and narcissus in
the pasture. But the rose is of another and higher order than the corn, and
you never saw a cornfield overrun with sweetbriar or apple-blossom.

They have no mind, they, to get into the wrong place.

What is it, then, this temper in some plants--malicious as it
seems--intrusive, at all events, or erring,--which brings them out of their
places--thrusts them where they thwart us and offend?

7. Primarily, it is mere hardihood and coarseness of make. A plant that can
live anywhere, will often live where it is not wanted. But the delicate and
tender ones {110} keep at home. You have no trouble in 'keeping down' the
spring gentian. It rejoices in its own Alpine home, and makes the earth as
like heaven as it can, but yields as softly as the air, if you want it to
give place. Here in England, it will only grow on the loneliest moors,
above the high force of Tees; its Latin name, for _us_ (I may as well tell
you at once) is to be 'Lucia verna;' and its English one, Lucy of Teesdale.

8. But a plant may be hardy, and coarse of make, and able to live anywhere,
and yet be no weed. The coltsfoot, so far as I know, is the first of
large-leaved plants to grow afresh on ground that has been disturbed: fall
of Alpine débris, ruin of railroad embankment, waste of drifted slime by
flood, it seeks to heal and redeem; but it does not offend us in our
gardens, nor impoverish us in our fields.

Nevertheless, mere coarseness of structure, indiscriminate hardihood, is at
least a point of some unworthiness in a plant. That it should have no
choice of home, no love of native land, is ungentle; much more if such
discrimination as it has, be immodest, and incline it, seemingly, to open
and much-traversed places, where it may be continually seen of strangers.
The tormentilla gleams in showers along the mountain turf; her delicate
crosslets are separate, though constellate, as the rubied daisy. But the
king-cup--(blessing be upon it always no less)--crowds itself sometimes
into too burnished flame of inevitable gold. I don't know if there was
anything in the {111} darkness of this last spring to make it brighter in
resistance; but I never saw any spaces of full warm yellow, in natural
colour, so intense as the meadows between Reading and the Thames; nor did I
know perfectly what purple and gold meant, till I saw a field of park land
embroidered a foot deep with king-cup and clover--while I was correcting my
last notes on the spring colours of the Royal Academy--at Aylesbury.

9. And there are two other questions of extreme subtlety connected with
this main one. What shall we say of the plants whose entire destiny is
parasitic--which are not only sometimes, and _im_pertinently, but always,
and pertinently, out of place; not only out of the right place, but out of
any place of their own? When is mistletoe, for instance, in the right
place, young ladies, think you? On an apple tree, or on a ceiling? When is
ivy in the right place?--when wallflower? The ivy has been torn down from
the towers of Kenilworth; the weeds from the arches of the Coliseum, and
from the steps of the Araceli, irreverently, vilely, and in vain; but how
are we to separate the creatures whose office it is to abate the grief of
ruin by their gentleness,

         "wafting wallflower scents
  From out the crumbling ruins of fallen pride,
  And chambers of transgression, now forlorn,"

from those which truly resist the toil of men, and conspire against their
fame; which are cunning to consume, and {112} prolific to encumber; and of
whose perverse and unwelcome sowing we know, and can say assuredly, "An
enemy hath done this."

10. Again. The character of strength which gives prevalence over others to
any common plant, is more or less consistently dependent on woody fibre in
the leaves; giving them strong ribs and great expanding extent; or spinous
edges, and wrinkled or gathered extent.

Get clearly into your mind the nature of those two conditions. When a leaf
is to be spread wide, like the Burdock, it is supported by a framework of
extending ribs like a Gothic roof. The supporting function of these is
geometrical; every one is constructed like the girders of a bridge, or
beams of a floor, with all manner of science in the distribution of their
substance in the section, for narrow and deep strength; and the shafts are
mostly hollow. But when the extending space of a leaf is to be enriched
with fulness of folds, and become beautiful in wrinkles, this may be done
either by pure undulation as of a liquid current along the leaf edge, or by
sharp 'drawing'--or 'gathering' I believe ladies would call it--and
stitching of the edges together. And this stitching together, if to be done
very strongly, is done round a bit of stick, as a sail is reefed round a
mast; and this bit of stick needs to be compactly, not geometrically
strong; its function is essentially that of starch,--not to hold the leaf
up off the ground against gravity; but to stick the edges out, stiffly, in
a crimped frill. And in beautiful work of {113} this kind, which we are
meant to study, the stays of the leaf--or stay-bones--are finished off very
sharply and exquisitely at the points; and indeed so much so, that they
prick our fingers when we touch them; for they are not at all meant to be
touched, but admired.

11. To be admired,--with qualification, indeed, always, but with extreme
respect for their endurance and orderliness. Among flowers that pass away,
and leaves that shake as with ague, or shrink like bad cloth,--these, in
their sturdy growth and enduring life, we are bound to honour; and, under
the green holly, remember how much softer friendship was failing, and how
much of other loving, folly. And yet--you are not to confuse the thistle
with the cedar that is in Lebanon; nor to forget--if the spinous nature of
it become too cruel to provoke and offend--the parable of Joash to Amaziah,
and its fulfilment: "There passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and
trode down the thistle."

12. Then, lastly, if this rudeness and insensitiveness of nature be gifted
with no redeeming beauty; if the boss of the thistle lose its purple, and
the star of the Lion's tooth, its light; and, much more, if service be
perverted as beauty is lost, and the honied tube, and medicinal leaf,
change into mere swollen emptiness, and salt brown membrane, swayed in
nerveless languor by the idle sea,--at last the separation between the two
natures is as great as between the fruitful earth and fruitless ocean; and
between the living hands that tend the Garden of Herbs where {114} Love is,
and those unclasped, that toss with tangle and with shells.

       *       *       *       *       *

13. I had a long bit in my head, that I wanted to write, about St. George
of the Seaweed, but I've no time to do it; and those few words of
Tennyson's are enough, if one thinks of them: only I see, in correcting
press, that I've partly misapplied the idea of 'gathering' in the leaf
edge. It would be more accurate to say it was gathered at the central rib;
but there is nothing in needlework that will represent the actual excess by
lateral growth at the edge, giving three or four inches of edge for one of
centre. But the stiffening of the fold by the thorn which holds it out is
very like the action of a ship's spars on its sails; and absolutely in many
cases like that of the spines in a fish's fin, passing into the various
conditions of serpentine and dracontic crest, connected with all the
terrors and adversities of nature; not to be dealt with in a chapter on
weeds.

14. Here is a sketch of a crested leaf of less adverse temper, which may as
well be given, together with Plate III., in this number, these two
engravings being meant for examples of two different methods of drawing,
both useful according to character of subject. Plate III. is sketched first
with a finely-pointed pen, and common ink, on white paper; then washed
rapidly with colour, and retouched with the pen to give sharpness and
completion. {115} This method is used because the thistle leaves are full
of complex and sharp sinuosities, and set with intensely sharp spines
passing into hairs, which require many kinds of execution with the fine
point to imitate at all. In the drawing there was more look of the bloom or
woolliness on the stems, but it was useless to try for this in the
mezzotint, and I desired Mr. Allen to leave his work at the stage where it
expressed as much form as I wanted. The leaves are of the common marsh
thistle, of which more anon; and the two long lateral ones are only two
different views of the same leaf, while the central figure is a young leaf
just opening. It beat me, in its delicate bossing, and I had to leave it,
discontentedly enough.

Plate IV. is much better work, being of an easier subject, adequately
enough rendered by perfectly simple means. Here I had only a succulent and
membranous surface to represent, with definite outlines, and merely
undulating folds; and this is sufficiently done by a careful and firm pen
outline on grey paper, with a slight wash of colour afterwards, reinforced
in the darks; then marking the lights with white. This method is classic
and authoritative, being used by many of the greatest masters, (by Holbein
continually;) and it is much the best which the general student can adopt
for expression of the action and muscular power of plants.

The goodness or badness of such work depends absolutely on the truth of the
single line. You will find a thousand botanical drawings which will give
you a {116} delicate and deceptive resemblance of the leaf, for one that
will give you the right convexity in its backbone, the right perspective of
its peaks when they foreshorten, or the right relation of depth in the
shading of its dimples. On which, in leaves as in faces, no little
expression of temper depends.

Meantime we have yet to consider somewhat more touching that temper itself,
in next chapter.

       *       *       *       *       *

{117}

CHAPTER VII.

THE PARABLE OF JOTHAM.

1. I do not know if my readers were checked, as I wished them to be, at
least for a moment, in the close of the last chapter, by my talking of
thistles and dandelions changing into seaweed, by gradation of which,
doubtless, Mr. Darwin can furnish us with specious and sufficient
instances. But the two groups will not be contemplated in our Oxford system
as in any parental relations whatsoever.

We shall, however, find some very notable relations existing between the
two groups of the wild flowers of dry land, which represent, in the widest
extent, and the distinctest opposition, the two characters of material
serviceableness and unserviceableness; the groups which in our English
classification will be easily remembered as those of the Thyme, and the
Daisy.

The one, scented as with incense--medicinal--and in all gentle and humble
ways, useful. The other, scentless--helpless for ministry to the body;
infinitely dear as the bringer of light, ruby, white and gold; the three
colours of the Day, with no hue of shade in it. Therefore I {118} take it
on the coins of St. George for the symbol of the splendour or light of
heaven, which is dearest where humblest.

2. Now these great two orders--of which the types are the thyme and the
daisy--you are to remember generally as the 'Herbs' and the 'Sunflowers.'
You are not to call them Lipped flowers, nor Composed flowers; because the
first is a vulgar term; for when you once come to be able to draw a lip,
or, in noble duty, to kiss one, you will know that no other flower in earth
is like that: and the second is an indefinite term; for a foxglove is as
much a 'composed' flower as a daisy; but it is composed in the shape of a
spire, instead of the shape of the sun. And again a thistle, which common
botany calls a composed flower, as well as a daisy, is composed in quite
another shape, being on the whole, bossy instead of flat; and of another
temper, or composition of mind, also, being connected in that respect with
butterburs, and a vast company of rough, knotty, half-black or brown, and
generally unluminous--flowers I can scarcely call them--and weeds I will
not,--creatures, at all events, in nowise to be gathered under the general
name 'Composed,' with the stars that crown Chaucer's Alcestis, when she
returns to the day from the dead.

But the wilder and stronger blossoms of the Hawk's-eye--again you see I
refuse for them the word weed;--and the waste-loving Chicory, which the
Venetians call "Sponsa solis," are all to be held in one class with the
{119} Sunflowers; but dedicate,--the daisy to Alcestis alone; others to
Clytia, or the Physician Apollo himself: but I can't follow their mythology
yet awhile.

3. Now in these two families you have typically Use opposed to Beauty in
_wildness_; it is their wildness which is their virtue;--that the thyme is
sweet where it is unthought of, and the daisies red, where the foot
despises them: while, in other orders, wildness is their
crime,--"Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes?" But in all of them you must distinguish
between the pure wildness of flowers and their distress. It may not be our
duty to tame them; but it must be, to relieve.

4. It chanced, as I was arranging the course of these two chapters, that I
had examples given me of distressed and happy wildness, in immediate
contrast. The first, I grieve to say, was in a bit of my own brushwood,
left uncared-for evidently many a year before it became mine. I had to cut
my way into it through a mass of thorny ruin; black, birds-nest like,
entanglement of brittle spray round twisted stems of ill-grown birches
strangling each other, and changing half into roots among the rock clefts;
knotted stumps of never-blossoming blackthorn, and choked stragglings of
holly, all laced and twisted and tethered round with an untouchable, almost
unhewable, thatch, a foot thick, of dead bramble and rose, laid over rotten
ground through which the water soaked ceaselessly, undermining it into
merely unctuous {120} clods and clots, knitted together by mossy sponge. It
was all Nature's free doing! she had had her way with it to the uttermost;
and clearly needed human help and interference in her business; and yet
there was not one plant in the whole ruinous and deathful riot of the
place, whose nature was not in itself wholesome and lovely; but all lost
for want of discipline.

5. The other piece of wild growth was among the fallen blocks of limestone
under Malham Cove. Sheltered by the cliff above from stress of wind, the
ash and hazel wood spring there in a fair and perfect freedom, without a
diseased bough, or an unwholesome shade. I do not know why mine is all
encumbered with overgrowth, and this so lovely that scarce a branch could
be gathered but with injury;--while underneath, the oxalis, and the two
smallest geraniums (Lucidum and Herb-Robert) and the mossy saxifrage, and
the cross-leaved bed-straw, and the white pansy, wrought themselves into
wreaths among the fallen crags, in which every leaf rejoiced, and was at
rest.

6. Now between these two states of equally natural growth, the point of
difference that forced itself on me (and practically enough, in the work I
had in my own wood), was not so much the withering and waste of the one,
and the life of the other, as the thorniness and cruelty of the one, and
the softness of the other. In Malham Cove, the stones of the brook were
softer with moss than any silken pillow--the crowded oxalis leaves yielded
to the pressure of the hand, and were not felt--the cloven {121} leaves of
the Herb-Robert and orbed clusters of its companion overflowed every rent
in the rude crags with living balm; there was scarcely a place left by the
tenderness of the happy things, where one might not lay down one's forehead
on their warm softness, and sleep. But in the waste and distressed ground,
the distress had changed itself to cruelty. The leaves had all perished,
and the bending saplings, and the wood of trust;--but the thorns were
there, immortal, and the gnarled and sapless roots, and the dusty
treacheries of decay.

7. Of which things you will find it good to consider also otherwise than
botanically. For all these lower organisms suffer and perish, or are
gladdened and flourish, under conditions which are in utter precision
symbolical, and in utter fidelity representative, of the conditions which
induce adversity and prosperity in the kingdoms of men: and the Eternal
Demeter,--Mother, and Judge,--brings forth, as the herb yielding seed, so
also the thorn and the thistle, not to herself, but _to thee_.

8. You have read the words of the great Law often enough;--have you ever
thought enough of them to know the difference between these two appointed
means of Distress? The first, the Thorn, is the type of distress _caused by
crime_, changing the soft and breathing leaf into inflexible and wounding
stubbornness. The second is the distress appointed to be the means and
herald of good,--Thou shalt see the stubborn thistle bursting, into glossy
purple, which outredden, all voluptuous garden roses. {122}

9. It is strange that, after much hunting, I cannot find authentic note of
the day when Scotland took the thistle for her emblem; and I have no space
(in this chapter at least) for tradition; but, with whatever lightness of
construing we may receive the symbol, it is actually the truest that could
have been found, for some conditions of the Scottish mind. There is no
flower which the Proserpina of our Northern Sicily cherishes more dearly:
and scarcely any of us recognize enough the beautiful power of its
close-set stars, and rooted radiance of ground leaves; yet the stubbornness
and ungraceful rectitude of its stem, and the besetting of its wholesome
substance with that fringe of offence, and the forwardness of it, and
dominance,--I fear to lacess some of my dearest friends if I went on:--let
them rather, with Bailie Jarvie's true conscience,[33] take their Scott
from the inner shelf in their heart's library which all true Scotsmen give
him, and trace, with the swift reading of memory, the characters of Fergus
M'Ivor, Hector M'Intyre, Mause Headrigg, Alison Wilson, Richie {123}
Moniplies, and Andrew Fairservice; and then say, if the faults of all
these, drawn as they are with a precision of touch like a Corinthian
sculptor's of the acanthus leaf, can be found in anything like the same
strength in other races, or if so stubbornly folded and starched moni-plies
of irritating kindliness, selfish friendliness, lowly conceit, and
intolerable fidelity, are native to any other spot of the wild earth of the
habitable globe.

10. Will you note also--for this is of extreme interest--that these
essential faults are all mean faults;--what we may call ground-growing
faults; conditions of semi-education, of hardly-treated homelife, or of
coarsely-minded and wandering prosperity. How literally may we go back from
the living soul symbolized, to the strangely accurate earthly symbol, in
the prickly weed. For if, with its bravery of endurance, and carelessness
in choice of home, we find also definite faculty and habit of migration,
volant mechanism for choiceless journey, not divinely directed in
pilgrimage to known shrines; but carried at the wind's will by a Spirit
which listeth _not_--it will go hard but that the plant shall become, if
not dreaded, at least despised; and, in its wandering and reckless
splendour, disgrace the garden of the sluggard, and possess the inheritance
of the prodigal: until even its own nature seems contrary to good, and the
invocation of the just man be made to it as the executor of Judgment, "Let
thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley."

11. Yet to be despised--either for men or flowers--may {124} be no
ill-fortune; the real ill-fortune is only to be despicable. These faults of
human character, wherever found, observe, belong to it as
ill-trained--incomplete; confirm themselves only in the vulgar. There is no
base pertinacity, no overweening conceit, in the Black Douglas, or
Claverhouse, or Montrose; in these we find the pure Scottish temper, of
heroic endurance and royal pride; but, when, in the pay, and not deceived,
but purchased, idolatry of Mammon, the Scottish persistence and pride
become knit and vested in the spleuchan, and your stiff Covenanter makes
his covenant with Death, and your Old Mortality deciphers only the
senseless legends of the eternal gravestone,--you get your weed,
earth-grown, in bitter verity, and earth-devastating, in bitter strength.

12. I have told you, elsewhere, we are always first to study national
character in the highest and purest examples. But if our knowledge is to be
complete, we have to study also the special diseases of national character.
And in exact opposition to the most solemn virtue of Scotland, the domestic
truth and tenderness breathed in all Scottish song, you have this special
disease and mortal cancer, this woody-fibriness, literally, of temper and
thought: the consummation of which into pure lignite, or rather black
Devil's charcoal--the sap of the birks of Aberfeldy become cinder, and the
blessed juices of them, deadly gas,--you may know in its pure blackness
best in the work of the greatest of these ground-growing Scotchmen, Adam
Smith. {125}

13. No man of like capacity, I believe, born of any other nation, could
have deliberately, and with no momentary shadow of suspicion or question,
formalized the spinous and monstrous fallacy that human commerce and policy
are _naturally_ founded on the desire of every man to possess his
neighbour's goods.

_This_ is the 'release unto us Barabbas,' with a witness; and the
deliberate systematization of that cry, and choice, for perpetual
repetition and fulfilment in Christian statesmanship, has been, with the
strange precision of natural symbolism and retribution, signed, (as of old,
by strewing of ashes on Kidron,) by strewing of ashes on the brooks of
Scotland; waters once of life, health, music, and divine tradition; but to
whose festering scum you may now set fire with a candle; and of which,
round the once excelling palace of Scotland, modern sanitary science is now
helplessly contending with the poisonous exhalations.

14. I gave this chapter its heading, because I had it in my mind to work
out the meaning of the fable in the ninth chapter of Judges, from what I
had seen on that thorny ground of mine, where the bramble was king over all
the trees of the wood. But the thoughts are gone from me now; and as I
re-read the chapter of Judges,--now, except in my memory, unread, as it
chances, for many a year,--the sadness of that story of Gideon fastens on
me, and silences me. _This_ the end of his angel visions, and dream-led
victories, the slaughter of all his {126} sons but this youngest,[34]--and
he never again heard of in Israel!

You Scottish children of the Rock, taught through all your once pastoral
and noble lives by many a sweet miracle of dew on fleece and ground,--once
servants of mighty kings, and keepers of sacred covenant; have you indeed
dealt truly with your warrior kings, and prophet saints, or are these ruins
of their homes, and shrines, dark with the fire that fell from the curse of
Jerubbael?

       *       *       *       *       *

{127}

CHAPTER VIII.

THE STEM.

1. As I read over again, with a fresh mind, the last chapter, I am struck
by the opposition of states which seem best to fit a weed for a weed's
work,--stubbornness, namely, and flaccidity. On the one hand, a sternness
and a coarseness of structure which changes its stem into a stake, and its
leaf into a spine; on the other, an utter flaccidity and ventosity of
structure, which changes its stem into a riband, and its leaf into a
bubble. And before we go farther--for we are not yet at the end of our
study of these obnoxious things--we had better complete an examination of
the parts of a plant in general, by ascertaining what a Stem proper is; and
what makes it stiffer, or hollower, than we like it;--how, to wit, the
gracious and generous strength of ash differs from the spinous obstinacy of
blackthorn,--and how the geometric and enduring hollowness of a stalk of
wheat differs from the soft fulness of that of a mushroom. To which end, I
will take up a piece of study, not of black, but white, thorn, written last
spring. {128}

2. I suppose there is no question but that all nice people like hawthorn
blossom.

I want, if I can, to find out to-day, 25th May, 1875, what it is we like it
so much for: holding these two branches of it in my hand--one full out, the
other in youth. This full one is a mere mass of symmetrically
balanced--snow, one was going vaguely to write, in the first impulse. But
it is nothing of the sort. White,--yes, in a high degree; and pure,
totally; but not at all dazzling in the white, nor pure in an insultingly
rivalless manner, as snow would be; yet pure somehow, certainly; and white,
absolutely, in spite of what might be thought failure,--imperfection--nay,
even distress and loss in it. For every little rose of it has a green
darkness in the centre--not even a pretty green, but a faded, yellowish,
glutinous, unaccomplished green; and round that, all over the surface of
the blossom, whose shell-like petals are themselves deep sunk, with grey
shadows in the hollows of them--all above this already subdued brightness,
are strewn the dark points of the dead stamens--manifest more and more, the
longer one looks, as a kind of grey sand, sprinkled without sparing over
what looked at first unspotted light. And in all the ways of it the lovely
thing is more like the spring frock of some prudent little maid of
fourteen, than a flower;--frock with some little spotty pattern on it to
keep it from showing an unintended and inadvertent spot,--if Fate should
ever inflict such a thing! Undeveloped, thinks Mr. Darwin,--the poor {129}
short-coming, ill-blanched thorn blossom--going to be a Rose, some day
soon; and, what next?--who knows?--perhaps a Pæony!

3. Then this next branch, in dawn and delight of youth, set with opening
clusters of yet numerable blossom, four, and five, and seven, edged, and
islanded, and ended, by the sharp leaves of freshest green, deepened under
the flowers, and studded round with bosses, better than pearl beads of St.
Agnes' rosary,--folded, over and over, with the edges of their little
leaves pouting, as the very softest waves do on flat sand where one meets
another; then opening just enough to show the violet colour within--which
yet isn't violet colour, nor even "meno che le rose," but a different
colour from every other lilac that one ever saw;--faint and faded even
before it sees light, as the filmy cup opens over the depth of it, then
broken into purple motes of tired bloom, fading into darkness, as the cup
extends into the perfect rose.

This, with all its sweet change that one would so fain stay, and soft
effulgence of bud into softly falling flower, one has watched--how often;
but always with the feeling that the blossoms are thrown over the green
depth like white clouds--never with any idea of so much as asking what
holds the cloud there. Have each of the innumerable blossoms a separate
stalk? and, if so, how is it that one never thinks of the stalk, as one
does with currants?

4. Turn the side of the branch to you;--Nature never meant you to see it
so; but now it is all stalk below, and {130} stamens above,--the petals
nothing, the stalks all tiny trees, always dividing their branches mainly
into three--one in the centre short, and the two lateral, long, with an
intermediate extremely long one, if needed, to fill a gap, so contriving
that the flowers shall all be nearly at the same level, or at least surface
of ball, like a guelder rose. But the cunning with which the tree conceals
its structure till the blossom is fallen, and then--for a little while, we
had best look no more at it, for it is all like grape-stalks with no
grapes.

These, whether carrying hawthorn blossom and haw, or grape blossom and
grape, or peach blossom and peach, you will simply call the 'stalk,'
whether of flower or fruit. A 'stalk' is essentially round, like a pillar;
and has, for the most part, the power of first developing, and then shaking
off, flower and fruit from its extremities. You can pull the peach from its
stalk, the cherry, the grape. Always at some time of its existence, the
flower-stalk lets fall something of what it sustained, petal or seed.

In late Latin it is called 'petiolus,' the little foot; because the
expanding piece that holds the grape, or olive, is a little like an
animal's foot. Modern botanists have misapplied the word to the
_leaf_-stalk, which has no resemblance to a foot at all. We must keep the
word to its proper meaning, and, when we want to write Latin, call it
'petiolus;' when we want to write English, call it 'stalk,' meaning always
fruit or flower stalk. {131}

I cannot find when the word 'stalk' first appears in English:--its
derivation will be given presently.

5. Gather next a hawthorn leaf. That also has a stalk; but you can't shake
the leaf off it. It, and the leaf, are essentially one; for the sustaining
fibre runs up into every ripple or jag of the leaf's edge: and its section
is different from that of the flower-stalk; it is no more round, but has an
upper and under surface, quite different from each other. It will be
better, however, to take a larger leaf to examine this structure in.
Cabbage, cauliflower, or rhubarb, would any of them be good, but don't grow
wild in the luxuriance I want. So, if you please, we will take a leaf of
burdock, (Arctium Lappa,) the principal business of that plant being
clearly to grow leaves wherewith to adorn fore-grounds.[35]

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

6. The outline of it in Sowerby is not an intelligent one, and I have not
time to draw it but in the rudest way myself; Fig. 13, _a_; with
perspectives of the elementary form below, _b_, _c_, and d. By help of
which, if you will construct a burdock leaf in paper, my rude outline (_a_)
may tell the rest of what I want you to see.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

Take a sheet of stout note paper, Fig. 14, A, double it sharply down the
centre, by the dotted line, then give it the two cuts at _a_ and _b_, and
double those pieces sharply back, as at B; then, opening them again, cut
the whole {132} into the form C; and then, pulling up the corners _c d_,
stitch them together with a loose thread so that the points _c_ and _d_
shall be within half an inch of each other; and you will have a kind of
triangular scoop, or shovel, with a stem, by which you can sufficiently
hold it, D.

7. And from this easily constructed and tenable model, you may learn at
once these following main facts about all leaves. {133}

[I.] That they are not flat, but, however slightly, always hollowed into
craters, or raised into hills, in one or another direction; so that any
drawable outline of them does not in the least represent the real extent of
their surfaces; and until you know how to draw a cup, or a mountain,
rightly, you have no chance of drawing a leaf. My simple artist readers of
long ago, when I told them to draw leaves, thought they could do them by
the boughfull, whenever they liked. Alas, except by old William Hunt, and
Burne Jones, I've not seen a leaf painted, since those burdocks of
Turner's; far less sculptured--though one would think at first that was
easier! Of which we shall have talk elsewhere; here I must go on to note
fact number two, concerning leaves.

{134}

8. [II.] The strength of their supporting stem consists not merely in the
gathering together of all the fibres, but in gathering them essentially
into the profile of the letter V, which you will see your doubled paper
stem has; and of which you can feel the strength and use, in your hand, as
you hold it. Gather a common plantain leaf, and look at the way it puts its
round ribs together at the base, and you will understand the matter at
once. The arrangement is modified and disguised in every possible way,
according to the leaf's need: in the aspen, the leaf-stalk becomes an
absolute vertical plank; and in the large trees is often almost rounded
into the likeness of a fruit-stalk;--but, in all,[36] the essential
structure is this doubled one; and in all, it opens at the place where the
leaf joins the main stem, into a kind of cup, which holds next year's bud
in the hollow of it.

9. Now there would be no inconvenience in your simply getting into the
habit of calling the round petiol of the fruit the 'stalk,' and the
contracted channel of the leaf, 'leaf-stalk.' But this way of naming them
would not enforce, nor fasten in your mind, the difference between the two,
so well as if you have an entirely different name for the leaf-stalk. Which
is the more desirable, because the limiting character of the leaf,
botanically, is--(I only learned this from my botanical friend the other
day, just {135} in the very moment I wanted it,)--that it holds the bud of
the new stem in its own hollow, but cannot itself grow in the hollow of
anything else;--or, in botanical language, leaves are never
axillary,--don't grow in armpits, but are themselves armpits; hollows, that
is to say, where they spring from the main stem.

10. Now there is already a received and useful botanical word, 'cyme'
(which we shall want in a little while.) derived from the Greek [Greek:
kuma], a swelling or rising wave, and used to express a swelling cluster of
foamy blossom. Connected with that word, but in a sort the reverse of it,
you have the Greek '[Greek: kumbê],' the _hollow_ of a cup, or bowl; whence
[Greek: kumbalou], a cymbal,--that is to say, a musical instrument owing
its tone to its _hollowness_. These words become in Latin, cymba, and
cymbalum; and I think you will find it entirely convenient and advantageous
to call the leaf-stalk distinctively the 'cymba,' retaining the mingled
idea of cup and boat, with respect at least to the part of it that holds
the bud; and understanding that it gathers itself into a V-shaped, or even
narrowly vertical, section, as a boat narrows to its bow, for strength to
sustain the leaf.

With this word you may learn the Virgilian line, that shows the final use
of iron--or iron-darkened--ships:

 "Et ferrugíneâ subvectat corpora cymbâ."

The "subvectat corpora" will serve to remind you of the office of the leafy
cymba in carrying the bud; and make {136} you thankful that the said leafy
vase is not of iron; and is a ship of Life instead of Death.

11. Already, not once, nor twice, I have had to use the word 'stem,' of the
main round branch from which both stalk and cymba spring. This word you had
better keep for all growing, or advancing, shoots of trees, whether from
the ground, or from central trunks and branches. I regret that the words
multiply on us; but each that I permit myself to use has its own proper
thought or idea to express, as you will presently perceive; so that true
knowledge multiplies with true words.

12. The 'stem,' you are to say, then, when you mean the _advancing_
shoot,--which lengthens annually, while a stalk ends every year in a
blossom, and a cymba in a leaf. A stem is essentially round,[37] square, or
regularly polygonal; though, as a cymba may become exceptionally round, a
stem may become exceptionally flat, or even mimic the shape of a leaf.
Indeed I should have liked to write "a stem is essentially round, and
constructively, on occasion, square,"--but it would have been too grand.
The fact is, however, that a stem is really a roundly minded thing,
throwing off its branches in circles as a trundled mop throws off drops,
though it can always order the branches to fly off in what order it
likes,--two at a time, opposite to each other; or three, or five, in a
spiral coil; or one here and one there, on this side and that; {137} but it
is always twisting, in its own inner mind and force; hence it is especially
proper to use the word 'stem' of it--[Greek: stemma], a twined wreath;
properly, twined round a staff, or sceptre: therefore, learn at once by
heart these lines in the opening Iliad:

     "[Greek: Stemmat' echôn en chersin hekêbolou Apollônos,]
  [Greek: Chruseôi ana skêptrôi;]"

And recollect that a sceptre is properly a staff to lean upon; and that as
a crown or diadem is first a binding thing, a 'sceptre' is first a
_supporting_ thing, and it is in its nobleness, itself made of the stem of
a young tree. You may just as well learn also this:

 "[Greek: Nai ma tode skêptron, to men oupote phulla kai ozous]
  [Greek: Phusei, epeidê prôta tomên en oressi leloipen,]
  [Greek: Oud' anathêlêsei; peri gar rha he chalkos elepse]
  [Greek: Phulla te kai phloion; nun aute min huies Achaiôn]
  [Greek: En palamêis phoreousi dikaspoloi, hoi te themistas]
  [Greek: Pros Dios eiruatai;]"

 "Now, by this sacred sceptre hear me swear
  Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
  Which, severed from the trunk, (as I from thee,)
  On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
  This sceptre, formed by tempered steel to prove
  An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
  From whom the power of laws and justice springs
  (Tremendous oath, inviolate to Kings)."

13. The supporting power in the tree itself is, I doubt not, greatly
increased by this spiral action; and the fine {138} instinct of its being
so, caused the twisted pillar to be used in the Lombardic Gothic,--at
first, merely as a pleasant variety of form, but at last constructively and
universally, by Giotto, and all the architects of his school. Not that the
spiral form actually adds to the strength of a Lombardic pillar, by
imitating contortions of wood, any more than the fluting of a Doric shaft
adds to its strength by imitating the canaliculation of a reed; but the
perfect action of the imagination, which had adopted the encircling
acanthus for the capital, adopted the twining stemma for the shaft; the
pure delight of the eye being the first condition in either case: and it is
inconceivable how much of the pleasure taken both in ornament and in
natural form is founded elementarily on groups of spiral line. The study in
our fifth plate, of the involucre of the waste-thistle,[38] is as good an
example as I can give of the more subtle and concealed conditions of this
structure.

14. Returning to our present business of nomenclature, we find the Greek
word, 'stemma,' adopted by the Latins, {139} becoming the expression of a
growing and hereditary race; and the branched tree, the natural type, among
all nations, of multiplied families. Hence the entire fitness of the word
for our present purposes; as signifying, "a spiral shoot extending itself
by branches." But since, unless it is spiral, it is not a stem, and unless
it has branches, it is not a stem, we shall still want another word for the
sustaining 'sceptre' of a foxglove, or cowslip. Before determining that,
however, we must see what need there may be of one familiar to our ears
until lately, although now, I understand, falling into disuse.

15. By our definition, a stem is a spirally bent, essentially living and
growing, shoot of vegetation. But the branch of a tree, in which many such
stems have their origin, is not, except in a very subtle and partial way,
spiral; nor, except in the shoots that spring from it, progressive
forwards; it only receives increase of thickness at its sides. Much more,
what used to be called the _trunk_ of a tree, in which many branches are
united, has ceased to be, except in mere tendency and temper, spiral; and
has so far ceased from growing as to be often in a state of decay in its
interior, while the external layers are still in serviceable strength.

16. If, however, a trunk were only to be defined as an arrested stem, or a
cluster of arrested stems, we might perhaps refuse, in scientific use, the
popular word. But such a definition does not touch the main idea. Branches
usually begin to assert themselves at a height above the {140} ground
approximately fixed for each species of tree,--low in an oak, high in a
stone pine; but, in both, marked as a point of _structural change in the
direction of growing force_, like the spring of a vault from a pillar; and
as the tree grows old, some of its branches getting torn away by winds or
falling under the weight of their own fruit, or load of snow, or by natural
decay, there remains literally a 'truncated' mass of timber, still bearing
irregular branches here and there, but inevitably suggestive of resemblance
to a human body, after the loss of some of its limbs.

And to prepare trees for their practical service, what age and storm only
do partially, the first rough process of human art does completely. The
branches are lopped away, leaving literally the 'truncus' as the part of
the tree out of which log and rafter can be cut. And in many trees, it
would appear to be the chief end of their being to produce this part of
their body on a grand scale, and of noble substance; so that, while in
thinking of vegetable life without reference to its use to men or animals,
we should rightly say that the essence of it was in leaf and flower--not in
trunk or fruit; yet for the sake of animals, we find that some plants, like
the vine, are apparently meant chiefly to produce fruit; others, like
laurels, chiefly to produce leaves; others chiefly to produce flowers; and
others to produce permanently serviceable and sculptural wood; or, in some
cases, merely picturesque and monumental masses of vegetable rock,
"intertwisted {141} fibres serpentine,"--of far nobler and more pathetic
use in their places, and their enduring age, than ever they could be for
material purpose in human habitation. For this central mass of the
vegetable organism, then, the English word 'trunk' and French 'tronc' are
always in accurate scholarship to be retained--meaning the part of a tree
which remains when its branches are lopped away.

17. We have now got distinct ideas of four different kinds of stem, and
simple names for them in Latin and English,--Petiolus, Cymba, Stemma, and
Truncus; Stalk, Leaf-stalk, Stem, and Trunk; and these are all that we
shall commonly need. There is, however, one more that will be sometimes
necessary, though it is ugly and difficult to pronounce, and must be as
little used as we can.

And here I must ask you to learn with me a little piece of Roman history. I
say, to _learn_ with me, because I don't know any Roman history except the
two first books of Livy, and little bits here and there of the following
six or seven. I only just know enough about it to be able to make out the
bearings and meaning of any fact that I now learn. The greater number of
modern historians know, (if honest enough even for that,) the facts, or
something that may possibly be like the facts, but haven't the least notion
of the meaning of them. So that, though I have to find out everything that
I want in Smith's dictionary, like any schoolboy, I can usually tell you
the {142} significance of what I so find, better than perhaps even Mr.
Smith himself could.

18. In the 586th page of Mr. Smith's volume, you have it written that
'Calvus,' bald-head, was the name of a family of the Licinia gens; that the
man of whom we hear earliest, as so named, was the first plebeian elected
to military tribuneship in B.C. 400; and that the fourth of whom we hear,
was surnamed 'Stolo,' because he was so particular in pruning away the
Stolons (stolones), or useless young shoots, of his vines.

We must keep this word 'stolon,' therefore, for these young suckers
springing from an old root. Its derivation is uncertain; but the main idea
meant by it is one of uselessness,--sprouting without occasion or fruit;
and the words 'stolidus' and 'stolid' are really its derivatives, though we
have lost their sense in English by partly confusing them with 'solid'
which they have nothing to do with. A 'stolid' person is essentially a
'useless sucker' of society; frequently very leafy and graceful, but with
no good in him.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

19. Nevertheless, I won't allow our vegetable 'stolons' to be despised.
Some of quite the most beautiful forms of leafage belong to them;--even the
foliage of the olive itself is never seen to the same perfection on the
upper branches as in the young ground-rods in which the dual groups of
leaves crowd themselves in their haste into clusters of three.

But, for our point of Latin history, remember always {143} that in 400
B.C., just a year before the death of Socrates at Athens, this family of
Stolid persons manifested themselves at Rome, shooting up from plebeian
roots into places where they had no business; and preparing the way for the
degradation of the entire Roman race under the Empire; their success being
owed, remember also, to the faults of the patricians, for one of the laws
passed by Calvus Stolo was that the Sibylline books should be in custody of
ten men, of whom five should be plebeian, "that no falsifications might be
introduced in favour of the patricians."

20. All this time, however, we have got no name for the prettiest of all
stems,--that of annual flowers growing high from among their ground leaves,
like lilies of the valley, and saxifrages, and the tall primulas--of which
this pretty type, Fig. 15, was cut for me by Mr. Burgess years ago;
admirable in its light outline of the foamy globe of flowers, supported and
balanced in the meadow breezes on that elastic rod of slenderest life.

What shall we call it? We had better rest from our study of terms a little,
and do a piece of needful classifying, before we try to name it.

21. My younger readers will find it easy to learn, and convenient to
remember, for a beginning of their science, {144} the names of twelve great
families of cinquefoiled flowers,[39] of which the first group of three, is
for the most part golden, the second, blue, the third, purple, and the
fourth, red.

And their names, by simple lips, can be pleasantly said, or sung, in this
order, the two first only being a little difficult to get over.

      1          2            3          4

  Roof-foil,    Lucy,        Pea,       Pink,
  Rock-foil,    Blue-bell,   Pansy,     Peach,
  Primrose.     Bindweed.    Daisy.     Rose.

Which even in their Latin magniloquence will not be too terrible, namely,--

     1           2           3            4

  Stella,     Lucia,       Alata,       Clarissa,
  Francesca,  Campanula,   Viola,       Persica,
  Primula.    Convoluta.   Margarita.   Rosa.

22. I do not care much to assert or debate my reasons for the changes of
nomenclature made in this list. The {145} most gratuitous is that of 'Lucy'
for 'Gentian,' because the King of Macedon, from whom the flower has been
so long named, was by no means a person deserving of so consecrated memory.
I conceive no excuse needed for rejecting Caryophyll, one of the crudest
and absurdest words ever coined by unscholarly men of science; or
Papilionaceæ, which is unendurably long for pease; and when we are now
writing Latin, in a sentimental temper, and wish to say that we gathered a
daisy, we shall not any more be compelled to write that we gathered a
'Bellidem perennem,' or, an 'Oculum Diei.'

I take the pure Latin form, Margarita, instead of Margareta, in memory of
Margherita of Cortona,[40] as well as of the great saint: also the tiny
scatterings and sparklings of the daisy on the turf may remind us of the
old use of the word 'Margaritæ,' for the minute particles of the Host
sprinkled on the patina--"Has particulas [Greek: meridas] vocat
Euchologium, [Greek: margaritas] Liturgia Chrysostomi."[41] My young German
readers will, I hope, call the flower Gretschen,--unless they would uproot
the daisies of the Rhine, lest French girls should also count their
love-lots by the Marguerite. I must be so ungracious to my fair young
readers, however, as to warn them that this trial of their lovers is a very
favourable one, for, in nine blossoms out of {146} ten, the leaves of the
Marguerite are odd, so that, if they are only gracious enough to begin with
the supposition that he loves them, they must needs end in the conviction
of it.

23. I am concerned, however, for the present, only with my first or golden
order, of which the Roof-foil, or house-leek, is called in present botany,
Sedum, 'the squatter,' because of its way of fastening itself down on
stones, or roof, as close as it can sit. But I think this an ungraceful
notion of its behaviour; and as its blossoms are, of all flowers, the most
sharply and distinctly star-shaped, I shall call it 'Stella' (providing
otherwise, in due time, for the poor little chickweeds;) and the common
stonecrop will therefore be 'Stella domestica.'

The second tribe, (at present saxifraga,) growing for the most part wild on
rocks, may, I trust, even in Protestant botany, be named Francesca, after
St. Francis of Assisi; not only for its modesty, and love of mountain
ground, and poverty of colour and leaf; but also because the chief element
of its decoration, seen close, will be found in its spots, or stigmata.

In the nomenclature of the third order I make no change.

24. Now all this group of golden-blossoming plants agree in general
character of having a rich cluster of radical leaves, from which they throw
up a single stalk bearing clustered blossoms; for which stalk, when
entirely leafless, I intend always to keep the term 'virgula,' the {147}
'little rod'--not painfully caring about it, but being able thus to define
it with precision, if required. And these are connected with the stems of
branching shrubs through infinite varieties of structure, in which the
first steps of transition are made by carrying the cluster of radical
leaves up, and letting them expire gradually from the rising stem: the
changes of form in the leaves as they rise higher from the ground being one
of quite the most interesting specific studies in every plant. I had set
myself once, in a bye-study for foreground drawing, hard on this point; and
began, with Mr. Burgess, a complete analysis of the foliation of annual
stems; of which Line-studies II., III., and IV., are examples; reduced
copies, all, from the beautiful Flora Danica. But after giving two whole
lovely long summer days, under the Giesbach, to the blue scabious,
('Devil's bit,') and getting in that time, only half-way up it, I gave in;
and must leave the work to happier and younger souls.

25. For these flowering stems, therefore, possessing nearly all the complex
organization of a tree, but not its permanence, we will keep the word
'virga;' and 'virgula' for those that have no leaves. I believe, when we
come to the study of leaf-order, it will be best to begin with these annual
virgæ, in which the leaf has nothing to do with preparation for a next
year's branch. And now the remaining terms commonly applied to stems may be
for the most part dispensed with; but several are interesting, and must be
examined before dismissal. {148}

26. Indeed, in the first place, the word we have to use so often, 'stalk,'
has not been got to the roots of, yet. It comes from the Greek [Greek:
stelechos,] (stelechos,) the 'holding part' of a tree, that which is like a
handle to all its branches; 'stock' is another form in which it has come
down to us: with some notion of its being the mother of branches: thus,
when Athena's olive was burnt by the Persians, two days after, a shoot a
cubit long had sprung from the 'stelechos,' of it.

27. Secondly. Few words are more interesting to the modern scholarly and
professorial mind than 'stipend.' (I have twice a year at present to
consider whether I am worth mine, sent with compliments from the Curators
of the University chest). Now, this word comes from 'stips,' small pay,
which itself comes from 'stipo,' to press together, with the idea of small
coin heaped up in little towers or piles. But with the idea of lateral
pressing together, instead of downward, we get 'stipes,' a solid log; in
Greek, with the same sense, [Greek: stupos,] (stupos,) whence, gradually,
with help from another word meaning to beat, (and a side-glance at beating
of hemp,) we get our 'stupid,' the German stumph, the Scottish sumph, and
the plain English 'stump.'

Refining on the more delicate sound of stipes, the Latins got 'stipula,'
the thin stem of straw: which rustles and ripples daintily in verse,
associated with spica and spiculum, used of the sharp pointed ear of corn,
and its fine processes of fairy shafts. {149}

28. There are yet two more names of stalk to be studied, though, except for
particular plants, not needing to be used,--namely, the Latin cau-dex, and
cau-lis, both connected with the Greek [Greek: kaulos], properly meaning a
solid stalk like a handle, passing into the sense of the hilt of a sword,
or quill of a pen. Then, in Latin, caudex passes into the sense of log, and
so, of cut plank or tablet of wood; thus finally becoming the classical
'codex' of writings engraved on such wooden tablets, and therefore
generally used for authoritative manuscripts.

Lastly, 'caulis,' retained accurately in our cauliflower, contracted in
'colewort,' and refined in 'kail,' softens itself into the French 'chou,'
meaning properly the whole family of thick-stalked eatable salads with
spreading heads; but these being distinguished explicitly by Pliny as
'Capitati,' 'salads with a head,' or 'Captain salads,' the mediæval French
softened the 'caulis capitatus' into 'chou cabus;'--or, to separate the
round or apple-like mass of leaves from the flowery foam, 'cabus' simply,
by us at last enriched and emphasized into 'cabbage.'

29. I believe we have now got through the stiffest piece of etymology we
shall have to master in the course of our botany; but I am certain that
young readers will find patient work, in this kind, well rewarded by the
groups of connected thoughts which will thus attach themselves to familiar
names; and their grasp of every language they learn must only be esteemed
by them secure when they recognize its derivatives in these homely
associations, {150} and are as much at ease with the Latin or French
syllables of a word as with the English ones; this familiarity being above
all things needful to cure our young students of their present ludicrous
impression that what is simple, in English, is knowing, in Greek; and that
terms constructed out of a dead language will explain difficulties which
remained insoluble in a living one. But Greek is _not_ yet dead: while if
we carry our unscholarly nomenclature much further, English soon will be;
and then doubtless botanical gentlemen at Athens will for some time think
it fine to describe what we used to call caryophyllaceæ, as the [Greek:
hedlêphides].

30. For indeed we are all of us yet but school-boys, clumsily using alike
our lips and brains; and with all our mastery of instruments and patience
of attention, but few have reached, and those dimly, the first level of
science,--wonder.

For the first instinct of the stem,--unnamed by us yet--unthought of,--the
instinct of seeking light, as of the root to seek darkness,--what words can
enough speak the wonder of it.

Look. Here is the little thing, Line-study V. (A), in its first birth to
us: the stem of stems; the one of which we pray that it may bear our daily
bread. The seed has fallen in the ground with the springing germ of it
downwards; with heavenly cunning the taught stem curls round, and seeks the
never-seen light. Veritable 'conversion,' miraculous, called of God. And
here is the oat {151} germ, (B)--after the wheat, most vital of divine
gifts; and assuredly, in days to come, fated to grow on many a naked rock
in hitherto lifeless lands, over which the glancing sheaves of it will
shake sweet treasure of innocent gold.

And who shall tell us how they grow; and the fashion of their rustling
pillars--bent, and again erect, at every breeze. Fluted shaft or clustered
pier, how poor of art, beside this grass-shaft--built, first to sustain the
food of men, then to be strewn under their feet!

We must not stay to think of it, yet, or we shall get no farther till
harvest has come and gone again. And having our names of stems now
determined enough, we must in next chapter try a little to understand the
different kinds of them.

The following notes, among many kindly sent me on the subject of Scottish
Heraldry, seem to be the most trustworthy:--

    "The earliest known mention of the thistle as the national badge of
    Scotland is in the inventory of the effects of James III., who probably
    adopted it as an appropriate illustration of the royal motto, _In
    defence_.

    "Thistles occur on the coins of James IV., Mary, James V., and James
    VI.; and on those of James VI. they are for the first time accompanied
    by the motto, _Nemo me impune lacesset_.

    "A collar of thistles appears on the gold bonnet-pieces of James V. of
    1539; and the royal ensigns, as depicted in Sir David Lindsay's
    armorial register of 1542, are surrounded by a collar formed entirely
    of golden thistles, with an oval badge attached. {152}

    "This collar, however, was a mere device until the institution, or as
    it is generally but inaccurately called, the revival, of the order of
    the Thistle by James VII. (II. of England), which took place on May 29,
    1687."

    Date of James III.'s reign 1460-1488.

       *       *       *       *       *

{153}

CHAPTER IX.

OUTSIDE AND IN.

1. The elementary study of methods of growth, given in the following
chapter, has been many years written, (the greater part soon after the
fourth volume of 'Modern Painters'); and ought now to be rewritten
entirely; but having no time to do this, I leave it with only a word or two
of modification, because some truth and clearness of incipient notion will
be conveyed by it to young readers, from which I can afterwards lop the
errors, and into which I can graft the finer facts, better than if I had a
less blunt embryo to begin with.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

2. A stem, then, broadly speaking, (I had thus began the old chapter,) is
the channel of communication between the leaf and root; and if the leaf can
grow directly from the root there is no stem: so that it is well first to
conceive of all plants as consisting of leaves and roots only, with the
condition that each leaf must have its own quite particular root[42]
somewhere. {154} Let a b c, Fig. 16, be three leaves, each, as you see,
with its own root, and by no means dependent on other leaves for its daily
bread; and let the horizontal line be the surface of the ground. Then the
plant has no stem, or an underground one. But if the three leaves rise
above the ground, as in Fig. 17, they must reach their roots by elongating
their stalks, and this elongation is the stem of the plant. If the outside
leaves grow last, and are therefore youngest, the plant is said to grow
from the outside. You know that 'ex' means out, and that 'gen' is the first
syllable of Genesis (or creation), therefore the old botanists, putting an
o between the two syllables, called plants whose outside leaves grew last,
Ex-o-gens. If the inside leaf grows last, and is youngest, the plant was
said to grow from the inside, and from the Greek Endon, within, called an
'Endo-gen.' If these names are persisted in, the Greek botanists, to return
the compliment, will of course call Endogens [Greek: Inseidbornides], and
Exogens [Greek: Houtseidbornides]. In the Oxford school, they will be
called simply Inlaid and Outlaid.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

3. You see that if the outside leaves are to grow last, they may
conveniently grow two at a time; which they accordingly do, and exogens
always start with two little {155} leaves from their roots, and may
therefore conveniently be called two-leaved; which, if you please, we will
for our parts call them. The botanists call them 'two-suckered,' and can't
be content to call them _that_ in English; but drag in a long Greek word,
meaning the fleshy sucker of the sea-devil,--'cotyledon,' which, however, I
find is practically getting shortened into 'cot,' and that they will have
to end by calling endogens, monocots, and exogens, bicots. I mean steadily
to call them one-leaved and two-leaved, for this further reason, that they
differ not merely in the single or dual springing of first leaves from the
seed; but in the distinctly single or dual arrangement of leaves afterwards
on the stem; so that, through all the complexity obtained by alternate and
spiral placing, every bicot or two-leaved flower or tree is in reality
composed of dual groups of leaves, separated by a given length of stem; as,
most characteristically in this pure mountain type of the Ragged Robin
(Clarissa laciniosa), Fig. 18; and compare A, and B, Line-study II.; while,
on the other hand, the monocot plants are by close analysis, I think,
always resolvable into successively climbing leaves, sessile on one
another, and sending their roots, {156} or processes, for nourishment, down
through one another, as in Fig. 19.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

4. Not that I am yet clear, at all, myself; but I do think it's more the
botanists' fault than mine, what 'cotyledonous' structure there may be at
the outer base of each successive bud; and still less, how the intervenient
length of stem, in the bicots, is related to their power, or law, of
branching. For not only the two-leaved tree is outlaid, and the one-leaved
inlaid, but the two-leaved tree is branched, and the one-leaved tree is not
branched. This is a most vital and important distinction, which I state to
you in very bold terms, for though there are some apparent exceptions to
the law, there are, I believe, no real ones, if we define a branch rightly.
Thus, the head of a palm tree is merely a cluster of large leaves; and the
spike of a grass, a clustered blossom. The stem, in both, is unbranched;
and we should be able in this respect to classify plants very simply
indeed, but for a provoking species of intermediate creatures whose
branching is always in the manner of corals, or sponges, or arborescent
minerals, irregular and accidental, and essentially, therefore,
distinguished from the systematic anatomy of a truly branched tree. Of
these presently; we must go on by very short steps: and I find no step can
be taken without check from existing generalizations. Sowerby's definition
of Monocotyledons, in his ninth volume, begins thus: "Herbs, (or rarely,
and only in exotic genera,) trees, in which the wood, pith, and bark are
indistinguishable." {157} Now if there be one plant more than another in
which the pith is defined, it is the common Rush; while the nobler families
of true herbs derive their principal character from being pithless
altogether! We cannot advance too slowly.

5. In the families of one-leaved plants in which the young leaves grow
directly out of the old ones, it becomes a grave question for them whether
the old ones are to lie flat or edgeways, and whether they must therefore
grow out of their faces or their edges. And we must at once understand the
way they contrive it, in either case.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

Among the many forms taken by the Arethusan leaf, one of the commonest is
long and gradually tapering,--much broader at the base than the point. We
will take such an one for examination, and suppose that it is growing on
the ground as in Fig. 20, with a root to its every fibre. Cut out a piece
of strong paper roughly into the shape of this Arethusan leaf, a, Fig. 21.
Now suppose the next young leaf has to spring out of the front of this one,
at about the middle of its height. Give it two nicks with the scissors at b
b; then roll up the lower part into a cylinder, (it will overlap a good
deal at the bottom,) and tie it fast with a fine thread: so, you will get
the form at c. Then bend the top of it back, so that, seen sideways, it
appears as at d, and you see you have made quite a little flower-pot to
plant your {158} new leaf in, and perhaps it may occur to you that you have
seen something like this before. Now make another, a little less wide, but
with the part for the cylinder twice as long, roll it up in the same way,
and slip it inside the other, with the flat part turned the other way, e.
Surely this reminds you now of something you have seen? Or must I draw the
something (Fig. 22)?

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

6. All grasses are thus constructed, and have their leaves set thus,
opposite, on the sides of their tubular stems, alternately, as they ascend.
But in most of them there is also a peculiar construction, by which, at the
base of the sheath, or enclosing tube, each leaf articulates itself with
the rest of the stem at a ringed knot, or joint. {159}

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

Before examining these, remember there are mainly two sorts of joints in
the framework of the bodies of animals. One is that in which the bone is
thick at the joints and thin between them, (see the bone of the next
chicken leg you eat), the other is that of animals that have shells or
horny coats, in which characteristically the shell is thin at the joints,
and thick between them (look at the next lobster's claw you can see,
without eating). You know, also, that though the crustaceous are titled
only from their crusts, the name 'insect' is given to the whole insect
tribe, because they are farther jointed almost into _sect_ions: it is
easily remembered, also, that the projecting joint means strength and
elasticity in the creature, and that all its limbs are useful to it, and
cannot conveniently be parted with; and that the incised, sectional, or
insectile joint means more or less weakness,[43] and necklace-like laxity
or license in the creature's make; and an ignoble power of shaking off its
legs or arms on occasion, coupled also with modes of growth involving
occasionally quite astonishing transformations, and beginnings of new life
under new circumstances; so that, until very lately, no mortal knew what a
crab was like in its youth, the very existence {160} of the creature, as
well as its legs, being jointed, as it were and made in separate pieces
with the narrowest possible thread of connection between them; and its
principal, or stomachic, period of life, connected with its sentimental
period by as thin a thread as a wasp's stomach is with its thorax.

7. Now in plants, as in animals, there are just the same opposed aspects of
joint, with this specialty of difference in function, that the animal's
limb bends at the joints, but the vegetable limb stiffens. And when the
articulation projects, as in the joint of a cane, it means not only that
the strength of the plant is well carried through the junction, but is
carried farther and more safely than it could be without it: a cane is
stronger, and can stand higher than it could otherwise, because of its
joints. Also, this structure implies that the plant has a will of its own,
and a position which on the whole it will keep, however it may now and then
be bent out of it; and that it has a continual battle, of a healthy and
humanlike kind, to wage with surrounding elements.

But the crabby, or insect-like, joint, which you get in seaweeds and cacti,
means either that the plant is to be dragged and wagged here and there at
the will of waves, and to have no spring nor mind of its own; or else that
it has at least no springy intention and elasticity of purpose, but only a
knobby, knotty, prickly, malignant stubbornness, and incoherent
opiniativeness; crawling about, and coggling, and grovelling, and
aggregating {161} anyhow, like the minds of so many people whom one knows!

8. Returning then to our grasses, in which the real rooting and junction of
the leaves with each other is at these joints; we find that therefore every
leaf of grass may be thought of as consisting of two main parts, for which
we shall want two separate names. The lowest part, which wraps itself round
to become strong, we will call the 'staff,' and for the free-floating outer
part we will take specially the name given at present carelessly to a large
number of the plants themselves, 'flag.' This will give a more clear
meaning to the words 'rod' (virga), and 'staff' (baculus), when they occur
together, as in the 23rd Psalm; and remember the distinction is that a rod
bends like a switch, but a staff is stiff. I keep the well-known name
'blade' for grass-leaves in their fresh green state.

9. You felt, as you were bending down the paper into the form d, Fig. 21,
the difficulty and awkwardness of the transition from the tubular form of
the staff to the flat one of the flag. The mode in which this change is
effected is one of the most interesting features in plants, for you will
find presently that the leaf-stalk in ordinary leaves is only a means of
accomplishing the same change from round to flat. But you know I said just
now that some leaves were not flat, but set upright, edgeways. It is not a
common position in two-leaved trees; but if you can run out and look at an
arbor vitæ, it may interest you {162} to see its hatchet-shaped vertically
crested cluster of leaves transforming themselves gradually downwards into
branches; and in one-leaved trees the vertically edged group is of great
importance.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

10. Cut out another piece of paper like a in Fig. 21, but now, instead of
merely giving it nicks at a, b, cut it into the shape A, Fig. 23. Roll the
lower part up as before, but instead of pulling the upper part down, pinch
its back at the dotted line, and bring the two points, a and b, forward, so
that they may touch each other. B shows the look of the thing half-done,
before the points a and b have quite met. Pinch them close, and stitch the
two edges neatly together, all the way from a to the point c; then roll and
tie up the lower part as before. You will find then that the back or spinal
line of the whole leaf is bent forward, as at B. Now go out to the garden
and gather the green leaf of a fleur-de-lys, and look at it and your piece
of disciplined paper together; and I fancy you will probably find out
several things for yourself that I want you to know.

11. You see, for one thing, at once, how _strong_ the fleur-de-lys leaf is,
and that it is just twice as strong as a blade of grass, for it is the
substance of the staff, with its sides flattened together, while the grass
blade is a staff cut {163} open and flattened out. And you see that as a
grass blade necessarily flaps down, the fleur-de-lys leaf as necessarily
curves up, owing to that inevitable bend in its back. And you see, with its
keen edge, and long curve, and sharp point, how like a sword it is. The
botanists would for once have given a really good and right name to the
plants which have this kind of leaf, 'Ensatæ,' from the Latin 'ensis,' a
sword; if only sata had been properly formed from sis. We can't let the
rude Latin stand, but you may remember that the fleur-de-lys, which is the
flower of chivalry, has a sword for its leaf, and a lily for its heart.

12. In case you cannot gather a fleur-de-lys leaf, I have drawn for you, in
Plate VI., a cluster of such leaves, which are as pretty as any, and so
small that, missing the points of a few, I can draw them of their actual
size. You see the pretty alternate interlacing at the bottom, and if you
can draw at all, and will try to outline their curves, you will find what
subtle lines they are. I did not know this name for the strong-edged grass
leaves when I wrote the pieces about shield and sword leaves in 'Modern
Painters'; I wish I had chanced in those passages on some other similitude,
but I can't alter them now, and my trustful pupils may avoid all confusion
of thought by putting gladius for ensis, and translating it by the word
'scymitar,' which is also more accurate in expressing the curvature blade.
So we will call the ensatæ, instead, 'gladiolæ,' translating,
'scymitar-grasses.' And having {164} now got at some clear idea of the
distinction between outlaid and inlaid growth in the stem, the reader will
find the elementary analysis of forms resulting from outlaid growth in
'Modern Painters'; and I mean to republish it in the sequel of this book,
but must go on to other matters here. The growth of the inlaid stem we will
follow as far as we need, for English plants, in examining the glasses.

FLORENCE, _11th September, 1874_.

As I correct this chapter for press, I find it is too imperfect to be let
go without a word or two more. In the first place, I have not enough, in
distinguishing the nature of the living yearly shoot, with its cluster of
fresh leafage, from that of the accumulated mass of perennial trees, taken
notice of the similar power even of the annual shoot, to obtain some manner
of immortality for itself, or at least of usefulness, _after_ death. A
Tuscan woman stopped me on the path up to Fiesole last night, to beg me to
buy her plaited straw. I wonder how long straw lasts, if one takes care of
it? A Leghorn bonnet, (if now such things are,) carefully put away,--even
properly taken care of when it is worn,--how long will it last, young
ladies?

I have just been reading the fifth chapter of II. Esdras, and am fain to
say, with less discomfort than otherwise I might have felt, (the example
being set me by the archangel Uriel,) "I am not sent to tell thee, for I do
not know." How old is the oldest straw known? the oldest {165} linen? the
oldest hemp? We have mummy wheat,--cloth of papyrus, which is a kind of
straw. The paper reeds by the brooks, the flax-flower in the field, leave
such imperishable frame behind them. And Ponte-della-Paglia, in Venice; and
Straw Street, of Paris, remembered in Heaven,--there is no occasion to
change their names, as one may have to change 'Waterloo Bridge,' or the
'Rue de l'Impératrice.' Poor Empress! Had she but known that her true
dominion was in the straw streets of her fields; not in the stone streets
of her cities!

But think how wonderful this imperishableness of the stem of many plants
is, even in their annual work: how much more in their perennial work! The
noble stability between death and life, of a piece of perfect wood? It
cannot grow, but will not decay; keeps record of its years of life, but
surrenders them to become a constantly serviceable thing: which may be
sailed in, on the sea, built with, on the land, carved by Donatello,
painted on by Fra Angelico. And it is not the wood's fault, but the fault
of Florence in not taking proper care of it, that the panel of Sandro
Botticelli's loveliest picture has cracked, (not with heat, I believe, but
blighting frost), a quarter of an inch wide through the Madonna's face.

But what is this strange state of undecaying wood? What sort of latent life
has it, which it only finally parts with when it rots?

Nay, what is the law by which its natural life is measured? What makes a
tree 'old'? One sees the {166} Spanish-chesnut trunks among the Apennines
growing into caves, instead of logs. Vast hollows, confused among the
recessed darknesses of the marble crags, surrounded by mere laths of living
stem, each with its coronal of glorious green leaves. Why can't the tree go
on, and on,--hollowing itself into a Fairy--no--a Dryad, Ring,--till it
becomes a perfect Stonehenge of a tree? Truly, "I am not sent to tell thee,
for I do not know."

The worst of it is, however, that I don't know one thing which I ought very
thoroughly to have known at least thirty years ago, namely, the true
difference in the way of building the trunk in outlaid and inlaid wood. I
have an idea that the stem of a palm-tree is only a heap of leaf-roots
built up like a tower of bricks, year by year, and that the palm tree
really grows on the top of it, like a bunch of fern; but I've no books
here, and no time to read them if I had. If only I were a strong giant,
instead of a thin old gentleman of fifty-five, how I should like to pull up
one of those little palm-trees by the roots--(by the way, what are the
roots of a palm like? and, how does it stand in sand, where it is wanted to
stand, mostly? Fancy, not knowing that, at fifty-five!)--that grow all
along the Riviera; and snap its stem in two, and cut it down the middle.
But I suppose there are sections enough now in our grand botanical
collections, and you can find it all out for yourself. That you should be
able to ask a question clearly, is two-thirds of the way to getting it
answered; and I think this chapter of mine will at {167} least enable you
to ask some questions about the stem, though what a stem is, truly, "I am
not sent to tell thee, for I do not know."

KNARESBOROUGH, _30th April, 1876_.

I see by the date of last paragraph that this chapter has been in my good
Aylesbury printer's type for more than a year and a half. At this rate,
Proserpina has a distant chance of being finished in the spirit-land, with
more accurate information derived from the archangel Uriel himself, (not
that he is likely to know much about the matter, if he keeps on letting
himself be prevented from ever seeing foliage in spring-time by the black
demon-winds,) about the year 2000. In the meantime, feeling that perhaps I
_am_ sent to tell my readers a little more than is above told, I have had
recourse to my botanical friend, good Mr. Oliver of Kew, who has taught me,
first, of palms, that they actually stitch themselves into the ground, with
a long dipping loop, up and down, of the root fibres, concerning which
sempstress-work I shall have a month's puzzlement before I can report on
it; secondly, that all the increment of tree stem is, by division and
multiplication of the cells of the wood, a process not in the least to be
described as 'sending down roots from the leaf to the ground.' I suspected
as much in beginning to revise this chapter; but hold to my judgment in not
cancelling it. For this multiplication of the cells is at least compelled
by an influence which passes from the leaf to the ground, and vice versa;
and which is at present best {168} conceivable to me by imagining the
continual and invisible descent of lightning from electric cloud by a
conducting rod, endowed with the power of softly splitting the rod into two
rods, each as thick as the original one. Studying microscopically, we
should then see the molecules of copper, as we see the cells of the wood,
dividing and increasing, each one of them into two. But the visible result,
and mechanical conditions of growth, would still be the same as if the leaf
actually sent down a new root fibre; and, more than this, the currents of
accumulating substance, marked by the grain of the wood, are, I think,
quite plainly and absolutely those of streams flowing only from the leaves
downwards; never from the root up, nor of mere lateral increase. I must
look over all my drawings again, and at tree stems again, with more
separate study of the bark and pith in those museum sections, before I can
assert this; but there will be no real difficulty in the investigation. If
the increase of the wood is lateral only, the currents round the knots will
be compressed at the sides, and open above and below; but if downwards,
compressed above the knot and open below it. The nature of the force
itself, and the manner of its ordinances in direction, remain, and must for
ever remain, inscrutable as our own passions, in the hand of the God of all
Spirits, and of all Flesh.

     "Drunk is each ridge, of thy cup drinking,
      Each clod relenteth at thy dressing,
  {169}
      Thy cloud-borne waters inly sinking,
      Fair spring sproutes forth, blest with thy blessing;
  The fertile year is with thy bounty crouned,
  And where thou go'st, thy goings fat the ground.

      Plenty bedews the desert places,
      A hedge of mirth the hills encloseth.
      The fields with flockes have hid their faces,
      A robe of corn the valleys clotheth.
  Deserts and hills and fields and valleys all,
  Rejoice, shout, sing, and on thy name do call."

       *       *       *       *       *

{170}

CHAPTER X.

THE BARK.

1. Philologists are continually collecting instances, like our friend the
French critic of Virgil, of the beauty of finished language, or the origin
of unfinished, in the imitation of natural sounds. But such collections
give an entirely false idea of the real power of language, unless they are
balanced by an opponent list of the words which signally fail of any such
imitative virtue, and whose sound, if one dwelt upon it, is destructive of
their meaning.

2. For instance. Few sounds are more distinct in their kind, or one would
think more likely to be vocally reproduced in the word which signified
them, than that of a swift rent in strongly woven cloth; and the English
word 'rag' and ragged, with the Greek [Greek: rhêgnumi], do indeed in a
measure recall the tormenting effect upon the ear. But it is curious that
the verb which is meant to express the actual origination of rags, should
rhyme with two words entirely musical and peaceful--words, indeed, which I
always reserve for final resource in passages which I want to be soothing
as well as pretty,--'fair,' and {171} 'air;' while, in its orthography, it
is identical with the word representing the bodily sign of tenderest
passion, and grouped with a multitude of others,[44] in which the mere
insertion of a consonant makes such wide difference of sentiment as between
'dear' and 'drear,' or 'pear' and 'spear.' The Greek root, on the other
hand, has persisted in retaining some vestige of its excellent dissonance,
even where it has parted with the last vestige of the idea it was meant to
convey; and when Burns did his best,--and his best was above most men's--to
gather pleasant liquid and labial syllabling, round gentle meaning, in

 "Bonnie lassie, will ye go,
  Will ye go, will ye go,
  Bonnie lassie, will ye go,
  To the birks of Aberfeldy?"

he certainly had little thought that the delicately crisp final k, in birk,
was the remnant of a magnificent Greek effort to express the rending of the
earth by earthquake, in the wars of the giants. In the middle of that word
'esmarag[=e]se,' we get our own beggar's 'rag' for a pure root, which
afterwards, through the Latin frango, softens into our 'break,' and
'bark,'--the 'broken thing'; that idea of its rending around the tree's
stem having been, in the very earliest human efforts at botanical
description, {172} attached to it by the pure Aryan race, watching the
strips of rosy satin break from the birch stems, in the Aberfeldys of
Imaus.

3. That this tree should have been the only one which "the Aryans, coming
as conquerors from the North, were able to recognize in Hindustan,"[45] and
should therefore also be "the only one whose name is common to Sanskrit,
and to the languages of Europe," delighted me greatly, for two reasons: the
first, for its proof that in spite of the development of species, the sweet
gleaming of birch stem has never changed its argent and sable for any
unchequered heraldry; and the second, that it gave proof of a much more
important fact, the keenly accurate observation of Aryan foresters at that
early date; for the fact is that the breaking of the thin-beaten silver of
the birch trunk is so delicate, and its smoothness so graceful, that until
I painted it with care, I was not altogether clear-headed myself about the
way in which the chequering was done: nor until Fors today brought me to
the house of one of my father's friends at Carshalton, and gave me three
birch stems to look at just outside the window, did I perceive it to be a
primal question about them, what it is that blanches that dainty dress of
theirs, or, anticipatorily, weaves. What difference is there between the
making of the corky excrescence of other {173} trees, and of this almost
transparent fine white linen? I perceive that the older it is, within
limits, the finer and whiter; hoary tissue, instead of hoary
hair--honouring the tree's aged body; the outer sprays have no silvery
light on their youth. Does the membrane thin itself into whiteness merely
by stretching, or produce an outer film of new substance?[46]

4. And secondly, this investiture, why is it transverse to the
trunk,--swathing it, as it were, in bands? Above all,--when it breaks,--why
does it break round the tree instead of down? All other bark breaks as
anything would, naturally, round a swelling rod, but this, as if the stem
were growing longer; until, indeed, it reaches farthest heroic old age,
when the whiteness passes away again, and the rending is like that of other
trees, downwards. So that, as it were in a changing language, we have the
great botanical fact twice taught us, by this tree of Eden, that the skins
of trees differ from the skins of the higher animals in that, for the most
part, they won't stretch, and must be worn torn.

So that in fact the most popular arrangement of vegetative adult costume is
Irish; a normal investiture in honourable rags; and decorousness of
tattering, as of a banner borne in splendid ruin through storms of war.

5. Now therefore, if we think of it, we have five {174} distinct orders of
investiture for organic creatures; first, mere secretion of mineral
substance, chiefly lime, into a hard shell, which, if broken, can only be
mended, like china--by sticking it together; secondly, organic substance of
armour which grows into its proper shape at once for good and all, and
can't be mended at all, if broken, (as of insects); thirdly, organic
substance of skin, which stretches, as the creatures grows, by cracking,
over a fresh skin which is supplied beneath it, as in bark of trees;
fourthly, organic substance of skin cracked symmetrically into plates or
scales which can increase all round their edges, and are connected by
softer skin, below, as in fish and reptiles, (divided with exquisite lustre
and flexibility, in feathers of birds); and lastly, true elastic skin,
extended in soft unison with the creature's growth,--blushing with its
blood, fading with its fear; breathing with its breath, and guarding its
life with sentinel beneficence of pain.

6. It is notable, in this higher and lower range of organic beauty, that
the decoration, by pattern and colour, which is almost universal in the
protective coverings of the middle ranks of animals, should be reserved in
vegetables for the most living part of them, the flower only; and that
among animals, few but the malignant and senseless are permitted, in the
corrugation of their armour, to resemble the half-dead trunk of the tree,
as they float beside it in the tropical river. I must, however, leave the
scale patterns of the palms and other inlaid tropical {175} stems for
after-examination,--content, at present, with the general idea of the bark
of an outlaid tree as the successive accumulation of the annual protecting
film, rent into ravines of slowly increasing depth, and coloured, like the
rock, whose stability it begins to emulate, with the grey or gold of
clinging lichen and embroidering moss.

       *       *       *       *       *

{176}

CHAPTER XI.

GENEALOGY.

1. Returning, after more than a year's sorrowful interval, to my Sicilian
fields,--not incognisant, now, of some of the darker realms of Proserpina;
and with feebler heart, and, it may be, feebler wits, for wandering in her
brighter ones,--I find what I had written by way of sequel to the last
chapter, somewhat difficult, and extremely tiresome. Not the less, after
giving fair notice of the difficulty, and asking due pardon for the
tiresomeness, I am minded to let it stand; trusting to end, with it, once
for all, investigations of the kind. But in finishing this first volume of
my School Botany, I must try to give the reader some notion of the plan of
the book, as it now, during the time for thinking over it which illness
left me, has got itself arranged in my mind, within limits of possible
execution. And this the rather, because I wish also to state, somewhat more
gravely than I have yet done, the grounds on which I venture here to reject
many of the received names of plants; and to substitute others for them,
relating to entirely different attributes {177} from those on which their
present nomenclature is confusedly edified.

I have already in some measure given the reasons for this change;[47] but I
feel that, for the sake of those among my scholars who have laboriously
learned the accepted names, I ought now also to explain its method more
completely.

2. I call the present system of nomenclature _confusedly_ edified, because
it introduces,--without, apparently, any consciousness of the
inconsistency, and certainly with no apology for it,--names founded
sometimes on the history of plants, sometimes on their qualities, sometimes
on their forms, sometimes on their products, and sometimes on their
poetical associations.

On their history--as 'Gentian' from King Gentius, and Funkia from Dr. Funk.

On their qualities--as 'Scrophularia' from its (quite uncertified) use in
scrofula.

On their forms--as the 'Caryophylls' from having petals like husks of nuts.

On their products--as 'Cocos nucifera' from its nuts.

And on their poetical associations,--as the Star of Bethlehem from its
imagined resemblance to the light of that seen by the Magi.

3. Now, this variety of grounds for nomenclature might patiently, and even
with advantage, be permitted, {178} provided the grounds themselves were
separately firm, and the inconsistency of method advisedly allowed, and, in
each case, justified. If the histories of King Gentius and Dr. Funk are
indeed important branches of human knowledge;--if the Scrophulariaceæ do
indeed cure King's Evil;--if pinks be best described in their likeness to
nuts;--and the Star of Bethlehem verily remind us of Christ's Nativity,--by
all means let these and other such names be evermore retained. But if Dr.
Funk be not a person in any special manner needing either stellification or
florification; if neither herb nor flower can avail, more than the touch of
monarchs, against hereditary pain; if it be no better account of a pink to
say it is nut-leaved, than of a nut to say it is pink-leaved; and if the
modern mind, incurious respecting the journeys of wise men, has already
confused, in its Bradshaw's Bible, the station of Bethlehem with that of
Bethel,[48] it is certainly time to take some order with the partly false,
partly useless, and partly forgotten literature of the Fields; and, before
we bow our children's memories to the burden of it, ensure that there shall
be matter worth carriage in the load.

4. And farther, in attempting such a change, we must be clear in our own
minds whether we wish our nomenclature to tell us something about the plant
itself, or only to tell us the place it holds in relation to other plants:
as, for instance, in the Herb-Robert, would it be well to {179} christen
it, shortly, 'Rob Roy,' because it is pre-eminently red, and so have done
with it;--or rather to dwell on its family connections, and call it
'Macgregoraceous'?

5. Before we can wisely decide this point, we must resolve whether our
botany is intended mainly to be useful to the vulgar, or satisfactory to
the scientific élite. For if we give names characterizing individuals, the
circle of plants which any country possesses may be easily made known to
the children who live in it: but if we give names founded on the connexion
between these and others at the Antipodes, the parish school-master will
certainly have double work; and it may be doubted greatly whether the
parish school-boy, at the end of the lecture, will have half as many ideas.

6. Nevertheless, when the features of any great order of plants are
constant, and, on the whole, represented with great clearness both in cold
and warm climates, it may be desirable to express this their citizenship of
the world in definite nomenclature. But my own method, so far as hitherto
developed, consists essentially in fastening the thoughts of the pupil on
the special character of the plant, in the place where he is likely to see
it; and therefore, in expressing the power of its race and order in the
wider world, rather by reference to mythological associations than to
botanical structure.

7. For instance, Plate VII. represents, of its real size, an ordinary
spring flower in our English mountain fields. It is an average
example,--not one of rare size under rare {180} conditions,--rather smaller
than the average, indeed, that I might get it well into my plate. It is one
of the flowers whose names I think good to change; but I look carefully
through the existing titles belonging to it and its fellows, that I may
keep all I expediently can. I find, in the first place, that Linnæus called
one group of its relations, Ophryds, from Ophrys,--Greek for the
eyebrow,--on account of their resemblance to the brow of an animal
frowning, or to the overshadowing casque of a helmet. I perceive this to be
really a very general aspect of the flower; and therefore, no less than in
respect to Linnæus, I adopt this for the total name of the order, and call
them 'Ophrydæ,' or, shortly, 'Ophryds.'

8. Secondly: so far as I know these flowers myself, I perceive them to fall
practically into three divisions,--one, growing in English meadows and
Alpine pastures, and always adding to their beauty; another, growing in all
sorts of places, very ugly itself, and adding to the ugliness of its
indiscriminated haunts; and a third, growing mostly up in the air, with as
little root as possible, and of gracefully fantastic forms, such as this
kind of nativity and habitation might presuppose. For the present, I am
satisfied to give names to these three groups only. There may be plenty of
others which I do not know, and which other people may name, according to
their knowledge. But in all these three kinds known to me, I perceive one
constant characteristic to be _some_ manner of _distortion_ and I desire
that fact,--marking a {181} spiritual (in my sense of the word) character
of extreme mystery,--to be the first enforced on the mind of the young
learner. It is exhibited to the English child, primarily, in the form of
the stalk of each flower, attaching it to the central virga. This stalk is
always twisted once and a half round, as if somebody had been trying to
wring the blossom off; and the name of the family, in Proserpina, will
therefore be 'Contorta'[49] in Latin, and 'Wreathe-wort' in English.

Farther: the beautiful power of the one I have drawn in its spring life, is
in the opposition of its dark purple to the primrose in England, and the
pale yellow anemone in the Alps. And its individual name will be,
therefore, 'Contorta purpurea'--_Purple_ Wreathe-wort.

And in drawing it, I take care to dwell on this strength of its color, and
to show thoroughly that it is a _dark_ blossom,[50] before I trouble myself
about its minor characters.

9. The second group of this kind of flowers live, as I said, in all sorts
of places; but mostly, I think, in disagreeable ones,--torn and irregular
ground, under alternations of unwholesome heat and shade, and among swarms
of nasty insects. I cannot yet venture on any bold general statement about
them, but I think that is mostly their way; and at all events, they
themselves are in the {182} habit of dressing in livid and unpleasant
colors; and are distinguished from all other flowers by twisting, not only
their stalks, but one of their petals, not once and a half only, but two or
three times round, and putting it far out at the same time, as a foul
jester would put out his tongue: while also the singular power of grotesque
mimicry, which, though strong also in the other groups of their race, seems
in the others more or less playful, is, in these, definitely degraded, and,
in aspect, malicious.

10. Now I find the Latin name 'Satyrium' attached already to one sort of
these flowers; and we cannot possibly have a better one for all of them. It
is true that, in its first Greek form, Dioscorides attaches it to a white,
not a livid, flower; and I dare say there are some white ones of the breed:
but, in its full sense, the term is exactly right for the entire group of
ugly blossoms of which the characteristic is the spiral curve and
protraction of their central petal: and every other form of Satyric
ugliness which I find among the Ophryds, whatever its color, will be
grouped with them. And I make them central, because this humour runs
through the whole order, and is, indeed, their distinguishing sign.

11. Then the third group, living actually in the air, and only holding fast
by, without nourishing itself from, the ground, rock, or tree-trunk on
which it is rooted, may of course most naturally and accurately be called
'Aeria,' as it has long been popularly known in English by the name of
Air-plant. {183}

Thus we have one general name for all these creatures, 'Ophryd'; and three
family or group names, Contorta, Satyrium, and Aeria,--every one of these
titles containing as much accurate fact about the thing named as I can
possibly get packed into their syllables: and I will trouble my young
readers with no more divisions of the order. And if their parents, tutors,
or governors, after this fair warning, choose to make them learn, instead,
the seventy-seven different names with which botanist-heraldries have
beautifully ennobled the family,--all I can say is, let them at least begin
by learning them themselves. They will be found in due order in pages 1084,
1085 of Loudon's Cyclopædia.[51]

12. But now, farther: the student will observe that the name of the total
order is Greek; while the three family ones are Latin, although the central
one is originally Greek also.

I adopt this as far as possible for a law through my whole plant
nomenclature.

13. Farther: the terminations of the Latin family names will be, for the
most part, of the masculine, {184} feminine, and neuter forms, us, a, um,
with these following attached conditions.

(I.) Those terminating in 'us,' though often of feminine words, as the
central Arbor, will indicate either real masculine strength (quereus,
laurus), or conditions of dominant majesty (cedrus), of stubbornness and
enduring force (crataegus), or of peasant-like commonalty and hardship
(juncus); softened, as it may sometimes happen, into gentleness and
beneficence (thymus). The occasional forms in 'er' and 'il' will have
similar power (acer, basil).

(II.) Names with the feminine termination 'a,' if they are real names of
girls, will always mean flowers that are perfectly pretty and perfectly
good (Lucia, Viola, Margarita, Clarissa). Names terminating in 'a' which
are not also accepted names of girls, may sometimes be none the less
honourable, (Primula, Campanula,) but for the most part will signify either
plants that are only good and worthy in a nursy sort of way, (Salvia,) or
that are good without being pretty, (Lavandula,) or pretty without being
good, (Kalmia). But no name terminating in 'a' will be attached to a plant
that is neither good nor pretty.

(III.) The neuter names terminating in 'um' will always indicate some power
either of active or suggestive evil, (Conîum, Solanum, Satyrium,) or a
relation, more or less definite, to death; but this relation to death may
sometimes be noble, or pathetic,--"which {185} to-day is, and to-morrow is
cast into the oven,"--Lilium.

But the leading position of these neuters in the plant's double name must
be noticed by students unacquainted with Latin, in order to distinguish
them from plural genitives, which will always, of course, be the second
word, (Francesca Fontium, Francesca of the Springs.)

14. Names terminating in 'is' and 'e,' if definitely names of women, (Iris,
Amaryllis, Alcestis, Daphne,) will always signify flowers of great beauty,
and noble historic association. If not definitely names of women, they will
yet indicate some specialty of sensitiveness, or association with legend
(Berberis, Clematis). No neuters in 'e' will be admitted.

15. Participial terminations (Impatiens), with neuters in 'en' (Cyclamen),
will always be descriptive of some special quality or form,--leaving it
indeterminate if good or bad, until explained. It will be manifestly
impossible to limit either these neuters, or the feminines in 'is' to Latin
forms; but we shall always know by their termination that they cannot be
generic names, if we are strict in forming these last on a given method.

16. How little method there is in our present formation of them, I am
myself more and more surprised as I consider. A child is shown a rose, and
told that he is to call every flower like that, 'Rosaceous';[52] he is next
{186} shown a lily, and told that he is to call every flower like that,
'Liliaceous';--so far well; but he is next shown a daisy, and is not at all
allowed to call every flower like that, 'Daisaceous,' but he must call it,
like the fifth order of architecture, 'Composite'; and being next shown a
pink, he is not allowed to call other pinks 'Pinkaceous,' but 'Nut-leafed';
and being next shown a pease-blossom, he is not allowed to call other
pease-blossoms 'Peasaceous,' but, in a brilliant burst of botanical
imagination, he is incited to call it by two names instead of one,
'Butterfly-aceous' from its flower, and 'Pod-aceous' from its seed;--the
inconsistency of the terms thus enforced upon him being perfected in their
inaccuracy, for a daisy is not one whit more composite than Queen of the
meadow, or Jura Jacinth;[53] and 'legumen' is not Latin for a pod, but
'siliqua,'--so that no good scholar could remember Virgil's 'siliqua
quassante legumen,' without overthrowing all his Pisan nomenclature.

17. Farther. If we ground our names of the higher orders on the distinctive
characters of _form_ in plants, these are so many, and so subtle, that we
are at once involved in more investigations than a young learner has ever
time to follow successfully, and they must be at all times liable to
dislocations and rearrangements on the discovery of any new link in the
infinitely entangled {187} chain. But if we found our higher nomenclature
at once on historic fact, and relative conditions of climate and character,
rather than of form, we may at once distribute our flora into unalterable
groups, to which we may add at our pleasure, but which will never need
disturbance; far less, reconstruction.

18. For instance,--and to begin,--it is an historical fact that for many
centuries the English nation believed that the Founder of its religion,
spiritually, by the mouth of the King who spake of all herbs, had likened
himself to two flowers,--the Rose of Sharon, and Lily of the Valley. The
fact of this belief is one of the most important in the history of
England,--that is to say, of the mind or heart of England: and it is
connected solemnly with the heart of Italy also, by the closing cantos of
the Paradiso.

I think it well therefore that our two first generic, or at least
commandant, names heading the out-laid and in-laid divisions of plants,
should be of the rose and lily, with such meaning in them as may remind us
of this fact in the history of human mind.

It is also historical that the personal appearing of this Master of our
religion was spoken of by our chief religious teacher in these terms: "The
Grace of God, that bringeth salvation, hath appeared unto all men." And it
is a constant fact that this 'grace' or 'favor' of God is spoken of as
"giving us to eat of the Tree of Life."

19. Now, comparing the botanical facts I have to express, with these
historical ones, I find that the rose tribe {188} has been formed among
flowers, not in distant and monstrous geologic æras, but in the human
epoch;--that its 'grace' or favor has been in all countries so felt as to
cause its acceptance everywhere for the most perfect physical type of
womanhood;--and that the characteristic fruit of the tribe is so sweet,
that it has become symbolic at once of the subtlest temptation, and the
kindest ministry to the earthly passion of the human race. "Comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love."

20. Therefore I shall call the entire order of these flowers 'Charites,'
(Graces,) and they will be divided into these five genera, Rosa, Persica,
Pomum, Rubra, and Fragaria. Which sequence of names I do not think the
young learner will have difficulty in remembering; nor in understanding why
I distinguish the central group by the fruit instead of the flower. And if
he once clearly master the structure and relations of these five genera, he
will have no difficulty in attaching to them, in a satellitic or
subordinate manner, such inferior groups as that of the Silver-weed, or the
Tormentilla; but all he will have to learn by heart and rote, will be these
six names; the Greek Master-name, Charites, and the five generic names, in
each case belonging to plants, as he will soon find, of extreme personal
interest to him.

21. I have used the word 'Order' as the name of our widest groups, in
preference to 'Class,' because these widest groups will not always include
flowers like each other in form, or equal to each other in vegetative rank;
{189} but they will be 'Orders,' literally like those of any religious or
chivalric association, having some common link rather intellectual than
national,--the Charites, for instance, linked by their kindness,--the
Oreiades, by their mountain seclusion, as Sisters of Charity or Monks of
the Chartreuse, irrespective of ties of relationship. Then beneath these
orders will come, what may be rightly called, either as above in Greek
derivation, 'Genera,' or in Latin, 'Gentes,' for which, however, I choose
the Latin word, because Genus is disagreeably liable to be confused on the
ear with 'genius'; but Gens, never; and also 'nomen gentile' is a clearer
and better expression than 'nomen generosum,' and I will not coin the
barbarous one, 'genericum.' The name of the Gens, (as 'Lucia,') with an
attached epithet, as 'Verna,' will, in most cases, be enough to
characterize the individual flower; but if farther subdivision be
necessary, the third order will be that of Families, indicated by a 'nomen
familiare' added in the third place of nomenclature, as Lucia
Verna,--Borealis; and no farther subdivision will ever be admitted. I avoid
the word 'species'--originally a bad one, and lately vulgarized beyond
endurance--altogether. And varieties belonging to narrow localities, or
induced by horticulture, may be named as they please by the people living
near the spot, or by the gardener who grows them; but will not be
acknowledged by Proserpina. Nevertheless, the arbitrary reduction under
Ordines, Gentes, and Familiæ, {190} is always to be remembered as one of
massive practical convenience only; and the more subtle arborescence of the
infinitely varying structures may be followed, like a human genealogy, as
far as we please, afterwards; when once we have got our common plants
clearly arranged and intelligibly named.

22. But now we find ourselves in the presence of a new difficulty, the
greatest we have to deal with in the whole matter.

One new nomenclature, to be thoroughly good, must be acceptable to scholars
in the five great languages, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and English;
and it must be acceptable by them in teaching the native children of each
country. I shall not be satisfied, unless I can feel that the little maids
who gather their first violets under the Acropolis rock, may receive for
them Æschylean words again with joy. I shall not be content, unless the
mothers watching their children at play in the Ceramicus of Paris, under
the scarred ruins of her Kings' palace, may yet teach them there to know
the flowers which the Maid of Orleans gathered at Domremy. I shall not be
satisfied unless every word I ask from the lips of the children of Florence
and Rome, may enable them better to praise the flowers that are chosen by
the hand of Matilda,[54] and bloom around the tomb of Virgil.

{191}

23. Now in this first example of nomenclature, the Master-name, being
_pure_ Greek, may easily be accepted by Greek children, remembering that
certain also of their own poets, if they did not call the flower a Grace
itself, at least thought of it as giving gladness to the Three in their
dances.[55] But for French children the word 'Grâce' has been doubly and
trebly corrupted; first, by entirely false theological scholarship,
mistaking the 'Favor' or Grace done by God to good men, for the
'Misericordia,' or mercy, shown by Him to bad ones; and so, in practical
life, finally substituting 'Grâce' as a word of extreme and mortal prayer,
for 'Merci,' and of late using 'Merci' in a totally ridiculous and
perverted power, for the giving of thanks (or refusal of offered good):
while the literally derived word 'Charite' has become, in the modern mind,
a gift, whether from God or man, only to the wretched, never to the happy:
and lastly, 'Grâce' in its physical sense has been perverted, by their
social vulgarity, into an idea, whether with respect to form or motion,
commending itself rather to the ballet-master than either to the painter or
the priest.

For these reasons, the Master name of this family, for my French pupils,
must be simply 'Rhodiades,' which will bring, for them, the entire group of
names into easily remembered symmetry; and the English form of {192} the
same name, Rhodiad, is to be used by English scholars also for all tribes
of this group except the five principal ones.

24. Farther, in every gens of plants, one will be chosen as the
representative, which, if any, will be that examined and described in the
course of this work, if I have opportunity of doing so.

This representative flower will always be a wild one, and of the simplest
form which completely expresses the character of the plant; existing
divinely and unchangeably from age to age, ungrieved by man's neglect, and
inflexible by his power.

And this divine character will be expressed by the epithet 'Sacred,' taking
the sense in which we attach it to a dominant and christened majesty, when
it belongs to the central type of any forceful order;--'Quercus sacra,'
'Laurus sacra,' etc.,--the word 'Benedicta,' or 'Benedictus,' being used
instead, if the plant be too humble to bear, without some discrepancy and
unbecomingness, the higher title; as 'Carduus Benedictus,' Holy Thistle.

25. Among the gentes of flowers bearing girls' names, the dominant one will
be simply called the Queen, 'Rose Regina,' 'Rose the Queen' (the English
wild rose); 'Clarissa Regina,' 'Clarissa the Queen' (Mountain Pink); 'Lucia
Regina,' 'Lucy the Queen' (Spring Gentian), or in simpler English, 'Lucy of
Teesdale,' as 'Harry of Monmouth.' The ruling flowers of groups {193} which
bear names not yet accepted for names of girls, will be called simply
'Domina,' or shortly 'Donna.' 'Rubra domina' (wild raspberry): the wild
strawberry, because of her use in heraldry, will bear a name of her own,
exceptional, 'Cora coronalis.'

26. These main points being understood, and concessions made, we may first
arrange the greater orders of land plants in a group of twelve, easily
remembered, and with very little forcing. There must be _some_ forcing
always to get things into quite easily tenable form, for Nature always has
her ins and outs. But it is curious how fitly and frequently the number of
twelve may be used for memoria technica; and in this instance the Greek
derivative names fall at once into harmony with the most beautiful parts of
Greek mythology, leading on to early Christian tradition.

27. Their series will be, therefore, as follows: the principal subordinate
groups being at once placed under each of the great ones. The reasons for
occasional appearance of inconsistency will be afterwards explained, and
the English and French forms given in each case are the terms which would
be used in answering the rapid question, 'Of what order is this flower?'
the answer being, It is a 'Cyllenid,' a 'Pleiad,' or a 'Vestal,' as one
would answer of a person, he is a Knight of St. John or Monk of St.
Benedict; while to the question, of what gens, we answer, a Stella or an
Erica, as one would answer of a person, a Stuart or Plantagenet. {194}

  I. CHARITES.
  ENG. CHARIS. FR. RHODIADE.
  Rosa. Persica. Pomum. Rubra. Fragaria.

  II. URANIDES.
  ENG. URANID. FR. URANIDE.
  Lucia. Campanula. Convoluta.

  III. CYLLENIDES.
  ENG. CYLLENID. FR. NEPHELIDE.
  Stella. Francesca. Primula.

  IV. OREIADES.
  ENG. OREIAD. FR. OREADE.
  Erica. Myrtilla. Aurora.

  V. PLEIADES.
  ENG. PLEIAD. FR. PLEIADE.
  Silvia. Anemone.

  VI. ARTEMIDES.
  ENG. ARTEMID. FR. ARTEMIDE.
  Clarissa. Lychnis. Scintilla. Mica.

  VII. VESTALES.
  ENG. VESTAL. FR. VESTALE.
  Mentha. Melitta. Basil. Salvia. Lavandula. Thymus.

  VIII. CYTHERIDES.
  ENG. CYTHERID. FR. CYTHERIDE.
  Viola. Veronica. Giulietta.
  {195}

  IX. HELIADES.
  ENG. ALCESTID. FR. HELIADE.
  Clytia. Margarita. Alcestis. Falconia. Carduus.

  X. DELPHIDES.
  ENG. DELPHID. FR. DELPHIDE.
  Laurus. Granata. Myrtus.

  XI. HESPERIDES.
  ENG. HESPERID. FR. HESPERIDE.
  Aurantia. Aglee.

  XII. ATHENAIDES.
  ENG. ATHENAID. FR. ATHENAIDE.
  Olea. Fraxinus.

I will shortly note the changes of name in their twelve orders, and the
reasons for them.

I. CHARITES.--The only change made in the nomenclature of this order is the
slight one of 'rubra' for 'rubus': partly to express true sisterhood with
the other Charites; partly to enforce the idea of redness, as
characteristic of the race, both in the lovely purple and russet of their
winter leafage, and in the exquisite bloom of scarlet on the stems in
strong young shoots. They have every right to be placed among the Charites,
first because the raspberry is really a more important fruit in domestic
economy than the strawberry; and, secondly, because the wild bramble is
often in its wandering sprays even more graceful than the rose; and in
blossom and {196} fruit the best autumnal gift that English Nature has
appointed for her village children.

II. URANIDES.--Not merely because they are all of the color of the sky, but
also sacred to Urania in their divine purity. 'Convoluta' instead of
'convolvulus,' chiefly for the sake of euphony; but also because pervinca
is to be included in this group.

III. CYLLENIDES.--Named from Mount Cyllene in Arcadia, because the three
races included in the order alike delight in rocky ground, and in the cold
or moist air of mountain-clouds.

IV. OREIADES.--Described in next chapter.

V. PLEIADES.--From the habit of the flowers belonging to this order to get
into bright local clusters. Silvia, for the wood-sorrel, will I hope be an
acceptable change to my girl-readers.

VI. ARTEMIDES.--Dedicate to Artemis for their expression of energy, no less
than purity. This character was rightly felt in them by whoever gave the
name 'Dianthus' to their leading race; a name which I should have retained
if it had not been bad Greek. I wish them, by their name 'Clarissa' to
recall the memory of St. Clare, as 'Francesca' that of St. Francis.[56] The
{197} 'issa,' not without honour to the greatest of our English moral
story-tellers, is added for the practical reason, that I think the sound
will fasten in the minds of children the essential characteristic of the
race, the cutting of the outer edge of the petal as if with scissors.

VII. VESTALES.--I allow this Latin form, because Hestiades would have been
confused with Heliades. The order is named 'of the hearth,' from its
manifold domestic use, and modest blossoming.

VIII. CYTHERIDES.--Dedicate to Venus, but in all purity and peace of
thought. Giulietta, for the coarse, and more than ordinarily false,
Polygala.

IX. HELIADES.--The sun-flowers.[57] In English, Alcestid, in honour to
Chaucer and the Daisy.

X. DELPHIDES.--Sacred to Apollo. Granata, changed from Punica, in honor to
Granada and the Moors.

XI. HESPERIDES.--Already a name given to the order. {198} Aegle, prettier
and more classic than Limonia, includes the idea of brightness in the
blossom.

XII. ATHENAIDES.--I take Fraxinus into this group, because the mountain
ash, in its hawthorn-scented flower, scarletest of berries, and exquisitely
formed and finished leafage, belongs wholly to the floral decoration of our
native rocks, and is associated with their human interests, though lightly,
not less spiritually, than the olive with the mind of Greece.

28. The remaining groups are in great part natural; but I separate for
subsequent study five orders of supreme domestic utility, the Mallows,
Currants, Pease,[58] Cresses, and Cranesbills, from those which, either in
fruit or blossom, are for finer pleasure or higher beauty. I think it will
be generally interesting for children to learn those five names as an easy
lesson, and gradually discover, wondering, the world that they include. I
will give their terminology at length, separately.

29. One cannot, in all groups, have all the divisions of equal importance;
the Mallows are only placed with the other four for their great value in
decoration of cottage gardens in autumn: and their softly healing {199}
qualities as a tribe. They will mentally connect the whole useful group
with the three great Æsculapiadæ, Cinchona, Coffea, and Camellia.

30. Taking next the water-plants, crowned in the DROSIDÆ, which include the
five great families, Juncus, Jacinthus, Amaryllis, Iris, and Lilium, and
are masculine in their Greek name because their two first groups, Juncus
and Jacinthus, are masculine, I gather together the three orders of
TRITONIDES, which are notably trefoil; the NAIADES, notably quatrefoil, but
for which I keep their present pretty name; and the BATRACHIDES,[59]
notably cinqfoil, for which I keep their present ugly one, only changing it
from Latin into Greek.

31. I am not sure of being forgiven so readily for putting the Grasses,
Sedges, Mosses, and Lichens together, under the great general head of
Demetridæ. But it seems to me the mosses and lichens belong no less
definitely to Demeter, in being the first gatherers of earth on rock, and
the first coverers of its sterile surface, than the grass which at last
prepares it to the foot and to the food of man. And with the mosses I shall
take all the especially moss-plants which otherwise are homeless or
companionless, Drosera, and the like, and as a connecting link with the
flowers belonging to the Dark {200} Kora, the two strange orders of the
Ophryds and Agarics.

32. Lastly will come the orders of flowers which may be thought of as
belonging for the most part to the Dark Kora of the lower world,--having at
least the power of death, if not its terror, given them, together with
offices of comfort and healing in sleep, or of strengthening, if not too
prolonged, action on the nervous power of life. Of these, the first will be
the DIONYSIDÆ,--Hedera, Vitis, Liana; then the DRACONIDÆ,--Atropa,
Digitalis, Linaria; and, lastly, the MOIRIDÆ,--Conîum, Papaver, Solanum,
Arum, and Nerium.

33. As I see this scheme now drawn out, simple as it is, the scope of it
seems not only far too great for adequate completion by my own labour, but
larger than the time likely to be given to botany by average scholars would
enable them intelligently to grasp: and yet it includes, I suppose, not the
tenth part of the varieties of plants respecting which, in competitive
examination, a student of physical science is now expected to know, or at
least assert on hearsay, _something_.

So far as I have influence with the young, myself, I would pray them to be
assured that it is better to know the habits of one plant than the names of
a thousand; and wiser to be happily familiar with those that grow in the
nearest field, than arduously cognisant of all that plume the isles of the
Pacific, or illumine the Mountains of the Moon. {201}

Nevertheless, I believe that when once the general form of this system in
Proserpina has been well learned, much other knowledge may be easily
attached to it, or sheltered under the eaves of it: and in its own
development, I believe everything may be included that the student will
find useful, or may wisely desire to investigate, of properly European
botany. But I am convinced that the best results of his study will be
reached by a resolved adherence to extreme simplicity of primal idea, and
primal nomenclature.

34. I do not think the need of revisal of our present scientific
classification could be more clearly demonstrated than by the fact that
laurels and roses are confused, even by Dr. Lindley, in the mind of his
feminine readers; the English word laurel, in the index to his first volume
of Ladies' Botany, referring them to the cherries, under which the common
laurel is placed as 'Prunus Laurocerasus,' while the true laurel, 'Laurus
nobilis,' must be found in the index of the second volume, under the Latin
form 'Laurus.'

This accident, however, illustrates another, and a most important point to
be remembered, in all arrangements whether of plants, minerals, or animals.
No single classification can possibly be perfect, or anything _like_
perfect. It must be, at its best, a ground, or _warp_ of arrangement only,
through which, or over which, the cross threads of another,--yes, and of
many others,--must be woven in our minds. Thus the almond, though in {202}
the form and colour of its flower, and method of its fruit, rightly
associated with the roses, yet by the richness and sweetness of its kernel
must be held mentally connected with all plants that bear nuts. These
assuredly must have something in their structure common, justifying their
being gathered into a conceived or conceivable group of 'Nuciferæ,' in
which the almond, hazel, walnut, cocoa-nut, and such others would be
considered as having relationship, at least in their power of secreting a
crisp and sweet substance which is not wood, nor bark, nor pulp, nor
seed-pabulum reducible to softness by boiling;--but quite separate
substance, for which I do not know that there at present exists any
botanical name,--of which, hitherto, I find no general account, and can
only myself give so much, on reflection, as that it is crisp and close in
texture, and always contains some kind of oil or milk.

35. Again, suppose the arrangement of plants could, with respect to their
flowers and fruits, be made approximately complete, they must instantly be
broken and reformed by comparison of their stems and leaves. The three
_creeping_ families of the Charites,--Rosa, Rubra, and Fragaria,--must then
be frankly separated from the elastic Persica and knotty Pomum; of which
one wild and lovely species, the hawthorn, is no less notable for the
massive accumulation of wood in the stubborn stem of it, than the wild rose
for her lovely power of wreathing her garlands at pleasure wherever they
are {203} fairest, the stem following them and sustaining, where they will.

36. Thus, as we examine successively each part of any plant, new
sisterhoods, and unthought-of fellowships, will be found between the most
distant orders; and ravines of unexpected separation open between those
otherwise closely allied. Few botanical characters are more definite than
the leaf structure illustrated in Plate VI., which has given to one group
of the Drosidæ the descriptive name of Ensatæ, (see above, Chapter IX., §
11,) but this conformation would not be wisely permitted to interfere in
the least with the arrangement founded on the much more decisive floral
aspects of the Iris and Lily. So, in the fifth volume of 'Modern Painters,'
the sword-like, or rather rapier-like, leaves of the pine are opposed, for
the sake of more vivid realization, to the shield-like leaves of the
greater number of inland trees; but it would be absurd to allow this
difference any share in botanical arrangement,--else we should find
ourselves thrown into sudden discomfiture by the wide-waving and opening
foliage of the palms and ferns.

37. But through all the defeats by which insolent endeavors to sum the
orders of Creation must be reproved, and in the midst of the successes by
which patient insight will be surprised, the fact of the _confirmation_ of
species in plants and animals must remain always a miraculous one. What
outstretched sign of constant Omnipotence can be more awful, than that the
susceptibility to {204} external influences, with the reciprocal power of
transformation, in the organs of the plant; and the infinite powers of
moral training and mental conception over the nativity of animals, should
be so restrained within impassable limits, and by inconceivable laws, that
from generation to generation, under all the clouds and revolutions of
heaven with its stars, and among all the calamities and convulsions of the
Earth with her passions, the numbers and the names of her Kindred may still
be counted for her in unfailing truth;--still the fifth sweet leaf unfold
for the Rose, and the sixth spring for the Lily; and yet the wolf rave
tameless round the folds of the pastoral mountains, and yet the tiger flame
through the forests of the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

{205}

CHAPTER XII.

CORA AND KRONOS.

1. Of all the lovely wild plants--and few, mountain-bred, in Britain, are
other than lovely,--that fill the clefts and crest the ridges of my
Brantwood rock, the dearest to me, by far, are the clusters of whortleberry
which divide possession of the lower slopes with the wood hyacinth and
pervenche. They are personally and specially dear to me for their
association in my mind with the woods of Montanvert; but the plant itself,
irrespective of all accidental feeling, is indeed so beautiful in all its
ways--so delicately strong in the spring of its leafage, so modestly
wonderful in the formation of its fruit, and so pure in choice of its
haunts, not capriciously or unfamiliarly, but growing in luxuriance through
all the healthiest and sweetest seclusion of mountain territory throughout
Europe,--that I think I may without any sharp remonstrance be permitted to
express for this once only, personal feeling in my nomenclature, calling it
in Latin 'Myrtilla Cara,' and in French 'Myrtille Chérie,' but retaining
for it in English its simply classic name, 'Blue Whortle.' {206}

2. It is the most common representative of the group of Myrtillæ, which, on
reference to our classification, will be found central between the Ericæ
and Auroræ. The distinctions between these three families may be easily
remembered, and had better be learned before going farther; but first let
us note their fellowship. They are all Oreiades, mountain plants; in
specialty, they are all strong in stem, low in stature, and the Ericæ and
Auroræ glorious in the flush of their infinitely exulting flowers, ("the
rapture of the heath"--above spoken of, p. 96.) But all the essential
loveliness of the Myrtillæ is in their leaves and fruit: the first always
exquisitely finished and grouped like the most precious decorative work of
sacred painting; the second, red or purple, like beads of coral or
amethyst. Their minute flowers have rarely any general part or power in the
colors of mountain ground; but, examined closely, they are one of the chief
joys of the traveller's rest among the Alps; and full of exquisiteness
unspeakable, in their several bearings and miens of blossom, so to speak.
Plate VIII. represents, however feebly, the proud bending back of her head
by Myrtilla Regina:[60] an action as beautiful in _her_ as it is terrible
in the Kingly Serpent of Egypt.

3. The formal differences between these three families are trenchant and
easily remembered. The Ericæ {207} are all quatrefoils, and quatrefoils of
the most studied and accomplished symmetry; and they bear no berries, but
only dry seeds. The Myrtillæ and Auroræ are both Cinqfoil; but the Myrtillæ
are symmetrical in their blossom, and the Auroræ unsymmetrical. Farther,
the Myrtillæ are not absolutely determinate in the number of their foils,
(this being essentially a characteristic of flowers exposed to much
hardship,) and are thus sometimes quatrefoil, in sympathy with the Ericæ.
But the Auroræ are strictly cinqfoil. These last are the only European form
of a larger group, well named 'Azalea' from the Greek [Greek: aza],
dryness, and its adjective [Greek: azalea], dry or parched; and _this_ name
must be kept for the world-wide group, (including under it Rhododendron,
but not Kalmia,) because there is an under-meaning in the word Aza,
enabling it to be applied to the substance of dry earth, and indicating one
of the great functions of the Oreiades, in common with the mosses,--the
collection of earth upon rocks.

4. Neither the Ericæ, as I have just said, nor Auroræ bear useful fruit;
and the Ericæ are named from their consequent worthlessness in the eyes of
the Greek farmer; they were the plants he 'tore up' for his bed, or
signal-fire, his word for them including a farther sense of crushing or
bruising into a heap. The Westmoreland shepherds now, alas! burn them
remorselessly on the ground, (and a year since had nearly set the copse of
Brantwood on fire just above the house.) The sense of {208} parched and
fruitless existence is given to the heaths, with beautiful application of
the context, in our English translation of Jeremiah xvii. 6; but I find the
plant there named is, in the Septuagint, Wild Tamarisk; the mountains of
Palestine being, I suppose, in that latitude, too low for heath, unless in
the Lebanon.

5. But I have drawn the reader's thoughts to this great race of the
Oreiades at present, because they place for us in the clearest light a
question which I have finally to answer before closing the first volume of
Proserpina; namely, what is the real difference between the three ranks of
Vegetative Humility, and Noblesse--the Herb, the Shrub, and the Tree?

6. Between the herb, which perishes annually, and the plants which
construct year after year an increasing stem, there is, of course, no
difficulty of discernment; but between the plants which, like these
Oreiades, construct for themselves richest intricacy of supporting stem,
yet scarcely rise a fathom's height above the earth they gather and
adorn,--between these, and the trees that lift cathedral aisles of colossal
shade on Andes and Lebanon,--where is the limit of kind to be truly set?

7. We have the three orders given, as no botanist could, in twelve lines by
Milton:--

 "Then herbs of every leaf, that sudden flow'r'd
  Op'ning their various colours, and made gay
  Her bosom smelling sweet; and, these scarce blown,
  Forth flourish'd thick the clust'ring vine, forth crept
  {209}
  The swelling gourd, up stood the corny reed
  Embattel'd in her field; and th' _humble shrub,_
  _And bush with frizzled hair implicit_: last
  Rose, as in dance, the stately trees, and spread
  Their branches hung with copious fruits, or gemm'd
  Their blossoms; with high woods the hills were crown'd;
  With tufts the valleys and each fountain side;
  With borders long the rivers."

Only to learn, and be made to understand, these twelve lines thoroughly
would teach a youth more of true botany than an entire Cyclopædia of modern
nomenclature and description: they are, like all Milton's work, perfect in
accuracy of epithet, while consummate in concentration. Exquisite in touch,
as infinite in breadth, they gather into their unbroken clause of melodious
compass the conception at once of the Columbian prairie, the English
cornfield, the Syrian vineyard, and the Indian grove. But even Milton has
left untold, and for the instant perhaps unthought of, the most solemn
difference of rank between the low and lofty trees, not in magnitude only,
nor in grace, but in duration.

8. Yet let us pause before passing to this greater subject, to dwell more
closely on what he has told us so clearly,--the difference in Grace,
namely, between the trees that rise 'as in dance,' and 'the bush with
frizzled hair.' For the bush form is essentially one taken by vegetation in
some kind of distress; scorched by heat, discouraged by darkness, or bitten
by frost; it is the form in which isolated knots of earnest plant life stay
{210} the flux of fiery sands, bind the rents of tottering crags, purge the
stagnant air of cave or chasm, and fringe with sudden hues of unhoped
spring the Arctic edge of retreating desolation.

On the other hand, the trees which, as in sacred dance, make the borders of
the rivers glad with their procession, and the mountain ridges statelier
with their pride, are all expressions of the vegetative power in its
accomplished felicities; gathering themselves into graceful companionship
with the fairest arts and serenest life of man; and providing not only the
sustenance and the instruments, but also the lessons and the delights, of
that life, in perfectness of order, and unblighted fruition of season and
time.

9. 'Interitura'--yet these not to-day, nor to-morrow, nor with the decline
of the summer's sun. We describe a plant as small or great; and think we
have given account enough of its nature and being. But the chief question
for the plant, as for the human creature, is the Number of its days; for to
the tree, as to its master, the words are forever true--"As thy Day is, so
shall thy Strength be."

10. I am astonished hourly, more and more, at the apathy and stupidity
which have prevented me hitherto from learning the most simple facts at the
base of this question! Here is this myrtille bush in my hand--its cluster
of some fifteen or twenty delicate green branches knitting themselves
downwards into the stubborn brown {211} of a stem on which my knife makes
little impression. I have not the slightest idea how old it is, still less
how old it might one day have been if I had not gathered it; and, less than
the least, what hinders it from becoming as old as it likes! What doom is
there over these bright green sprays, that they may never win to any height
or space of verdure, nor persist beyond their narrow scope of years?

11. And the more I think the more I bewilder myself; for these bushes,
which are pruned and clipped by the deathless Gardener into these lowly
thickets of bloom, do not strew the ground with fallen branches and faded
clippings in any wise,--it is the pining umbrage of the patriarchal trees
that tinges the ground and betrays the foot beneath them: but, under the
heather and the Alpine rose.--Well, what _is_ under them, then? I never
saw, nor thought of looking,--will look presently under my own bosquets and
beds of lingering heather-blossom: beds indeed they were only a month
since, a foot deep in flowers, and close in tufted cushions, and the
mountain air that floated over them rich in honey like a draught of
metheglin.

12. Not clipped, nor pruned, I think, after all,--nor dwarfed in the
gardener's sense; but pausing in perpetual youth and strength, ordained out
of their lips of roseate infancy. Rose-trees--the botanists have falsely
called the proudest of them; yet not trees in any wise, they, nor doomed to
know the edge of axe at their {212} roots, nor the hoary waste of time, or
searing thunderstroke, on sapless branches. Continual morning for them, and
_in_ them; they themselves an Aurora, purple and cloudless, stayed on all
the happy hills. That shall be our name for them, in the flushed Phoenician
colour of their height, in calm or tempest of the heavenly sea; how much
holier than the depth of the Tyrian! And the queen of them on our own Alps
shall be 'Aurora Alpium.'[61]

13. There is one word in the Miltonian painting of them which I must lean
on specially; for the accurate English of it hides deep morality no less
than botany. 'With hair _implicit_.' The interweaving of complex band,
which knits the masses of heath or of Alpine rose into their dense tufts
and spheres of flower, is to be noted both in these, and in stem structure
of a higher order like that of the stone pine, for an expression of the
instinct of the plant gathering itself into protective unity, whether
against cold or heat, while the forms of the trees which have no hardship
to sustain are uniformly based on the effort of each spray to _separate_
itself from its fellows to the utmost, and obtain around its own leaves the
utmost space of air.

In vulgar modern English, the term 'implicit' used of Trust or Faith, has
come to signify only its serenity. But the Miltonian word gives the
_reason_ of serenity: {213} the root and branch intricacy of closest
knowledge and fellowship.

14. I have said that Milton has told us more in these few lines than any
botanist could. I will prove my saying by placing in comparison with them
two passages of description by the most imaginative and generally
well-trained scientific man since Linnæus--Humboldt--which, containing much
that is at this moment of special use to us, are curious also in the
confusion even of the two orders of annual and perennial plants, and show,
therefore, the extreme need of most careful initial work in this
distinction of the reign of Cora from that of Kronos.

"The disk of the setting sun appeared like a globe of fire suspended over
the savannah; and its last rays, as they swept the earth, illumined the
extremities of the grass, strongly agitated by the evening breeze. In the
low and humid places of the equinoxial zone, even when the gramineous
plants and reeds present the aspect of a meadow, of turf, a rich decoration
of the picture is usually wanting. I mean that variety of wild flowers
which, scarcely rising above the grass, seem to lie upon a smooth bed of
verdure. Between the tropics, the strength and luxury of vegetation give
such a development to plants, that the smallest of the dicotyledonous
family become shrubs.[62] It would seem as if the {214} liliaceous plants,
mingled with the gramina, assumed the place of the flowers of our meadows.
Their form is indeed striking; they dazzle by the variety and splendor of
their colours; but, too high above the soil, they disturb that harmonious
relation which exists among the plants that compose our meadows and our
turf. Nature, in her beneficence, has given the landscape under every zone
its peculiar type of beauty.

"After proceeding four hours across the savannahs, we entered into a little
wood composed of shrubs and small trees, which is called El Pejual; no
doubt because of the great abundance of the 'Pejoa' (Gaultheria odorata,) a
plant with very odoriferous leaves. The steepness of the mountain became
less considerable, and we felt an indescribable pleasure in examining the
plants of this region. Nowhere, perhaps, can be found collected together in
so small a space of ground, productions so beautiful, and so remarkable in
regard to the geography of plants. At the height of a thousand toises, the
lofty savannahs of the hills terminate in a zone of shrubs, which by their
appearance, their tortuous branches, their stiff leaves, and the dimensions
and beauty of their purple flowers, remind us of what is called in the
Cordilleras of the Andes the vegetation of the _paramos_[63] and the
_punas_. We find there the {215} family of the Alpine rhododendrons, the
thibaudias, the andromedas, the vacciniums, and those befarias[64] with
resinous leaves, which we have several times compared to the rhododendron
of our European Alps.

"Even when nature does not produce the same species in analogous climates,
either in the plains of isothermal parallels, or on table-lands the
temperature of which resembles that of places nearer the poles, we still
remark a striking resemblance of appearance and physiognomy in the
vegetation of the most distant countries. This phenomenon is one of the
most curious in the history of organic forms. I say the history; for in
vain would reason forbid man to form hypotheses on the origin of things: he
is not the less tormented with these insoluble problems of the distribution
of beings."

15. Insoluble--yes, assuredly, poor little beaten phantasms of palpitating
clay that we are--and who asked us to solve it? Even this Humboldt,
quiet-hearted and modest watcher of the ways of Heaven, in the real make of
him, came at last to be so far puffed up by his vain science in declining
years that he must needs write a Kosmos of things in the Universe,
forsooth, as if he knew all about them! when he was not able meanwhile,
(and does not seem even to have desired the ability,) to put the slightest
Kosmos into his own 'Personal Narrative'; but leaves one to gather what one
wants out of {216} its wild growth; or rather, to wash or winnow what may
be useful out of its débris, without any vestige either of reference or
index; and I must look for these fragmentary sketches of heath and grass
through chapter after chapter about the races of the Indian and religion of
the Spaniard,--these also of great intrinsic value, but made useless to the
general reader by interspersed experiment on the drifts of the wind and the
depths of the sea.

16. But one more fragment out of a note (vol. iii., p. 494) I must give,
with reference to an order of the Rhododendrons as yet wholly unknown to
me.

"The name of vine tree, 'uvas camaronas' (Shrimp grapes?) is given in the
Andes to plants of the genus Thibaudia on account of their _large succulent
fruit_. Thus the ancient botanists give the name of Bear's vine, 'Uva
Ursi,' and vine of Mount Ida, 'Vitis Idea,' to an Arbutus and Myrtillus
which belong, like the Thibaudiæ, to the family of the Ericineæ."

Now, though I have one entire bookcase and half of another, and a large
cabinet besides, or about fifteen feet square of books on botany beside me
here, and a quantity more at Oxford, I have no means whatever, in all the
heap, of finding out what a Thibaudia is like. Loudon's Cyclopædia, the
only general book I have, tells me only that it will grow well in camellia
houses, that its flowers develope at Christmas, and that they are
beautifully varied like a fritillary: whereupon I am very anxious to see
them, and taste their fruit, and be able to {217} tell my pupils something
intelligible of them,--a new order, as it seems to me, among my Oreiades.
But for the present I can make no room for them, and must be content, for
England and the Alps, with my single class, Myrtilla, including all the
fruit-bearing and (more or less) myrtle-leaved kinds; and Azalea for the
fruitless flushing of the loftier tribes; taking the special name 'Aurora'
for the red and purple ones of Europe, and resigning the already accepted
'Rhodora' to those of the Andes and Himalaya.

17. Of which also, with help of earnest Indian botanists, I hope
nevertheless to add some little history to that of our own Oreiades; but
shall set myself on the most familiar of them first, as I partly hinted in
taking for the frontispiece of this volume two unchecked shoots of our
commonest heath, in their state of full lustre and decline. And now I must
go out and see and think--and for the first time in my life--what becomes
of all these fallen blossoms, and where my own mountain Cora hides herself
in winter; and where her sweet body is laid in its death.

Think of it with me, for a moment before I go. That harvest of amethyst
bells, over all Scottish and Irish and Cumberland hill and moorland; what
substance is there in it, yearly gathered out of the mountain
winds,--stayed there, as if the morning and evening clouds had been caught
out of them and woven into flowers; 'Ropes of sea-sand'--but that is
child's magic {218} merely, compared to the weaving of the Heath out of the
cloud. And once woven, how much of it is forever worn by the Earth? What
weight of that transparent tissue, half crystal and half comb of honey,
lies strewn every year dead under the snow?

I must go and look, and can write no more to-day; nor to-morrow neither. I
must gather slowly what I see, and remember; and meantime leaving, to be
dealt with afterwards, the difficult and quite separate question of the
production of _wood_, I will close this first volume of Proserpina with
some necessary statements respecting the operations, serviceable to other
creatures than themselves, in which the lives of the noblest plants are
ended: honourable in this service equally, though evanescent, some,--in the
passing of a breeze--or the dying of a day;--and patient some, of storm and
time, serene in fruitful sanctity, through all the uncounted ages which Man
has polluted with his tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

{219}

CHAPTER XIII.

THE SEED AND HUSK.

1. Not the least sorrowful, nor least absurd of the confusions brought on
us by unscholarly botanists, blundering into foreign languages, when they
do not know how to use their own, is that which has followed on their
practice of calling the seed-vessels of flowers 'egg-vessels,'[65] in
Latin; thus involving total loss of the power of the good old English word
'husk,' and the good old French one, 'cosse.' For all the treasuries of
plants (see Chapter IV., § 17) may be best conceived, and described,
generally, as consisting of 'seed' and 'husk,'--for the most part two or
more seeds, in a husk composed of two or more parts, as pease in their
shell, pips in an orange, or kernels in a walnut; but whatever their
number, or the method of their enclosure, let the student keep clear in his
mind, for the base of all study of fructification, the broad distinction
between the seed, as one thing, and the husk as another: the seed,
essential to the continuance of the plant's race; and the husk, {220}
adapted, primarily, to its guard and dissemination; but secondarily, to
quite other and far more important functions.

2. For on this distinction follows another practical one of great
importance. A seed may serve, and many do mightily serve, for the food of
man, when boiled, crushed, or otherwise industriously prepared by man
himself, for his mere _sustenance_. But the _husk_ of the seed is prepared
in many cases for the delight of his eyes, and the pleasure of his palate,
by Nature herself, and is then called a 'fruit.'

3. The varieties of structure both in seed and husk, and yet more, the
manner in which the one is contained, and distributed by, the other, are
infinite; and in some cases the husk is apparently wanting, or takes some
unrecognizable form. But in far the plurality of instances the two parts of
the plant's treasury are easily distinguishable, and must be separately
studied, whatever their apparent closeness of relation, or, (as in all
natural things,) the equivocation sometimes taking place between the one
and the other. To me, the especially curious point in this matter is that,
while I find the most elaborate accounts given by botanists of the stages
of growth in each of these parts of the treasury, they never say of what
use the guardian is to the guarded part, irrespective of its service to
man. The mechanical action of the husk in containing and scattering the
seeds, they indeed often notice and insist on; but they do not tell {221}
us of what, if any, nutritious or fostering use the rind is to a chestnut,
or an orange's pulp to its pips, or a peach's juice to its stone.

4. Putting aside this deeper question for the moment, let us make sure we
understand well, and define safely, the separate parts themselves. A seed
consists essentially of a store, or sack, containing substance to nourish a
germ of life, which is surrounded by such substance, and in the process of
growth is first fed by it. The germ of life itself rises into two portions,
and not more than two, in the seeds of two-leaved plants; but this
symmetrical dualism must not be allowed to confuse the student's
conception, of the _three_ organically separate parts,--the tough skin of a
bean, for instance; the softer contents of it which we boil to eat; and the
small germ from which the root springs when it is sown. A bean is the best
type of the whole structure. An almond out of its shell, a peach-kernel,
and an apple-pip are also clear and perfect, though varied types.

5. The husk, or seed-vessel, is seen in perfect simplicity of type in the
pod of a bean, or the globe of a poppy. There are, I believe, flowers in
which it is absent or imperfect; and when it contains only one seed, it may
be so small and closely united with the seed it contains, that both will be
naturally thought of as one thing only. Thus, in a dandelion, the little
brown grains, which may be blown away, each with its silken parachute, are
every one of them a complete husk and {222} seed together. But the majority
of instances (and those of plants the most serviceable to man) in which the
seed-vessel has entirely a separate structure and mechanical power, justify
us in giving it the normal term 'husk,' as the most widely applicable and
intelligible.

6. The change of green, hard, and tasteless vegetable substance into
beautifully coloured, soft, and delicious substance, which produces what we
call a fruit, is, in most cases, of the husk only; in others, of the part
of the stalk which immediately sustains the seed; and in a very few
instances, not properly a change, but a distinct formation, of fruity
substance between the husk and seed. Normally, however, the husk, like the
seed, consists always of three parts; it has an outer skin, a central
substance of peculiar nature, and an inner skin, which holds the seed. The
main difficulty, in describing or thinking of the completely ripened
product of any plant, is to discern clearly which is the inner skin of the
husk, and which the outer skin of the seed. The peach is in this respect
the best general type,--the woolly skin being the outer one of the husk;
the part we eat, the central substance of the husk; and the hard shell of
the stone, the inner skin of the husk. The bitter kernel within is the
seed.

7. In this case, and in the plum and cherry, the two parts under present
examination--husk and seed--separate naturally; the fruity part, which is
the body of the husk, adhering firmly to the shell, which is its inner
{223} coat. But in the walnut and almond, the two outer parts of the husk
separate from the interior one, which becomes an apparently independent
'shell.' So that when first I approached this subject I divided the general
structure of a treasury into _three_ parts--husk, shell, and kernel; and
this division, when we once have mastered the main one, will be often
useful. But at first let the student keep steadily to his conception of the
two constant parts, husk and seed, reserving the idea of shells and kernels
for one group of plants only.

8. It will not be always without difficulty that he maintains the
distinction, when the tree pretends to have changed it. Thus, in the
chestnut, the inner coat of the husk becomes brown, adheres to the seed,
and seems part of it; and we naturally call only the thick, green, prickly
coat, the husk. But this is only one of the deceiving tricks of Nature, to
compel our attention more closely. The real place of separation, to _her_
mind, is between the mahogany-coloured shell and the nut itself, and that
more or less silky and flossy coating within the brown shell is the true
lining of the entire 'husk.' The paler brown skin, following the rugosities
of the nut, is the true sack or skin of the seed. Similarly in the walnut
and almond.

9. But, in the apple, two new tricks are played us. First, in the brown
skin of the ripe pip, we might imagine we saw the part correspondent to the
mahogany skin of the chestnut, and therefore the inner coat of the {224}
husk. But it is not so. The brown skin of the pips belongs to them
properly, and is all their own. It is the true skin or sack of the seed.
The inner coat of the husk is the smooth, white, scaly part of the core
that holds them.

Then,--for trick number two. We should as naturally imagine the skin of the
apple, which we peel off, to be correspondent to the skin of the peach; and
therefore, to be the outer part of the husk. But not at all. The outer part
of the husk in the apple is melted away into the fruity mass of it, and the
red skin outside is the skin of its _stalk_, not of its seed-vessel at all!

10. I say 'of its stalk,'--that is to say, of the part of the stalk
immediately sustaining the seed, commonly called the torus, and expanding
into the calyx. In the apple, this torus incorporates itself with the husk
completely; then refines its own external skin, and colours _that_
variously and beautifully, like the true skin of the husk in the peach,
while the withered leaves of the calyx remain in the 'eye' of the apple.

But in the 'hip' of the rose, the incorporation with the husk of the seed
does not take place. The torus, or,--as in this flower from its peculiar
form it is called,--the tube of the calyx, alone forms the frutescent part
of the hip; and the complete seeds, husk and all, (the firm triangular husk
enclosing an almond-shaped kernel,) are grouped closely in its interior
cavity, while the calyx remains on the top in a large and scarcely
withering star. {225} In the nut, the calyx remains green and beautiful,
forming what we call the husk of a filbert; and again we find Nature
amusing herself by trying to make us think that this strict envelope,
almost closing over the single seed, is the same thing to the nut that its
green shell is to a walnut!

11. With still more capricious masquing, she varies and hides the structure
of her 'berries.'

The strawberry is a hip turned inside-out, the frutescent receptacle
changed into a scarlet ball, or cone, of crystalline and delicious coral,
in the outside of which the separate seeds, husk and all, are imbedded. In
the raspberry and blackberry, the interior mound remains sapless; and the
rubied translucency of dulcet substance is formed round each separate seed,
_upon_ its husk; not a part of the husk, but now an entirely independent
and added portion of the plant's bodily form.

12. What is thus done for each seed, on the _out_side of the receptacle, in
the raspberry, is done for each seed, _in_side the calyx, in a pomegranate;
which is a hip in which the seeds have become surrounded with a radiant
juice, richer than claret wine; while the seed itself, within the generous
jewel, is succulent also, and spoken of by Tournefort as a "baie
succulente." The tube of the calyx, brown-russet like a large hip,
externally, is yet otherwise divided, and separated wholly from the
cinque-foiled, and cinque-celled rose, both in number of petal and division
of treasuries; the calyx has eight points, and nine cells. {226}

13. Lastly, in the orange, the fount of fragrant juice is interposed
between the seed and the husk. It is wholly independent of both; the
Aurantine rind, with its white lining and divided compartments, is the true
husk; the orange pips are the true seeds; and the eatable part of the fruit
is formed between them, in clusters of delicate little flasks, as if a
fairy's store of scented wine had been laid up by her in the hollow of a
chestnut shell, between the nut and rind; and then the green changed to
gold.

14. I have said '_lastly_'--of the orange, for fear of the reader's
weariness only; not as having yet represented, far less exhausted, the
variety of frutescent form. But these are the most important types of it;
and before I can explain the relation between these, and another, too often
confounded with them--the _granular_ form of the seed of grasses.--I must
give some account of what, to man, is far more important than the form--the
gift to him in fruit-food; and trial, in fruit-temptation.

       *       *       *       *       *

{227}

CHAPTER XIV.

THE FRUIT GIFT.

1. In the course of the preceding chapter, I hope that the reader has
obtained, or may by a little patience both obtain and secure, the idea of a
great natural Ordinance, which, in the protection given to the part of
plants necessary to prolong their race, provides, for happier living
creatures, food delightful to their taste, and forms either amusing or
beautiful to their eyes. Whether in receptacle, calyx, or true husk,--in
the cup of the acorn, the fringe of the filbert, the down of the apricot,
or bloom of the plum, the powers of Nature consult quite other ends than
the mere continuance of oaks and plum trees on the earth; and must be
regarded always with gratitude more deep than wonder, when they are indeed
seen with human eyes and human intellect.

2. But in one family of plants, the _contents_ also of the seed, not the
envelope of it merely, are prepared for the support of the higher animal
life; and their grain, filled with the substance which, for universally
understood name, may best keep the Latin one of Farina,--becoming in
French, 'Farine,' and in English, 'Flour,'--both in the perfectly
nourishing elements of it, and its {228} easy and abundant
multiplicability, becomes the primal treasure of human economy.

3. It has been the practice of botanists of all nations to consider the
seeds of the grasses together with those of roses and pease, as if all
could be described on the same principles, and with the same nomenclature
of parts. But the grain of corn is a quite distinct thing from the seed of
pease. In _it_, the husk and the seed envelope have become inextricably
one. All the exocarps, endocarps, epicarps, mesocarps, shells, husks,
sacks, and skins, are woven at once together into the brown bran; and
inside of that, a new substance is collected for us, which is not what we
boil in pease, or poach in eggs, or munch in nuts, or grind in coffee;--but
a thing which, mixed with water and then baked, has given to all the
nations of the world their prime word for food, in thought and
prayer,--Bread; their prime conception of the man's and woman's labor in
preparing it--("whoso putteth hand to the _plough_"--two women shall be
grinding at the _mill_)--their prime notion of the means of cooking by
fire--("which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the _oven_"), and their
prime notion of culinary office--the "chief _baker_," cook, or
pastrycook,--(compare Bedreddin Hassan in the Arabian Nights): and,
finally, to modern civilization, the Saxon word 'lady,' with whatever it
imports.

4. It has also been the practice of botanists to confuse all the ripened
products of plants under the general term {229} 'fruit.' But the essential
and separate fruit-gift is of two substances, quite distinct from flour,
namely, oil and wine, under the last term including for the moment all
kinds of juice which will produce alcohol by fermentation. Of these, oil
may be produced either in the kernels of nuts, as in almonds, or in the
substance of berries, as in the olive, date, and coffee-berry. But the
sweet juice which will become medicinal in wine, can only be developed in
the husk, or in the receptacle.

5. The office of the Chief Butler, as opposed to that of the Chief Baker,
and the office of the Good Samaritan, pouring in oil and wine, refer both
to the total fruit-gift in both kinds: but in the study of plants, we must
primarily separate our notion of their gifts to men into the three
elements, flour, oil, and wine; and have instantly and always intelligible
names for them in Latin, French, and English.

And I think it best not to confuse our ideas of pure vegetable substance
with the possible process of fermentation:--so that rather than 'wine,' for
a constant specific term, I will take 'Nectar,'--this term more rightly
including the juices of the peach, nectarine, and plum, as well as those of
the grape, currant, and apple.

Our three separate substances will then be easily named in all three
languages:

  Farina.            Oleum.             Nectar.
  Farine.            Huile.             Nectare.
  Flour.             Oil.               Nectar.

{230}

There is this farther advantage in keeping the third common term, that it
leaves us the words Succus, Jus, Juice, for other liquid products of
plants, watery, milky, sugary, or resinous,--often indeed important to man,
but often also without either agreeable flavor or nutritious power; and it
is therefore to be observed with care that we may use the word 'juice,' of
a liquid produced by any part of a plant, but 'nectar,' only of the juices
produced in its fruit.

6. But the good and pleasure of fruit is not in the juice only;--in some
kinds, and those not the least valuable, (as the date,) it is not in the
juice at all. We still stand absolutely in want of a word to express the
more or less firm _substance_ of fruit, as distinguished from all other
products of a plant. And with the usual ill-luck,--(I advisedly think of it
as demoniacal misfortune)--of botanical science, no other name has been yet
used for such substance than the entirely false and ugly one of
'Flesh,'--Fr., 'Chair,' with its still more painful derivation 'Charnu,'
and in England the monstrous scientific term, 'Sarco-carp.'

But, under the housewifery of Proserpina, since we are to call the juice of
fruit, Nectar, its substance will be as naturally and easily called
Ambrosia; and I have no doubt that this, with the other names defined in
this chapter, will not only be found practically more convenient than the
phrases in common use, but will more securely fix in the student's mind a
true conception of {231} the essential differences in substance, which,
ultimately, depend wholly on their pleasantness to human perception, and
offices for human good; and not at all on any otherwise explicable
structure or faculty. It is of no use to determine, by microscope or
retort, that cinnamon is made of cells with so many walls, or grape-juice
of molecules with so many sides;--we are just as far as ever from
understanding why these particular interstices should be aromatic, and
these special parallelopipeds exhilarating, as we were in the savagely
unscientific days when we could only see with our eyes, and smell with our
noses. But to call each of these separate substances by a name rightly
belonging to it through all the past variations of the language of educated
man, will probably enable us often to discern powers in the thing itself,
of affecting the human body and mind, which are indeed qualities infinitely
more its _own_, than any which can possibly be extracted by the point of a
knife, or brayed out with a mortar and pestle.

7. Thus, to take merely instance in the three main elements of which we
have just determined the names,--flour, oil, and ambrosia;--the differences
in the kinds of pleasure which the tongue received from the powderiness of
oat-cake, or a well-boiled potato--(in the days when oat-cake and potatoes
were!)--from the glossily-softened crispness of a well-made salad, and from
the cool and fragrant amber of an apricot, are indeed distinctions between
the essential virtues of things which {232} were made to be _tasted_, much
more than to be eaten; and in their various methods of ministry to, and
temptation of, human appetites, have their part in the history, not of
elements merely, but of souls; and of the soul-virtues, which from the
beginning of the world have bade the barrel of meal not waste, nor the
cruse of oil fail; and have planted, by waters of comfort, the fruits which
are for the healing of nations.

8. And, again, therefore, I must repeat, with insistance, the claim I have
made for the limitation of language to the use made of it by educated men.
The word 'carp' could never have multiplied itself into the absurdities of
endo-carps and epi-carps, but in the mouths of men who scarcely ever read
it in its original letters, and therefore never recognized it as meaning
precisely the same thing as 'fructus,' which word, being a little more
familiar with, they would have scarcely abused to the same extent; they
would not have called a walnut shell an intra-fruct--or a grape skin an
extra-fruct; but again, because, though they are accustomed to the English
'fructify,' 'frugivorous'--and 'usufruct,' they are unaccustomed to the
Latin 'fruor,' and unconscious therefore that the derivative 'fructus' must
always, in right use, mean an _enjoyed_ thing, they generalize every mature
vegetable product under the term; and we find Dr. Gray coolly telling us
that there is no fruit so "likely to be mistaken for a seed," as a grain of
corn! a grain, whether of corn, or any other {233} grass, being precisely
the vegetable structure to which frutescent change is forever forbidden!
and to which the word _seed_ is primarily and perfectly applicable!--the
thing to be _sown_, not grafted.

9. But to mark this total incapability of frutescent change, and connect
the form of the seed more definitely with its dusty treasure, it is better
to reserve, when we are speaking with precision, the term 'grain' for the
seeds of the grasses: the difficulty is greater in French than in English:
because they have no monosyllabic word for the constantly granular 'seed';
but for us the terms are all simple, and already in right use, only not
quite clearly enough understood; and there remains only one real difficulty
now in our system of nomenclature, that having taken the word 'husk' for
the seed-vessel, we are left without a general word for the true fringe of
a filbert, or the chaff of a grass. I don't know whether the French
'frange' could be used by them in this sense, if we took it in English
botany. But for the present, we can manage well enough without it, one
general term, 'chaff,' serving for all the grasses, 'cup' for acorns, and
'fringe' for nuts.

10. But I call this a _real_ difficulty, because I suppose, among the
myriads of plants of which I know nothing, there may be forms of the
envelope of fruits or seeds which may, for comfort of speech, require some
common generic name. One _un_real difficulty, or shadow of difficulty,
remains in our having no entirely comprehensive {234} name for seed and
seed-vessel together than that the botanists now use, 'fruit.' But
practically, even now, people feel that they can't gather figs of thistles,
and never speak of the fructification of a thistle, or of the fruit of a
dandelion. And, re-assembling now, in one view, the words we have
determined on, they will be found enough for all practical service, and in
such service always accurate, and, usually, suggestive. I repeat them in
brief order, with such farther explanation as they need.

11. All ripe products of the life of flowers consist essentially of the
Seed and Husk,--these being, in certain cases, sustained, surrounded, or
provided with means of motion, by other parts of the plant; or by
developments of their own form which require in each case distinct names.
Thus the white cushion of the dandelion to which its brown seeds are
attached, and the personal parachutes which belong to each, must be
separately described for that species of plants; it is the little brown
thing they sustain and carry away on the wind, which must be examined as
the essential product of the floret;--the 'seed and husk.'

12. Every seed has a husk, holding either that seed alone, or other seeds
with it.

Every perfect seed consists of an embryo, and the substance which first
nourishes that embryo; the whole enclosed in a sack or other sufficient
envelope. Three essential parts altogether. {235}

Every perfect husk, vulgarly pericarp, or 'round-fruit,'--(as periwig,
'round-wig,')--consists of a shell, (vulgarly endocarp,) rind, (vulgarly
mesocarp,) and skin, (vulgarly epicarp); three essential parts altogether.
But one or more of these parts may be effaced, or confused with another;
and in the seeds of grasses they all concentrate themselves into bran.

13. When a husk consists of two or more parts, each of which has a separate
shaft and volute, uniting in the pillar and volute of the flower, each
separate piece of the husk is called a 'carpel.' The name was first given
by De Candolle, and must be retained. But it continually happens that a
simple husk divides into two parts corresponding to the two leaves of the
embryo, as in the peach, or symmetrically holding alternate seeds, as in
the pea. The beautiful drawing of the pea-shell with its seeds, in
Rousseau's botany, is the only one I have seen which rightly shows and
expresses this arrangement.

14. A Fruit is either the husk, receptacle, petal, or other part of a
flower _external to the seed_, in which chemical changes have taken place,
fitting it for the most part to become pleasant and healthful food for man,
or other living animals; but in some cases making it bitter or poisonous to
them, and the enjoyment of it depraved or deadly. But, as far as we know,
it is without any definite office to the seed it contains; and the change
takes {236} place entirely to fit the plant to the service of animals.[66]

In its perfection, the Fruit Gift is limited to a temperate zone, of which
the polar limit is marked by the strawberry, and the equatorial by the
orange. The more arctic regions produce even the smallest kinds of fruit
with difficulty; and the more equatorial, in coarse, oleaginous, or
over-luscious masses.

15. All the most perfect fruits are developed _from exquisite forms either
of foliage or flower_. The vine leaf, in its generally decorative power, is
the most important, both in life and in art, of all that shade the
habitations of men. The olive leaf is, without any rival, the most
beautiful of the leaves of timber trees; and its blossom, though minute, of
extreme beauty. The apple is essentially the fruit of the rose, and the
peach of her only rival in her own colour. The cherry and orange blossom
are the two types of floral snow.

16. And, lastly, let my readers be assured, the economy of blossom and
fruit, with the distribution of water, {237} will be found hereafter the
most accurate test of wise national government.

For example of the action of a national government, rightly so called, in
these matters, I refer the student to the Mariegolas of Venice, translated
in Fors Clavigera; and I close this chapter, and this first volume of
Proserpina, not without pride, in the words I wrote on this same matter
eighteen years ago. "So far as the labourer's immediate profit is
concerned, it matters not an iron filing whether I employ him in growing a
peach, or in forging a bombshell. But the difference to him is final,
whether, when his child is ill, I walk into his cottage, and give it the
peach,--or drop the shell down his chimney, and blow his roof off."

       *       *       *       *       *

{238}

INDEX I.

DESCRIPTIVE NOMENCLATURE.

Plants in perfect form are said, at page 26, to consist of four principal
parts: root, stem, leaf, and flower. (Compare Chapter V., § 2.) The reader
may have been surprised at the omission of the fruit from this list. But a
plant which has borne fruit is no longer of 'perfect' form. Its flower is
dead. And, observe, it is further said, at page 65, (and compare Chapter
III., § 2,) that the use of the fruit is to produce the flower: not of the
flower to produce the fruit. Therefore, the plant in perfect blossom, is
itself perfect. Nevertheless, the formation of the fruit, practically, is
included in the flower, and so spoken of in the fifteenth line of the same
page.

Each of these four main parts of a plant consist normally of a certain
series of minor parts, to which it is well to attach easily remembered
names. In this section of my index I will not admit the confusion of idea
involved by alphabetical arrangement of these names, but will sacrifice
facility of reference to clearness of explanation, and taking the four
great parts of the plant in {239} succession, I will give the list of the
minor and constituent parts, with their names as determined in Proserpina,
and reference to the pages where the reasons for such determination are
given, endeavouring to supply, at the same time, any deficiencies which I
find in the body of the text.

I. THE ROOT.

                                                             PAGE

  Origin of the word Root                                     27

  The offices of the root are threefold: namely,
  Tenure, Nourishment, and Animation                       27-34

  The essential parts of a Root are two: the Limbs
  and Fibres                                                  33

  I. THE LIMB is the gathered mass of fibres, or at
  least of fibrous substance, which extends itself
  in search of nourishment                                    32

  II. THE FIBRE is the organ by which the nourishment
  is received                                                 32

  The inessential or accidental parts of roots, which
  are attached to the roots of some plants, but
  not to those of others, (and are, indeed, for the
  most part absent,) are three: namely, Store-Houses,
  Refuges, and Ruins                                          34

  III. Store-houses contain the food of the future
  plant                                                       34

  {240}

  IV. REFUGES shelter the future plant itself for a
  time                                                        35

  V. RUINS form a basis for the growth of the future
  plant in its proper order                                   36

  Root-Stocks, the accumulation of such ruins in a vital
  order                                                       37

  General questions relating to the office and chemical
  power of roots                                              38

  /#
  The nomenclature of Roots will not be extended, in
  Proserpina, beyond the five simple terms here given:
  though the ordinary botanical ones--corm, bulb, tuber,
  etc.--will be severally explained in connection with the
  plants which they specially characterize.
  #/

II. THE STEM.

  Derivation of word                                         137

  The channel of communication between leaf and
  root                                                       153

  In a perfect plant it consists of three parts:

  I. THE STEM (STEMMA) proper.--A growing or advancing
  shoot which sustains all the other
  organs of the plant                                        136

  It may grow by adding thickness to its sides without
  advancing; but its essential characteristic is
  the vital power of Advance                                 136
  {241}

  It may be round, square, or polygonal, but is always
  roundly minded                                             136

  Its structural power is Spiral                             137

  It is essentially branched; having subordinate leaf-stalks
  and flower-stalks, if not larger branches                  139

  It developes the buds, leaves, and flowers of the
  plant.

  This power is not yet properly defined, or explained;
  and referred to only incidentally throughout
  the eighth chapter                                     134-138

  II. THE LEAF-STALK (CYMBA) sustains, and expands
  itself into, the Leaf                                 133, 134

  It is essentially furrowed above, and convex below         134

  It is to be called in Latin, the Cymba; in English,
  the Leaf-Stalk                                             135

  III. THE FLOWER-STALK (PETIOLUS):

  It is essentially round                                    130

  It is usually separated distinctly at its termination
  from the flower                                       130, 131

  It is to be called in Latin, Petiolus; in English,
  Flower-stalk                                               130

  These three are the essential parts of a stem. But
  {242}
  besides these, it has, when largely developed, a
  permanent form: namely,

  IV. THE TRUNK.--A non-advancing mass of collected
  stem, arrested at a given height from the
  ground                                                     139

  /#
  The stems of annual plants are either leafy, as of a
  thistle, or bare, sustaining the flower or flower-cluster at
  a certain height above the ground. Receiving therefore
  these following names:---
  #/

  V. THE VIRGA.--The leafy stem of an annual plant,
  not a grass, yet growing upright                           147

  VI. THE VIRGULA.--The leafless flower-stem of an
  annual plant, not a grass, as of a primrose or
  dandelion                                                  147

  VII. THE FILUM.--The running stem of a creeping
  plant

  /#
  It is not specified in the text for use; but will be necessary;
  so also, perhaps, the Stelechos, or stalk proper (26),
  the branched stem of an annual plant, not a grass; one
  cannot well talk of the Virga of hemlock. The 'Stolon'
  is explained in its classical sense at page 158, but I believe
  botanists use it otherwise. I shall have occasion
  to refer to, and complete its explanation, in speaking of
  bulbous plants.
  #/

  VIII. THE CAUDEX.--The essentially ligneous and
  compact part of a stem                                     149

  {243}

  /#
  This equivocal word is not specified for use in the text,
  but I mean to keep it for the accumulated stems of inlaid
  plants, palms, and the like; for which otherwise we have
  no separate term.
  #/

  IX. THE AVENA.--Not specified in the text at all;
  but it will be prettier than 'baculus,' which is
  that I had proposed, for the 'staff' of grasses.
  See page 179.

  /#
  These ten names are all that the student need remember;
  but he will find some interesting particulars respecting
  the following three, noticed in the text:---
  #/

  STIPS.--The origin of stipend, stupid, and stump           148

  STIPULA.--The subtlest Latin term for straw                148

  CAULIS (Kale).--The peculiar stem of branched eatable
  vegetables                                                 149

  CANNA.--Not noticed in the text; but likely to be
  sometimes useful for the stronger stems of
  grasses.

III. THE LEAF.

  Derivation of word                                          26

  The Latin form 'folium'                                     41

  The Greek form 'petalos'                                    42

  Veins and ribs of leaves, to be usually summed under
  the term 'rib'                                              44

  Chemistry of leaves                                         46
  {244}

  /#
  The nomenclature of the leaf consists, in botanical
  books, of little more than barbarous, and, for the general
  reader, totally useless attempts to describe their
  forms in Latin. But their forms are infinite and indescribable
  except by the pencil. I will give central types of
  form in the next volume of Proserpina; which, so that
  the reader sees and remembers, he may _call_ anything he
  likes. But it is necessary that names should be assigned
  to certain classes of leaves which are essentially different
  from each other in character and tissue, not merely
  in form. Of these the two main divisions have been
  already given: but I will now add the less important
  ones which yet require distinct names.
  #/

  I. APOLLINE.--Typically represented by the laurel           51

  II. ARETHUSAN.--Represented by the alisma                   52

  /#
  It ought to have been noticed that the character of serration,
  within reserved limits, is essential to an Apolline
  leaf, and absolutely refused by an Arethusan one.
  #/

  III. DRYAD.--Of the ordinary leaf tissue, neither
  manifestly strong, nor admirably tender, but
  serviceably consistent, which we find generally
  to be the substance of the leaves of forest trees.
  Typically represented by those of the oak.

  IV. ABIETINE.--Shaft or sword-shape, as the leaves
  of firs and pines.

  V. CRESSIC.--Delicate and light, with smooth tissue,
  as the leaves of cresses, and clover.
  {245}

  VI. SALVIAN.--Soft and woolly, like miniature
  blankets, easily folded, as the leaves of sage.

  VII. CAULINE.--Softly succulent, with thick central
  ribs, as of the cabbage.

  VIII. ALOEINE.--Inflexibly succulent, as of the
  aloe or houseleek.

  /#
  No rigid application of these terms must ever be attempted;
  but they direct the attention to important general
  conditions, and will often be found to save time and
  trouble in description.
  #/

IV. THE FLOWER.

  Its general nature and function                             65

  Consists essentially of Corolla and Treasury                78

  Has in perfect form the following parts:--

  I. THE TORUS.--Not yet enough described in the
  text. It is the expansion of the extremity of
  the flower-stalk, in preparation for the support
  of the expanding flower                                66, 224

  II. THE INVOLUCRUM.--Any kind of wrapping or
  propping condition of leafage at the base of a
  flower may properly come under this head; but
  the manner of prop or protection differs in different
  kinds, and I will not at present give generic
  names to these peculiar forms.

  {246}
  III. THE CALYX (The Hiding-place).--The outer
  whorl of leaves, under the protection of which
  the real flower is brought to maturity. Its separate
  leaves are called SEPALS                                    80

  IV. THE COROLLA (The Cup).--The inner whorl of
  leaves, forming the flower itself. Its separate
  leaves are called PETALS                                    71

  V. THE TREASURY.--The part of the flower that
  contains its seeds.

  VI. THE PILLAR.--The part of the flower above its
  treasury, by which the power of the pollen is
  carried down to the seeds                                   78

  It consists usually of two parts--the SHAFT and
  VOLUTE                                                      78

  When the pillar is composed of two or more shafts,
  attached to separate treasury-cells, each cell
  with its shaft is called a CARPEL                          235

  VII. THE STAMENS.--The parts of the flower which
  secrete its pollen                                          78

  They consist usually of two parts, the FILAMENT and
  ANTHER, not yet described.

  VIII. THE NECTARY.--The part of the flower containing
  its honey, or any other special product
  of its inflorescence. The name has often been
  {247}
  given to certain forms of petals of which the
  use is not yet known. No notice has yet been
  taken of this part of the flower in Proserpina.

  /#
  These being all the essential parts of the flower itself,
  other forms and substances are developed in the seed as it
  ripens, which, I believe, may most conveniently be arranged
  in a separate section, though not logically to be
  considered as separable from the flower, but only as
  mature states of certain parts of it.
  #/

V. THE SEED.

I must once more desire the reader to take notice that, under the four
sections already defined, the morphology of the plant is to be considered
as complete, and that we are now only to examine and name, farther, its
_product_; and that not so much as the germ of its own future descendant
flower, but as a separate substance which it is appointed to form, partly
to its own detriment, for the sake of higher creatures. This product
consists essentially of two parts: the Seed and its Husk.

  I. THE SEED.--Defined                                      220

  It consists, in its perfect form, of three parts           222

  /#
  These three parts are not yet determinately named in
  the text: but I give now the names which will be usually
  attached to them.
  #/

  A. _The Sacque_.--The outside skin of a seed               221

  {248}

  B. _The Nutrine_.--A word which I coin, for general
  applicability, whether to the farina of
  corn, the substance of a nut, or the parts that
  become the first leaves in a bean                          221

  C. _The Germ_.--The origin of the root                     221

  II. THE HUSK.--Defined                                     222

  Consists, like the seed when in perfect form, of
  three parts.

  A. _The Skin_.--The outer envelope of all the
  seed structures                                            222

  B. _The Rind_.--The central body of the Husk.          222-235

  C. _The Shell_.--Not always shelly, yet best described
  by this general term; and becoming
  a shell, so called, in nuts, peaches, dates, and
  other such kernel-fruits                                   222

  The products of the Seed and Husk of Plants, for
  the use of animals, are practically to be massed
  under the three heads of BREAD, OIL, and FRUIT.
  But the substance of which bread is made is
  more accurately described as Farina; and the
  pleasantness of fruit to the taste depends on two
  elements in its substance: the juice, and the
  pulp containing it, which may properly be
  called Nectar and Ambrosia. We have therefore
  in all four essential products of the Seed
  and Husk--

  {249}
  A. Farina.    Flour                                        227

  B. Oleum.     Oil                                          229

  C. Nectar.    Fruit-juice                                  229

  D. Ambrosia.  Fruit-substance                              230


Besides these all-important products of the seed, others are formed in the
stems and leaves of plants, of which no account hitherto has been given in
Proserpina. I delay any extended description of these until we have
examined the structure of wood itself more closely; this intricate and
difficult task having been remitted (p. 195) to the days of coming spring;
and I am well pleased that my younger readers should at first be vexed with
no more names to be learned than those of the vegetable productions with
which they are most pleasantly acquainted: but for older ones, I think it
well, before closing the present volume, to indicate, with warning, some of
the obscurities, and probable fallacies, with which this vanity of science
encumbers the chemistry, no less than the morphology, of plants.

Looking back to one of the first books in which our new knowledge of
organic chemistry began to be displayed, thirty years ago, I find that even
at that period the organic elements which the cuisine of the laboratory had
already detected in simple Indigo, were the following:-- {250}

  Isatine, Bromisatine, Bidromisatine;
  Chlorisatine, Bichlorisatine;
  Chlorisatyde, Bichlorisatyde;
  Chlorindine, Chlorindoptene, Chlorindatmit;
  Chloranile, Chloranilam, and, Chloranilammon.

And yet, with all this practical skill in decoction, and accumulative
industry in observation and nomenclature, so far are our scientific men
from arriving, by any decoctive process of their own knowledge, at general
results useful to ordinary human creatures, that when I wish now to
separate, for young scholars, in first massive arrangement of vegetable
productions, the Substances of Plants from their Essences; that is to say,
the weighable and measurable body of the plant from its practically
immeasurable, if not imponderable, spirit, I find in my three volumes of
close-printed chemistry, no information what ever respecting the quality of
volatility in matter, except this one sentence:--

"The disposition of various substances to yield vapour is very different:
and the difference depends doubtless on the relative power of cohesion with
which they are endowed."[67]

Even in this not extremely pregnant, though extremely {251} cautious,
sentence, two conditions of matter are confused, no notice being taken of
the difference in manner of dissolution between a vitally fragrant and a
mortally putrid substance.

It is still more curious that when I look for more definite instruction on
such points to the higher ranks of botanists, I find in the index to Dr.
Lindley's 'Introduction to Botany'--seven hundred pages of close print--not
one of the four words 'Volatile,' 'Essence,' 'Scent,' or 'Perfume.' I
examine the index to Gray's 'Structural and Systematic Botany,' with
precisely the same success. I next consult Professors Balfour and Grindon,
and am met by the same dignified silence. Finally, I think over the
possible chances in French, and try in Figuier's indices to the 'Histoire
des Plantes' for 'Odeur'--no such word! 'Parfum'--no such word.
'Essence'--no such word. 'Encens'--no such word. I try at last 'Pois de
Senteur,' at a venture, and am referred to a page which describes their
going to sleep.

Left thus to my own resources, I must be content for the present to bring
the subject at least under safe laws of nomenclature. It is possible that
modern chemistry may be entirely right in alleging the absolute identity of
substances such as albumen, or fibrine, whether they occur in the animal or
vegetable economies. But I do not choose to assume this identity in my
nomenclature. It may, perhaps, be very fine and very instructive to {252}
inform the pupils preparing for competitive examination that the main
element of Milk is Milkine, and of Cheese, Cheesine. But for the practical
purposes of life, all that I think it necessary for the pupil to know is
that in order to get either milk or cheese, he must address himself to a
Cow, and not to a Pump; and that what a chemist can produce for him out of
dandelions or cocoanuts, however milky or cheesy it may look, may more
safely be called by some name of its own.

This distinctness of language becomes every day more desirable, in the face
of the refinements of chemical art which now enable the ingenious
confectioner to meet the demands of an unscientific person for (suppose) a
lemon drop, with a mixture of nitric acid, sulphur, and stewed bones. It is
better, whatever the chemical identity of the products may be, that each
should receive a distinctive epithet, and be asked for and supplied, in
vulgar English, and vulgar probity, either as essence of lemons, or
skeletons.

I intend, therefore,--and believe that the practice will be found both wise
and convenient,--to separate in all my works on natural history the terms
used for vegetable products from those used for animal or mineral ones,
whatever may be their chemical identity, or resemblance in aspect. I do not
mean to talk of fat in seeds, nor of flour in eggs, nor of milk in rocks.
Pace my prelatical friends, I mean to use the word 'Alb' for vegetable
albumen; and although I cannot without pedantry avoid {253} using sometimes
the word 'milky' of the white juices of plants, I must beg the reader to
remain unaffected in his conviction that there is a vital difference
between liquids that coagulate into butter, or congeal into India-rubber.
Oil, when used simply, will always mean a vegetable product: and when I
have occasion to speak of petroleum, tallow, or blubber, I shall generally
call these substances by their right names.

There are also a certain number of vegetable materials more or less
prepared, secreted, or digested for us by animals, such as wax, honey,
silk, and cochineal. The properties of these require more complex
definitions, but they have all very intelligible and well-established
names. 'Tea' must be a general term for an extract of any plant in boiling
water: though when standing alone the word will take its accepted Chinese
meaning: and essence, the general term for the condensed dew of a vegetable
vapour, which is with grace and fitness called the 'being' of a plant,
because its properties are almost always characteristic of the species; and
it is not, like leaf tissue or wood fibre, approximately the same material
in different shapes; but a separate element in each family of flowers, of a
mysterious, delightful, or dangerous influence, logically inexplicable,
chemically inconstructible, and wholly, in dignity of nature, above all
modes and faculties of form.

       *       *       *       *       *

{254}

INDEX II.

TO THE PLANTS SPOKEN OF IN THIS VOLUME, UNDER THEIR ENGLISH NAMES, ACCEPTED
BY PROSERPINA.

  Apple, 102
  Ash, 120, 127
  Aspen, 134
  Asphodel, 8, 36
  Bay, 51
  Bean, 104
  Bed-straw, 120
  Bindweed, 144
  Birch, 172
  Blackthorn, 119, 127
  Blaeberry, 52, 206
  Bluebell, 144
  Bramble, 119, 195
  Burdock, 112, 131
  Burnet, 95
  Butterbur, 118
  Cabbage, 131, 149
  Captain-salad, 149
  Carrot, 32, 35
  Cauliflower, 131, 149
  Cedar, 35, 61, 113
  Celandine, 72
  Cherry, 65, 130
  Chestnut, 62
     "   Spanish, 166
  Chicory, 118
  Clover, 111
  Colewort, 149
  Coltsfoot, 110
  Corn-cockle, 108
  Corn-flag, 104, 109
  Cowslip, 139
  Crocus, 36, 37
  Daffodil,
  {255}
  Daisy, 117, 144, 145
  Dandelion, 117
  Devil's Bit, 147
  Dock, 131
  Elm, 52
  Fig, 63
  Flag, 104
  Flax, 165
  Foils, Rock, 144
     "   Roof, 144, 146
  Foxglove, 70, 118, 139
  Frog-flower, 56
  Grape, 103, 130
  Grass, 52, 53, 55, 156, 158, 161, 163
  Hawk's-eye, 118
  Hazel, 120
  Heath, 67, 68, 107, 208
  Hemlock, 107
  Herb-Robert, 121
  Holly, 113, 119
  Houseleek, 37, 146
  Hyacinth, 65, 67
  Ivy, 111
  Jacinth, 83, 186
  King-cup, 110
  Laurel, 35, 59, 140
     "   leaves, 43, 51, 60
  Lichen, 175
  Lilac, 76
  Lily, 1, 36, 53, 104, 109
  Lily, St. Bruno's, 1, 7, 9, 10
  Lily of the Valley, 143
  Lily, Water, 55, 72
  Ling, 68, 69
  Lion's-tooth, 113
  Liquorice, 38
  Lucy, 110, 144
  Mistletoe, 111
  Moss, 12, 15, 175
  Mushroom, 43, 127
  Myrtle, 51
  Nettle, 52, 88, 107
  Nightshade, 108
  Oak, 36, 140
     "   blossom, 67
  Olive, 51, 63, 142
  Onion, 38
  Orange, 51
  Pæony, 129
  Palm, 43, 53, 54, 103, 156, 166
  {256}
  Pansy, 120, 144
  Papilionaceæ, 145
  Papyrus, 165
  Pea, 32, 144
  Peach, 130, 144
  Pine, 140
  Pineapple, 14
  Pink, 144
  Plantain, 134
  Pomegranate, 102
  Poplar, 52
  Poppy, 70, 76, 86, 104
  Primrose, 79, 144
  Radish, 35, 38
  Ragged Robin, 155
  Rhubarb, 131
  Rice, 52
  Rock-foil, 144
  Roof-foil, 144, 146
  Rose, 64, 69, 75, 104, 109, 119, 121, 129, 144
  Rush, 157
  Saxifrage, 120, 143, 146
  Scabious, 147
  Sedum, 146
  Sorrel-wood, 9
  Spider Plant, 8
  Sponsa solis, 118
  Stella, 144, 146
     "   domestica, 146
  Stonecrop, 146
  Sweetbriar, 109
  Thistle, 103, 104, 113, 117, 118, 121, 144 _note_, 151
  Thistle, Creeping, 138
     "   Waste, 138
  Thorns, 121, 127
     "   Black, 119, 127
  Thyme, 118
  Tobacco, 38, 108
  Tormentilla, 110
  Turnip, 35
  Vine, 104, 108, 140, 142
  Viola, 144
  Wallflower, 111
  Wheat, 127, 165
  Wreathewort, 181

       *       *       *       *       *

{257}

INDEX III.

TO THE PLANTS SPOKEN OF IN THIS VOLUME, UNDER THEIR LATIN OR GREEK NAMES,
ACCEPTED BY PROSERPINA.

  Acanthus, 104
  Alata, 144
  Alisma, 52
  Amaryllis, 36, 37
  Anemone, 107
  Artemides, 196
  Asphodel, 11
  Aurora, 207
  Azalea, 207
  Cactus, 43
  Campanula, 144
  Carduus, 138
  Charites, 188
  Cistus, 69
  Clarissa, 144, 155
  Contorta, 181
  Convoluta, 144
  Cyclamen, 32
  Drosidæ, 36, 199
  Ensatæ, 203
  Ericæ, 9, 206
  Eryngo, 83
  Fragaria, 188
  Francesca, 144, 146
  Fraxinus, 195
  Geranium, 83, 120
  Gladiolus, 104, 109, 163
  Hyacinthus, 186
  Hypnum, 13
  Iris, 36, 103
  Lilium (_see_ Lily), 8
  Lucia, 110, 189
  {258}
  Magnolia, 51
  Margarita, 144
  Myrtilla, 206
  Narcissus, 109
  Ophrys, 180
  Papaver, 91, 96
  Persica, 144
  Pomum, 188
  Primula, 143
  Rosa, 144
  Rubra, 188, 195
  Satyrium, 182
  Stella, 144, 146
  Veronica, 75
  Viola, 144

       *       *       *       *       *

Notes

[1] At least, it throws off its flowers on each side in a bewilderingly
pretty way; a real lily can't branch, I believe: but, if not, what is the
use of the botanical books saying "on an unbranched stem"?

[2] I have by happy chance just added to my Oxford library the poet Gray's
copy of Linnæus, with its exquisitely written Latin notes, exemplary alike
to scholar and naturalist.

[3] It was in the year 1860, in June.

[4] Admirably engraved by Mr. Burgess, from my pen drawing, now at Oxford.
By comparing it with the plate of the same flower in Sowerby's work, the
student will at once see the difference between attentive drawing, which
gives the cadence and relation of masses in a group, and the mere copying
of each flower in an unconsidered huddle.

[5] "Histoire des Plantes." Ed. 1865, p. 416.

[6] The like of it I have now painted, Number 281, CASE XII., in the
Educational Series of Oxford.

[7] Properly, Floræ Danicæ, but it is so tiresome to print the diphthongs
that I shall always call it thus. It is a folio series, exquisitely begun,
a hundred years ago; and not yet finished.

[8] Magnified about seven times. See note at end of this chapter.

[9] American,--'System of Botany,' the best technical book I have.

[10] 'Dicranum cerviculatum,' sequel to Flora Danica, Tab. MMCCX.

[11] The reader should buy a small specimen of this mineral; it is a useful
type of many structures.

[12] LUCCA, _Aug. 9th, 1874._--I have left this passage as originally
written, but I believe the dome is of accumulated earth. Bringing home,
here, evening after evening, heaps of all kinds of mosses from the hills
among which the Archbishop Ruggieri was hunting the wolf and her whelps in
Ugolino's dream, I am more and more struck, every day, with their special
function as earth-gatherers, and with the enormous importance to their own
brightness, and to our service, of that dark and degraded state of the
inferior leaves. And it fastens itself in my mind mainly as their
distinctive character, that as the leaves of a tree become wood, so the
leaves of a moss become earth, while yet a normal part of the plant. Here
is a cake in my hand weighing half a pound, bright green on the surface,
with minute crisp leaves; but an inch thick beneath in what looks at first
like clay, but is indeed knitted fibre of exhausted moss. Also, I don't at
all find the generalization I made from the botanical books likely to have
occurred to me from the real things. No moss leaves that I can find here
give me the idea of resemblance to pineapple leaves; nor do I see any,
through my weak lens, clearly serrated; but I do find a general tendency to
run into a silky filamentous structure, and in some, especially on a small
one gathered from the fissures in the marble of the cathedral, white
threads of considerable length at the extremities of the leaves, of which
threads I remember no drawing or notice in the botanical books. Figure 1
represents, magnified, a cluster of these leaves, with the germinating
stalk springing from their centre; but my scrawl was tired and careless,
and for once, Mr. Burgess has copied _too_ accurately.

[13] Learn this word, at any rate; and if you know any Greek, learn also
this group of words: "[Greek: hôs rhiza en gê dipsôsêi]," which you may
chance to meet with, and even to think about, some day.

[14] "Duhamel, botanist of the last century, tells us that, wishing to
preserve a field of good land from the roots of an avenue of elms which
were exhausting it, he cut a ditch between the field and avenue to
intercept the roots. But he saw with surprise those of the roots which had
not been cut, go down behind the slope of the ditch to keep out of the
light, go under the ditch, and into the field again." And the Swiss
naturalist Bonnet said wittily, apropos of a wonder of this sort, "that
sometimes it was difficult to distinguish a cat from a rosebush."

[15] As the first great office of the mosses is the gathering of earth, so
that of the grasses is the binding of it. Theirs the Enchanter's toil, not
in vain,--making ropes out of sea-sand.

[16] Drosidæ, in our school nomenclature, is the general name, including
the four great tribes, iris, asphodel, amaryllis, and lily. See reason for
this name given in the 'Queen of the Air,' Section II.

[17] The only use of a great part of our existing nomenclature is to enable
one botanist to describe to another a plant which the other has not seen.
When the science becomes approximately perfect, all known plants will be
properly figured, so that nobody need describe them; and unknown plants be
so rare that nobody will care to learn a new and difficult language, in
order to be able to give an account of what in all probability he will
never see.

[18] An excellent book, nevertheless.

[19] Lindley, 'Introduction to Botany,' vol. i., p. 21. The terms "wholly
obsolete," says an authoritative botanic friend. Thank Heaven!

[20] "You should see the girders on under-side of the Victoria Water-lily,
the most wonderful bit of engineering, of the kind, I know
of."--('Botanical friend.')

[21] Roughly, Cyllene 7,700 feet high; Erymanthus 7,000; Mænalus 6,000.

[22] _March 3rd._--We now ascend the roots of the mountain called Kastaniá,
and begin to pass between it and the mountain of Alonístena, which is on
our right. The latter is much higher than Kastaniá, and, like the other
peaked summits of the Mænalian range, is covered with firs, and deeply at
present with snow. The snow lies also in our pass. At a fountain in the
road, the small village of Bazeníko is half a mile on the right, standing
at the foot of the Mænalian range, and now covered with snow.

Saetá is the most lofty of the range of mountains, which are in face of
Levídhi, to the northward and eastward; they are all a part of the chain
which extends from Mount Khelmós, and connects that great summit with
Artemisium, Parthenium, and Parnon. Mount Saetá is covered with firs. The
mountain between the plain of Levídhi and Alonístena, or, to speak by the
ancient nomenclature, that part of the Mænalian range which separates the
Orchomenia from the valleys of Helisson and Methydrium, is clothed also
with large forests of the same trees; the road across this ridge from
Lavídhi to Alonístena is now impracticable on account of the snow.

I am detained all day at Levídhi by a heavy fall of snow, which before the
evening has covered the ground to half a foot in depth, although the
village is not much elevated above the plain, nor in a more lofty situation
than Tripolitzá.

_March 4th._--Yesterday afternoon and during the night the snow fell in
such quantities as to cover all the plains and adjacent mountains; and the
country exhibited this morning as fine a snow-scene as Norway could supply.
As the day advanced and the sun appeared, the snow melted rapidly, but the
sky was soon overcast again, and the snow began to fall.

[23] Just in time, finding a heap of gold under an oak tree some thousand
years old, near Arundel, I've made them out: Eight, divided by three; that
is to say, three couples of petals, with two odd little ones inserted for
form's sake. No wonder I couldn't decipher them by memory.

[24] Figs. 8 and 9 are both drawn and engraved by Mr. Burgess.

[25] Of Vespertilian science generally, compare 'Eagles' Nest,' pp. 25 and
179.

[26] The mathematical term is 'rhomb.'

[27] [Greek: hês to sperma artopoieitai.]

[28] [Greek: epimêkes echousa to kephalion.] Dioscorides makes no effort to
distinguish species, but gives the different names as if merely used in
different places.

[29] It is also used sometimes of the garden poppy, says Dioscorides,
"[Greek: dia to rhein ex autês ton opon]"--"because the sap, opium, flows
from it."

[30] See all the passages quoted by Liddell.

[31] I find this chapter rather tiresome on re-reading it myself, and
cancel some farther criticism of the imitation of this passage by Virgil,
one of the few pieces of the Æneid which are purely and vulgarly imitative,
rendered also false as well as weak by the introducing sentence, "Volvitur
Euryalus leto," after which the simile of the drooping flower is absurd. Of
criticism, the chief use of which is to warn all sensible men from such
business, the following abstract of Diderot's notes on the passage, given
in the 'Saturday Review' for April 29th, 1871, is worth preserving. (Was
the French critic really not aware that Homer _had_ written the lines his
own way?)

"Diderot illustrates his theory of poetical hieroglyphs by no quotations,
but we can show the manner of his minute and sometimes fanciful criticism
by repeating his analysis of the passage of Virgil wherein the death of
Euryalus is described:--

                 'Pulchrosque per artus
  It cruor, inque humeros cervix collapsa recumbit;
  Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratro
  Languescit moriens; lassove papavera collo
  Demisere caput, pluvia cum forte gravantur.'

"The sound of 'It cruor,' according to Diderot, suggests the image of a jet
of blood; 'cervix collapsa recumbit,' the fall of a dying man's head upon
his shoulder; 'succisus' imitates the use of a cutting scythe (not plough);
'demisere' is as soft as the eye of a flower; 'gravantur,' on the other
hand, has all the weight of a calyx, filled with rain; 'collapsa' marks an
effort and a fall, and similar double duty is performed by 'papavera,' the
first two syllables symbolizing the poppy upright, the last two the poppy
bent. While thus pursuing his minute investigations, Diderot can scarcely
help laughing at himself, and candidly owns that he is open to the
suspicion of discovering in the poem beauties which have no existence. He
therefore qualifies his eulogy by pointing out two faults in the passage.
'Gravantur,' notwithstanding the praise it has received, is a little too
heavy for the light head of a poppy, even when filled with water. As for
'aratro,' coming as it does after the hiss of 'succisus,' it is altogether
abominable. Had Homer written the lines, he would have ended with some
hieroglyph, which would have continued the hiss or described the fall of a
flower. To the hiss of 'succisus' Diderot is warmly attached. Not by
mistake, but in order to justify the sound, he ventures to translate
'aratrum' into 'scythe,' boldly and rightly declaring in a marginal note
that this is not the meaning of the word."

[32] And I have too harshly called our English vines, 'wicked weeds of
Kent,' in Fors Clavigera, xxvii. 11. Much may be said for Ale, when we brew
it for our people honestly.

[33] Has my reader ever thought,--I never did till this moment,--how it
perfects the exquisite character which Scott himself loved, as he invented,
till he changed the form of the novel, that his habitual interjection
should be this word;--not but that the oath, by conscience, was happily
still remaining then in Scotland, taking the place of the mediæval 'by St.
Andrew,' we in England, long before the Scot, having lost all sense of the
Puritanical appeal to private conscience, as of the Catholic oath, 'by St.
George;' and our uncanonized 'by George' in sonorous rudeness, ratifying,
not now our common conscience, but our individual opinion.

[34] 'Jotham,' 'Sum perfectio eorum,' or 'Consummatio eorum.'
(Interpretation of name in Vulgate index.)

[35] If you will look at the engraving, in the England and Wales series, of
Turner's Oakhampton, you will see its use.

[36] General assertions of this kind must always be accepted under
indulgence,--exceptions being made afterwards.

[37] I use 'round' rather than 'cylindrical,' for simplicity's sake.

[38] Carduus Arvensis. 'Creeping Thistle,' in Sowerby; why, I cannot
conceive, for there is no more creeping in it than in a furzebush. But it
especially haunts foul and neglected ground; so I keep the Latin name,
translating 'Waste-Thistle.' I could not show the variety of the curves of
the involucre without enlarging; and if, on this much increased scale, I
had tried to draw the flower, it would have taken Mr. Allen and me a good
month's more work. And I had no more a month than a life, to spare: so the
action only of the spreading flower is indicated, but the involucre drawn
with precision.

[39] The florets gathered in the daisy are cinquefoils, examined closely.
No system founded on colour can be very general or unexceptionable: but the
splendid purples of the pansy, and thistle, which will be made one of the
lower composite groups under Margarita, may justify the general assertion
of this order's being purple.

[40] See Miss Yonge's exhaustive account of the name, 'History of Christian
Names,' vol. i., p. 265.

[41] (Du Cange.) The word 'Margarete' is given as heraldic English for
pearl, by Lady Juliana Berners, in the book of St. Albans.

[42] Recent botanical research makes this statement more than dubitable.
Nevertheless, on no other supposition can the forms and action of
tree-branches, so far as at present known to me, be yet clearly accounted
for.

[43] Not always in muscular power; but the framework on which strong
muscles are to act, as that of an insect's wing, or its jaw, is never
insectile.

[44] It is one of the three cadences, (the others being of the words
rhyming to 'mind' and 'way,') used by Sir Philip Sidney in his marvellous
paraphrase of the 55th Psalm.

[45] Lectures on the Families of Speech, by the Rev. F. Farrer Longman,
1870. Page 81.

[46] I only profess, you will please to observe, to ask questions in
Proserpina. Never to answer any. But of course this chapter is to introduce
some further inquiry in another place.

[47] See Introduction, pp. 5-8.

[48] See Sowerby's nomenclature of the flower, vol. ix., plate 1703.

[49] Linnæus used this term for the oleanders; but evidently with less
accuracy than usual.

[50] "[Greek: anthê porphuroeidê]" says Dioscorides, of the race
generally,--but "[Greek: anthê de hupoporphura]" of this particular one.

[51] I offer a sample of two dozen for good papas and mammas to begin
with:--

  Angraecum.
  Anisopetalum.
  Brassavola.
  Brassia.
  Caelogyne.
  Calopogon.
  Corallorrhiza.
  Cryptarrhena.
  Eulophia.
  Gymnadenia.
  Microstylis.
  Octomeria.
  Ornithidium.
  Ornithocephalus.
  Platanthera.
  Pleurothallis.
  Pogonia.
  Polystachya.
  Prescotia.
  Renanthera.
  Rodriguezia.
  Stenorhyncus.
  Trizeuxis.
  Xylobium.

[52] Compare Chapter V., § 7.

[53] "Jacinthus Jurae," changed from "Hyacinthus Comosus."

[54]

 "Cantando, e scegliendo fior di fiore
  Onde era picta tutta la sua via."--_Purg._, xxviii. 35.

[55] "[Greek: kai theoisi terpna.]"

[56] The four races of this order are more naturally distinct than
botanists have recognized. In Clarissa, the petal is cloven into a fringe
at the outer edge; in Lychnis, the petal is terminated in two rounded lobes
and the fringe withdrawn to the top of the limb; in Scintilla, the petal is
divided into two _sharp_ lobes, without any fringe of the limb; and in
Mica, the minute and scarcely visible flowers have simple and far separate
petals. The confusion of these four great natural races under the vulgar or
accidental botanical names of spittle-plant, shore-plant, sand plant, etc.,
has become entirely intolerable by any rational student; but the names
'Scintilla,' substituted for Stellaria, and 'Mica' for the utterly
ridiculous and probably untrue Sagina, connect themselves naturally with
Lychnis, in expression of the luminous power of the white and sparkling
blossoms.

[57] Clytia will include all the true sun-flowers, and Falconia the
hawkweeds; but I have not yet completed the analysis of this vast and
complex order, so as to determine the limits of Margarita and Alcestis.

[58] The reader must observe that the positions given in this more
developed system to any flower do not interfere with arrangements either
formerly or hereafter given for memoria technica. The name of the pea, for
instance (alata), is to be learned first among the twelve cinqfoils, p.
214, above; then transferred to its botanical place.

[59] The amphibious habit of this race is to me of more importance than its
outlaid structure.

[60] "Arctostaphylos Alpina," I believe; but scarcely recognize the flower
in my botanical books.

[61] 'Aurora Regina,' changed from Rhododendron Ferrugineum.

[62] I do not see what this can mean. Primroses and cowslips can't become
shrubs; nor can violets, nor daisies, nor any other of our pet meadow
flowers.

[63] 'Deserts.' Punas is not in my Spanish dictionary, and the reference to
a former note is wrong in my edition of Humboldt, vol. iii., p. 490.

[64] "The Alpine rose of equinoctial America," p. 453.

[65] More literally "persons to whom the care of eggs is entrusted."

[66] A most singular sign of this function is given to the chemistry of the
changes, according to a French botanist, to whose carefully and richly
illustrated volume I shall in future often refer my readers, "Vers l'époque
de la maturité, les fruits _exhalent de l'acide carbonique_. Ils ne
presentent plus dès lors aucun dégagement d'oxygène pendant le jour, et
_respirent, pour ainsi dire, à la façon des animaux_."--(Figuier, 'Histoire
des Plantes,' p. 182. 8vo. Paris. Hachette. 1874.)

[67] 'Elements of Chemistry,' p. 44. By Edward Turner; edited by Justus
Liebig and William Gregory. Taylor and Walton, 1840.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROSERPINA.

STUDIES OF WAYSIDE FLOWERS,

WHILE THE AIR WAS YET PURE

_AMONG THE ALPS, AND IN THE SCOTLAND AND
ENGLAND WHICH MY FATHER KNEW_.

BY

JOHN RUSKIN, LL.D.,

HONORARY STUDENT OF CHRISTCHURCH, AND HONORARY FELLOW OF CORPUS
CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD.

VOL. II.

1888.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER I.

VIOLA.

1. Although I have not been able in the preceding volume to complete, in
any wise as I desired, the account of the several parts and actions of
plants in general, I will not delay any longer our entrance on the
examination of particular kinds, though here and there I must interrupt
such special study by recurring to general principles, or points of wider
interest. But the scope of such larger inquiry will be best seen, and the
use of it best felt, by entering now on specific study.

I begin with the Violet, because the arrangement of the group to which it
belongs--Cytherides--is more arbitrary than that of the rest, and calls for
some immediate explanation.

2. I fear that my readers may expect me to write something very pretty for
them about violets: but my time for writing prettily is long past; and it
requires some watching over myself, I find, to keep me even from writing
querulously. For while, the older I grow, very thankfully I recognize more
and more the number of pleasures granted to human eyes in this fair world,
I recognize also an increasing sensitiveness in my temper to anything that
interferes with them; and a grievous readiness to find fault--always of
course submissively, but very articulately--with whatever Nature seems to
me not to have managed to the best of her power;--as, for extreme instance,
her late arrangements of frost this spring, destroying all the beauty of
the wood sorrels; nor am I less inclined, looking to her as the greatest of
sculptors and painters, to ask, every time I see a narcissus, why it should
be wrapped up in brown paper; and every time I see a violet, what it wants
with a spur?

3. What _any_ flower wants with a spur, is indeed the simplest and hitherto
to me unanswerablest form of the question; nevertheless, when blossoms grow
in spires, and are crowded together, and have to grow partly downwards, in
order to win their share of light and breeze, one can see some reason for
the effort of the petals to expand upwards and backwards also. But that a
violet, who has her little stalk to herself, and might grow straight up, if
she pleased, should be pleased to do nothing of the sort, but quite
gratuitously bend her stalk down at the top, and fasten herself to it by
her waist, as it were,--this is so much more like a girl of the period's
fancy than a violet's, that I never gather one separately but with renewed
astonishment at it.

4. One reason indeed there is, which I never thought of until this moment!
a piece of stupidity which I can only pardon myself in, because, as it has
chanced, I have studied violets most in gardens, not in their wild
haunts,--partly thinking their Athenian honour was as a garden flower; and
partly being always fed away from them, among the hills, by flowers which I
could see nowhere else. With all excuse I can furbish up, however, it is
shameful that the truth of the matter never struck me before, or at least
this bit of the truth--as follows.

5. The Greeks, and Milton, alike speak of violets as growing in meadows (or
dales). But the Greeks did so because they could not fancy any delight
except in meadows; and Milton, because he wanted a rhyme to
nightingale--and, after all, was London bred. But Viola's beloved knew
where violets grew in Illyria,--and grow everywhere else also, when they
can,--on a _bank_, facing the south.

Just as distinctly as the daisy and buttercup are _meadow_ flowers, the
violet is a _bank_ flower, and would fain grow always on a steep slope,
towards the sun. And it is so poised on its stem that it shows, when
growing on a slope, the full space and opening of its flower,--not at all,
in any strain of modesty, hiding _itself_, though it may easily be, by
grass or mossy stone, 'half hidden,'--but, to the full, showing itself, and
intending to be lovely and luminous, as fragrant, to the uttermost of its
soft power.

Nor merely in its oblique setting on the stalk, but in the reversion of its
two upper petals, the flower shows this purpose of being fully seen. (For a
flower that _does_ hide itself, take a lily of the valley, or the bell of a
grape hyacinth, or a cyclamen.) But respecting this matter of
petal-reversion, we must now farther state two or three general principles.

6. A perfect or pure flower, as a rose, oxalis, or campanula, is always
composed of an unbroken whorl, or corolla, in the form of a disk, cup,
bell, or, if it draw together again at the lips, a narrow-necked vase. This
cup, bell, or vase, is divided into similar petals, (or segments, which are
petals carefully joined,) varying in number from three to eight, and
enclosed by a calyx whose sepals are symmetrical also.

An imperfect, or, as I am inclined rather to call it, an 'injured' flower,
is one in which some of the petals have inferior office and position, and
are either degraded, for the benefit of others, or expanded and honoured at
the cost of others.

Of this process, the first and simplest condition is the reversal of the
upper petals and elongation of the lower ones, in blossoms set on the side
of a clustered stalk. When the change is simply and directly dependent on
their position in the cluster, as in Aurora Regina,[1] modifying every bell
just in proportion as it declines from the perfected central one, some of
the loveliest groups of form are produced which can be seen in any inferior
organism: but when the irregularity becomes fixed, and the flower is always
to the same extent distorted, whatever its position in the cluster, the
plant is to be rightly thought of as reduced to a lower rank in creation.

7. It is to be observed, also, that these inferior forms of flower have
always the appearance of being produced by some kind of mischief--blight,
bite, or ill-breeding; they never suggest the idea of improving themselves,
now, into anything better; one is only afraid of their tearing or puffing
themselves into something worse. Nay, even the quite natural and simple
conditions of inferior vegetable do not in the least suggest, to the
unbitten or unblighted human intellect, the notion of development into
anything other than their like: one does not expect a mushroom to translate
itself into a pineapple, nor a betony to moralize itself into a lily, nor a
snapdragon to soften himself into a lilac.

8. It is very possible, indeed, that the recent phrenzy for the
investigation of digestive and reproductive operations in plants may by
this time have furnished the microscopic malice of botanists with
providentially disgusting reasons, or demoniacally nasty necessities, for
every possible spur, spike, jag, sting, rent, blotch, flaw, freckle, filth,
or venom, which can be detected in the construction, or distilled from the
dissolution, of vegetable organism. But with these obscene processes and
prurient apparitions the gentle and happy scholar of flowers has nothing
whatever to do. I am amazed and saddened, more than I can care to say, by
finding how much that is abominable may be discovered by an ill-taught
curiosity, in the purest things that earth is allowed to produce for
us;--perhaps if we were less reprobate in our own ways, the grass which is
our type might conduct itself better, even though _it_ has no hope but of
being cast into the oven; in the meantime, healthy human eyes and thoughts
are to be set on the lovely laws of its growth and habitation, and not on
the mean mysteries of its birth.

9. I relieve, therefore, our presently inquiring souls from any farther
care as to the reason for a violet's spur,--or for the extremely ugly
arrangements of its stamens and style, invisible unless by vexatious and
vicious peeping. You are to think of a violet only in its green leaves, and
purple or golden petals;--you are to know the varieties of form in both,
proper to common species; and in what kind of places they all most fondly
live, and most deeply glow.

"And the recreation of the minde which is taken heereby cannot be but verie
good and honest, for they admonish and stir up a man to that which is
comely and honest. For flowers, through their beautie, varietie of colour,
and exquisite forme, do bring to a liberall and gentle manly minde the
remembrance of honestie, comeliness, and all kinds of vertues. For it would
be an unseemely and filthie thing, as a certain wise man saith, for him
that doth looke upon and handle faire and beautiful things, and who
frequenteth and is conversant in faire and beautiful places, to have his
mind not faire, but filthie and deformed."

10. Thus Gerarde, in the close of his introductory notice of the
violet,--speaking of things, (honesty, comeliness, and the like,) scarcely
now recognized as desirable in the realm of England; but having previously
observed that violets are useful for the making of garlands for the head,
and posies to smell to;--in which last function I observe they are still
pleasing to the British public: and I found the children here, only the
other day, munching a confection of candied violet leaves. What pleasure
the flower can still give us, uncandied, and unbound, but in its own place
and life, I will try to trace through some of its constant laws.

11. And first, let us be clear that the native colour of the violet _is_
violet; and that the white and yellow kinds, though pretty in their place
and way, are not to be thought of in generally meditating the flower's
quality or power. A white violet is to black ones what a black man is to
white ones; and the yellow varieties are, I believe, properly pansies, and
belong also to wild districts for the most part; but the true violet, which
I have just now called 'black,' with Gerarde, "the blacke or purple violet,
hath a great prerogative above others," and all the nobler species of the
pansy itself are of full purple, inclining, however, in the ordinary wild
violet to blue. In the 'Laws of Fésole,' chap, vii., §§ 20, 21, I have made
this dark pansy the representative of purple pure; the viola odorata, of
the link between that full purple and blue; and the heath-blossom of the
link between that full purple and red. The reader will do well, as much as
may be possible to him, to associate his study of botany, as indeed all
other studies of visible things, with that of painting: but he must
remember that he cannot know what violet colour really is, unless he watch
the flower in its _early_ growth. It becomes dim in age, and dark when it
is gathered--at least, when it is tied in bunches;--but I am under the
impression that the colour actually deadens also,--at all events, no other
single flower of the same quiet colour lights up the ground near it as a
violet will. The bright hounds-tongue looks merely like a spot of bright
paint; but a young violet glows like painted glass.

12. Which, when you have once well noticed, the two lines of Milton and
Shakspeare which seem opposed, will both become clear to you. The said
lines are dragged from hand to hand along their pages of pilfered
quotations by the hack botanists,--who probably never saw _them_, nor
anything else, _in_ Shakspeare or Milton in their lives,--till even in
reading them where they rightly come, you can scarcely recover their fresh
meaning: but none of the botanists ever think of asking why Perdita calls
the violet 'dim,' and Milton 'glowing.'

Perdita, indeed, calls it dim, at that moment, in thinking of her own love,
and the hidden passion of it, unspeakable; nor is Milton without some
purpose of using it as an emblem of love, mourning,--but, in both cases,
the subdued and quiet hue of the flower as an actual tint of colour, and
the strange force and life of it as a part of light, are felt to their
uttermost.

And observe, also, that both, of the poets contrast the violet, in its
softness, with the intense marking of the pansy. Milton makes the
opposition directly---

          "the pansy, freaked with jet,
  The glowing violet."

Shakspeare shows yet stronger sense of the difference, in the "purple with
Love's wound" of the pansy, while the violet is sweet with Love's hidden
life, and sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes.

Whereupon, we may perhaps consider with ourselves a little, what the
difference _is_ between a violet and a pansy?

13. Is, I say, and was, and is to come,--in spite of florists, who try to
make pansies round, instead of pentagonal; and of the wise classifying
people, who say that violets and pansies are the same thing--and that
neither of them are of much interest! As, for instance, Dr. Lindley in his
'Ladies' Botany.'

"Violets--sweet Violets, and Pansies, or Heartsease, represent a small
family, with the structure of which you should be familiar; more, however,
for the sake of its singularity than for its extent or importance, for the
family is a very small one, and there are but few species belonging to it
in which much interest is taken. As the parts of the Heartsease are larger
than those of the Violet, let us select the former in preference for the
subject of our study." Whereupon we plunge instantly into the usual account
of things with horns and tails. "The stamens are five in number--two of
them, which are in front of the others, are hidden within the horn of the
front petal," etc., etc., etc. (Note in passing, by the '_horn of the
front_' petal he means the '_spur of the bottom_' one, which indeed does
stand in front of the rest,--but if therefore _it_ is to be called the
_front_ petal--which is the back one?) You may find in the next paragraph
description of a "singular conformation," and the interesting conclusion
that "no one has yet discovered for what purpose this singular conformation
was provided." But you will not, in the entire article, find the least
attempt to tell you the difference between a violet and a pansy!--except in
one statement--and _that_ false! "The sweet violet will have no rival among
flowers, if we merely seek for delicate fragrance; but her sister, the
heartsease, who is destitute of all sweetness, far surpasses her in rich
dresses and _gaudy_!!! colours." The heartsease is not without sweetness.
There are sweet pansies scented, and dog pansies unscented--as there are
sweet violets scented, and dog violets unscented. What is the real
difference?

14. I turn to another scientific gentleman--_more_ scientific in form
indeed, Mr. Grindon,--and find, for another interesting phenomenon in the
violet, that it sometimes produces flowers without any petals! and in the
pansy, that "the flowers turn towards the sun, and when many are open at
once, present a droll appearance, looking like a number of faces all on the
'qui vive.'" But nothing of the difference between them, except something
about 'stipules,' of which "it is important to observe that the leaves
should be taken from the middle of the stem--those above and below being
variable."

I observe, however, that Mr. Grindon _has_ arranged his violets under the
letter A, and his pansies under the letter B, and that something may be
really made out of him, with an hour or two's work. I am content, however,
at present, with his simplifying assurance that of violet and pansy
together, "six species grow wild in Britain--or, as some believe, only
four--while the analysts run the number up to fifteen."

15. Next I try Loudon's Cyclopædia, which, through all its 700 pages, is
equally silent on the business; and next, Mr. Baxter's 'British Flowering
Plants,' in the index of which I find neither Pansy nor Heartsease, and
only the 'Calathian' Violet, (where on earth is Calathia?) which proves, on
turning it up, to be a Gentian.

16. At last, I take my Figuier, (but what should I do if I only knew
English?) and find this much of clue to the matter:--

"Qu'est ce que c'est que la Pensée? Cette jolie plante appartient aussi ou
genre Viola, mais à un section de ce genre. En effet, dans les Pensées, les
pétales supérieurs et lateraux sont dirigés en haut, l'inférieur seul est
dirigé en bas: et de plus, le stigmate est urcéole, globuleux."

And farther, this general description of the whole violet tribe, which I
translate, that we may have its full value:--

"The violet is a plant without a stem (tige),--(see vol. i., p.
154,)--whose height does not surpass one or two decimetres. Its leaves,
radical, or carried on stolons, (vol. i., p. 158,) are sharp, or oval,
crenulate, or heart-shape. Its stipules are oval-acuminate, or lanceolate.
Its flowers, of sweet scent, of a dark violet or a reddish blue, are
carried each on a slender peduncle, which bends down at the summit. Such
is, for the botanist, the Violet, of which the poets would give assuredly
another description."

17. Perhaps; or even the painters! or even an ordinary unbotanical human
creature! I must set about my business, at any rate, in my own way, now, as
I best can, looking first at things themselves, and then putting this and
that together, out of these botanical persons, which they can't put
together out of themselves. And first, I go down into my kitchen garden,
where the path to the lake has a border of pansies on both sides all the
way down, with clusters of narcissus behind them. And pulling up a handful
of pansies by the roots, I find them "without stems," indeed, if a stem
means a wooden thing; but I should say, for a low-growing flower, quiet
lankily and disagreeably stalky! And, thinking over what I remember about
wild pansies, I find an impression on my mind of their being rather more
stalky, always, than is quite graceful; and, for all their fine flowers,
having rather a weedy and littery look, and getting into places where they
have no business. See, again, vol. i., chap. vi., § 5.

18. And now, going up into my flower and fruit garden, I find (June 2nd,
1881, half-past six, morning.) among the wild saxifrages, which are allowed
to grow wherever they like, and the rock strawberries, and Francescas,
which are coaxed to grow wherever there is a bit of rough ground for them,
a bunch or two of pale pansies, or violets, I don't know well which, by the
flower; but the entire company of them has a ragged, jagged, unpurpose-like
look; extremely,--I should say,--demoralizing to all the little plants in
their neighbourhood: and on gathering a flower, I find it is a nasty big
thing, all of a feeble blue, and with two things like horns, or thorns,
sticking out where its ears would be, if the pansy's frequently monkey face
were underneath them. Which I find to be two of the leaves of its calyx
'out of place,' and, at all events, for their part, therefore, weedy, and
insolent.

19. I perceive, farther, that this disorderly flower is lifted on a lanky,
awkward, springless, and yet stiff flower-stalk; which is not round, as a
flower-stalk ought to be, (vol. i., p. 155,) but obstinately square, and
fluted, with projecting edges, like a pillar run thin out of an
iron-foundry for a cheap railway station. I perceive also that it has set
on it, just before turning down to carry the flower, two little jaggy and
indefinable leaves,--their colour a little more violet than the blossom.

These, and such undeveloping leaves, wherever they occur, are called
'bracts' by botanists, a good word, from the Latin 'bractea,' meaning a
piece of metal plate, so thin as to crackle. They seem always a little
stiff, like bad parchment,--born to come to nothing--a sort of
infinitesimal fairy-lawyer's deed. They ought to have been in my index at
p. 255, under the head of leaves, and are frequent in flower
structure,--never, as far as one can see, of the smallest use. They are
constant, however, in the flower-stalk of the whole violet tribe.

20. I perceive, farther, that this lanky flower-stalk, bending a little in
a crabbed, broken way, like an obstinate person tired, pushes itself up out
of a still more stubborn, nondescript, hollow angular, dogseared gas-pipe
of a stalk, with a section something like this,

[Illustration]

but no bigger than

[Illustration]

with a quantity of ill-made and ill-hemmed leaves on it, of no describable
leaf-cloth or texture,--not cressic, (though the thing does altogether look
a good deal like a quite uneatable old watercress); not salvian, for
there's no look of warmth or comfort in them; not cauline, for there's no
juice in them; not dryad, for there's no strength in them, nor apparent
use: they seem only there, as far as I can make out, to spoil the flower,
and take the good out of my garden bed. Nobody in the world could draw
them, they are so mixed up together, and crumpled and hacked about, as if
some ill-natured child had snipped them with blunt scissors, and an
ill-natured cow chewed them a little afterwards and left them, proved for
too tough or too bitter.

21. Having now sufficiently observed, it seems to me, this incongruous
plant, I proceed to ask myself, over it, M. Figuier's question, 'Qu'est-ce
c'est qu'un Pensée?' Is this a violet--or a pansy--or a bad imitation of
both?

Whereupon I try if it has any scent: and to my much surprise, find it has a
full and soft one--which I suppose is what my gardener keeps it for!
According to Dr. Lindley, then, it must be a violet! But according to M.
Figuier,--let me see, do its middle petals bend up, or down?

I think I'll go and ask the gardener what _he_ calls it.

22. My gardener, on appeal to him, tells me it is the 'Viola Cornuta,' but
that he does not know himself if it is violet or pansy. I take my Loudon
again, and find there were fifty-three species of violets, known in his
days, of which, as it chances, Cornuta is exactly the last.

'Horned violet': I said the green things were _like_ horns!--but what is
one to say of, or to do to, scientific people, who first call the spur of
the violet's petal, horn, and then its calyx points, horns, and never
define a 'horn' all the while!

Viola Cornuta, however, let it be; for the name does mean _some_thing, and
is not false Latin. But whether violet or pansy, I must look farther to
find out.

23. I take the Flora Danica, in which I at least am sure of finding
whatever is done at all, done as well as honesty and care can; and look
what species of violets it gives.

Nine, in the first ten volumes of it; four in their modern sequel (that I
know of,--I have had no time to examine the last issues). Namely, in
alphabetical order, with their present Latin, or tentative Latin, names;
and in plain English, the senses intended by the hapless scientific people,
in such their tentative Latin:--

(1)   Viola Arvensis.   Field (Violet)                  No. 1748

(2)     "   Biflora.    Two-flowered                    46

(3)     "   Canina.     Dog                             1453

(3b)    "   Canina.     Var. Multicaulus                2646
                        (many-stemmed), a very
                        singular sort of violet--if it
                        were so! Its real difference
                        from our dog-violet is in
                        being pale blue, and having a
                        golden centre

(4)     "   Hirta.      Hairy                           618

(5)     "   Mirabilis.  Marvellous                      1045

(6)     "   Montana.    Mountain                        1329

(7)     "   Odorata.    Odorous                         309

(8)     "   Palustris.  Marshy                          83

(9)     "   Tricolor.   Three-coloured                  623

(9B)    "   Tricolor.   Var. Arenaria, Sandy            2647
                        Three-coloured

(10)    "   Elatior.    Taller                          68

(11)    "   Epipsila.   (Heaven knows what: it is       2405
                        Greek, not Latin, and looks as
                        if it meant something between
                        a bishop and a short letter e)

I next run down this list, noting what names we can keep, and what we
can't; and what aren't worth keeping, if we could: passing over the
varieties, however, for the present, wholly.

(1) Arvensis. Field-violet. Good.

(2) Biflora. A good epithet, but in false Latin. It is to be our Viola
aurea, golden pansy.

(3) Canina. Dog. Not pretty, but intelligible, and by common use now
classical. Must stay.

(4) Hirta. Late Latin slang for hirsuta, and always used of nasty places or
nasty people; it shall not stay. The species shall be our Viola
Seclusa,--Monk's violet--meaning the kind of monk who leads a rough life
like Elijah's, or the Baptist's, or Esau's--in another kind. This violet is
one of the loveliest that grows.

(5) Mirabilis. Stays so; marvellous enough, truly: not more so than all
violets; but I am very glad to hear of scientific people capable of
admiring anything.

(6) Montana. Stays so.

(7) Odorata. Not distinctive;--nearly classical, however. It is to be our
Viola Regina, else I should not have altered it.

(8) Palustris. Stays so.

(9) Tricolor. True, but intolerable. The flower is the queen of the true
pansies: to be our Viola Psyche.

(10) Elatior. Only a variety of our already accepted Cornuta.

(11) The last is, I believe, also only a variety of Palustris. Its leaves,
I am informed in the text, are either "pubescent-reticulate-venose-
subreniform," or "lato-cordate-repando-crenate;" and its stipules are
"ovate-acuminate-fimbrio-denticulate." I do not wish to pursue the inquiry
farther.

24. These ten species will include, noting here and there a local variety,
all the forms which are familiar to us in Northern Europe, except only
two;--these, as it singularly chances, being the Viola Alpium, noblest of
all the wild pansies in the world, so far as I have seen or heard of
them,--of which, consequently, I find no picture, nor notice, in any
botanical work whatsoever; and the other, the rock-violet of our own
Yorkshire hills.

We have therefore, ourselves, finally then, twelve following species to
study. I give them now all in their accepted names and proper order,--the
reasons for occasional difference between the Latin and English name will
be presently given.

(1)   Viola Regina.     Queen violet.

(2)     "   Psyche.     Ophelia's pansy.

(3)     "   Alpium.     Freneli's pansy.

(4)     "   Aurea.      Golden violet.

(5)     "   Montana.    Mountain Violet.

(6)     "   Mirabilis.  Marvellous violet.

(7)     "   Arvensis.   Field violet.

(8)     "   Palustris.  Marsh violet.

(9)     "   Seclusa.    Monk's violet.

(10)    "   Canina.     Dog violet.

(11)    "   Cornuta.    Cow violet.

(12)    "   Rupestris.  Crag violet.

25. We will try, presently, what is to be found out of useful, or pretty,
concerning all these twelve violets; but must first find out how we are to
know which are violets indeed, and which, pansies.

Yesterday, after finishing my list, I went out again to examine Viola
Cornuta a little closer, and pulled up a full grip of it by the roots, and
put it in water in a wash-hand basin, which it filled like a truss of green
hay.

Pulling out two or three separate plants, I find each to consist mainly of
a jointed stalk of a kind I have not yet described,--roughly, some two feet
long altogether; (accurately, one 1 ft. 10½ in.; another, 1 ft. 10 in.;
another, 1 ft. 9 in.--but all these measures taken without straightening,
and therefore about an inch short of the truth), and divided into seven or
eight lengths by clumsy joints where the mangled leafage is knotted on it;
but broken a little out of the way at each joint, like a rheumatic elbow
that won't come straight, or bend farther; and--which is the most curious
point of all in it--it is thickest in the middle, like a viper, and gets
quite thin to the root and thin towards the flower; also the lengths
between the joints are longest in the middle: here I give them in inches,
from the root upwards, in a stalk taken at random.

1st (nearest root)   0¾

2nd                  0¾

3rd                  1½

4th                  1¾

5th                  3

6th                  4

7th                  3¼

8th                  3

9th                  2¼

10th                 1½

                     1 ft. 9¾ in.

But the thickness of the joints and length of terminal flower stalk bring
the total to two feet and about an inch over. I dare not pull it straight,
or should break it, but it overlaps my two-foot rule considerably, and
there are two inches besides of root, which are merely underground stem,
very thin and wretched, as the rest of it is merely root above ground, very
thick and bloated. (I begin actually to be a little awed at it, as I should
be by a green snake--only the snake would be prettier.) The flowers also, I
perceive, have not their two horns regularly set _in_, but the five spiky
calyx-ends stick out between the petals--sometimes three, sometimes four,
it may be all five up and down--and produce variously fanged or forked
effects, feebly ophidian or diabolic. On the whole, a plant entirely
mismanaging itself,--reprehensible and awkward, with taints of worse than
awkwardness; and clearly, no true 'species,' but only a link.[2] And it
really is, as you will find presently, a link in two directions; it is half
violet, half pansy, a 'cur' among the Dogs, and a thoughtless thing among
the thoughtful. And being so, it is also a link between the entire violet
tribe and the Runners--pease, strawberries, and the like, whose glory is in
their speed; but a violet has no business whatever to run anywhere, being
appointed to stay where it was born, in extremely contented (if not
secluded) places. "Half-hidden from the eye?"--no; but desiring attention,
or extension, or corpulence, or connection with anybody else's family,
still less.

[Illustration: FIG. II.]

26. And if, at the time you read this, you can run out and gather a _true_
violet, and its leaf, you will find that the flower grows from the very
ground, out of a cluster of heart-shaped leaves, becoming here a little
rounder, there a little sharper, but on the whole heart-shaped, and that is
the proper and essential form of the violet leaf. You will find also that
the flower has five petals; and being held down by the bent stalk, two of
them bend back and up, as if resisting it; two expand at the sides; and
one, the principal, grows downwards, with its attached spur behind. So that
the front view of the flower must be _some_ modification of this typical
arrangement, Fig. M, (for middle form). Now the statement above quoted from
Figuier, § 16, means, if he had been able to express himself, that the two
lateral petals in the violet are directed downwards, Fig. II. A, and in the
pansy upwards, Fig. II. C. And that, in the main, is true, and to be fixed
well and clearly in your mind. But in the real orders, one flower passes
into the other through all kinds of intermediate positions of petal, and
the plurality of species are of the middle type. Fig. II. B.[3]

27. Next, if you will gather a real pansy _leaf_, you will find it--not
heart-shape in the least, but sharp oval or spear-shape, with two deep
cloven lateral flakes at its springing from the stalk, which, in ordinary
aspect, give the plant the haggled and draggled look I have been vilifying
it for. These, and such as these, "leaflets at the base of other leaves"
(Balfour's Glossary), are called by botanists 'stipules.' I have not
allowed the word yet, and am doubtful of allowing it, because it entirely
confuses the student's sense of the Latin 'stipula' (see above, vol. i.,
chap. viii., § 27) doubly and trebly important in its connection with
'stipulor,' not noticed in that paragraph, but readable in your large
Johnson; we shall have more to say of it when we come to 'straw' itself.

28. In the meantime, one _may_ think of these things as stipulations for
leaves, not fulfilled, or 'stumps' or 'sumphs' of leaves! But I think I can
do better for them. We have already got the idea of _crested_ leaves, (see
vol. i., plate); now, on each side of a knight's crest, from earliest
Etruscan times down to those of the Scalas, the fashion of armour held,
among the nations who wished to make themselves terrible in aspect, of
putting cut plates or 'bracts' of metal, like dragons' wings, on each side
of the crest. I believe the custom never became Norman or English; it is
essentially Greek, Etruscan, or Italian,--the Norman and Dane always
wearing a practical cone (see the coins of Canute), and the Frank or
English knights the severely plain beavered helmet; the Black Prince's at
Canterbury, and Henry V.'s at Westminster, are kept hitherto by the great
fates for us to see. But the Southern knights constantly wore these lateral
dragon's wings; and if I can find their special name, it may perhaps be
substituted with advantage for 'stipule'; but I have not wit enough by me
just now to invent a term.

29. Whatever we call them, the things themselves are, throughout all the
species of violets, developed in the running and weedy varieties, and much
subdued in the beautiful ones; and generally the pansies have them, large,
with spear-shaped central leaves; and the violets small, with heart-shaped
leaves, for more effective decoration of the ground. I now note the
characters of each species in their above given order.

30. I. VIOLA REGINA. Queen Violet. Sweet Violet. 'Viola Odorata,' L., Flora
Danica, and Sowerby. The latter draws it with golden centre and white base
of lower petal; the Flora Danica, all purple. It is sometimes altogether
white. It is seen most perfectly for setting off its colour, in group with
primrose,--and most luxuriantly, so far as I know, in hollows of the Savoy
limestones, associated with the pervenche, which embroiders and illumines
them all over. I believe it is the earliest of its race, sometimes called
'Martia,' March violet. In Greece and South Italy even a flower of the
winter.

  "The Spring is come, the violet's _gone_,
  The first-born child of the early sun.
  With us, she is but a winter's flower;
  The snow on the hills cannot blast her bower,
  And she lifts up her dewy eye of blue
  To the youngest sky of the selfsame hue.

  And when the Spring comes, with her host
  Of flowers, that flower beloved the most
  Shrinks from the crowd that may confuse
  Her heavenly odour, and virgin hues.

  Pluck the others, but still remember
  Their herald out of dim December,--
  _The morning star_ of all the flowers,
  The pledge of daylight's lengthened hours,
  Nor, midst the roses, e'er forget
  The virgin, virgin violet."[4]

3. It is the queen, not only of the violet tribe, but of all low-growing
flowers, in sweetness of scent--variously applicable and serviceable in
domestic economy:--the scent of the lily of the valley seems less capable
of preservation or use.

But, respecting these perpetual beneficences and benignities of the sacred,
as opposed to the malignant, herbs, whose poisonous power is for the most
part restrained in them, during their life, to their juices or dust, and
not allowed sensibly to pollute the air, I should like the scholar to
re-read pp. 251, 252 of vol. i., and then to consider with himself what a
grotesquely warped and gnarled thing the modern scientific mind is, which
fiercely busies itself in venomous chemistries that blast every leaf from
the forests ten miles round; and yet cannot tell us, nor even think of
telling us, nor does even one of its pupils think of asking it all the
while, how a violet throws off her perfume!--far less, whether it might not
be more wholesome to 'treat' the air which men are to breathe in masses, by
administration of vale-lilies and violets, instead of charcoal and sulphur!

The closing sentence of the first volume just now referred
to--p.254--should also be re-read; it was the sum of a chapter I had in
hand at that time on the Substances and Essences of Plants--which never got
finished;--and in trying to put it into small space, it has become obscure:
the terms "logically inexplicable" meaning that no words or process of
comparison will define scents, nor do any traceable modes of sequence or
relation connect them; each is an independent power, and gives a separate
impression to the senses. Above all, there is no logic of pleasure, nor any
assignable reason for the difference, between loathsome and delightful
scent, which makes the fungus foul and the vervain sacred: but one
practical conclusion I (who am in all final ways the most prosaic and
practical of human creatures) do very solemnly beg my readers to meditate;
namely, that although not recognized by actual offensiveness of scent,
there is no space of neglected land which is not in some way modifying the
atmosphere of _all the world_,--it may be, beneficently, as heath and
pine,--it may be, malignantly, as Pontine marsh or Brazilian jungle; but,
in one way or another, for good and evil constantly, by day and night, the
various powers of life and death in the plants of the desert are poured
into the air, as vials of continual angels: and that no words, no thoughts
can measure, nor imagination follow, the possible change for good which
energetic and tender care of the wild herbs of the field and trees of the
wood might bring, in time, to the bodily pleasure and mental power of Man.

32. II. VIOLA PSYCHE. Ophelia's Pansy.

The wild heart's-ease of Europe; its proper colour an exquisitely clear
purple in the upper petals, gradated into deep blue in the lower ones; the
centre, gold. Not larger than a violet, but perfectly formed, and firmly
set in all its petals. Able to live in the driest ground; beautiful in the
coast sand-hills of Cumberland, following the wild geranium and burnet
rose: and distinguished thus by its power of life, in waste and dry places,
from the violet, which needs kindly earth and shelter.

Quite one of the most lovely things that Heaven has made, and only degraded
and distorted by any human interference; the swollen varieties of it
produced by cultivation being all gross in outline and coarse in colour by
comparison.

It is badly drawn even in the 'Flora Danica,' No. 623, considered there
apparently as a species escaped from gardens; the description of it being
as follows:--

"Viola tricolor hortensis repens, flore purpureo et coeruleo, C.B.P., 199."
(I don't know what C.B.P. means.) "Passim, juxta villas."

"Viola tricolor, caule triquetro diffuso, foliis oblongis incisis, stipulis
pinnatifidis," Linn. Systema Naturæ, 185.

33. "Near the country farms"--does the Danish botanist mean?--the more
luxuriant weedy character probably acquired by it only in such
neighbourhood; and, I suppose, various confusion and degeneration possible
to it beyond other plants when once it leaves its wild home. It is given by
Sibthorpe from the Trojan Olympus, with an exquisitely delicate leaf; the
flower described as "triste et pallide violaceus," but coloured in his
plate full purple; and as he does not say whether he went up Olympus to
gather it himself, or only saw it brought down by the assistant whose
lovely drawings are yet at Oxford, I take leave to doubt his epithets. That
this should be the only Violet described in a 'Flora Græca' extending to
ten folio volumes, is a fact in modern scientific history which I must
leave the Professor of Botany and the Dean of Christ Church to explain.

34. The English varieties seem often to be yellow in the lower petals, (see
Sowerby's plate, 1287 of the old edition), crossed, I imagine, with Viola
Aurea, (but see under Viola Rupestris, No. 12); the names, also, varying
between tricolor and bicolor--with no note anywhere of the three colours,
or two colours, intended!

The old English names are many.--'Love in idleness,'--making Lysander, as
Titania, much wandering in mind, and for a time mere 'Kits run the street'
(or run the wood?)--"Call me to you" (Gerarde, ch. 299, Sowerby, No. 178),
with 'Herb Trinity,' from its three colours, blue, purple, and gold,
variously blended in different countries? 'Three faces under a hood'
describes the English variety only. Said to be the ancestress of all the
florists' pansies, but this I much doubt, the next following species being
far nearer the forms most chiefly sought for.

35. III. VIOLA ALPINA. 'Freneli's Pansy'--my own name for it, from
Gotthelf's Freneli, in 'Ulric the Farmer'; the entirely pure and noble type
of the Bernese maid, wife, and mother.

The pansy of the Wengern Alp in specialty, and of the higher, but still
rich, Alpine pastures. Full dark-purple; at least an inch across the
expanded petals; I believe, the 'Mater Violarum' of Gerarde; and true black
violet of Virgil, remaining in Italian 'Viola Mammola' (Gerarde, ch. 298).

36. IV. VIOLA AUREA. Golden Violet. Biflora usually; but its brilliant
yellow is a much more definite characteristic; and needs insisting on,
because there is a 'Viola lutea' which is not yellow at all; named so by
the garden florists. My Viola aurea is the Rock-violet of the Alps; one of
the bravest, brightest, and dearest of little flowers. The following notes
upon it, with its summer companions, a little corrected from my diary of
1877, will enough characterize it.

"_June 7th._--The cultivated meadows now grow only dandelions--in frightful
quantity too; but, for wild ones, primula, bell gentian, golden pansy, and
anemone,--Primula farinosa in mass, the pansy pointing and vivifying in a
petulant sweet way, and the bell gentian here and there deepening all,--as
if indeed the sound of a deep bell among lighter music.

"Counted in order, I find the effectively constant flowers are eight;[5]
namely,

"1. The golden anemone, with richly cut large leaf; primrose colour, and in
masses like primrose, studded through them with bell gentian, and dark
purple orchis.

"2. The dark purple orchis, with bell gentian in equal quantity, say six of
each in square yard, broken by sparklings of the white orchis and the white
grass-flower; the richest piece of colour I ever saw, touched with gold by
the geum.

"3 and 4. These will be white orchis and the grass flower.[6]

"5. Geum--everywhere, in deep, but pure, gold, like pieces of Greek mosaic.

"6. Soldanella, in the lower meadows, delicate, but not here in masses.

"7. Primula Alpina, divine in the rock clefts, and on the ledges changing
the grey to purple,--set in the dripping caves with

"8. Viola (pertinax--pert); I want a Latin word for various
studies--failures all--to express its saucy little stuck-up way, and
exquisitely trim peltate leaf. I never saw such a lovely perspective line
as the pure front leaf profile. Impossible also to get the least of the
spirit of its lovely dark brown fibre markings. Intensely golden these dark
fibres, just browning the petal a little between them."

And again in the defile of Gondo, I find "Viola (saxatilis?) name yet
wanted;--in the most delicate studding of its round leaves, like a small
fern more than violet, and bright sparkle of small flowers in the dark
dripping hollows. Assuredly delights in shade and distilling moisture of
rocks."

I found afterwards a much larger yellow pansy on the Yorkshire high
limestones; with vigorously black crowfoot marking on the lateral petals.

37. V. VIOLA MONTANA. Mountain Violet.

Flora Danica, 1329. Linnæus, No. 13, "Caulibus erectis, foliis
cordato-lanceolatis, floribus serioribus apetalis," _i.e._, on erect stems,
with leaves long heart-shape, and its later flowers without petals--not a
word said of its earlier flowers which have got those unimportant
appendages! In the plate of the Flora it is a very perfect transitional
form between violet and pansy, with beautifully firm and well-curved
leaves, but the colour of blossom very pale. "In subalpinis Norvegiæ
passim," all that we are told of it, means I suppose, in the lower Alpine
pastures of Norway; in the Flora Suecica, p. 306, habitat in Lapponica,
juxta Alpes.

38. VI. VIOLA MIRABILIS. Flora Danica, 1045. A small and exquisitely formed
flower in the balanced cinquefoil intermediate between violet and pansy,
but with large and superbly curved and pointed leaves. It is a mountain
violet, but belonging rather to the mountain woods than meadows. "In
sylvaticis in Toten, Norvegiæ."

Loudon, 3056, "Broad-leaved: Germany."

Linnæus, Flora Suecica, 789, says that the flowers of it which have perfect
corolla and full scent often bear no seed, but that the later 'cauline'
blossoms, without petals, are fertile. "Caulini vero apetali fertiles sunt,
et seriores. Habitat passim Upsaliæ."

I find this, and a plurality of other species, indicated by Linnæus as
having triangular stalks, "caule triquetro," meaning, I suppose, the kind
sketched in Figure 1 above.

39. VII. VIOLA ARVENSIS. Field Violet. Flora Danica, 1748. A coarse running
weed; nearly like Viola Cornuta, but feebly lilac and yellow in colour. In
dry fields, and with corn.

Flora Suecica, 791; under titles of Viola 'tricolor' and 'bicolor
arvensis,' and Herba Trinitatis. Habitat ubique in _sterilibus_ arvis:
"Planta vix datur in qua evidentius perspicitur generationis opus, quam in
hujus cavo apertoque stigmate."

It is quite undeterminable, among present botanical instructors, how far
this plant is only a rampant and over-indulged condition of the true pansy
(Viola Psyche); but my own scholars are to remember that the true pansy is
full purple and blue with golden centre; and that the disorderly field
varieties of it, if indeed not scientifically distinguishable, are entirely
separate from the wild flower by their scattered form and faded or altered
colour. I follow the Flora Danica in giving them as a distinct species.

40. VIII. VIOLA PALUSTRIS. Marsh Violet. Flora Danica, 83. As there drawn,
the most finished and delicate in form of all the violet tribe; warm white,
streaked with red; and as pure in outline as an oxalis, both in flower and
leaf: it is like a violet imitating oxalis and anagallis.

In the Flora Suecica, the petal-markings are said to be black; in 'Viola
lactea' a connected species, (Sowerby, 45,) purple. Sowerby's plate of it
under the name 'palustris' is pale purple veined with darker; and the spur
is said to be 'honey-bearing,' which is the first mention I find of honey
in the violet. The habitat given, sandy and turfy heaths. It is said to
grow plentifully near Croydon.

Probably, therefore, a violet belonging to the chalk, on which nearly all
herbs that grow wild--from the grass to the bluebell--are singularly sweet
and pure. I hope some of my botanical scholars will take up this question
of the effect of different rocks on vegetation, not so much in bearing
different species of plants, as different characters of each species.[7]

41. IX. VIOLA SECLUSA. Monk's Violet. "Hirta," Flora Danica, 618, "In
fruticetis raro." A true wood violet, full but dim in purple. Sowerby, 894,
makes it paler. The leaves very pure and severe in the Danish one;--longer
in the English. "Clothed on both sides with short, dense, hoary hairs."

Also belongs to chalk or limestone only (Sowerby).

X. VIOLA CANINA. Dog Violet. I have taken it for analysis in my two plates,
because its grace of form is too much despised, and we owe much more of the
beauty of spring to it, in English mountain ground, than to the Regina.

XI. VIOLA CORNUTA. Cow Violet. Enough described already.

XII. VIOLA RUPESTRIS. Crag Violet. On the high limestone moors of
Yorkshire, perhaps only an English form of Viola Aurea, but so much larger,
and so different in habit--growing on dry breezy downs, instead of in
dripping caves--that I allow it, for the present, separate name and
number.[8]

42. 'For the present,' I say all this work in 'Proserpina' being merely
tentative, much to be modified by future students, and therefore quite
different from that of 'Deucalion,' which is authoritative as far as it
reaches, and will stand out like a quartz dyke, as the sandy speculations
of modern gossiping geologists get washed away.

But in the meantime, I must again solemnly warn my girl-readers against all
study of floral genesis and digestion. How far flowers invite, or require,
flies to interfere in their family affairs--which of them are
carnivorous--and what forms of pestilence or infection are most favourable
to some vegetable and animal growths,--let them leave the people to settle
who like, as Toinette says of the Doctor in the 'Malade Imaginaire'--"y
mettre le nez." I observe a paper in the last 'Contemporary Review,'
announcing for a discovery patent to all mankind that the colours of
flowers were made "to attract insects"![9] They will next hear that the
rose was made for the canker, and the body of man for the worm.

43. What the colours of flowers, or of birds, or of precious stones, or of
the sea and air, and the blue mountains, and the evening and the morning,
and the clouds of Heaven, were given for--they only know who can see them
and can feel, and who pray that the sight and the love of them may be
prolonged, where cheeks will not fade, nor sunsets die.

44. And now, to close, let me give you some fuller account of the reasons
for the naming of the order to which the violet belongs, 'Cytherides.'

You see that the Uranides, are, as far as I could so gather them, of the
pure blue of the sky; but the Cytherides of altered blue;--the first,
Viola, typically purple; the second, Veronica, pale blue with a peculiar
light; the third, Giulietta, deep blue, passing strangely into a subdued
green before and after the full life of the flower.

All these three flowers have great strangenesses in them, and weaknesses;
the Veronica most wonderful in its connection with the poisonous tribe of
the foxgloves; the Giulietta, alone among flowers in the action of the
shielding leaves; and the Viola, grotesque and inexplicable in its hidden
structure, but the most sacred of all flowers to earthly and daily Love,
both in its scent and glow.

Now, therefore, let us look completely for the meaning of the two leading
lines,--

  "Sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes,
  Or Cytherea's breath."

45. Since, in my present writings, I hope to bring into one focus the
pieces of study fragmentarily given during past life, I may refer my
readers to the first chapter of the 'Queen of the Air' for the explanation
of the way in which all great myths are founded, partly on physical, partly
on moral fact,--so that it is not possible for persons who neither know the
aspect of nature, nor the constitution of the human soul, to understand a
word of them. Naming the Greek gods, therefore, you have first to think of
the physical power they represent. When Horace calls Vulcan 'Avidus,' he
thinks of him as the power of Fire; when he speaks of Jupiter's red right
hand, he thinks of him as the power of rain with lightning; and when Homer
speaks of Juno's dark eyes, you have to remember that she is the softer
form of the rain power, and to think of the fringes of the rain-cloud
across the light of the horizon. Gradually the idea becomes personal and
human in the "Dove's eyes within thy locks,"[10] and "Dove's eyes by the
river of waters" of the Song of Solomon.

46. "Or Cytherea's breath,"--the two thoughts of softest glance, and
softest kiss, being thus together associated with the flower: but note
especially that the Island of Cythera was dedicated to Venus because it was
the chief, if not the only Greek island, in which the purple fishery of
Tyre was established; and in our own minds should be marked not only as the
most southern fragment of true Greece, but the virtual continuation of the
chain of mountains which separate the Spartan from the Argive territories,
and are the natural home of the brightest Spartan and Argive beauty which
is symbolized in Helen.

47. And, lastly, in accepting for the order this name of Cytherides, you
are to remember the names of Viola and Giulietta, its two limiting
families, as those of Shakspeare's two most loving maids--the two who love
simply, and to the death: as distinguished from the greater natures in whom
earthly Love has its due part, and no more; and farther still from the
greatest, in whom the earthly love is quiescent, or subdued, beneath the
thoughts of duty and immortality.

It may be well quickly to mark for you the levels of loving temper in
Shakspeare's maids and wives, from the greatest to the least.

48. 1. Isabel. All earthly love, and the possibilities of it, held in
absolute subjection to the laws of God, and the judgments of His will. She
is Shakspeare's only 'Saint.' Queen Catherine, whom you might next think
of, is only an ordinary woman of trained religious temper:--her maid of
honour gives Wolsey a more Christian epitaph.

2. Cordelia. The earthly love consisting in diffused compassion of the
universal spirit; not in any conquering, personally fixed, feeling.

                  "Mine enemy's dog,
  Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
  Against my fire."

These lines are spoken in her hour of openest direct expression; and are
_all_ Cordelia.

Shakspeare clearly does not mean her to have been supremely beautiful in
person; it is only her true lover who calls her 'fair' and 'fairest'--and
even that, I believe, partly in courtesy, after having the instant before
offered her to his subordinate duke; and it is only _his_ scorn of her
which makes France fully care for her.

  "Gods, Gods, 'tis strange that from their cold neglect
  My love should kindle to inflamed respect!"

Had she been entirely beautiful, he would have honoured her as a lover
should, even before he saw her despised; nor would she ever have been so
despised--or by her father, misunderstood. Shakspeare himself does not
pretend to know where her girl-heart was,--but I should like to hear how a
great actress would say the "Peace be with Burgundy!"

3. Portia. The maidenly passion now becoming great, and chiefly divine in
its humility, is still held absolutely subordinate to duty; no thought of
disobedience to her dead father's intention is entertained for an instant,
though the temptation is marked as passing, for that instant, before her
crystal strength. Instantly, in her own peace, she thinks chiefly of her
lover's;--she is a perfect Christian wife in a moment, coming to her
husband with the gift of perfect Peace,--

  "Never shall you lie by Portia's side
  With an unquiet soul."

She is highest in intellect of all Shakspeare's women, and this is the root
of her modesty; her 'unlettered girl' is like Newton's simile of the child
on the sea-shore. Her perfect wit and stern judgment are never disturbed
for an instant by her happiness: and the final key to her character is
given in her silent and slow return from Venice, where she stops at every
wayside shrine to pray.

4. Hermione. Fortitude and Justice personified, with unwearying affection.
She is Penelope, tried by her husband's fault as well as error.

5. Virgilia. Perfect type of wife and mother, but without definiteness of
character, nor quite strength of intellect enough entirely to hold her
husband's heart. Else, she had saved him: he would have left Rome in his
wrath--but not her. Therefore, it is his mother only who bends him: but she
cannot save.

6. Imogen. The ideal of grace and gentleness; but weak; enduring too
mildly, and forgiving too easily. But the piece is rather a pantomime than
play, and it is impossible to judge of the feelings of St. Columba, when
she must leave the stage in half a minute after mistaking the headless
clown for headless Arlecchino.

7. Desdemona, Ophelia, Rosalind. They are under different conditions from
all the rest, in having entirely heroic and faultless persons to love. I
can't class them, therefore,--fate is too strong, and leaves them no free
will.

8. Perdita, Miranda. Rather mythic visions of maiden beauty than mere
girls.

9. Viola and Juliet. Love the ruling power in the entire character: wholly
virginal and pure, but quite earthly, and recognizing no other life than
his own. Viola is, however, far the noblest. Juliet will die unless Romeo
loves _her_: "If he be wed, the grave is like to be my wedding bed;" but
Viola is ready to die for the happiness of the man who does _not_ love her;
faithfully doing his messages to her rival, whom she examines strictly for
his sake. It is not in envy that she says, "Excellently done,--if God did
all." The key to her character is given in the least selfish of all lover's
songs, the one to which the Duke bids her listen:

  "Mark it, Cesario,--it is old and plain,
  The spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
  And the free maids, that _weave their thread with bones_,
  Do use to chaunt it."

(They, the unconscious Fates, weaving the fair vanity of life with death);
and the burden of it is--

  "My part of Death, no one so true
  Did share it."

Therefore she says, in the great first scene, "Was not _this_ love indeed?"
and in the less heeded closing one, her heart then happy with the knitters
in the _sun_,

  "And all those sayings will I over-swear,
  And all those swearings keep as true in soul
  As doth that orbed continent the Fire
  That severs day from night."

Or, at least, did once sever day from night,--and perhaps does still in
Illyria. Old England must seek new images for her loves from gas and
electric sparks,--not to say furnace fire.

I am obliged, by press of other work, to set down these notes in cruel
shortness: and many a reader may be disposed to question utterly the
standard by which the measurement is made. It will not be found, on
reference to my other books, that they encourage young ladies to go into
convents; or undervalue the dignity of wives and mothers. But, as surely as
the sun _does_ sever day from night, it will be found always that the
noblest and loveliest women are dutiful and religious by continual nature;
and their passions are trained to obey them; like their dogs. Homer,
indeed, loves Helen with all his heart, and restores her, after all her
naughtiness, to the queenship of her household; but he never thinks of her
as Penelope's equal, or Iphigenia's. Practically, in daily life, one often
sees married women as good as saints; but rarely, I think, unless they have
a good deal to bear from their husbands. Sometimes also, no doubt, the
husbands have some trouble in managing St. Cecilia or St. Elizabeth; of
which questions I shall be obliged to speak more seriously in another
place: content, at present, if English maids know better, by Proserpina's
help, what Shakspeare meant by the dim, and Milton by the glowing, violet.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.

PINGUICULA.

(Written in early June, 1881.)

1. On the rocks of my little stream, where it runs, or leaps, through the
moorland, the common Pinguicula is now in its perfectest beauty; and it is
one of the offshoots of the violet tribe which I have to place in the minor
collateral groups of Viola very soon, and must not put off looking at it
till next year.

There are three varieties given in Sowerby: 1. Vulgaris, 2.
Greater-flowered, and 3. Lusitanica, white, for the most part, pink, or
'carnea,' sometimes: but the proper colour of the family is violet, and the
perfect form of the plant is the 'vulgar' one. The larger-flowered variety
is feebler in colour, and ruder in form: the white Spanish one, however, is
very lovely, as far as I can judge from Sowerby's (_old_ Sowerby's) pretty
drawing.

The 'frequent' one (I shall usually thus translate 'vulgaris'), is not by
any means so 'frequent' as the Queen violet, being a true wild-country, and
mostly Alpine, plant; and there is also a real 'Pinguicula Alpina,' which
we have not in England, who might be the Regina, if the group were large
enough to be reigned over: but it is better not to affect Royalty among
these confused, intermediate, or dependent families.

2. In all the varieties of Pinguicula, each blossom has one stalk only,
growing from the _ground_ and you may pull all the leaves away from the
base of it, and keep the flower only, with its bunch of short fibrous
roots, half an inch long; looking as if bitten at the ends. Two flowers,
characteristically,--three and four very often,--spring from the same root,
in places where it grows luxuriantly; and luxuriant growth means that
clusters of some twenty or thirty stars may be seen on the surface of a
square yard of boggy ground, quite to its mind; but its real glory is in
harder life, in the crannies of well-wetted rock.

3. What I have called 'stars' are irregular clusters of approximately, or
tentatively, five aloeine ground leaves, of very pale green,--they may be
six or seven, or more, but always run into a rudely pentagonal arrangement,
essentially first trine, with two succeeding above. Taken as a whole the
_plant_ is really a main link between violets and Droseras; but the
_flower_ has much more violet than Drosera in the make of it,--spurred, and
_five-petaled_,[11] and held down by the top of its bending stalk as a
violet is; only its upper two petals are not reverted--the calyx, of a dark
soppy green, holding them down, with its three front sepals set exactly
like a strong trident, its two backward sepals clasping the spur. There are
often six sepals, four to the front, but the normal number is five. Tearing
away the calyx, I find the flower to have been held by it as a lion might
hold his prey by the loins if he missed its throat; the blue petals being
really campanulate, and the flower best described as a dark bluebell,
seized and crushed almost flat by its own calyx in a rage. Pulling away now
also the upper petals, I find that what are in the violet the lateral and
well-ordered fringes, are here thrown mainly on the lower (largest) petal
near its origin, and opposite the point of the seizure by the calyx,
spreading from this centre over the surface of the lower petals, partly
like an irregular shower of fine Venetian glass broken, partly like the
wild-flung Medusa like embroidery of the white Lucia.[12]

4. The calyx is of a dark _soppy_ green, I said; like that of sugary
preserved citron; the root leaves are of green just as soppy, but pale and
yellowish, as if they were half decayed; the edges curled up and, as it
were, water-shrivelled, as one's fingers shrivel if kept too long in water.
And the whole plant looks as if it had been a violet unjustly banished to a
bog, and obliged to live there--not for its own sins, but for some Emperor
Pansy's, far away in the garden,--in a partly boggish, partly hoggish
manner, drenched and desolate; and with something of demoniac temper got
into its calyx, so that it quarrels with, and bites the corolla;--something
of gluttonous and greasy habit got into its leaves; a discomfortable
sensuality, even in its desolation. Perhaps a penguin-ish life would be
truer of it than a piggish, the _nest_ of it being indeed on the rock, or
morassy rock-investiture, like a sea-bird's on her rock ledge.

5. I have hunted through seven treatises on Botany, namely, Loudon's
Encyclopædia, Balfour, Grindon, Oliver, Baxter of Oxford, Lindley ('Ladies'
Botany'), and Figuer, without being able to find the meaning of
'Lentibulariaceæ,' to which tribe the Pinguicula is said by them all
(except Figuier) to belong. It may perhaps be in Sowerby:[13] but these
above-named treatises are precisely of the kind with which the ordinary
scholar must be content: and in all of them he has to learn this long,
worse than useless, word, under which he is betrayed into classing together
two orders naturally quite distinct, the Butterworts and the Bladderworts.

Whatever the name may mean--it is bad Latin. There is such a word as
Lenticularis--there is no Lentibularis; and it must positively trouble us
no longer.[14]

The Butterworts are a perfectly distinct group--whether small or large,
always recognizable at a glance. Their proper Latin name will be
Pinguicula, (plural Pinguiculæ,)--their English, Bog-Violet, or, more
familiarly, Butterwort; and their French, as at present, _Grassette_.

The families to be remembered will be only five, namely,

1. Pinguicula Major, the largest of the group. As bog plants, Ireland may
rightly claim the noblest of them, which certainly grow there luxuriantly,
and not (I believe) with us. Their colour is, however, more broken and less
characteristic than that of the following species.

2. Pinguicula Violacea: Violet-coloured Butterwort, (instead of
'vulgaris,') the common English and Swiss kind above noticed.

3. Pinguicula Alpina: Alpine Butterwort, white and much smaller than either
of the first two families; the spur especially small, according to D. 453.
Much rarer, as well as smaller, than the other varieties in Southern
Europe. "In Britain, known only upon the moors of Rosehaugh, Ross-shire,
where the progress of cultivation seems likely soon to efface it."
(Grindon.)

4. Pinguicula Pallida: Pale Butterwort. From Sowerby's drawing, (135, vol.
iii,) it would appear to be the most delicate and lovely of all the group.
The leaves, "like those of other species, but rather more delicate and
pellucid, reticulated with red veins, and much involute in the margin. Tube
of the corolla, yellow, streaked with red, (the streaks like those of a
pansy); the petals, pale violet. It much resembles Villosa, (our Minima,
No. 5,) in many particulars, the stem being hairy, and in the lower part
the hairs tipped with a viscid fluid, like a sundew. But the Villosa has a
slender sharp spur; and in this the spur is blunt and thick at the end."
(Since the hairy stem is not peculiar to Villosa, I take for her, instead,
the epithet Minima, which is really definitive.)

The pale one is commonly called 'Lusitanica,' but I find no direct notice
of its Portuguese habitation. Sowerby's plant came from Blandford,
Dorsetshire; and Grindon says it is frequent in Ireland, abundant in Arran,
and extends on the western side of the British island from Cornwall to Cape
Wrath. My epithet, Pallida, is secure, and simple, wherever the plant is
found.

[Illustration: FIG. III.]

5. Pinguicula Minima: Least Butterwort; in D. 1021 called Villosa, the
_scape_ of it being hairy. I have not yet got rid of this absurd word
'scape,' meaning, in botanist's Latin, the flower-stalk of a flower growing
out of a cluster of leaves on the ground. It is a bad corruption of
'sceptre,' and especially false and absurd, because a true sceptre is
necessarily branched.[15] In 'Proserpina,' when it is spoken of
distinctively, it is called 'virgula' (see vol. i., pp. 146, 147, 151,
152). The hairs on the virgula are in this instance so minute, that even
with a lens I cannot see them in the Danish plate: of which Fig. 3 is a
rough translation into woodcut, to show the grace and mien of the little
thing. The trine leaf cluster is characteristic, and the folding up of the
leaf edges. The flower, in the Danish plate, full purple. Abundant in east
of _Finmark_ (Finland?), but _always growing in marsh moss_, (Sphagnum
palustre).

6. I call it 'Minima' only, as the least of the five here named; without
putting forward any claim for it to be the smallest pinguicula that ever
was or will be. In such sense only, the epithets minima or maxima are to be
understood when used in 'Proserpina': and so also, every statement and
every principle is only to be understood as true or tenable, respecting the
plants which the writer has seen, and which he is sure that the reader can
easily see: liable to modification to any extent by wider experience; but
better first learned securely within a narrow fence, and afterwards trained
or fructified, along more complex trellises.

7. And indeed my readers--at least, my newly found readers--must note
always that the only power which I claim for any of my books, is that of
being right and true as far as they reach. None of them pretend to be
Kosmoses;--none to be systems of Positivism or Negativism, on which the
earth is in future to swing instead of on its old worn-out poles;--none of
them to be works of genius;--none of them to be, more than all true work
_must_ be, pious;--and none to be, beyond the power of common people's
eyes,[16] ears, and noses, 'æsthetic.' They tell you that the world is _so_
big, and can't be made bigger--that you yourself are also so big, and can't
be made bigger, however you puff or bloat yourself; but that, on modern
mental nourishment, you may very easily be made smaller. They tell you that
two and two are four, that ginger is hot in the mouth, that roses are red,
and smuts black. Not themselves assuming to be pious, they yet assure you
that there is such a thing as piety in the world, and that it is wiser than
impiety; and not themselves pretending to be works of genius, they yet
assure you that there is such a thing as genius in the world, and that it
is meant for the light and delight of the world.

8. Into these repetitions of remarks on my work, often made before, I have
been led by an unlucky author who has just sent me his book, advising me
that it is "neither critical nor sentimental" (he had better have said in
plain English "without either judgment or feeling"), and in which nearly
the first sentence I read is--"Solomon with all his acuteness was not wise
enough to ... etc., etc., etc." ('give the Jews the British constitution,'
I believe the man means.) He is not a whit more conceited than Mr. Herbert
Spencer, or Mr. Goldwin Smith, or Professor Tyndall,--or any lively London
apprentice out on a Sunday; but this general superciliousness with respect
to Solomon, his Proverbs, and his politics, characteristic of the modern
Cockney, Yankee, and Anglicised Scot, is a difficult thing to deal with for
us of the old school, who were well whipped when we were young; and have
been in the habit of occasionally ascertaining our own levels as we grew
older, and of recognizing that, here and there, somebody stood higher, and
struck harder.

9. A difficult thing to deal with, I feel more and more, hourly, even to
the point of almost ceasing to write; not only every feeling I have, but,
of late, even _every word I use_, being alike inconceivable to the
insolence, and unintelligible amidst the slang, of the modern London
writers. Only in the last magazine I took up, I found an article by Mr.
Goldwin Smith on the Jews (of which the gist--as far as it had any--was
that we had better give up reading the Bible), and in the text of which I
found the word 'tribal' repeated about ten times in every page. Now, if
'tribe' makes 'tribal,' tube must make tubal, cube, cubal, and gibe, gibal;
and I suppose we shall next hear of tubal music, cubal minerals, and gibal
conversation! And observe how all this bad English leads instantly to
blunder in thought, prolonged indefinitely. The Jewish Tribes are not
separate races, but the descendants of brothers. The Roman Tribes,
political divisions; essentially Trine: and the whole force of the word
Tribune vanishes, as soon as the ear is wrung into acceptance of his lazy
innovation by the modern writer. Similarly, in the last elements of
mineralogy I took up, the first order of crystals was called 'tesseral';
the writer being much too fine to call them 'four-al,' and too much bent on
distinguishing himself from all previous writers to call them cubic.

10. What simple schoolchildren, and sensible schoolmasters, are to do in
this atmosphere of Egyptian marsh, which rains fools upon them like frogs,
I can no more with any hope or patience conceive;--but this finally I
repeat, concerning my own books, that they are written in honest English,
of good Johnsonian lineage, touched here and there with colour of a little
finer or Elizabethan quality: and that the things they tell you are
comprehensible by any moderately industrious and intelligent person; and
_accurate_, to a degree which the accepted methods of modern science
cannot, in my own particular fields, approach.

11. Of which accuracy, the reader may observe for immediate instance, my
extrication for him, from among the uvularias, of these five species of the
Butterwort; which, being all that need be distinctly named and remembered,
_do_ need to be first carefully distinguished, and then remembered in their
companionship. So alike are they, that Gerarde makes no distinction among
them; but masses them under the general type of the frequent English one,
described as the second kind of his promiscuous group of 'Sanicle,' "which
Clusius calleth Pinguicula; not before his time remembered, hath sundry
small thick leaves, fat and full of juice, being broad towards the root and
sharp towards the point, of a faint green colour, and bitter in taste; out
of the middest whereof sprouteth or shooteth up a naked slender stalke nine
inches long, every stalke bearing one flower and no more, sometimes white,
and sometimes of a bluish purple colour, fashioned like unto the common
Monkshoods" (he means Larkspurs) "called Consolida Regalis, having the like
spur or Lark's heel attached thereto." Then after describing a third kind
of Sanicle--(Cortusa Mathioli, a large-leaved Alpine Primula,) he goes on:
"These plants are strangers in England; their natural country is the alpish
mountains of Helvetia. They grow in my garden, where they flourish
exceedingly, except Butterwoort, which groweth in our English _squally_ wet
grounds,"--('Squally,' I believe, here, from squalidus, though Johnson does
not give this sense; but one of his quotations from Ben Jonson touches it
nearly: "Take heed that their new flowers and sweetness do not as much
corrupt as the others' dryness and squalor,"--and note farther that the
word 'squal,' in the sense of gust, is not pure English, but the Arabic
'Chuaul' with an s prefixed:--the English word, a form of 'squeal,' meaning
a child's cry, from Gothic 'Squæla' and Icelandic 'squilla,' would scarcely
have been made an adjective by Gerarde),--"and will not yield to any
culturing or transplanting: it groweth especially in a field called Cragge
Close, and at Crosbie Ravenswaithe, in Westmerland; (West-_mere_-land you
observe, not mor) upon Ingleborough Fells, twelve miles from Lancaster, and
by Harwoode in the same county near to Blackburn: ten miles from Preston,
in Anderness, upon the bogs and marish ground, and in the boggie meadows
about Bishop's-Hatfield, and also in the fens in the way to Wittles Meare"
(Roger Wildrake's Squattlesea Mere?) "from Fendon, in Huntingdonshire."
Where doubtless Cromwell ploughed it up, in his young days, pitilessly; and
in nowise pausing, as Burns beside his fallen daisy.

12. Finally, however, I believe we may accept its English name of
'Butterwort' as true Yorkshire, the more enigmatic form of 'Pigwilly'
preserving the tradition of the flowers once abounding, with softened Latin
name, in Pigwilly bottom, close to Force bridge, by Kendal. Gerarde draws
the English variety as "Pinguicula sive Sanicula Eboracensis,--Butterwoort,
or Yorkshire Sanicle;" and he adds: "The husbandmen's wives of Yorkshire do
use to anoint the dugs of their kine with the fat and oilous juice of the
herb Butterwort when they be bitten of any venomous worm, or chapped,
rifted and hurt by any other means."

13. In Lapland it is put to much more certain use; "it is called Tätgrass,
and the leaves are used by the inhabitants to make their 'tät miolk,' a
preparation of milk in common use among them. Some fresh leaves are laid
upon a filter, and milk, yet warm from the reindeer, is poured over them.
After passing quickly through the filter, this is allowed to rest for one
or two days until it becomes ascescent,[17] when it is found not to have
separated from the whey, and yet to have attained much greater tenacity and
consistence than it would have done otherwise. The Laplanders and Swedes
are said to be extremely fond of this milk, which when once made, it is not
necessary to renew the use of the leaves, for we are told that a spoonful
of it will turn another quantity of warm milk, and make it like the
first."[18] (Baxter, vol. iii., No. 209.)

14. In the same page, I find quoted Dr. Johnston's observation that "when
specimens of this plant were somewhat rudely pulled up, the flower-stalk,
previously erect, almost immediately began to bend itself backwards, and
formed a more or less perfect segment of a circle; and so also, if a
specimen is placed in the Botanic box, you will in a short time find that
the leaves have curled themselves backwards, and now conceal the root by
their revolution."

I have no doubt that this elastic and wiry action is partly connected with
the plant's more or less predatory or fly-trap character, in which these
curiously degraded plants are associated with Drosera. I separate them
therefore entirely from the Bladderworts, and hold them to be a link
between the Violets and the Droseraceæ, placing them, however, with the
Cytherides, as a sub-family, for their beautiful colour, and because they
are indeed a grace and delight in ground which, but for them, would be
painfully and rudely desolate.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER III.

VERONICA.

1. "The Corolla of the Foxglove," says Dr. Lindley, beginning his account
of the tribe at page 195 of the first volume of his 'Ladies' Botany,' "is a
large inflated body(!), with its throat spotted with rich purple, and its
border divided obliquely into five very short lobes, of which the two upper
are the smaller; its four stamens are of unequal length, and its style is
divided into two lobes at the upper end. A number of long hairs cover the
ovary, which contains two cells and a great quantity of ovules.

"This" (_sc._ information) "will show you what is the usual character of
the Foxglove tribe; and you will find that all the other genera referred to
it in books agree with it essentially, although they differ in subordinate
points. It is chiefly (A) in the form of the corolla, (B) in the number of
the stamens, (C) in the consistence of the rind of the fruit, (D) in its
form, (E) in the number of the seeds it contains, and (F) in the manner in
which the sepals are combined, that these differences consist."

2. The enumerative letters are of my insertion--otherwise the above
sentence is, word for word, Dr. Lindley's,--and it seems to me an
interesting and memorable one in the history of modern Botanical science.
For it appears from the tenor of it, that in a scientific botanist's mind,
six particulars, at least, in the character of a plant, are merely
'subordinate points,'--namely,

  1. (F) The combination of its calyx,
  2. (A) The shape of its corolla,
  3. (B) The number of its stamens,
  4. (D) The form of its fruit,
  5. (C) The consistence of its shell,--and
  6. (E) The number of seeds in it.

Abstracting, then, from the primary description, all the six inessential
points, I find the three essential ones left are, that the style is divided
into two lobes at the upper end, that a number of glandular hairs cover the
ovary, and that this latter contains two cells.

3. None of which particulars concern any reasonable mortal, looking at a
Foxglove, in the smallest degree. Whether hairs which he can't see are
glandular or bristly,--whether the green knobs, which are left when the
purple bells are gone, are divided into two lobes or two hundred,--and
whether the style is split, like a snake's tongue, into two lobes, or like
a rogue's, into any number--are merely matters of vulgar curiosity, which
he needs a microscope to discover, and will lose a day of his life in
discovering. But if any pretty young Proserpina, escaped from the Plutonic
durance of London, and carried by the tubular process, which replaces
Charon's boat, over the Lune at Lancaster, cares to come and walk on the
Coniston hills in a summer morning, when the eyebright is out on the high
fields, she may gather, with a little help from Brantwood garden, a bouquet
of the entire Foxglove tribe in flower, as it is at present defined, and
may see what they are like, altogether.

4. She shall gather: first, the Euphrasy, which makes the turf on the brow
of the hill glitter as if with new-fallen manna; then, from one of the blue
clusters on the top of the garden wall, the common bright blue Speedwell;
and, from the garden bed beneath, a dark blue spire of Veronica spicata;
then, at the nearest opening into the wood, a little foxglove in its first
delight of shaking out its bells; then--what next does the Doctor say?--a
snapdragon? we must go back into the garden for that--here is a goodly
crimson one, but what the little speedwell will think of him for a relative
_I_ can't think!--a mullein?--that we must do without for the moment; a
monkey flower?--that we will do without, altogether; a lady's slipper?--say
rather a goblin's with the gout! but, such as the flower-cobbler has made
it, here is one of the kind that people praise, out of the greenhouse,--and
yet a figwort we must have, too; which I see on referring to Loudon, may be
balm-leaved, hemp-leaved, tansy-leaved, nettle-leaved, wing-leaved,
heart-leaved, ear-leaved, spear-leaved, or lyre-leaved. I think I can find
a balm-leaved one, though I don't know what to make of it when I've got it,
but it's called a 'Scorodonia' in Sowerby, and something very ugly
besides;--I'll put a bit of Teucrium Scorodonia in, to finish: and now--how
will my young Proserpina arrange her bouquet, and rank the family relations
to their contentment?

5. She has only one kind of flowers--in her hand, as botanical
classification stands at present; and whether the system be more rational,
or in any human sense more scientific, which puts calceolaria and speedwell
together,--and foxglove and euphrasy; and runs them on one side into the
mints, and on the other into the nightshades;--naming them, meanwhile, some
from diseases, some from vermin, some from blockheads, and the rest
anyhow:--or the method I am pleading for, which teaches us, watchful of
their seasonable return and chosen abiding places, to associate in our
memory the flowers which truly resemble, or fondly companion, or, in time
kept by the signs of Heaven, succeed, each other; and to name them in some
historical connection with the loveliest fancies and most helpful faiths of
the ancestral world--Proserpina be judge; with every maid that sets flowers
on brow or breast--from Thule to Sicily.

6. We will unbind our bouquet, then, and putting all the rest of its
flowers aside, examine the range and nature of the little blue cluster
only.

And first--we have to note of it, that the plan of the blossom in all the
kinds is the same; an irregular quatre-foil: and irregular quatrefoils are
of extreme rarity in flower form. I don't myself know _one_, except the
Veronica. The cruciform vegetables--the heaths, the olives, the lilacs, the
little Tormentillas, and the poppies, are all perfectly symmetrical. Two of
the petals, indeed, as a rule, are different from the other two, except in
the heaths; and thus a distinctly crosslet form obtained, but always an
equally balanced one: while in the Veronica, as in the Violet, the blossom
always refers itself to a supposed place on the stalk with respect to the
ground; and the upper petal is always the largest.

The supposed place is often very suppositious indeed--for clusters of the
common veronicas, if luxuriant, throw their blossoms about anywhere. But
the idea of an upper and lower petal is always kept in the flower's little
mind.

7. In the second place, it is a quite open and flat quatrefoil--so
separating itself from the belled quadrature of the heath, and the tubed
and primrose-like quadrature of the cruciferæ; and, both as a quatrefoil,
and as an open one, it is separated from the foxgloves and snapdragons,
which are neither quatrefoils, nor open; but are cinqfoils shut up!

8. In the third place, open and flat though the flower be, it is
monopetalous; all the four arms of the cross strictly becoming one in the
centre; so that, though the blue foils _look_ no less sharply separate than
those of a buttercup or a cistus; and are so delicate that one expects them
to fall from their stalk if we breathe too near,--do but lay hold of
one,--and, at the touch, the entire blossom is lifted from its stalk, and
may be laid, in perfect shape, on our paper before us, as easily as if it
had been a nicely made-up blue bonnet, lifted off its stand by the
milliner.

I pause here, to consider a little; because I find myself mixing up two
characteristics which have nothing necessary in their relation;--namely,
the unity of the blossom, and its coming easily off the stalk. The separate
petals of the cistus and cherry fall as easily as the foxglove drops its
bells;--on the other hand, there are monopetalous things that don't drop,
but hold on like the convoluta,[19] and make the rest of the tree sad for
their dying. I do not see my way to any systematic noting of decadent or
persistent corolla; but, in passing, we may thank the veronica for never
allowing us to see how it fades,[20] and being always cheerful and lovely,
while it is with us.

9. And for a farther specialty, I think we should take note of the purity
and simplicity of its _floral_ blue, not sprinkling itself with unwholesome
sugar like a larkspur, nor varying into coppery or turquoise-like hue as
the forget-me-not; but keeping itself as modest as a blue print, pale, in
the most frequent kinds; but pure exceedingly; and rejoicing in fellowship
with the grey of its native rocks. The palest of all I think it will be
well to remember as Veronica Clara, the "Poor Clare" of Veronicas. I find
this note on it in my diary,--

'The flower of an exquisite grey-white, like lichen, or shaded hoar-frost,
or dead silver; making the long-weathered stones it grew upon perfect with
a finished modesty of paleness, as if the flower _could_ be blue, and would
not, for their sake. Laying its fine small leaves along in embroidery, like
Anagallis tenella,--indescribable in the tender feebleness of
it--afterwards as it grew, dropping the little blossoms from the base of
the spire, before the buds at the top had blown. Gathered, it was happy
beside me, with a little water under a stone, and put out one pale blossom
after another, day by day.'

10. Lastly, and for a high worthiness, in my estimate, note that it is
_wild_, of the wildest, and proud in pure descent of race; submitting
itself to no follies of the cur-breeding florist. Its species, though many
resembling each other, are severally constant in aspect, and easily
recognizable; and I have never seen it provoked to glare into any gigantic
impudence at a flower show. Fortunately, perhaps, it is scentless, and so
despised.

11. Before I attempt arranging its families, we must note that while the
corolla itself is one of the most constant in form, and so distinct from
all other blossoms that it may be always known at a glance; the leaves and
habit of growth vary so greatly in families of different climates, and
those born for special situations, moist or dry, and the like, that it is
quite impossible to characterize Veronic, or Veronique, vegetation in
general terms. One can say, comfortably, of a strawberry, that it is a
creeper, without expecting at the next moment to see a steeple of
strawberry blossoms rise to contradict us;--we can venture to say of a
foxglove that it grows in a spire, without any danger of finding, farther
on, a carpet of prostrate and entangling digitalis; and we may pronounce of
a buttercup that it grows mostly in meadows, without fear of finding
ourselves, at the edge of the next thicket, under the shadow of a
buttercup-bush growing into valuable timber. But the Veronica reclines with
the lowly,[21] upon occasion, and aspires, with the proud; is here the
pleased companion of the ground-ivies, and there the unrebuked rival of the
larkspurs: on the rocks of Coniston it effaces itself almost into the film
of a lichen; it pierces the snows of Iceland with the gentian: and in the
Falkland Islands is a white-blossomed evergreen, of which botanists are in
dispute whether it be Veronica or Olive.

12. Of these many and various forms, I find the manners and customs alike
inconstant; and this of especially singular in them--that the Alpine and
northern species bloom hardily in contest with the retiring snows, while
with us they wait till the spring is past, and offer themselves to us only
in consolation for the vanished violet and primrose. As we farther examine
the ways of plants, I suppose we shall find some that determine upon a
fixed season, and will bloom methodically in June or July, whether in
Abyssinia or Greenland; and others, like the violet and crocus, which are
flowers of the spring, at whatever time of the favouring or frowning year
the spring returns to their country. I suppose also that botanists and
gardeners know all these matters thoroughly: but they don't put them into
their books, and the clear notions of them only come to me now, as I think
and watch.

13. Broadly, however, the families of the Veronica fall into three main
divisions,--those which have round leaves lobed at the edge, like ground
ivy; those which have small thyme-like leaves; and those which have long
leaves like a foxglove's, only smaller--never more than two or two and a
half inches long. I therefore take them in these connections, though
without any bar between the groups; only separating the Regina from the
other thyme-leaved ones, to give her due precedence; and the rest will then
arrange themselves into twenty families, easily distinguishable and
memorable.

[Illustration: FIG. IV.]

I have chosen for Veronica Regina, the brave Icelandic one, which pierces
the snow in first spring, with lovely small shoots of perfectly set leaves,
no larger than a grain of wheat; the flowers in a lifted cluster of five or
six together, not crowded, yet not loose; large, for veronica--about the
size of a silver penny, or say half an inch across--deep blue, with ruby
centre.

My woodcut, Fig. 4, is outlined[22] from the beautiful engraving D.
342,[23]--there called 'fruticulosa,' from the number of the young shoots.

14. Beneath the Regina, come the twenty easily distinguished families,
namely:--

1. Chamædrys. 'Ground-oak.' I cannot tell why so called--its small and
rounded leaves having nothing like oak leaves about them, except the
serration, which is common to half, at least, of all leaves that grow. But
the idea is all over Europe, apparently. Fr. 'petit chêne:' German and
English 'Germander,' a merely corrupt form of Chamædrys.

The representative English veronica "Germander Speedwell"--very prettily
drawn in S. 986; too tall and weed-like in D. 448.

2. Hederifolia. Ivy-leaved: but more properly, cymbalaria-leaved. It is the
English field representative, though blue-flowered, of the Byzantine white
veronica, V. Cymbalaria, very beautifully drawn in G. 9. Hederifolia well
in D. 428.

3. Agrestis. Fr. 'Rustique.' We ought however clearly to understand whether
'agrestis,' used by English botanists, is meant to imply a literally field
flower, or only a 'rustic' one, which might as properly grow in a wood. I
shall always myself use 'agrestis' in the literal sense, and 'rustica' for
'rustique.' I see no reason, in the present case, for separating the Polite
from the Rustic flower: the agrestis, D. 449 and S. 971, seems to me not
more meekly recumbent, nor more frankly cultureless, than the so-called
Polita, S. 972: there seems also no French acknowledgment of its
politeness, and the Greek family, G. 8, seem the rudest and wildest of all.

Quite a _field_ flower it is, I believe, lying always low on the ground;
recumbent, but not creeping. Note this difference: no fastening roots are
thrown out by the reposing stems of this Veronica; a creeping or accurately
'rampant' plant roots itself in advancing. Conf. Nos. 5, 6.

4. Arvensis. We have yet to note a still finer distinction in epithet.
'Agrestis' will properly mean a flower of the open ground--yet not caring
whether the piece of earth be cultivated or not, so long as it is under
clear sky. But when _agri_-culture has turned the unfruitful acres into
'arva beata,'--if then the plant thrust itself between the furrows of the
plough, it is properly called 'Arvensis.'

I don't quite see my way to the same distinction in English,--perhaps I may
get into the habit, as time goes on, of calling the Arvenses consistently
furrow-flowers, and the Agrestes field-flowers. Furrow-veronica is a
tiresomely long name, but must do for the present, as the best
interpretation of its Latin character, "vulgatissima in cultis et arvis."
D. 515. The blossom itself is exquisitely delicate; and we may be thankful,
both here and in Denmark, for such a lovely 'vulgate.'

5. Montana. D. 1201. The first really creeping plant we have had to notice.
It throws out roots from the recumbent stems. Otherwise like agrestis, it
has leaves like ground-ivy. Called a wood species in the text of D.

6. Persica. An eastern form, but now perfectly naturalized here--D. 1982;
S. 973. The flowers very large, and extremely beautiful, but only one
springing from each leaf-axil.

Leaves and stem like Montana; and also creeping with new-roots at
intervals.

7. Triphylla, (not triphyll_os_,--see Flora Suecica, 22). Meaning
trifid-leaved; but the leaf is really divided into five lobes, not
three--see S. 974, and G. 10. The palmate form of the leaf seems a mere
caprice, and indicates no transitional form in the plant: it may be
accepted as only a momentary compliment of mimicry to the geraniums. The
Siberian variety, 'multifida,' C. 1679, divides itself almost as the
submerged leaves of the water-ranunculus.

The triphylla itself is widely diffused, growing alike on the sandy fields
of Kent, and of Troy. In D. 627 is given an extremely delicate and minute
northern type, the flowers springing as in Persica, one from each
leaf-axil, and at distant intervals.

8. Officinalis. D. 248, S. 294. Fr. 'Veronique officinale'; (Germ.
Gebrauchlicher Ehrenpreis,) our commonest English and Welsh speedwell;
richest in cluster and frankest in roadside growth, whether on bank or
rock; but assuredly liking _either_ a bank _or_ a rock, and the top of a
wall better than the shelter of one. Uncountable 'myriads,' I am tempted to
write, but, cautiously and literally, 'hundreds' of blossoms--if one
_could_ count,--ranging certainly towards the thousand in some groups, all
bright at once, make our Westmoreland lanes look as if they were decked for
weddings, in early summer. In the Danish Flora it is drawn small and poor;
its southern type being the true one: but it is difficult to explain the
difference between the look of a flower which really _suffers_, as in this
instance, by a colder climate, and becomes mean and weak, as well as
dwarfed; and one which is braced and brightened by the cold, though
diminished, as if under the charge and charm of an affectionate fairy, and
becomes a joyfully patriotic inheritor of wilder scenes and skies.
Medicinal, to soul and body alike, this gracious and domestic flower;
though astringent and bitter in the juice. It is the Welsh deeply honoured
'Fluellen.'--See final note on the myth of Veronica, see § 18.

9. Thymifolia. Thyme-leaved, G. 6. Of course the longest possible
word--serpyllifolia--is used in S. 978. It is a high mountain plant,
growing on the top of Crete as the snow retires; and the Veronica minor of
Gerarde; "the roote is small and threddie, taking hold of the _upper
surface_ of the earth, where it spreadeth." So also it is drawn as a
creeper in F. 492, where the flower appears to be oppressed and concealed
by the leafage.

10. Minuta, called 'hirsuta' in S. 985: an ugly characteristic to name the
lovely little thing by. The distinct blue lines in the petals might perhaps
justify 'picta' or 'lineata,' rather than an epithet of size; but I suppose
it is Gerarde's Minima, and so leave it, more safely named as 'minute' than
'least.' For I think the next variety may dispute the leastness.

[Illustration: FIG. V.]

11. Verna. D. 252. Mountains, in dry places in early spring. Upright, and
confused in the leafage, which is sharp-pointed and close set, much hiding
the blossom, but of extreme elegance, fit for a sacred foreground; as any
gentle student will feel, who copies this outline from the Flora Danica,
Fig. 5.

12. Peregrina. Another extremely small variety, nearly pink in colour,
passing into bluish lilac and white. American; but called, I do not see
why, 'Veronique _voyageuse_,' by the French, and Fremder Ehrenpreis in
Germany. Given as a frequent English weed in S. 927.

13. Alpina. Veronique des Alpes. Gebirgs Ehrenpreis. Still minute; its
scarcely distinct flowers forming a close head among the leaves;
round-petalled in D. 16, but sharp, as usual, in S. 980. On the Norway Alps
in grassy places; and in Scotland by the side of mountain rills; but rare.
On Ben Nevis and Lachin y Gair (S.)

14. Scutellata. From the shield-like shape of its seed-vessels. Veronique à
Ecusson; Schildfruchtiger Ehrenpreis. But the seed-vessels are more heart
shape than shield. Marsh Speedwell. S. 988, D. 209,--in the one pink, in
the other blue; but again in D. 1561, pink.

"In flooded meadows, common." (D.) A spoiled and scattered form; the seeds
too conspicuous, but the flowers very delicate, hence 'Gratiola minima' in
Gesner. The confused ramification of the clusters worth noting, in relation
to the equally straggling fibres of root.

15. Spicata. S. 982: very prettily done, representing the inside of the
flower as deep blue, the outside pale. The top of the spire, all calices,
the calyx being indeed, through all the veronicas, an important and
persistent member.

The tendency to arrange itself in spikes is to be noted as a degradation of
the veronic character; connecting it on one side with the snapdragons, on
the other with the ophryds. In Veronica Ophrydea, (C. 2210,) this
resemblance to the contorted tribe is carried so far that "the corolla of
the veronica becomes irregular, the tube gibbous, the faux (throat) hairy,
and three of the laciniæ (lobes of petals) variously twisted." The spire of
blossom, violet-coloured, is then close set, and exactly resembles an
ophryd, except in being sharper at the top. The engraved outline of the
blossom is good, and very curious.

16. Gentianoides. This is the most directly and curiously imitative among
the--shall we call them--'histrionic' types of Veronica. It grows exactly
like a clustered upright gentian; has the same kind of leaves at its root,
and springs with the same bright vitality among the retiring snows of the
Bithynian Olympus. (G. 5.) If, however, the Caucasian flower, C. 1002, be
the same, it has lost its perfect grace in luxuriance, growing as large as
an asphodel, and with root-leaves half a foot long.

The petals are much veined; and this, of all veronicas, has the lower petal
smallest in proportion to the three above,--"triplò aut quadruplò minori."
(G.)

17. Stagnarum. Marsh-Veronica. The last four families we have been
examining vary from the typical Veronicas not only in their lance-shaped
clusters, but in their lengthened, and often every way much enlarged leaves
also: and the two which we now will take in association, 17 and 18, carry
the change in aspect farthest of any, being both of them true water-plants,
with strong stems and thick leaves. The present name of my Veronica
Stagnarum is however V. anagallis, a mere insult to the little water
primula, which one plant of the Veronica would make fifty of. This is a
rank water-weed, having confused bunches of blossom and seed, like unripe
currants, dangling from the leaf-axils. So that where the little triphylla,
(No. 7, above,) has only one blossom, daintily set, and well seen, this has
a litter of twenty-five or thirty on a long stalk, of which only three or
four are well out as flowers, and the rest are mere knobs of bud or seed.
The stalk is thick (half an inch round at the bottom), the leaves long and
misshapen. "Frequens in fossis," D. 203. French, Mouron d'Eau, but I don't
know the root or exact meaning of Mouron.

An ugly Australian species, 'labiata,' C. 1660, has leaves two inches long,
of the shape of an aloe's, and partly aloeine in texture, "sawed with
unequal, fleshy, pointed teeth."

18. Fontium. Brook-Veronica. Brook-_Lime_, the Anglo-Saxon 'lime' from
Latin limus, meaning the soft mud of streams. German 'Bach-bunge'
(Brook-purse?) ridiculously changed by the botanists into 'Beccabunga,' for
a Latin name! Very beautiful in its crowded green leaves as a
stream-companion; rich and bright more than watercress. See notice of it at
Matlock, in 'Modern Painters,' vol. v.

19. Clara. Veronique des rochers. Saxatilis, I suppose, in Sowerby, but am
not sure of having identified that with my own favourite, for which I
therefore keep the name 'Clara,' (see above, § 9); and the other rock
variety, if indeed another, mast be remembered, together with it.

20. Glauca. G. 7. And this, at all events, with the Clara, is to be
remembered as closing the series of twenty families, acknowledged by
Proserpina. It is a beautiful low-growing ivy-leaved type, with flowers of
subdued lilac blue. On Mount Hymettus: no other locality given in the Flora
Græca.

15. I am sorry, and shall always be so, when the varieties of any flower
which I have to commend to the student's memory, exceed ten or twelve in
number; but I am content to gratify his pride with lengthier task, if
indeed he will resign himself to the imperative close of the more inclusive
catalogue, and be content to know the twelve, or sixteen, or twenty,
acknowledged families, thoroughly; and only in their illustration to think
of rarer forms. The object of 'Proserpina' is to make him happily cognizant
of the common aspect of Greek and English flowers; under the term
'English,' comprehending the Saxon, Celtic, Norman, and Danish Floras. Of
the evergreen shrub alluded to in § 11 above, the Veronica Decussata of the
Pacific, which is "a bushy evergreen, with beautifully set cross-leaves,
and white blossoms scented like olea fragrans," I should like him only to
read with much surprise, and some incredulity, in Pinkerton's or other
entertaining travellers' voyages.

16. And of the families given, he is to note for the common simple
characteristic, that they are quatrefoils referred to a more or less
elevated position on a central stem, and having, in that relation, the
lowermost petal diminished, contrary to the almost universal habit of other
flowers to develope in such a position the lower petal chiefly, that it may
have its full share of light. You will find nothing but blunder and
embarrassment result from any endeavour to enter into further particulars,
such as "the relation of the dissepiment with respect to the valves of the
capsule," etc., etc., since "in the various species of Veronica almost
every kind of dehiscence may be observed" (C. under V. perfoliata, 1936, an
Australian species). Sibthorpe gives the entire definition of Veronica with
only one epithet added to mine, "Corolla quadrifida, _rotata_, laciniâ
infimâ angustiore," but I do not know what 'rotata' here means, as there is
no appearance of revolved action in the petals, so far as I can see.

17. Of the mythic or poetic significance of the veronica, there is less to
be said than of its natural beauty. I have not been able to discover with
what feeling, or at what time, its sacred name was originally given; and
the legend of S. Veronica herself is, in the substance of it, irrational,
and therefore incredible. The meaning of the term 'rational,' as applied to
a legend or miracle, is, that there has been an intelligible need for the
permission of the miracle at the time when it is recorded; and that the
nature and manner of the act itself should be comprehensible in the scope.
There was thus quite simple need for Christ to feed the multitudes, and to
appear to S. Paul; but no need, so far as human intelligence can reach, for
the reflection of His features upon a piece of linen which could be seen by
not one in a million of the disciples to whom He might more easily, at any
time, manifest Himself personally and perfectly. Nor, I believe, has the
story of S. Veronica ever been asserted to be other than symbolic by the
sincere teachers of the Church; and, even so far as in that merely
explanatory function, it became the seal of an extreme sorrow, it is not
easy to understand how the pensive fable was associated with a flower so
familiar, so bright, and so popularly of good omen, as the Speedwell.

18. Yet, the fact being actually so, and this consecration of the veronica
being certainly far more ancient and earnest than the faintly romantic and
extremely absurd legend of the forget-me-not; the speedwell has assuredly
the higher claim to be given and accepted as a token of pure and faithful
love, and to be trusted as a sweet sign that the innocence of affection is
indeed more frequent, and the appointed destiny of its faith more
fortunate, than our inattentive hearts have hitherto discerned.

19. And this the more, because the recognized virtues and uses of the plant
are real and manifold; and the ideas of a peculiar honourableness and worth
of life connected with it by the German popular name 'Honour-prize'; while
to the heart of the British race, the same thought is brought home by
Shakespeare's adoption of the flower's Welsh name, for the faithfullest
common soldier of his ideal king. As a lover's pledge, therefore, it does
not merely mean memory;--for, indeed, why should love be thought of as such
at all, if it need to promise not to forget?--but the blossom is
significant also of the lover's best virtues, patience in suffering, purity
in thought, gaiety in courage, and serenity in truth: and therefore I make
it, worthily, the clasping and central flower of the Cytherides.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER IV.

GIULIETTA.

1. Supposing that, in early life, one had the power of living to one's
fancy,--and why should we not, if the said fancy were restrained by the
knowledge of the two great laws concerning our nature, that happiness is
increased, not by the enlargement of the possessions, but of the heart; and
days lengthened, not by the crowding of emotions, but the economy of
them?--if thus taught, we had, I repeat, the ordering of our house and
estate in our own hands, I believe no manner of temperance in pleasure
would be better rewarded than that of making our gardens gay only with
common flowers; and leaving those which needed care for their transplanted
life to be found in their native places when we travelled. So long as I had
crocus and daisy in the spring, roses in the summer, and hollyhocks and
pinks in the autumn, I used to be myself independent of farther
horticulture,--and it is only now that I am old, and since pleasant
travelling has become impossible to me, that I am thankful to have the
white narcissus in my borders, instead of waiting to walk through the
fragrance of the meadows of Clarens; and pleased to see the milkwort blue
on my scythe-mown banks, since I cannot gather it any more on the rocks of
the Vosges, or in the divine glens of Jura.

2. Among the losses, all the more fatal in being unfelt, brought upon us by
the fury and vulgarity of modern life, I count for one of the saddest, the
loss of the wish to gather a flower in travelling. The other day,--whether
indeed a sign of some dawning of doubt and remorse in the public mind, as
to the perfect jubilee of railroad journey, or merely a piece of the common
daily flattery on which the power of the British press first depends, I
cannot judge;--but, for one or other of such motives, I saw lately in some
illustrated paper, a pictorial comparison of old-fashioned and modern
travel, representing, as the type of things passed away, the outside
passengers of the mail shrinking into huddled and silent distress from the
swirl of a winter snowstorm; and for type of the present Elysian
dispensation, the inside of a first-class saloon carriage, with a beautiful
young lady in the last pattern of Parisian travelling dress, conversing,
Daily news in hand, with a young officer--her fortunate vis-à-vis--on the
subject of our military successes in Afghanistan and Zululand.[24]

3. I will not, in presenting--it must not be called the other side, but the
supplementary, and wilfully omitted, facts, of this ideal,--oppose, as I
fairly might, the discomforts of a modern cheap excursion train, to the
chariot-and-four, with outriders and courier, of ancient noblesse. I will
compare only the actual facts, in the former and in latter years, of my own
journey from Paris to Geneva. As matters are now arranged, I find myself,
at half past eight in the evening, waiting in a confused crowd with which I
am presently to contend for a seat, in the dim light and cigar-stench of
the great station of the Lyons line. Making slow way through the
hostilities of the platform, in partly real, partly weak politeness, as may
be, I find the corner seats of course already full of prohibitory cloaks
and umbrellas; but manage to get a middle back one; the net overhead is
already surcharged with a bulging extra portmanteau, so that I squeeze my
desk as well as I can between my legs, and arrange what wraps I have about
my knees and shoulders. Follow a couple of hours of simple patience, with
nothing to entertain one's thoughts but the steady roar of the line under
the wheels, the blinking and dripping of the oil lantern, and the more or
less ungainly wretchedness, and variously sullen compromises and
encroachments of posture, among the five other passengers preparing
themselves for sleep: the last arrangement for the night being to shut up
both windows, in order to effect, with our six breaths, a salutary
modification of the night air.

4. The banging and bumping of the carriages over the turn-tables wakes me
up as I am beginning to doze, at Fontainebleau, and again at Sens; and the
trilling and thrilling of the little telegraph bell establishes itself in
my ears, and stays there, trilling me at last into a shivering, suspicious
sort of sleep, which, with a few vaguely fretful shrugs and fidgets,
carries me as far as Tonnerre, where the 'quinze minutes d'arret'
revolutionize everything; and I get a turn or two on the platform, and
perhaps a glimpse of the stars, with promise of a clear morning; and so
generally keep awake past Mont Bard, remembering the happy walks one used
to have on the terrace under Buffon's tower, and thence watching, if
perchance, from the mouth of the high tunnel, any film of moonlight may
show the far undulating masses of the hills of Citeaux. But most likely one
knows the place where the great old view used to be only by the sensible
quickening of the pace as the train turns down the incline, and crashes
through the trenched cliffs into the confusion and high clattering vault of
the station at Dijon.

5. And as my journey is almost always in the springtime, the twisted spire
of the cathedral usually shows itself against the first grey of dawn, as we
run out again southwards: and resolving to watch the sunrise, I fall more
complacently asleep,--and the sun is really up by the time one has to
change carriages, and get morning coffee at Macon. And from Amberieux,
through the Jura valley, one is more or less feverishly happy and thankful,
not so much for being in sight of Mont Blanc again, as in having got
through the nasty and gloomy night journey; and then the sight of the Rhone
and the Salève seems only like a dream, presently to end in nothingness;
till, covered with dust, and feeling as if one never should be fit for
anything any more, one staggers down the hill to the Hotel des Bergues, and
sees the dirtied Rhone, with its new iron bridge, and the smoke of a new
factory exactly dividing the line of the aiguilles of Chamouni.

6. That is the journey as it is now,--and as, for me, it must be; except on
foot, since there is now no other way of making it. But this _was_ the way
we used to manage it in old days:--

Very early in Continental transits we had found out that the family
travelling carriage, taking much time and ingenuity to load, needing at the
least three, usually four--horses, and on Alpine passes six, not only
jolted and lagged painfully on bad roads, but was liable in every way to
more awkward discomfitures than lighter vehicles; getting itself jammed in
archways, wrenched with damage out of ruts, and involved in volleys of
justifiable reprobation among market stalls. So when we knew better, my
father and mother always had their own old-fashioned light two-horse
carriage to themselves, and I had one made with any quantity of front and
side pockets for books and picked up stones; and hung very low, with a
fixed side-step, which I could get off or on with the horses at the trot;
and at any rise or fall of the road, relieve them, and get my own walk,
without troubling the driver to think of me.

7. Thus, leaving Paris in the bright spring morning, when the Seine
glittered gaily at Charenton, and the arbres de Judée were mere pyramids of
purple bloom round Villeneuve-St.-Georges, one had an afternoon walk among
the rocks of Fontainebleau, and next day we got early into Sens, for new
lessons in its cathedral aisles, and the first saunter among the budding
vines of the coteaux. I finished my plate of the Tower of Giotto, for the
'Seven Lamps,' in the old inn at Sens, which Dickens has described in his
wholly matchless way in the last chapter of 'Mrs. Lirriper's Lodgings'. The
next day brought us to the oolite limestones at Mont Bard, and we always
spent the Sunday at the Bell in Dijon. Monday, the drive of drives, through
the village of Genlis, the fortress of Auxonne, and up the hill to the
vine-surrounded town of Dole; whence, behold at last the limitless ranges
of Jura, south and north, beyond the woody plain, and above them the
'Derniers Kochers' and the white square-set summit, worshipped ever anew.
Then at Poligny, the same afternoon, we gathered the first milkwort for
that year; and on Tuesday, at St. Laurent, the wild lily of the valley; and
on Wednesday, at Morez, gentians.

And on Thursday, the _eighth or ninth_ day from Paris, days all spent
patiently and well, one saw from the gained height of Jura, the great Alps
unfold themselves in their chains and wreaths of incredible crest and
cloud.

8. Unhappily, during all the earliest and usefullest years of such
travelling, I had no thought of ever taking up botany as a study; feeling
well that even geology, which was antecedent to painting with me, could not
be followed out in connection with art but under strict limits, and with
sore shortcomings. It has only been the later discovery of the uselessness
of old scientific botany, and the abominableness of new, as an element of
education for youth;--and my certainty that a true knowledge of their
native Flora was meant by Heaven to be one of the first heart-possessions
of every happy boy and girl in flower-bearing lands, that have compelled me
to gather into system my fading memories, and wandering thoughts.[25] And
of course in the diaries written at places of which I now want chiefly the
details of the Flora, I find none; and in this instance of the milkwort,
whose name I was first told by the Chamouni guide, Joseph Couttet, then
walking with me on the unperilous turf of the first rise of the Vosges,
west of Strasburg, and rebuking me indignantly for my complaint that, being
then thirty-seven years old, and not yet able to draw the great plain and
distant spire, it was of no use trying in the poor remainder of life to do
anything serious,--then, and there, I say, for the first time examining the
strange little flower, and always associating it, since, with the limestone
crags of Alsace and Burgundy, I don't find a single note of its preferences
or antipathies in other districts, and cannot say a word about the soil it
chooses, or the height it ventures, or the familiarities to which it
condescends, on the Alps or Apennines.

9. But one thing I have ascertained of it, lately at Brantwood, that it is
capricious and fastidious beyond any other little blossom I know of. In
laying out the rock garden, most of the terrace sides were trusted to
remnants of the natural slope, propped by fragments of stone, among which
nearly every other wild flower that likes sun and air, is glad sometimes to
root itself. But at the top of all, one terrace was brought to
mathematically true level of surface, and slope of side, and turfed with
delicately chosen and adjusted sods, meant to be kept duly trim by the
scythe. And _only_ on this terrace does the Giulietta choose to show
herself,--and even there, not in any consistent places, but gleaming out
here in one year, there in another, like little bits of unexpected sky
through cloud; and entirely refusing to allow either bank or terrace to be
mown the least trim during _her_ time of disport there. So spared and
indulged, there are no more wayward things in all the woods or wilds; no
more delicate and perfect things to be brought up by watch through day and
night, than her recumbent clusters, trickling, sometimes almost gushing
through the grass, and meeting in tiny pools of flawless blue.

10. I will not attempt at present to arrange the varieties of the
Giulietta, for I find that all the larger and presumably characteristic
forms belong to the Cape; and only since Mr. Froude came back from his
African explorings have I been able to get any clear idea of the brilliancy
and associated infinitude of the Cape flowers. If I could but write down
the substance of what he has told me, in the course of a chat or two, which
have been among the best privileges of my recent stay in London, (prolonged
as it has been by recurrence of illness,) it would be a better summary of
what should be generally known in the natural history of southern plants
than I could glean from fifty volumes of horticultural botany. In the
meantime, everything being again thrown out of gear by the aforesaid
illness, I must let this piece of 'Proserpina' break off, as most of my
work does--and as perhaps all of it may soon do--leaving only suggestion
for the happier research of the students who trust me thus far.

11. Some essential points respecting the flower I shall note, however,
before ending. There is one large and frequent species of it of which the
flowers are delicately yellow, touched with tawny red, forming one of the
chief elements of wild foreground vegetation in the healthy districts of
hard Alpine limestone.[26] This is, I believe, the only European type of
the large Cape varieties, in all of which, judging from such plates as have
been accessible to me, the crests or fringes of the lower petal are less
conspicuous than in the smaller species; and the flower almost takes the
aspect of a broom-blossom or pease-blossom. In the smaller European
varieties, the white fringes of the lower petal are the most important and
characteristic part of the flower, and they are, among European wild
flowers, absolutely without any likeness of associated structure. The
fringes or crests which, towards the origin of petals, so often give a
frosted or gemmed appearance to the centres of flowers, are here thrown to
the extremity of the petal, and suggest an almost coralline structure of
blossom, which in no other instance whatever has been imitated, still less
carried out into its conceivable varieties of form. How many such varieties
might have been produced if these fringes of the Giulietta, or those
already alluded to of Lucia nivea, had been repeated and enlarged; as the
type, once adopted for complex bloom in the thistle-head, is multiplied in
the innumerable gradations of thistle, teasel, hawkweed, and aster! We
might have had flowers edged with lace finer than was ever woven by mortal
fingers, or tasselled and braided with fretwork of silver, never
tarnished--or hoarfrost that grew brighter in the sun. But it was not to
be, and after a few hints of what might be done in this kind, the Fate, or
Folly, or, on recent theories, the extreme fitness--and consequent
survival, of the Thistles and Dandelions, entirely drives the fringed
Lucias and blue-flushing milkworts out of common human neighbourhood, to
live recluse lives with the memories of the abbots of Cluny, and pastors of
Piedmont.

12. I have called the Giulietta 'blue-_flushing_' because it is one of the
group of exquisite flowers which at the time of their own blossoming,
breathe their colour into the surrounding leaves and supporting stem. Very
notably the Grape hyacinth and Jura hyacinth, and some of the Vestals,
empurpling all their green leaves even to the ground: a quite distinct
nature in the flower, observe, this possession of a power to kindle the
leaf and stem with its own passion, from that of the heaths, roses, or
lilies, where the determined bracts or calicos assert themselves in
opposition to the blossom, as little pine-leaves, or mosses, or brown paper
packages, and the like.

13. The Giulietta, however, is again entirely separate from the other
leaf-flushing blossoms, in that, after the two green leaves next the flower
have glowed with its blue, while it lived, they do not fade or waste with
it, but return to their own former green simplicity, and close over it to
protect the seed. I only know this to be the case with the Giulietta
Regina; but suppose it to be (with variety of course in the colours) a
condition in other species,--though of course nothing is ever said of it in
the botanical accounts of them. I gather, however, from Curtis's careful
drawings that the prevailing colour of the Cape species is purple, thus
justifying still further my placing them among the Cytherides; and I am
content to take the descriptive epithets at present given them, for the
following five of this southern group, hoping that they may be explained
for me afterwards by helpful friends.

14. Bracteolata, C. 345. Oppositifolia, C. 492. Speciosa, C. 1790. These
three all purple, and scarcely distinguishable from sweet pease-blossom,
only smaller.

Stipulacea, C. 1715. Small, and very beautiful, lilac and purple, with a
leaf and mode of growth like rosemary. The "Foxtail" milkwort, whose name I
don't accept, C. 1006, is intermediate between this and the next species.

15. Mixta, C. 1714. I don't see what mingling is meant, except that it is
just like Erica tetralix in the leaf, only, apparently, having little
four-petalled pinks for blossoms. This appearance is thus botanically
explained. I do not myself understand the description, but copy it,
thinking it may be of use to somebody. "The apex of the carina is expanded
into a two-lobed plain petal, the lobes of which are emarginate. This
appendix is of a bright rose colour, and forms the principal part of the
flower." The describer relaxes, or relapses, into common language so far as
to add that 'this appendix' "dispersed among the green foliage in every
part of the shrub, gives it a pretty lively appearance."

Perhaps this may also be worth extracting.

"Carina, deeply channeled, _of a saturated purple_ within, sides folded
together, so as to include and firmly embrace the style and stamens, which,
when arrived at maturity, upon being moved, escape elastically from their
confinement, and strike against the two erect petals or alæ--by which the
pollen is dispersed.

"Stem shrubby, with long flexile branches." (Length or height not told. I
imagine like an ordinary heath's.)

The term 'carina,' occurring twice in the above description, is peculiar to
the structure of the pease and milk-worts; we will examine it afterwards.
The European varieties of the milkwort, except the chamæbuxus, are all
minute,--and, their ordinary epithets being at least inoffensive, I give
them for reference till we find prettier ones; altering only the Calcarea,
because we could not have a 'Chalk Juliet,' and two varieties of the
Regina, changed for reason good--her name, according to the last modern
refinements of grace and ease in pronunciation, being Eu-vularis, var.
genuina! My readers may more happily remember her and her sister as
follows:--

16. (I.) Giulietta Regina. Pure blue. The same in colour, form, and size,
throughout Europe.

(II.) Giulietta Soror-Reginæ. Pale, reddish-blue or white in the flower,
and smaller in the leaf, otherwise like the Regina.

(III.) Giulietta Depressa. The smallest of those I can find drawings of.
Flowers, blue; lilac in the fringe, and no bigger than pins' heads; the
leaves quite gem-like in minuteness and order.

(IV.) Giulietta Cisterciana. Its present name, 'Calcarea,' is meant, in
botanic Latin, to express its growth on limestone or chalk mountains. But
we might as well call the South Down sheep, Calcareous mutton. My epithet
will rightly associate it with the Burgundian hills round Cluny and
Citeaux. Its ground leaves are much larger than those of the Depressa; the
flower a little larger, but very pale.

(V.) Giulietta Austriaca. Pink, and very lovely, with bold cluster of
ground leaves, but itself minute--almost dwarf. Called 'small bitter
milkwort' by S. How far distinct from the next following one, Norwegian, is
not told.

The above five kinds are given by Sowerby as British, but I have never
found the Austriaca myself.

(VI.) Giulietta Amara. Norwegian. Very quaint in blossom outline, like a
little blue rabbit with long ears. D. 1169.

17. Nobody tells me why either this last or No. 5 have been called bitter;
and Gerarde's five kinds are distinguished only by colour--blue, red,
white, purple, and "the dark, of an overworn ill-favoured colour, which
maketh it to differ from all others of his kind." I find no account of this
ill-favoured one elsewhere. The white is my Soror Reginæ; the red must be
the Austriaca; but the purple and overworn ones are perhaps now overworn
indeed. All of them must have been more common in Gerarde's time than now,
for he goes on to say "Milk-woort is called _Ambarualis flos_. so called
because it doth specially flourish in the Crosse or Gang-weeke, or
Rogation-weeke, of which flowers, the maidens which use in the countries to
walk the procession do make themselves garlands and nosegaies, in English
we may call it Crosse flower, Gang flower, Rogation flower, and
Milk-woort."

18. Above, at page 197, vol. i., in first arranging the Cytherides, I too
hastily concluded that the ascription to this plant of helpfulness to
nursing mothers was 'more than ordinarily false'; thinking that its rarity
could never have allowed it to be fairly tried. If indeed true, or in any
degree true, the flower has the best right of all to be classed with the
Cytherides, and we might have as much of it for beauty and for service as
we choose, if we only took half the pains to garnish our summer gardens
with living and life-giving blossom, that we do to garnish our winter
gluttonies with dying and useless ones.

19. I have said nothing of root, or fruit, or seed, having never had the
hardness of heart to pull up a milkwort cluster--nor the chance of watching
one in seed:--The pretty thing vanishes as it comes, like the blue sky of
April, and leaves no sign of itself--that _I_ ever found. The botanists
tell me that its fruit "dehisces loculicidally," which I suppose is botanic
for "splits like boxes," (but boxes shouldn't split, and didn't, as we used
to make and handle them before railways). Out of the split boxes fall
seeds--too few; and, as aforesaid, the plant never seems to grow again in
the same spot. I should thankfully receive any notes from friends happy
enough to live near milkwort banks, on the manner of its nativity.

20. Meanwhile, the Thistle, and the Nettle, and the Dock, and the Dandelion
are cared for in their generations by the finest arts of--Providence, shall
we say? or of the spirits appointed to punish our own want of Providence?
May I ask the reader to look back to the seventh chapter of the first
volume, for it contains suggestions of thoughts which came to me at a time
of very earnest and faithful inquiry, set down, I now see too shortly,
under the press of reading they involved, but intelligible enough if they
are read as slowly as they were written, and especially note the paragraph
of summary of p. 121 on the power of the Earth Mother, as Mother, and as
_judge;_ watching and rewarding the conditions which induce adversity and
prosperity in the kingdoms of men: comparing with it carefully the close of
the fourth chapter, p. 85,[27] which contains, for the now recklessly
multiplying classes of artists and colonists, truths essential to their
skill, and inexorable upon their labour.

21. The pen-drawing facsimiled by Mr. Allen with more than his usual care
in the frontispiece to this number of 'Proserpina,' was one of many
executed during the investigation of the schools of Gothic (German, and
later French), which founded their minor ornamentation on the serration of
the thistle leaf, as the Greeks on that of the Acanthus, but with a
consequent, and often morbid, love of thorny points, and insistance upon
jagged or knotted intricacies of stubborn vegetation, which is connected in
a deeply mysterious way with the gloomier forms of Catholic asceticism.[28]

22. But also, in beginning 'Proserpina,' I intended to give many
illustrations of the light and shade of foreground leaves belonging to the
nobler groups of thistles, because I thought they had been neglected by
ordinary botanical draughtsmen; not knowing at that time either the
original drawings at Oxford for the 'Flora Græca,' or the nobly engraved
plates executed in the close of the last century for the 'Flora Danica' and
'Flora Londinensis.' The latter is in the most difficult portraiture of the
larger plants, even the more wonderful of the two; and had I seen the
miracles of skill, patience, and faithful study which are collected in the
first and second volumes, published in 1777 and 1798, I believe my own work
would never have been undertaken.[29] Such as it is, however, I may still,
health being granted me, persevere in it; for my own leaf and branch
studies express conditions of shade which even these most exquisite
botanical plates ignore; and exemplify uses of the pen and pencil which
cannot be learned from the inimitable fineness of line engraving. The
frontispiece to this number, for instance, (a seeding head of the commonest
field-thistle of our London suburbs,) copied with a steel pen on smooth
grey paper, and the drawing softly touched with white on the nearer thorns,
may well surpass the effect of the plate.

23. In the following number of 'Proserpina' I have been tempted to follow,
with more minute notice than usual, the 'conditions of adversity' which, as
they fret the thistle tribe into jagged malice, have humbled the beauty of
the great domestic group of the Vestals into confused likenesses of the
Dragonweed and Nettle: but I feel every hour more and more the necessity of
separating the treatment of subjects in 'Proserpina' from the microscopic
curiosities of recent botanic illustration, nor shall this work close, if
my strength hold, without fulfilling in some sort, the effort begun long
ago in 'Modern Painters,' to interpret the grace of the larger blossoming
trees, and the mysteries of leafy form which clothe the Swiss precipice
with gentleness, and colour with softest azure the rich horizons of England
and Italy.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER V.

BRUNELLA.

1. It ought to have been added to the statements of general law in
irregular flowers, in Chapter I. of this volume, § 6, that if the petals,
while brought into relations of inequality, still retain their perfect
petal form,--and whether broad or narrow, extended or reduced, remain
clearly _leaves_, as in the pansy, pea, or azalea, and assume no grotesque
or obscure outline,--the flower, though injured, is not to be thought of as
corrupted or misled. But if any of the petals lose their definite character
as such, and become swollen, solidified, stiffened, or strained into any
other form or function than that of petals, the flower is to be looked upon
as affected by some kind of constant evil influence; and, so far as we
conceive of any spiritual power being concerned in the protection or
affliction of the inferior orders of creatures, it will be felt to bear the
aspect of possession by, or pollution by, a more or less degraded
Spirit.[30]

2. I have already enough spoken of the special manifestation of this
character in the orders Contorta and Satyrium, vol. i., p. 91, and the
reader will find the parallel aspects of the Draconidæ dwelt upon at length
in the 86th and 87th paragraphs of the 'Queen of the Air,' where also their
relation to the labiate group is touched upon. But I am far more
embarrassed by the symbolism of that group which I called 'Vestales,' from
their especially domestic character and their serviceable purity; but which
may be, with more convenience perhaps, simply recognizable as 'Menthæ.'

3. These are, to our northern countries, what the spice-bearing trees are
in the tropics;--our thyme, lavender, mint, marjoram, and their like,
separating themselves not less in the health giving or strengthening
character of their scent from the flowers more or less enervating in
perfume, as the rose, orange, and violet,--than in their humble colours and
forms from the grace and splendour of those higher tribes; thus allowing
themselves to be summed under the general word 'balm' more truly than the
balsams from which the word is derived. Giving the most pure and healing
powers to the air around them; with a comfort of warmth also, being mostly
in dry places, and forming sweet carpets and close turf; but only to be
rightly enjoyed in the open air, or indoors when dried; not tempting any
one to luxury, nor expressive of any kind of exultation. Brides do not deck
themselves with thyme, nor do we wreathe triumphal arches with mint.

4. It is most notable, also, farther, that none of these flowers have any
extreme beauty in colour. The blue sage is the only one of vivid hue at
all; and we never think of it as for a moment comparable to the violet or
bluebell: thyme is unnoticed beside heath, and many of the other purple
varieties of the group are almost dark and sad coloured among the flowers
of summer; while, so far from gaining beauty on closer looking, there is
scarcely a blossom of them which is not more or less grotesque, even to
ugliness, in outline; and so hooded or lappeted as to look at first like
some imperfect form of snapdragon for the most part spotted also, wrinkled
as if by old age or decay, cleft or torn, as if by violence, and springing
out of calices which, in their clustering spines, embody the general
roughness of the plant.

5. I take at once for example, lest the reader should think me unkind or
intemperate in my description, a flower very dear and precious to me; and
at this time my chief comfort in field walks. For, now, the reign of all
the sweet reginas of the spring is over--the reign of the silvia and
anemone, of viola and veronica; and at last, and this year abdicated under
tyrannous storm,[31] the reign of the rose. And the last foxglove-bells are
nearly fallen; and over all my fields and by the brooksides are coming up
the burdock, and the coarse and vainly white aster, and the black
knapweeds; and there is only one flower left to be loved among the
grass,--the soft, warm-scented Brunelle.

6. _P_runell, _or_ Brunell--Gerarde calls it; and Brunella, rightly and
authoritatively, Tournefort; Prunella, carelessly, Linnæus, and idly
following him, the moderns, casting out all the meaning and help of its
name--of which presently. Selfe-heale, Gerarde and Gray call it, in
English--meaning that who has this plant needs no physician.

7. As I look at it, close beside me, it seems as if it would reprove me for
what I have just said of the poverty of colour in its tribe; for the most
glowing of violets could not be lovelier than each fine purple gleam of its
hooded blossoms. But their flush is broken and oppressed by the dark
calices out of which they spring, and their utmost power in the field is
only of a saddened amethystine lustre, subdued with furry brown. And what
is worst in the victory of the darker colour is the disorder of the
scattered blossoms;--of all flowers I know, this is the strangest, in the
way that here and there, only in their cluster, its bells rise or remain,
and it always looks as if half of them had been shaken off, and the top of
the cluster broken short away altogether.

8. We must never lose hold of the principle that every flower is meant to
be seen by human creatures with human eyes, as by spiders with spider eyes.
But as the painter may sometimes play the spider, and weave a mesh to
entrap the heart, so the beholder may play the spider, when there are
meshes to be disentangled that have entrapped his mind. I take my lens,
therefore--to the little wonder of a brown wasps' nest with blue-winged
wasps in it,--and perceive therewith the following particulars.

9. First, that the blue of the petals is indeed pure and lovely, and a
little crystalline in texture; but that the form and setting of them is
grotesque beyond all wonder; the two uppermost joined being like an old
fashioned and enormous hood or bonnet, and the lower one projecting far out
in the shape of a cup or cauldron, torn deep at the edges into a kind of
fringe.

Looking more closely still, I perceive there is a cluster of stiff white
hairs, almost bristles, on the top of the hood; for no imaginable purpose
of use or decoration--any more than a hearth-brush put for a
helmet-crest,--and that, as we put the flower full in front, the lower
petal begins to look like some threatening viperine or shark-like jaw,
edged with ghastly teeth,--and yet more, that the hollow within begins to
suggest a resemblance to an open throat in which there are two projections
where the lower petal joins the lateral ones, almost exactly like swollen
glands.

I believe it was this resemblance, inevitable to any careful and close
observer, which first suggested the use of the plant in throat diseases to
physicians; guided, as in those first days of pharmacy, chiefly by
imagination. Then the German name for one of the most fatal of throat
affections, Braune, extended itself into the first name of the plant,
Brunelle.

10. The truth of all popular traditions as to the healing power of herbs
will be tried impartially as soon as men again desire to lead healthy
lives; but I shall not in 'Proserpina' retain any of the names of their
gathered and dead or distilled substance, but name them always from the
characters of their life. I retain, however, for this plant its name
Brunella, Fr. Brunelle, because we may ourselves understand it as a
derivation from Brune; and I bring it here before the reader's attention as
giving him a perfectly instructive general type of the kind of degradation
which takes place in the forms of flowers under more or less malefic
influence, causing distortion and disguise of their floral structure. Thus
it is not the normal character of a flower petal to have a cluster of
bristles growing out of the middle of it, nor to be jagged at the edge into
the likeness of a fanged fish's jaw, nor to be swollen or pouted into the
likeness of a diseased gland in an animal's throat. A really uncorrupted
flower suggests none but delightful images, and is like nothing but itself.

11. I find that in the year 1719, Tournefort defined, with exactitude which
has rendered the definition authoritative for all time, the tribe to which
this Brownie flower belongs, constituting them his fourth class, and
describing them in terms even more depreciatingly imaginative than any I
have ventured to use myself. I translate the passage (vol. i., p. 177):--

12. "The name of Labiate flower is given to a single-petaled flower which,
beneath, is attenuated into a tube, and above is expanded into a lip, which
is either single or double. It is proper to a labiate flower,--first, that
it has a one-leaved calyx (ut calycem habeat _unifolium_), for the most
part tubulated, or reminding one of a paper hood (cucullum papyraceum);
and, secondly, that its pistil ripens into a fruit consisting of four
seeds, which ripen in the calyx itself, as if in their own seed-vessel, by
which a labiate flower is distinguished from a personate one, whose pistil
becomes a capsule far divided from the calyx (à calyce longò divisam). And
a labiate flower differs from rotate, or bell-shaped flowers, which have
four seeds, in that the lips of a labiate flower have a gape like the face
of a goblin, or ludicrous mask, emulous of animal form."

13. This class is then divided into four sections.

    In the first, the upper lip is helmeted, or hooked--"galeatum est, vel
    falcatum."
    In the second, the upper lip is excavated like a spoon--"cochlearis
    instar est excavatum."
    In the third the upper lip is erect.
    And in the fourth there is no upper lip at all.

The reader will, I hope, forgive me for at once rejecting a classification
of lipped plants into three classes that have lips, and one that has none,
and in which the lips of those that have got any, are like helmets and
spoons.

Linnaeus, in 1758, grouped the family into two divisions, by the form of
the calyx, (five-fold or two-fold), and then went into the wildest
confusion in distinction of species,--sometimes by the form of corolla,
sometimes by that of calyx, sometimes by that of the filaments, sometimes
by that of the stigma, and sometimes by that of the seed. As, for instance,
thyme is to be identified by the calyx having hairs in its throat, dead
nettle by having bristles in its mouth, lion's tail by having bones in its
anthers (antheræ punctis osseis adspersæ), and teucrium by having its upper
lip cut in two!

14. St. Hilaire, in 1805, divides again into four sections, but as three of
these depend on form of corolla, and the fourth on abortion of stamens, the
reader may conclude practically, that logical division of the family is
impossible, and that all he can do, or that there is the smallest occasion
for his doing, is first to understand the typical structure thoroughly, and
then to know a certain number of forms accurately, grouping the others
round them at convenient distances; and, finally, to attach to their known
forms such simple names as may be utterable by children, and memorable by
old people, with more ease and benefit than the 'Galeopsis Eu-te-trahit,'
'Lamium Galeobdalon,' or 'Scutellaria Galericulata,'and the like, of modern
botany. But to do this rightly, I must review and amplify some of my former
classification, which it will be advisable to do in a separate chapter.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VI.

MONACHA.

1. It is not a little vexing to me, in looking over the very little I have
got done of my planned Systema Proserpinæ, to discover a grave mistake in
the specifications of Veronica. It is Veronica chamædrys, not officinalis,
which is our proper English Speedwell, and Welsh Fluellen; and all the
eighth paragraph, p. 74, properly applies to that. Veronica officinalis is
an extremely small flower rising on vertical stems out of recumbent leaves;
and the drawing of it in the Flora Danica, which I mistook for a stunted
northern state, is quite true of the English species,[32] except that it
does not express the recumbent action of the leaves. The proper
representation of ground-leafage has never yet been attempted in any
botanical work whatever, and as, in recumbent plants, their grouping and
action can only be seen from above, the plates of them should always have a
dark and rugged background, not only to indicate the position of the eye,
but to relieve the forms of the leaves as they were intended to be shown. I
will try to give some examples in the course of this year.

2. I find also, sorrowfully, that the references are wrong in three, if not
more, places in that chapter. S. 971 and 972 should be transposed in p. 72.
S. 294 in p. 74 should be 984. D. 407 should be inserted after Peregrina,
in p. 76; and 203, in fourth line from bottom of p. 78, should be 903. I
wish it were likely that these errors had been corrected by my
readers,--the rarity of the Flora Danica making at present my references
virtually useless: but I hope in time that our public institutes will
possess themselves of copies: still more do I hope that some book of the
kind will be undertaken by English artists and engravers, which shall be
worthy of our own country.

3. Farther, I get into confusion by not always remembering my own
nomenclature, and have allowed 'Gentianoides' to remain, for No. 16, though
I banish Gentian. It will be far better to call this eastern mountain
species 'Olympica': according to Sibthorpe's localization, "in summâ parte,
nive solutâ, montis Olympi Bithyni," and the rather that Curtis's plate
above referred to shows it in luxuriance to be liker an asphodel than a
gentian.

4. I have also perhaps done wrong in considering Veronica polita and
agrestis as only varieties, in No. 3. No author tells me why the first is
called polite, but its blue seems more intense than that of agrestis; and
as it is above described with attention, vol. i., p. 75, as an example of
precision in flower-form, we may as well retain it in our list here. It
will be therefore our twenty-first variety,--it is Loudon's fifty-ninth and
last. He translates 'polita' simply 'polished,' which is nonsense. I can
think of nothing to call it but 'dainty,' and will leave it at present
unchristened.

5. Lastly. I can't think why I omitted V. Humifusa, S. 979, which seems to
be quite one of the most beautiful of the family--a mountain flower also,
and one which I ought to find here; but hitherto I know only among the
mantlings of the ground, V. thymifolia and officinalis. All these, however,
agree in the extreme prettiness and grace of their crowded leafage,--the
officinalis, of which the leaves are shown much too coarsely serrated in S.
984, forming carpets of finished embroidery which I have never yet rightly
examined, because I mistook them for St. John's wort. They are of a
beautiful pointed oval form, serrated so finely that they seem smooth in
distant effect, and covered with equally invisible hairs, which seem to
collect towards the edge in the variety Hirsuta, S. 985.

For the present, I should like the reader to group the three flowers, S.
979, 984, 985, under the general name of Humifusa, and to distinguish them
by a third epithet, which I allow myself when in difficulties, thus:

    V. Humifusa, cærulea, the beautiful blue one, which resembles
    Spicata.
    V. Humifusa, officinalis, and,
    V. Humifusa, hirsuta: the last seems to me extremely interesting, and I
    hope to find it and study it carefully.

By this arrangement we shall have only twenty-one species to remember: the
one which chiefly decorates the ground again dividing into the above three.

6. These matters being set right, I pass to the business in hand, which is
to define as far as possible the subtle relations between the Veronicas and
Draconidæ, and again between these and the tribe at present called labiate.
In my classification above, vol. i, p. 200, the Draconidæ include the
Nightshades; but this was an oversight. Atropa belongs properly to the
following class, Moiridæ; and my Draconids are intended to include only the
two great families of Personate and Ringent flowers, which in some degree
resemble the head of an animal: the representative one being what we call
'snapdragon,' but the French, careless of its snapping power, 'calf's
muzzle'--"Muflier, muflande, or muffle de Veau."--Rousseau, 'Lettres,' p.
19.

7. As I examine his careful and sensible plates of it, I chance also on a
bit of his text, which, extremely wise and generally useful, I translate
forthwith:--

"I understand, my dear, that one is vexed to take so much trouble without
learning the names of the plants one examines; but I confess to you in good
faith that it never entered into my plan to spare you this little chagrin.
One pretends that Botany is nothing but a science of words, which only
exercises the memory, and only teaches how to give plants names. For me, I
know _no_ rational study which is only a science of words: and to which of
the two, I pray you, shall I grant the name of botanist,--to him who knows
how to spit out a name or a phrase at the sight of a plant, without knowing
anything of its structure, or to him who, knowing that structure very well,
is ignorant nevertheless of the very arbitrary name that one gives to the
plant in such and such a country? If we only gave to your children an
amusing occupation, we should miss the best half of our purpose, which is,
in amusing them, to exercise their intelligence and accustom them to
attention. Before teaching them to name what they see, let us begin by
teaching them to see it. _That_ science, forgotten in all educations, ought
to form the most important part of theirs. I can never repeat it often
enough--teach them never to be satisfied with words, ('se payer de mots')
and to hold themselves as knowing nothing of what has reached no farther
than their memories."

8. Rousseau chooses, to represent his 'Personees,' La Mufflaude, la
Linaire, l'Euphraise, la Pediculaire, la Crête-de-coq, l'Orobanche, la
Cimbalaire, la Velvote, la Digitale, giving plates of snapdragon, foxglove,
and Madonna-herb, (the Cimbalaire), and therefore including my entire class
of Draconidæ, whether open or close throated. But I propose myself to
separate from them the flower which, for the present, I have called
Monacha, but may perhaps find hereafter a better name; this one, which is
the best Latin I can find for a nun of the desert, being given to it
because all the resemblance either to calf or dragon has ceased in its rosy
petals, and they resemble--the lower ones those of the mountain thyme, and
the upper one a softly crimson cowl or hood.

9. This beautiful mountain flower, at present, by the good grace of
botanists, known as Pedicularis, from a disease which it is supposed to
give to sheep, is distinguished from all other Draconidæ by its beautifully
divided leaves: while the flower itself, like, as aforesaid, thyme in the
three lower petals, rises in the upper one quite upright, and terminates in
the narrow and peculiar hood from which I have named it 'Monacha.'

10. Two deeper crimson spots with white centres animate the colour of the
lower petals in our mountain kind---mountain or morass;--it is vilely drawn
in S. 997 under the name of Sylvatica, translated 'Procumbent'! As it is
neither a wood flower nor a procumbent one,[33] and as its rosy colour is
rare among morass flowers, I shall call it simply Monacha Rosea.

I have not the smallest notion of the meaning of the following sentence in
S.:--"Upper lip of corolla not rostrate, with the margin on each side
furnished with a triangular tooth immediately below the apex, but without
any tooth below the middle." Why, or when, a lip is rostrate, or has any
'tooth below the middle,' I do not know; but the upper _petal_ of the
corolla is here a very close gathered hood, with the style emergent
downwards, and the stamens all hidden and close set within.

In this action of the upper petal, and curve of the style, the flower
resembles the Labiates,[34] and is the proper link between them and the
Draconidæ. The capsule is said by S. to be oval-ovoid. As eggs always _are_
oval, I don't feel farther informed by the epithet. The capsule and seed
both are of entirely indescribable shapes, with any number of sides--very
foxglove-like, and inordinately large. The seeds of the entire family are
'ovoid-subtrigonous.'--S.

11. I find only two species given as British by S., namely, Sylvatica and
Palustris; but I take first for the Regina, the beautiful Arctic species D.
1105, Flora Suecica, 555. Rose-coloured in the stem, pale pink in the
flowers (corollæ pallide incarnatæ), the calices furry against the cold,
whence the present ugly name, Hirsuta. Only on the highest crests of the
Lapland Alps.

(2) Rosea, D. 225, there called Sylvatica, as by S., presumably because "in
pascuis subhumidis non raræ." Beautifully drawn, but, as I have described
it, vigorously erect, and with no decumbency whatever in any part of it.
Root branched, and enormous in proportion to plant, and I fancy therefore
must be good for something if one knew it. But Gerarde, who calls the plant
Red Rattle, (it having indeed much in common with the Yellow Rattle), says,
"It groweth in moist and moorish meadows; the herbe is not only
unprofitable, but likewise hurtful, and an infirmity of the meadows."

(3) Palustris, D. 2055, S. 996--scarcely any likeness between the plates.
"Everywhere in the meadows," according to D. I leave the English name,
Marsh Monacha, much doubting its being more marshy than others.

12. I take next (4 and 5) two northern species, Lapponica, D. 2, and
Grönlandica, D. 1166; the first yellow, the second red, both beautiful. The
Lap one has its divided leaves almost united into one lovely spear-shaped,
single leaf. The Greenland one has its red hood much prolonged in front.

(6) Ramosa, also a Greenland species; yellow, very delicate and beautiful.
Three stems from one root, but may be more or fewer, I suppose.

13. (7) Norvegica, a beautifully clustered golden flower, with thick stem.
D. 30, the only locality given being the Dovrefeldt. "Alpina" and "Flammea"
are the synonyms, but I do not know it on the Alps, and it is no more
flame-coloured than a cowslip.

Both the Lapland and Norwegian flowers are drawn with their stems wavy,
though upright--a rare and pretty habit of growth.

14. (8) Suecica, D. 26, named awkwardly Sceptrum Carolinum, in honour of
Charles XII. It is the largest of all the species drawn in D., and
contrasts strikingly with (4) and (5) in the strict uprightness of its
stem. The corolla is closed at the extremity, which is red; the body of the
flower pale yellow. Grows in marshy and shady woods, near Upsal. Linn.,
Flora Suecica, 553.

The many-lobed but united leaves, at the root five or six inches long, are
irregularly beautiful.

15. These eight species are all I can specify, having no pictures of the
others named by Loudon,--eleven, making nineteen altogether, and I wish I
could find a twentieth and draw them all, but the reader may be well
satisfied if he clearly know these eight. The group they form is an
entirely distinct one, exactly intermediate between the Vestals and
Draconids, and cannot be rightly attached to either; for it is Draconid in
structure and affinity--Vestal in form--and I don't see how to get the
connection of the three families rightly expressed without taking the
Draconidæ out of the groups belonging to the dark Kora, and placing them
next the Vestals, with the Monachæ between; for indeed Linaria and several
other Draconid forms are entirely innocent and beautiful, and even the
Foxglove never does any real mischief like hemlock, while decoratively it
is one of the most precious of mountain flowers. I find myself also
embarrassed by my name of Vestals, because of the masculine groups of Basil
and Thymus, and I think it will be better to call them simply Menthæ, and
to place them with the other cottage-garden plants not yet classed, taking
the easily remembered names Mentha, Monacha, Draconida. This will leave me
a blank seventh place among my twelve orders at p. 194, vol. i., which I
think I shall fill by taking cyclamen and anagillis out of the Primulaceæ,
and making a separate group of them. These retouchings and changes are
inevitable in a work confessedly tentative and suggestive only; but in
whatever state of imperfection I may be forced to leave 'Proserpina,' it
will assuredly be found, up to the point reached, a better foundation for
the knowledge of flowers in the minds of young people than any hitherto
adopted system of nomenclature.

16. Taking then this re-arranged group, Mentha, Monacha, and Draconida, as
a sufficiently natural and convenient one, I will briefly give the
essentially botanical relations of the three families.

Mentha and Monacha agree in being essentially hooded flowers, the upper
petal more or less taking the form of a cup, helmet or hood, which conceals
the tops of the stamens. Of the three lower petals, the lowest is almost
invariably the longest; it sometimes is itself divided again into two, but
may be best thought of as single, and with the two lateral ones,
distinguished in the Menthæ as the apron and the side pockets.

Plate XII. represents the most characteristic types of the blossoms of
Menthæ, in the profile and front views, all a little magnified. The upper
two are white basil, purple spotted--growing here at Brantwood always with
two terminal flowers. The two middle figures are the purple-spotted dead
nettle, Lamium maculatum; and the two lower, thyme: but I have not been
able to draw these as I wanted, the perspectives of the petals being too
difficult, and inexplicable to the eye even in the flowers themselves
without continually putting them in changed positions.

17. The Menthæ are in their structure essentially quadrate plants; their
stems are square, their leaves opposite, their stamens either four or two,
their seeds two-carpeled. But their calices are five-sepaled, falling into
divisions of two and three; and the flowers, though essentially
four-petaled, may divide either the upper or lower petal, or both, into two
lobes, and so present a six-lobed outline. The entire plants, but chiefly
the leaves, are nearly always fragrant, and always innocent. None of them
sting, none prick, and none poison.

18. The Draconids, easily recognizable by their aspect, are botanically
indefinable with any clearness or simplicity. The calyx may be five- or
four-sepaled; the corolla, five- or four-lobed; the stamens may be two,
four, four with a rudimentary fifth, or five with the two anterior ones
longer than the other three! The capsule may open by two, three, or four
valves,--or by pores; the seeds, generally numerous, are sometimes
solitary, and the leaves may be alternate, opposite, or verticillate.

19. Thus licentious in structure, they are also doubtful in disposition.
None that I know of are fragrant, few useful, many more or less malignant,
and some parasitic. The following piece of a friend's letter almost makes
me regret my rescue of them from the dark kingdom of Kora:--

    "... And I find that the Monacha Rosea (Red Rattle is its name, besides
    the ugly one) is a perennial, and several of the other draconidæ,
    foxglove, etc., are biennials, born this year, flowering and dying next
    year, and the size of roots is generally proportioned to the life of
    plants; except when artificial cultivation develops the root specially,
    as in turnips, etc. Several of the Draconidæ are parasites, and suck
    the roots of other plants, and have only just enough of their own to
    catch with. The Yellow Rattle is one; it clings to the roots of the
    grasses and clovers, and no cultivation will make it thrive without
    them. My authority for this last fact is Grant Allen; but I have
    observed for myself that the Yellow Rattle has very small _white_
    sucking roots, and no earth sticking to them. The toothworts and broom
    rapes are Draconidæ, I think, and wholly parasites. Can it be that the
    Red Rattle is the one member of the family that has 'proper pride, and
    is self supporting'? the others are mendicant orders. We had what we
    choose to call the Dorcas flower show yesterday, and we gave, as usual,
    prizes for wild flower bouquets. I tried to find out the local names of
    several flowers, but they all seemed to be called 'I don't know,
    ma'am.' I would not allow this name to suffice for the red poppy, and I
    said 'This red flower _must_ be called _something_--tell me what you
    call it?' A few of the audience answered 'Blind Eyes.' Is it because
    they have to do with sleep that they are called Blind Eyes--or because
    they are dazzling?"

20. I think, certainly, from the dazzling, which sometimes with the poppy,
scarlet geranium, and nasturtium, is more distinctly oppressive to the eye
than a real excess of light.

I will certainly not include among my rescued Draconidæ, the parasitic
Lathræa and Orobanche; and cannot yet make certain of any minor
classification among those which I retain,--but, uniting Bartsia with
Euphrasia, I shall have, in the main, the three divisions Digitalis,
Linaria, Euphrasia, and probably separate the moneyworts as links with
Veronica, and Rhinanthus as links with Lathræa.

And as I shall certainly be unable this summer, under the pressure of
resumed work at Oxford, to spend time in any new botanical investigations,
I will rather try to fulfil the promise given in the last number, to
collect what little I have been able hitherto to describe or ascertain,
respecting the higher modes of tree structure.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VII.

SCIENCE IN HER CELLS.

    [The following chapter has been written six years. It was delayed in
    order to complete the promised clearer analysis of stem-structure;
    which, after a great deal of chopping, chipping, and peeling of my oaks
    and birches, came to reverently hopeless pause. What is here done may
    yet have some use in pointing out to younger students how they may
    simplify their language, and direct their thoughts, so as to attain, in
    due time, to reverent hope.]

1. The most generally useful book, to myself, hitherto, in such little time
as I have for reading about plants, has been Lindley's 'Ladies' Botany';
but the most rich and true I have yet found in illustration, the 'Histoire
des Plantes,'[35] by Louis Figuier. I should like those of my readers who
can afford it to buy both these books; the first named, at any rate, as I
shall always refer to it for structural drawings, and on points of doubtful
classification; while the second contains much general knowledge, expressed
with some really human intelligence and feeling; besides some good and
singularly _just_ history of botanical discovery and the men who guided it.
The botanists, indeed, tell me proudly, "Figuier is no authority." But who
wants authority! Is there nothing known yet about plants, then, which can
be taught to a boy or girl, without referring them to an 'authority'?

I, for my own part, care only to gather what Figuier can teach concerning
things visible, to any boy or girl, who live within reach of a bramble
hedge, or a hawthorn thicket, and can find authority enough for what they
are told, in the sticks of them.

2. If only _he_ would, or could, tell us clearly that much; but like other
doctors, though with better meaning than most, he has learned mainly to
look at things with a microscope,--rarely with his eyes. And I am sorry to
see, on re-reading this chapter of my own, which is little more than an
endeavour to analyze and arrange the statements contained in his second,
that I have done it more petulantly and unkindly than I ought; but I can't
do all the work over again, now,--more's the pity. I have not looked at
this chapter for a year, and shall be sixty before I know where I am;--(I
find myself, instead, now, sixty-four!)

3. But I stand at once partly corrected in this second chapter of
Figuier's, on the 'Tige,' French from the Latin 'Tignum,' which
'authorities' say is again from the Sanscrit, and means 'the thing hewn
with an axe'; anyhow it is modern French for what we are to call the stem
(§ 12, p. 136).

"The tige," then, begins M. Louis, "is the axis of the ascending system of
a vegetable, and it is garnished at intervals with vital knots, (eyes,)
from which spring leaves and buds, disposed in a perfectly regular order.
The root presents nothing of the kind. This character permits us always to
distinguish, in the vegetable axis, what belongs really to the stem, and
what to the root."

4. Yes; and that is partly a new idea to me, for in this power of
_assigning their order_ for the leaves, the stem seems to take a royal or
commandant character, and cannot be merely defined as the connexion of the
leaf with the roots.

In _it_ is put the spirit of determination. One cannot fancy the little
leaf, as it is born, determining the point it will be born at: the
governing stem must determine that for it. Also the disorderliness of the
root is to be noted for a condition of its degradation, no less than its
love, and need, of Darkness.

Nor was I quite right (above, § 15, p. 139) in calling the stem _itself_
'spiral': it is itself a straight-growing rod, but one which, as it grows,
lays the buds of future leaves round it in a spiral order, like the
bas-relief on Trajan's column.

I go on with Figuier: the next passage is very valuable.

5. "The tige is the part of plants which, directed into the air, supports,
and _gives growing power to_, the branches, the twigs, the leaves, and the
flowers. The form, strength, and direction of the tige depend on the part
that each plant has to play among the vast vegetable population of our
globe. Plants which need for their life a pure and often-renewed air, are
borne by a straight tige, robust and tall. When they have need only of a
moist air, more condensed, and more rarely renewed, when they have to creep
on the ground or glide in thickets, the tiges are long, flexible, and
dragging. If they are to float in the air, sustaining themselves on more
robust vegetables, they are provided with flexible, slender, and supple
tiges."

6. Yes; but in that last sentence he loses hold of his main idea, and to me
the important one,--namely, the connexion of the form of stem with the
quality of the air it requires. And that idea itself is at present vague,
though most valuable, to me. A strawberry creeps, with a flexible stem, but
requires certainly no less pure air than a wood-fungus, which stands up
straight. And in our own hedges and woods, are the wild rose and
honeysuckle signs of unwholesome air?

  "And honeysuckle loved to crawl
  Up the lone crags and ruined wall.
  I deemed such nooks the sweetest shade
  The sun in all his round surveyed."

It seems to me, in the nooks most haunted by honeysuckle in my own wood,
that the reason for its twining is a very feminine one,--that it likes to
twine; and that all these whys and wherefores resolve themselves at last
into--what a modern philosopher, of course, cannot understand--caprice.[36]

7. Farther on, Figuier, quoting St. Hilaire, tells us, of the creepers in
primitive forests,--"Some of them resemble waving ribands, others coil
themselves and describe vast spirals; they droop in festoons, they wind
hither and thither among the trees, they fling themselves from one to
another, and form masses of leaves and flowers in which the observer is
often at a loss to discover on which plant each several blossom grows."

For all this, the real reasons will be known only when human beings become
reasonable. For, except a curious naturalist or wistful missionary, no
Christian has trodden the labyrinths of delight and decay among these
garlands, but men who had no other thought than how to cheat their savage
people out of their gold, and give them gin and smallpox in exchange. But,
so soon as true servants of Heaven shall enter these Edens, and the Spirit
of God enter with them, another spirit will also be breathed into the
physical air; and the stinging insect, and venomous snake, and poisonous
tree, pass away before the power of the regenerate human soul.

8. At length, on the structure of the tige, Figuier begins his real work,
thus:---

"A glance of the eye, thrown on the section of a log of wood destined for
warming, permits us to recognize that the tige of the trees of our forests
presents three essential parts, which are, in going from within to without,
the pith, the wood, and the bark. The pith, (in French, marrow,) forms a
sort of column in the centre of the woody axis. In very thick and old stems
its diameter appears very little; and it has even for a long time been
supposed that the marrow ends by disappearing altogether from the stems of
old trees. But it does nothing of the sort;[37] and it is now ascertained,
by exact measures, that its diameter remains sensibly invariable[38] from
the moment when the young woody axis begins to consolidate itself, to the
epoch of its most complete development."

So far, so good; but what does he mean by the complete development of the
young _woody_ axis? When does the axis become 'wooden,' and how far up the
tree does he call it an axis? If the stem divides into three branches,
which is the axis? And is the pith in the trunk no thicker than in each
branch?

9. He proceeds to tell us, "The marrow is formed by a reunion of
cells."--Yes, and so is Newgate, and so was the Bastille. But what does it
matter whether the marrow is made of a reunion of cells, or cellars, or
walls, or floors, or ceilings? I want to know what's the use of it? why
doesn't it grow bigger with the rest of the tree? when _does_ the tree
'consolidate itself'? when is it finally consolidated? and how can there be
always marrow in it when the weary frame of its age remains a mere scarred
tower of war with the elements, full of dust and bats?

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

'He will tell you if only you go on patiently,' thinks the reader. He will
not! Once your modern botanist gets into cells, he stays in them. Hear how
he goes on!--"This cell is a sort of sack; this sack is completely closed;
sometimes it is empty, sometimes it"--is full?--no, that would be
unscientific simplicity: sometimes it "conceals a matter in its interior."
"The marrow of young trees, such as it is represented in Figure 24
(Figuier, Figs. 38, 39, p. 42), is nothing else"--(indeed!)--"than an
aggregation of cells, which, first of spherical form, have become
polyhedric by their increase and mutual compression."

10. Now these figures, 38 and 39, which profess to represent this change,
show us sixteen oval cells, such as at A, (Fig. 24) enlarged into thirteen
larger, and flattish, hexagons!--B, placed at a totally different angle.

And before I can give you the figure revised with any available accuracy, I
must know why or how the cells are enlarged, and in what direction.

Do their walls lengthen laterally when they are empty, or does the
'matière' inside stuff them more out, (itself increased from what sources?)
when they are full? In either case, during this change from circle to
hexagon, is the marrow getting thicker without getting longer? If so, the
change in the angle of the cells is intentional, and probably is so; but
the number of cells should have been the same: and further, the term
'hexagonal' can only be applied to the _section_ of a tubular cell, as in
honeycomb, so that the floor and ceiling of our pith cell are left
undescribed.

11. Having got thus much of (partly conjectural) idea of the mechanical
structure of marrow, here follows the solitary vital, or mortal, fact in
the whole business, given in one crushing sentence at the close:---

"The medullary tissue" (first time of using this fine phrase for the
marrow,--why can't he say marrowy tissue--'tissue moelleuse'?) "appears
very early struck with atony," ('atonic,' want of tone,) "above all, in its
central parts." And so ends all he has to say for the present about the
marrow! and it never appears to occur to him for a moment, that if indeed
the noblest trees live all their lives in a state of healthy and robust
paralysis, it is a distinction, hitherto unheard of, between vegetables and
animals!

12. Two pages farther on, however, (p. 45,) we get more about the marrow,
and of great interest,--to this effect, for I must abstract and complete
here, instead of translating.

"The marrow itself is surrounded, as the centre of an electric cable is, by
its guarding threads--that is to say, by a number of cords or threads
coming between it and the wood, and differing from all others in the tree.

"The entire protecting cylinder composed of them has been called the
'étui,' (or needle-case,) of the marrow. But each of the cords which
together form this étui, is itself composed of an almost infinitely
delicate thread twisted into a screw, like the common spring of a
letter-weigher or a Jack-in-the-box, but of exquisite fineness." Upon this,
two pages and an elaborate figure are given to these 'trachées'--tracheas,
the French call them,--and we are never told the measure of them, either in
diameter or length,[39] and still less, the use of them!

I collect, however, in my thoughts, what I have learned thus far.

13. A tree stem, it seems, is a growing thing, cracked outside, because its
skin won't stretch, paralysed inside, because its marrow won't grow, but
which continues the process of its life somehow, by knitted nerves without
any nervous energy in them, protected by spiral springs without any spring
in them.

Stay--I am going too fast. That coiling is perhaps prepared for some kind
of uncoiling; and I will try if I can't learn something about it from some
other book--noticing, as I pause to think where to look, the advantage of
our English tongue in its pithy Saxon word, 'pith,' separating all our
ideas of vegetable structure clearly from animal; while the poor Latin and
French must use the entirely inaccurate words 'medulla' and 'moelle'; all,
however, concurring in their recognition of a vital power of some essential
kind in this white cord of cells: "Medulla, sive illa vitalis anima est,
ante se tendit, longitudinem impellens." (Pliny, 'Of the Vine,' liber X.,
cap. xxi.) 'Vitalis anima'--yes--_that_ I accept; but 'longitudinem
impellens,' I pause at; being not at all clear, yet, myself, about any
impulsive power in the pith.[40]

14. However, I take up first, and with best hope, Dr. Asa Gray, who tells
me (Art. 211) that pith consists of parenchyma, 'which is at first gorged
with sap,' but that many stems expand so rapidly that their pith is torn
into a mere lining or into horizontal plates; and that as the stem grows
older, the pith becomes dry and light, and is 'then of no farther use to
the plant.' But of what use it ever was, we are not informed; and the
Doctor makes us his bow, so far as the professed article on pith goes; but,
farther on, I find in his account of 'Sap-wood,' (Art. 224.) that in the
germinating plantlet, the sap 'ascends first through the parenchyma,
especially through its central portion or pith.' Whereby we are led back to
our old question, what sap is, and where it comes from, with the now
superadded question, whether the young pith is a mere succulent sponge, or
an active power, and constructive mechanism, nourished by the abundant sap:
as Columella has it,--

"Naturali enim spiritu omne alimentum virentis quasi quædam anima, per
_medullam_ trunci veluti per siphonem, trahitur in summum."[41]

As none of these authors make any mention of a _communication_ between the
cells of the pith, I conclude that the sap they are filled with is taken up
by them, and used to construct their own thickening tissue.

15. Next, I take Balfour's 'Structural Botany,' and by his index, under the
word 'Pith,' am referred to his articles 8, 72, and 75. In article 8,
neither the word pith, nor any expression alluding to it, occurs.

In article 72, the stem of an outlaid tree is defined as consisting of
'pith, fibro-vascular and [42] woody tissue, medullary rays, bark, and
epidermis.'

A more detailed statement follows, illustrated by a figure surrounded by
twenty-three letters--namely, two _b_ s, three _c_ s, four _e_ s, three _f_
s, one _l_, four _m_ s, three _p_ s, one _r_, and two _v_ s.

Eighteen or twenty minute sputters of dots may, with a good lens, be
discerned to proceed from this alphabet, and to stop at various points, or
lose themselves in the texture, of the represented wood. And, knowing now
something of the matter beforehand, guessing a little more, and gleaning
the rest with my finest glass, I achieve the elucidation of the figure, to
the following extent, explicable without letters at all, by my more simple
drawing, Figure 25.

16. (1) The inner circle full of little cells, diminishing in size towards
the outside, represents the pith, 'very large at this period of the
growth'--(the first year, we are told in next page,) and 'very large'--he
means in proportion to the rest of the branch. _How_ large he does not say,
in his text, but states, in his note, that the figure is magnified 26
diameters. I have drawn mine by the more convenient multiplier of 30, and
given the real size at B, _according to Balfour_:--but without believing
him to be right. I never saw a maple stem of the first year so small.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

(2) The black band with white dots round the marrow, represents the
marrow-sheath.

(3) From the marrow-sheath run the marrow-rays 'dividing the vascular
circle into numerous compact segments.' A 'ray' cannot divide anything into
a segment. Only a partition, or a knife, can do that. But we shall find
presently that marrow _rays_ ought to be called marrow-_plates_, and are
really mural, forming more or less continuous partitions.

(4) The compact segments 'consist of woody vessels and of porous vessels.'
This is the first we have heard of woody _vessels_! He means the '_fibres_
ligneux' of Figuier; and represents them in each compartment, as at C (Fig.
25). without telling us why he draws the woody vessels as radiating. They
appear to radiate, indeed, when wood is sawn across, but they are really
upright.

(5) A moist layer of greenish cellular tissue called the cambium
layer--black in Figure 25--and he draws it in flat arches, without saying
why.

(6), (7), (8) Three layers of bark (called in his note Endophloeum;
Mesophloeum, and Epiphloeum!) with 'laticiferous vessels.' [43]

(9) Epidermis. The three layers of bark being separated by single lines, I
indicate the epidermis by a double one, with a rough fringe outside, and
thus we have the parts of the section clearly visible and distinct for
discussion, so far as this first figure goes,--without wanting one letter
of all his three and twenty!

17. But on the next page, this ingenious author gives us a new figure,
which professes to represent the same order of things in a longitudinal
section; and in retracing that order sideways, instead of looking down, he
not only introduces new terms, but misses one of his old layers in doing
so,--thus:

His order, in explaining Figure 96, contains, as above, nine members of the
tree stem.

But his order, in explaining Figure 97, contains only eight, thus:

(1) The pith. (2) Medullary sheath. Circles.

(3) Medullary ray = a Radius.

(4) Vascular zone, with woody _fibres_ (not now vessels!) The fibres are
composed of spiral, annular, pitted, and other vessels.

(5) Inner bark or 'liber,' with layer of cambium cells.

(6) Second layer of bark, or 'cellular envelope,' with laticiferous
vessels.

(7) Outer or tuberous layer of bark.

(8) Epidermis.

Doing the best I can to get at the muddle-headed gentleman's meaning, it
appears, by the lettering of his Figure 97, my 25 above, that the 'liber,'
number 5, contains the cambium layer in the middle of it. The part of the
liber between the cambium and the wood is not marked in Figure 96;--but the
cambium is number 5, and the liber outside of it is number 6,--the
Endophloeum of his note.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

Having got himself into this piece of lovely confusion, he proceeds to give
a figure of the wood in the second year, which I think he has borrowed,
without acknowledgment, from Figuier, omitting a piece of Figuier's woodcut
which is unexplained in Figuier's text. I will spare my readers the work I
have had to do, in order to get the statements on either side clarified:
but I think they will find, if they care to work through the wilderness of
the two authors' wits, that this which follows is the sum of what they have
effectively to tell us; with the collated list of the main questions they
leave unanswered--and, worse, unasked.

18. An ordinary tree branch, in transverse section, consists essentially of
three parts only,--the Pith, Wood, and Bark.

The pith is in full animation during the first year--that is to say, during
the actual shooting of the wood. We are left to infer that in the second
year, the pith of the then unprogressive shoot becomes collective only, not
formative; and that the pith of the new shoot virtually energizes the new
wood in its deposition beside the old one. Thus, let _a b_, Figure 26, be a
shoot of the first year, and _b c_ of the second. The pith remains of the
same thickness in both, but that of the new shoot is, I suppose, chiefly
active in sending down the new wood to thicken the old one, which is
collected, however, and fastened by the extending pith-rays below. You see,
I have given each shoot four fibres of wood for its own; then the four
fibres of the upper one send out two to thicken the lower: the pith-rays,
represented by the white transverse claws, catch and gather all together.
Mind, I certify nothing of this to you; but if this do not happen,--let the
botanists tell you what _does_.

19. Secondly. The wood, represented by these four lines, is to be always
remembered as consisting of fibres and vessels; therefore it is called
'vascular,' a word which you may as well remember (though rarely needed in
familiar English), with its roots, _vas_, a vase, and _vasculum_, a little
vase or phial. 'Vascule' may sometimes be allowed in botanical descriptions
where 'cell' is not clear enough; thus, at present, we find our botanists
calling the pith 'cellular' but the wood 'vascular,' with, I think, the
implied meaning that a 'vascule,' little or large, is a long thing, and has
some liquid in it, while a 'cell' is a more or less round thing, and to be
supposed empty, unless described as full. But what liquid fills the
vascules of the wood, they do not tell us.[44] I assume that they absorb
water, as long as the tree lives.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

20. Wood, whether vascular or fibrous, is however formed, in outlaid
plants, first outside of the pith, and then, in shoots of the second year,
outside of the wood of the first, and in the third year, outside of the
wood of the second; so that supposing the quantity of wood sent down from
the growing shoot distributed on a flat plane, the structure in the third
year would be as in Figure 27. But since the new wood is distributed all
round the stem, (in successive cords or threads, if not at once), the
increase of substance after a year or two would be untraceable, unless more
shoots than one were formed at the extremity of the branch. Of actual bud
and branch structure, I gave introductory account long since in the fifth
volume of 'Modern Painters.'[45] to which I would now refer the reader; but
both then, and to-day, after twenty years' further time allowed me, I am
unable to give the least explanation of the mode in which the wood is
really added to the interior stem. I cannot find, even, whether this is
mainly done in springtime, or in the summer and autumn, when the young
suckers form on the wood; but my impression is that though all the several
substances are added annually, a little more pith going to the edges of the
pith-plates, and a little more bark to the bark, with a great deal more
wood to the wood,--there is a different or at least successive period for
each deposit, the carrying all these elements to their places involving a
fineness of basket work or web work in the vessels, which neither
microscope nor dissecting tool can disentangle. The result on the whole,
however, is practically that we have, outside the wood, always a mysterious
'cambium layer,' and then some distinctions in the bark itself, of which we
must take separate notice.

21. Of Cambium, Dr. Gray's 220th article gives the following account. "It
is not a distinct substance, but a layer of delicate new cells full of sap.
The inner portion of the cambium layer is, therefore, nascent wood, and the
outer nascent bark. As the cells of this layer multiply, the greater number
lengthen vertically into _prosenchyma_, or woody tissue, while some are
transformed into ducts" (wood vessels?) "and others remaining as
_parenchyma_, continue the medullary rays, or commence new ones." Nothing
is said here of the part of the cambium which becomes bark: but at page
128, the thin walled cells of the bark are said to be those of ordinary
'parenchyma,' and in the next page a very important passage occurs, which
must have a paragraph to itself. I close the present one with one more
protest against the entirely absurd terms 'par-enchyma,' for common
cellular tissue, 'pros-enchyma,' for cellular tissue with longer
cells;--'cambium' for an early state of _both_, and 'diachyma' for a
peculiar position of _one_![46] while the chemistry of all these substances
is wholly neglected, and we have no idea given us of any difference in
pith, wood, and bark, than that they are made of short or long--young or
old--cells!

22. But in Dr. Gray's 230th article comes this passage of real value.
(Italics mine--all.) "While the newer layers of the wood abound in _crude_
sap, which they convey to the leaves, those of the inner bark abound in
_elaborated_ sap, which _they receive from the leaves_, and convey to the
_cambium_ layer, or _zone of growth_. The proper juices and peculiar
products of plants are accordingly found in the foliage and bark,
especially the latter. In the bark, therefore, either of the stem or root,
medicinal and other principles are usually to be sought, rather than in the
wood. Nevertheless, as the wood is kept in connection with the bark by the
medullary rays, many products which probably originate in the former are
deposited in the wood."

23. Now, at last, I see my way to useful summary of the whole, which I had
better give in a separate chapter: and will try in future to do the
preliminary work of elaboration of the sap from my authorities, above
shown, in its process, to the reader, without making so much fuss about it.
But, I think in this case, it was desirable that the floods of pros-, par-,
peri-, dia-, and circumlocution, through which one has to wade towards any
emergent crag of fact in modern scientific books, should for once be seen
in the wasteful tide of them; that so I might finally pray the younger
students who feel, or remember, their disastrous sway, to cure themselves
for ever of the fatal habit of imagining that they know more of anything
after naming it unintelligibly, and thinking about it impudently, than they
did by loving sight of its nameless being, and in wise confession of its
boundless mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

In re-reading the text of this number I can secure my young readers of some
things left doubtful, as, for instance, in their acceptance of the word
'Monacha,' for the flower described in the sixth chapter. I have used it
now habitually too long to part with it myself, and I think it will be
found serviceable and pleasurable by others. Neither shall I now change the
position of the Draconidae, as suggested at p. 118, but keep all as first
planned. See among other reasons for doing so the letter quoted in p. 121.

I also add to the plate originally prepared for this number, one showing
the effect of Veronica officinalis in decoration of foreground, merely by
its green leaves; see the paragraphs 1 and 5 of Chapter VI. I have not
represented the fine serration of the leaves, as they are quite invisible
from standing height: the book should be laid on the floor and looked down
on, without stooping, to see the effect intended. And so I gladly close
this long-lagging number, hoping never to write such a tiresome chapter as
this again, or to make so long a pause between any readable one and its
sequence.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES

[1] Vol. i., p. 212, note.

[2] See 'Deucalion,' vol. ii., chap, i., p. 12, § 18.

[3] I am ashamed to give so rude outlines; but every moment now is valuable
to me: careful outline of a dog-violet is given in Plate X.

[4] A careless bit of Byron's, (the last song but one in the 'Deformed
Transformed'); but Byron's most careless work is better, by its innate
energy, than other people's most laboured. I suppress, in some doubts about
my 'digamma,' notes on the Greek violet and the Ion of Euripides;--which
the reader will perhaps be good enough to fancy a serious loss to him, and
supply for himself.

[5] Nine; I see that I missed count of P. farinosa, the most abundant of
all.

[6] "A feeble little quatrefoil--growing one on the stem, like a Parnassia,
and looking like a Parnassia that had dropped a leaf. I think it drops one
of its own four, mostly, and lives as three-fourths of itself, for most of
its time. Stamens pale gold. Root-leaves, three or four, grass-like;
growing among the moist moss chiefly."

[7] The great work of Lecoq, 'Geographic Botanique,' is of priceless value;
but treats all on too vast a scale for our purposes.

[8] It is, I believe, Sowerby's Viola Lutea, 721 of the old edition, there
painted with purple upper petals; but he says in the text, "Petals either
all yellow, or the two uppermost are of a blue purple, the rest yellow with
a blue tinge: very often the whole are purple."

[9] Did the wretch never hear bees in a lime tree then, or ever see one on
a star gentian?

[10] Septuagint, "the eyes of doves out of thy silence." Vulgate, "the eyes
of doves, besides that which is hidden in them." Meaning--the _dim_ look of
love, beyond all others in sweetness.

[11] When I have the chance, and the time, to submit the proofs of
'Proserpina' to friends who know more of Botany than I, or have kindness
enough to ascertain debateable things for me, I mean in future to do
so,--using the letter A to signify Amicus, generally; with acknowledgment
by name, when it is permitted, of especial help or correction. Note first
of this kind: I find here on this word, 'five-petaled,' as applied to
Pinguicula, "Qy. two-lipped? it is monopetalous, and monosepalous, the
calyx and corolla being each all in one piece."

Yes; and I am glad to have the observation inserted. But my term,
'five-petaled,' must stand. For the question with me is always first, not
how the petals are connected, but how many they are. Also I have accepted
the term petal--but never the word lip--as applied to flowers. The generic
term 'Labiatæ' is cancelled in 'Proserpina,' 'Vestales' being substituted;
and these flowers, when I come to examine them, are to be described, not as
divided into two lips, but into hood, apron, and side-pockets. Farther, the
depth to which either calyx or corolla is divided, and the firmness with
which the petals are attached to the torus, may, indeed, often be an
important part of the plant's description, but ought not to be elements in
its definition. Three petaled and three-sepaled, four-petaled and
four-sepaled, five-petaled and five-sepaled, etc., etc., are
essential--with me, primal--elements of definition; next, whether resolute
or stellar in their connection; next, whether round or pointed, etc. Fancy,
for instance, the fatality to a rose of pointing its petals, and to a lily,
of rounding them! But how deep cut, or how hard holding, is quite a minor
question.

Farther, that all plants _are_ petaled and sepaled, and never mere cups in
saucers, is a great fact, not to be dwelt on in a note.

[12] Our 'Lucia Nivea,' 'Blanche Lucy;' in present botany, Bog bean! having
no connection whatever with any manner of bean, but only a slight
resemblance to bean-_leaves_ in its own lower ones. Compare Ch. IV. § 11.

[13] It is not. (Resolute negative from A., unsparing of time for me; and
what a state of things it all signifies!)

[14] With the following three notes, 'A' must become a definitely and
gratefully interpreted letter. I am indebted for the first, conclusive in
itself, but variously supported and confirmed by the two following, to R.J.
Mann, Esq., M.D., long ago a pupil of Dr. Lindley's, and now on the council
of Whitelands College, Chelsea:--for the second, to Mr. Thomas Moore,
F.L.S., the kind Keeper of the Botanic Garden at Chelsea; for the third,
which will be farther on useful to us, to Miss Kemm, the botanical lecturer
at Whitelands.

(1) There is no explanation of Lentibulariaceæ in Lindley's 'Vegetable
Kingdom.' He was not great in that line. The term is, however, taken from
_Lenticula_, the lentil, in allusion to the lentil-shaped air-bladders of
the typical genus _Utricularia_.

The change of the c into b may possibly have been made only from some
euphonic fancy of the contriver of the name, who, I think, was Rich.

But I somewhat incline myself to think that the _tibia_, a pipe or flute,
may have had something to do with it. The _tibia_ may possibly have been
diminished into a little pipe by a stretch of licence, and have become
_tibula_: [but _tibulus_ is a kind of pine tree in Pliny]; when _Len
tibula_ would be the lens or lentil-shaped pipe or bladder. I give you this
only for what it is worth. The _lenticula_, as a derivation, is reliable
and has authority.

_Lenticula_, a lentil, a freckly eruption; _lenticularis_, lentil-shaped;
so the nat. ord. ought to be (if this be right) _lenticulariaceæ_.

(2) BOTANIC GARDENS, CHELSEA, _Feb._ 14, 1882.

_Lentibularia_ is an old generic name of Tournefort's, which has been
superseded by _utricularia,_ but, oddly enough, has been retained in the
name of the order _lentibulareæ_; but it probably comes from _lenticula_,
which signifies the little root bladders, somewhat resembling lentils.

(3) 'Manual of Scientific Terms,' Stormonth, p. 234.
_Lentibulariaceæ_, neuter, plural.
(_Lenticula_, the shape of a lentil; from _lens_, a lentil.) The Butterwort
family, an order of plants so named from the lenticular shape of the
air-bladders on the branches of utricularia, one of the genera. (But
observe that the _Butterworts_ have nothing of the sort, any of them.--R.)

Loudon.--"Floaters."

Lindley.--"Sometimes with whorled vesicles."

In Nuttall's Standard (?) Pronouncing Dictionary, it is given,--
_Lenticulareæ_, a nat. ord. of marsh plants, which thrive in water or
marshes.

[15] More accurately, shows the pruned roots of branches,--[Greek: epeidê
prota tomên en horessi lelotpen]. The _pruning_ is the mythic expression of
the subduing of passion by rectorial law.

[16] The bitter sorrow with which I first recognized the extreme rarity of
finely-developed organic sight is expressed enough in the lecture on the
Mystery of Life, added in the large edition of 'Sesame and Lilies.'

[17] Lat. acesco, to turn sour.

[18] Withering quotes this as from Linnæus, and adds on authority of a Mr.
Hawkes, "This did not succeed when tried with cows' milk." He also gives as
another name, Yorkshire Sanicle; and says it is called _earning grass_ in
Scotland. Linnæus says the juice will curdle reindeer's milk. The name for
rennet is _earning_, in Lincolnshire. Withering also gives this note:
"_Pinguis_, fat, from its effect in CONGEALING milk."--(A.) Withering of
course wrong: the name comes, be the reader finally assured, from the
fatness of the green leaf, quite peculiar among wild plants, and fastened
down for us in the French word 'Grassette.' I have found the flowers also
difficult to dry, in the benighted early times when I used to think a dried
plant useful! See closing paragraphs of the *4th chapter.--R.

[19] I find much more difficulty, myself, being old, in using my altered
names for species than my young scholars will. In watching the bells of the
purple bindweed fade at evening, let them learn the fourth verse of the
prayer of Hezekiah, as it is in the Vulgate--"Generatio mea ablata est, et
convoluta est a me, sicut tabernaculum pastoris,"--and they will not forget
the name of the fast-fading--ever renewed--"belle d'un jour."

[20] "It is Miss Cobbe, I think, who says 'all wild flowers know how to die
gracefully.'"--A.

[21] See distinction between recumbent and rampant herbs, below, under
'Veronica Agrestis,' p. 72.

[22] 'Abstracted' rather, I should have said, and with perfect skill, by
Mr. Collingwood (the joint translator of Xenophon's Economics for the
'Bibliotheca Pastorum'). So also the next following cut, Fig. 5.

[23] Of the references, henceforward necessary to the books I have used as
authorities, the reader will please note the following abbreviations:--

    C. Curtis's Magazine of Botany.
    D. Flora Danica.
    F. Figuier.
    G. Sibthorpe's Flora Græca.
    L. Linnæus. Systema Naturæ.
    L.S. Linnæus's Flora Suecica. But till we are quite used to the other
    letters, I print this reference in words.
    L.N. William Curtis's Flora Londinensis. Of the exquisite plates
    engraved for this book by James Sowerby, note is taken in the close of
    next chapter.
    O. Sowerby's English Wild Flowers; the old edition in thirty-two thin
    volumes--far the best.
    S. Sowerby's English Wild Flowers; the modern edition in ten volumes.

[24] See letter on the last results of our African campaigns, in the
_Morning Post_ of April 14th, of this year.

[25] I deliberately, not garrulously, allow more autobiography in
'Proserpina' than is becoming, because I know not how far I may be
permitted to carry on that which was begun in 'Fors.'

[26] In present Botany, Polygala Chamæbuxus; C. 316: or, in English, Much
Milk Ground-box. It is not, as matters usually go, a name to be ill thought
of, as it really contains three ideas; and the plant does, without doubt,
somewhat resemble box, and grows on the ground;--far more fitly called
'ground-box' than the Veronica 'ground-oak.' I want to find a pretty name
for it in connection with Savoy or Dauphine, where it indicates, as above
stated, the _healthy_ districts of _hard_ limestone. I do not remember it
as ever occurring among the dark and moist shales of the inner mountain
ranges, which at once confine and pollute the air.

[27] Which, with the following page, is the summary of many chapters of
'Modern Painters:' and of the aims kept in view throughout 'Munera
Pulveris.' The three kinds of Desert specified--of Reed, Sand, and
Rock--should be kept in mind as exhaustively including the states of the
earth neglected by man. For instance of a Reed desert, produced _merely_ by
his neglect, see Sir Samuel Baker's account of the choking up of the bed of
the White Nile. Of the sand desert, Sir F. Palgrave's journey from the
Djowf to Hayel, vol. i., p. 92.

[28] This subject is first entered on in the 'Seven Lamps,' and carried
forward in the final chapters of 'Modern Painters,'to the point where I
hope to take it up for conclusion, in the sections of 'Our Fathers have
told us' devoted to the history of the fourteenth century.

[29] See in the first volume, the plates of Sonchus Arvensis and Tussilago
Petasites; in the second, Carduus tomentosus and Picris Echioides.

[30] For the sense in which this word is used throughout my writings, see
the definition of it in the 52nd paragraph of the 'Queen of the Air,'
comparing with respect to its office in plants, §§ 59-60.

[31] Written in 1880.

[32] The plate of Chamædrys, D. 448, is also quite right, and not 'too tall
and weedlike,' as I have called it at p. 72.

[33] "Stems numerous from the crown of the root-stock, de-cumbent."--S. The
effect of the flower upon the ground is always of an extremely upright and
separate plant, never appearing in clusters, (I meant, in close masses - it
forms exquisite little rosy crowds, on ground that it likes) or in any
relation to a central root. My epithet 'rosea' does not deny its botanical
de- or pro-cumbency.

[34] Compare especially Galeopsis Angustifolia, D. 3031.

[35] Octavo: Paris, Hachette, 1865.

[36] See in the ninth chapter what I have been able, since this sentence
was written, to notice on the matter in question.

[37] I envy the French their generalized form of denial, 'Il n'en est
rien.'

[38] 'Sensiblement invariable;' 'unchanged, _so far as we can see,_' or to
general sense; microscopic and minute change not being considered.

[39] Moreover, the confusion between vertical and horizontal sections in
pp. 46, 47, is completed by the misprint of vertical for horizontal in the
third line of p. 43, and of horizontal for vertical in the fifth line from
bottom of p. 46; while Figure 45 is to me totally unintelligible, this
being, as far as can be made out by the lettering, a section of a tree stem
which has its marrow on the outside!

[40] "Try a bit of rhubarb" (says A, who sends me a pretty drawing of
rhubarb pith); but as rhubarb does not grow into wood, inapplicable to our
present subject; and if we descend to annual plants, rush pith is the thing
to be examined.

[41] I am too lazy now to translate, and shall trust to the chance of some
remnant, among my readers, of classical study, even in modern England.

[42] '_Or_ woody tissue,' suggests A. It is 'and' in Balfour.

[43] Terms not used now, but others quite as bad: Cuticle, Epidermis,
Cortical layer, Periderm, Cambium, Phelloderm--six hard words for 'BARK,'
says my careful annotator. "Yes; and these new six to be changed for six
newer ones next year, no doubt."

[44] "At first the vessels are pervious and full of _fluid_, but by degrees
thickening layers are deposited, which contract their canal."--BALFOUR.

[45] I cannot better this earlier statement, which in beginning
'Proserpina,' I intended to form a part of that work; but, as readers
already in possession of it in the original form, ought not to be burdened
with its repetition, I shall republish those chapters as a supplement,
which I trust may be soon issued.

[46] "'Diachyma' is parenchyma in the middle of a leaf!" (Balfour, Art.
137.) Henceforward, if I ever make botanical quotations, I shall always
call parenchyma, By-tis; prosenchyma, To-tis; and diachyma, Through-tis,
short for By-tissue, To-tissue, and Through-tissue--then the student will
see what all this modern wisdom comes to!





SAINT URSULA

STORY OF URSULA     DREAM OF URSULA

    [Illustration: "_Dream of St. Ursula_"
      FROM THE PAINTING BY CARPACCIO]




SAINT URSULA

_By John Ruskin_


I
THE STORY OF ST. URSULA

II
THE DREAM OF ST. URSULA


[Illustration]


_New York_
THE DEVIN-ADAIR COMPANY
_1912_




Copyright, 1912, by
THE DEVIN-ADAIR COMPANY




_PREFACE_


Fors Clavigera!--to the ignorant a stumbling-stone, to the Philistines
a laughing-stock, but to the Initiate a sweet remembrance of many a
happy hour passed in informal chat with the Master.

The real Ruskin enthusiast has read every word of Fors, and reckons it
not least among the precious treasures of the Master's pen. But it
remains a fact that to the vast majority of those who have heard of
Fors Clavigera, it is but an excellent example of Ruskin's eccentric
seeking after curious titles; and the beauties of these letters are as
effectually buried as if they had appeared in a country journal.

It is in the desire of rescuing one of the choicest bits in all Fors
that the present little booklet is offered to the clients of the
"Celestial Lily" as Mother Church names the noble Martyr, St. Ursula.
Though, of course, a life of this royal maiden has an interest for me
apart from its authorship by Ruskin.

As one dedicated to the cause for which the little Princess and her
"legions" lost their lives, as one tenderly devoted to her and as
privileged to be sheltered beneath her protecting mantle, I look upon
this story as one of the sweetest relics of the "Age of Faith." It
makes no difference to me, as it made none to John Ruskin (and thank
God there are many like him), what learned Bollandists and others tell
us of the legendary character of the Princess of Over-sea. The
essential thing, as Ruskin remarked, is that a great people chose so
to represent their highest aspirations. It will remain eternally
true, to use his words, that "we see the Saints better through a
nimbus of religious enthusiasm than a fog of contemptuous
rationalism."

To all who, like Ursula, love holy living and unselfish dedication to
a noble cause, greeting--

    _AN URSULINE OF NEW ORLEANS._




I

THE STORY OF ST. URSULA




_THE STORY OF ST. URSULA_


There was once a just and most Christian King of Britain, called
Maurus. To him and to his wife Daria was born a little girl, the
fairest creature that this earth ever saw. She came into the world
wrapped in a hairy mantle, and all men wondered greatly what this
might mean. Then the King gathered together his wise men to inquire of
them. But they could not make known the thing to him, for only God in
Heaven knew how the rough robe signified that she should follow
holiness and purity all her days, and the wisdom of St. John the
Baptist. And because of the mantle, they called her Ursula, 'Little
Bear.'

Now Ursula grew day by day in grace and loveliness, and in such wisdom
that all men marvelled. Yet should they not have marvelled, since
with God all things are possible. And when she was fifteen years old
she was a light of all wisdom, and a glass of all beauty, and a
fountain of Scripture and of sweet ways. Lovelier woman there was not
alive. Her speech was so full of all delight that it seemed as though
an angel of Paradise had taken human flesh. And in all the kingdom no
weighty thing was done without counsel of Ursula.

So her fame was carried through the earth, and a King of England, a
heathen of Over-sea, hearing, was taken with the love of her. And he
set all his heart on having her for wife to his son Æther, and for
daughter in his home. So he sent a mighty and honourable embassy, of
earls and marquesses, with goodly company of knights and ladies and
philosophers; bidding them, with all courtesy and discretion, pray
King Maurus to give Ursula in marriage to Æther.

"But," he said, "if Maurus will not hear your gentle words, open to
him all my heart, and tell him that I will ravage his land with fire,
and slay his people, and make himself die a cruel death, and will,
after, lead Ursula away with me. Give him but three days to answer,
for I am wasted with desire to finish the matter and hold Ursula in my
ward."

But when the ambassadors came to King Maurus, he would not have his
daughter wed a heathen; so, since prayers and gifts did not move him,
they spoke out all the threats. Now the land of Britain was little,
and its soldiers few, while the heathen was a mighty king and a
conqueror; so Maurus and his Queen and his councillors, and all the
people, were in sore distress.

But on the evening of the second day Ursula went into her chamber and
shut close the doors, and before the image of the Father, who is very
pitiful, prayed all night with tears, telling how she had vowed in
her heart to live a holy maiden all her days, having Christ alone for
spouse. But if His will were that she should wed the son of the
heathen King, she prayed that wisdom might be given her to turn the
hearts of all that people who knew not faith or holiness, and power to
comfort her father and mother, and all the people of her fatherland.

And when the clear light of dawn was in the air she fell asleep. And
the Angel of the Lord appeared to her in a dream, saying, "Ursula,
your prayer is heard. At the sun-rising you shall go boldly before the
ambassadors of the King of Over-sea, for the God of Heaven shall give
you wisdom, and teach your tongue what it should speak."

When it was day, Ursula rose to bless and glorify the name of God. She
put on for covering and for beauty an enwrought mantle like the starry
sky, and was crowned with a coronet of gems. Then, straightway passing
to her father's chamber, she told him what grace had been done to her
that night, and all that now was in her heart to answer to the
ambassadors of Over-sea. So, though long he would not, she persuaded
her father.

Then Maurus, and his lords and councillors, and the ambassadors of the
heathen King, were gathered in the Hall of Council. And when Ursula
entered the place where these lords were, one said to the other, "Who
is this that comes from Paradise?" For she moved in all noble
gentleness, with eyes inclined to earth, learned and frank and fair,
delightful above all women upon earth. Behind her came a hundred
maidens, clothed in white silk, fair and lovely. They shone brightly
as the stars, but Ursula shone as the moon and the evening star.

Now this was the answer Ursula made, which the King caused to be
written, and sealed with the royal seal, and gave to the ambassadors
of the King of the Over-sea.

"I will take," she said, "for spouse, Æther, the son of my lord, the
King of Over-sea. But I ask of my lord three graces, and with heart
and soul pray of him to grant them.

"The first grace I ask is this, that he and the Queen and their son,
my spouse, be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit.

"The second grace is that three years may be given me, before the
bridal, in which to go to and fro upon the sea, that I may visit the
bodies of the Saints in Rome, and the blessed places of the Holy Land.

"And for the last grace, I ask that he choose ten fair maidens of his
kingdom, and with each of these a thousand more, all of gentle blood,
who shall come to me here in Britain, and go with me in gladness upon
the sea, following this my holy pilgrimage."

Then spake one of the nobles of the land to Maurus, saying, "My lord
the King, this your daughter is the Dove of Peace come from Paradise,
the same that in the days of the flood brought to the Ark of Noah the
olive-branch of good news." And at the answer were the ambassadors so
full of joy that they well-nigh could not speak, and with praise and
triumph, they went their way, and told their master all the sweet
answer of Ursula.

Then my lord the King said, "Praised and blessed be the name of our
God Malcometto, who has given my soul for comfort that which it
desired. Truly there is not a franker lady under the wheel of the sun;
and by the body of my mother I swear there is nothing she can ask that
I will not freely give. First of the maidens she desires shall be my
daughter Florence." Then all his lords rose, man by man, and gladly
named each his child.

So the will of Ursula was done; and that King, and all his folk, were
baptized into the Holy Faith. And Æther, with the English maidens, in
number above ten thousand, came to the land of Britain.

Then Ursula chose her own four sisters, Habila and Julia and Victoria
and Aurea, and a thousand daughters of her people, with certain holy
bishops and great lords and grave councillors, and an abbot of the
order of St. Benedict, men full of all wisdom and friends of God.

So all that company set sail in eleven ships, and passing this way and
that upon the sea, rejoiced in it, and in this their maiden
pilgrimage. And those who dwelt by the shores of the sea came forth in
multitudes to gaze upon them as they passed, and to each man it
appeared a delightful vision. For the ships sailed in fair order, side
by side, with sound of sweet psalms and murmur of the waters. And the
maidens were clad, some in scarlet and some in pure samite, some in
rich silk of Damascus, some in cloth of gold, and some in the purple
robe that is woven in Judea. Some wore crowns, others garlands of
flowers. Upon the shoulder of each was the visible cross, in the hands
of each a pilgrim's staff by their sides were pilgrims' scrips, and
each ship's company sailed under the gonfalon of the Holy Cross.
Ursula in the midst was like a ray of sunlight, and the Angel of the
Lord was ever with them for guide.

So in the holy time of Lent they came to Rome. And when my Lord the
Pope came forth, under the Castle of St. Angelo, with great state, to
greet them, seeing their blessed assembly, he put off the mantle of
Peter, and with many bishops, priests, and brothers, and certain
cardinals, set himself to go with them on their blessed pilgrimage.

At length they came to the land of Slavonia, whose ruler was friend
and liegeman to the Soldan of Babylon. Then the Lord of the Saracens
sent straightway to the Soldan, telling what a mighty company had come
to his land, and how they were Christian folk. And the Soldan
gathered all his men of war, and with great rage the host of the
heathen made against the company of Ursula.

And when they were nigh, the Soldan cried and said, "What folk are
ye?" And Ursula spake in answer, "We are Christian folk; our feet are
turned to the blessed tomb of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the saving of
our souls, and that we may win grace to pass into eternal life, in the
blessed Paradise." And the Soldan answered, "Either deny your God, or
I will slay you all with the sword. So shall ye die a dolorous death,
and see your land no more." And Ursula answered, "Even so we desire to
be sure witnesses for the name of God, declaring and preaching the
glory of His name; because He has made heaven and earth and the sea by
His Word; and afterward all living things; and afterward has willed,
Himself, to die for our salvation and glory. And who follows Him
shall go to rejoice in His Fatherland and in His Kingdom."

Then she turned to her people: "My sisters and my brothers, in this
place God has given us great grace. Embrace and make it sure, for our
death in this place will be life perpetual, and joy and sweetness
never-ending. And there, above, we shall be with the Majesty and the
angels of Paradise." Then she called her spouse to comfort and teach
him. And he answered her with these words: "To me it appears three
thousand years that death is a-coming, so much have I already tasted
of the sweetness of Paradise."

Then the Soldan gave commandment that they should all be slain with
the sword. And so was it done.

Yet when he saw Ursula standing in the midst of all that slaughter,
like the fairest stalk of corn in harvest, and how she was exceeding
lovely, beyond the tongues of this earth to tell, he would have saved
her alive, and taken her for wife. But when she would not, and rebuked
him, he was moved with anger. Now there was a bow in his hand, and he
set an arrow on the string, and drew it with all his strength, and it
pierced the heart of the glorious maiden. So she went to God.

And one maiden only, whose name was Corbula, through fear hid herself
in the ship. But God, who had chosen all that company, gave her heart,
and with the dawn of the next day she came forth willingly, and
received the martyr's crown.

Thus all were slain, and all are gone to Paradise, and sing the glad
and sweet songs of Paradise.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whosoever reads this holy history, let him not think it a great thing
to say an Our Father and a Hail Mary for the soul of him who has
written it.




II

_THE DREAM OF ST. URSULA_

(CARPACCIO)

_JOHN RUSKIN_




_THE DREAM OF ST. URSULA_


In the year 1869, just before leaving Venice, I had been carefully
looking at a picture by Victor Carpaccio, representing the dream of a
young princess. Carpaccio has taken much pains to explain to us, as
far as he can, the kind of life she leads, by completely painting her
little bedroom in the light of dawn, so that you can see everything in
it. It is lighted by two doubly-arched windows, the arches being
painted crimson round their edges, and the capitals of the shafts that
bear them, gilded. They are filled at the top with small round panes
of glass; but beneath, are open to the blue morning sky, with a low
lattice across them; and in the one at the back of the room are set
two beautiful white Greek vases with a plant in each, one having rich
dark and pointed green leaves, the other crimson flowers, but not of
any species known to me, each at the end of a branch like a spray of
heath.

These flower-pots stand on a shelf which runs all round the room and
beneath the window, at about the height of the elbow, and serves to
put things on anywhere; beneath it, down to the floor, the walls are
covered with green cloth, but above are bare and white. The second
window is nearly opposite the bed, and in front of it is the
princess's reading-table, some two feet and a half square, covered by
a red cloth with a white border and dainty fringe; and beside it her
seat, not at all like a reading-chair in Oxford, but a very small
three-legged stool like a music-stool, covered with crimson cloth. On
the table are a book, set up at a slope fittest for reading, and an
hour-glass. Under the shelf near the table, so as to be easily reached
by the outstretched arm, is a press full of books. The door of this
has been left open, and the books, I am grieved to say, are rather in
disorder, having been pulled about before the princess went to bed,
and one left standing on its side.

Opposite this window, on the white wall, is a small shrine or picture
(I can't see which, for it is in sharp retiring perspective), with a
lamp before it, and a silver vessel hung from the lamp, looking like
one for holding incense.

The bed is a broad four-poster, the posts being beautifully wrought
golden or gilded rods, variously wreathed and branched, carrying a
canopy of warm red. The princess's shield is at the head of it, and
the feet are raised entirely above the floor of the room, on a dais
which projects at the lower end so as to form a seat, on which the
child has laid her crown. Her little blue slippers lie at the side of
the bed, her white dog beside them; the coverlid is scarlet, the white
sheet folded half way back over it; the young girl lies straight,
bending neither at waist nor knee, the sheet rising and falling over
her in a narrow unbroken wave, like the shape of the coverlid of the
last sleep, when the turf scarcely rises. She is some seventeen or
eighteen years old, her head is turned towards us on the pillow, the
cheek resting on her hand, as if she were thinking, yet utterly calm
in sleep, and almost colourless. Her hair is tied with a narrow
riband, and divided into two wreaths, which encircle her head like a
double crown. The white nightgown hides the arm, raised on the pillow,
down to the wrist.

At the door of the room an angel enters (the little dog, though lying
awake, vigilant, takes no notice). He is a very small angel; his head
just rises a little above the shelf round the room, and would only
reach as high as the princess's chin, if she were standing up. He has
soft grey wings, lustreless; and his dress, of subdued blue, has
violet sleeves, open above the elbow, and showing white sleeves below.
He comes in without haste, his body like a mortal one, casting shadow
from the light through the door behind, his face perfectly quiet, a
palm-branch in his right hand, a scroll in his left.

So dreams the princess, with blessed eyes that need no earthly dawn.
It is very pretty of Carpaccio to make her dream out the angel's dress
so particularly, and notice the slashed sleeves; and to dream so
little an angel--very nearly a doll angel--bringing her the branch of
palm and message. But the lovely characteristic of all is the evident
delight of her continual life. Royal power over herself, and happiness
in her flowers, her books, her sleeping and waking, her prayers, her
dreams, her earth, her heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How do I know the princess is industrious?"

Partly by the trim state of her room--by the hour-glass on the table,
by the evident use of all the books she has (well bound, every one of
them, in stoutest leather or velvet, and with no dog's-ears), but more
distinctly from another picture of her, not asleep. In that one a
prince of England has sent to ask her in marriage; and her father,
little liking to part with her, sends for her to his room to ask her
what she would do. He sits, moody and sorrowful; she, standing before
him in a plain housewifely dress, talks quietly, going on with her
needle-work all the time.

A workwoman, friends, she, no less than a princess; and princess most
in being so. In like manner is a picture by a Florentine, whose mind I
would fain have you know somewhat, as well as Carpaccio's--Sandro
Botticelli. The girl who is to be the wife of Moses, when he first
sees her at the desert well, has fruit in her left hand, but a distaff
in her right.

"To do good work, whether you live or die"--it is the entrance to all
Princedoms; and if not done, the day will come, and that infallibly,
when you must labour for evil instead of good.

    _FORS CLAVIGERA_

Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent, 1872.

       *       *       *       *       *

    [Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *



Riverside College Classics


SELECTIONS

FROM THE WORKS OF

JOHN RUSKIN



EDITED WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES BY

CHAUNCEY B. TINKER, Ph.D.
_Professor of English in Yale College_

BOSTON--NEW YORK--CHICAGO--SAN FRANCISCO
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
The Riverside Press Cambridge



1908

BY HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

The Riverside Press
CAMBRIDGE--MASSACHUSETTS
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




PREFACE


In making the following selections, I have tried to avoid the
appearance of such a volume as used to be entitled _Elegant Extracts_.
Wherever practicable, entire chapters or lectures are given, or at
least passages of sufficient length to insure a correct notion of the
general complexion of Ruskin's work. The text is in all cases that of
the first editions, unless these were later revised by Ruskin himself.
The original spelling and punctuation are preserved, but a few minor
changes have been made for the sake of uniformity among the various
extracts. For similar reasons, Ruskin's numbering of paragraphs is
dispensed with.

I have aimed not to multiply notes. Practically all Ruskin's own
annotation is given, with the exception of one or two very long and
somewhat irrelevant notes from _Stones of Venice_. It has not been
deemed necessary to give the dates of every painter or to explain
every geographical reference. On the other hand, the sources of most
of the quotations are indicated. In the preparation of these notes,
the magnificent library edition of Messrs. Cook and Wedderburn has
inevitably been of considerable assistance; but all their references
have been verified, many errors have been corrected, and much has of
course been added.

In closing I wish to express my obligation to my former colleague, Dr.
Lucius H. Holt, without whose assistance this volume would never have
appeared. He wrote a number of the notes, including the short prefaces
to the various selections, and prepared the manuscript for the
printer.

C.B.T.

_September, 1908_.




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
    The Life of Ruskin
    The Unity of Ruskin's Writings
    Ruskin's Style

SELECTIONS FROM MODERN PAINTERS
    The Earth-Veil
    The Mountain Glory
    Sunrise on the Alps
    The Grand Style
    Of Realization
    Of the Novelty of Landscape
    Of the Pathetic Fallacy
    Of Classical Landscape
    Of Modern Landscape
    The Two Boyhoods

SELECTIONS FROM THE STONES OF VENICE
    The Throne
    St. Mark's
    Characteristics of Gothic Architecture

SELECTIONS FROM THE SEVEN LAMPS OF ARCHITECTURE
    The Lamp of Memory
    The Lamp of Obedience

SELECTIONS FROM LECTURES ON ART
    Inaugural
    The Relation of Art to Morals
    The Relation of Art to Use

    ART AND HISTORY

    TRAFFIC

    LIFE AND ITS ARTS

    BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE




ILLUSTRATIONS


JOHN RUSKIN IN 1857
TURNER'S FIGHTING TÉMÉRAIRE
CHURCH OF ST. MARK, VENICE
ST. MARK'S: CENTRAL ARCH OF FAÇADE




INTRODUCTION


[Sidenote: Two conflicting tendencies in Ruskin.]

It is distinctive of the nineteenth century that in its passion for
criticising everything in heaven and earth it by no means spared to
criticise itself. Alike in Carlyle's fulminations against its
insincerity, in Arnold's nice ridicule of Philistinism, and in
Ruskin's repudiation of everything modern, we detect that fine
dissatisfaction with the age which is perhaps only proof of its
idealistic trend. For the various ills of society, each of these men
had his panacea. What Carlyle had found in hero-worship and Arnold in
Hellenic culture, Ruskin sought in the study of art; and it is of the
last importance to remember that throughout his work he regarded
himself not merely as a writer on painting or buildings or myths or
landscape, but as the appointed critic of the age. For there existed
in him, side by side with his consuming love of the beautiful, a
rigorous Puritanism which was constantly correcting any tendency
toward a mere cult of the aesthetic. It is with the interaction of
these two forces that any study of the life and writings of Ruskin
should be primarily concerned.




I

THE LIFE OF RUSKIN


[Sidenote: Ancestry.]

It is easy to trace in the life of Ruskin these two forces tending
respectively toward the love of beauty and toward the contempt of mere
beauty. They are, indeed, present from the beginning. He inherited
from his Scotch parents that upright fearlessness which has always
characterized the race. His stern mother "devoted him to God before he
was born,"[1] and she guarded her gift with unremitting but perhaps
misguided caution. The child was early taught to find most of his
entertainment within himself, and when he did not, he was whipped. He
had no playmates and few toys. His chief story-book was the Bible,
which he read many times from cover to cover at his mother's knee.
His father, the "perfectly honest wine-merchant," seems to have been
the one to foster the boy's aesthetic sense; he was in the habit of
reading aloud to his little family, and his son's apparently genuine
appreciation of Scott, Pope, and Homer dates from the incredibly early
age of five. It was his father, also, to whom he owed his early
acquaintance with the finest landscape, for the boy was his companion
in yearly business trips about Britain, and later visited, in his
parents' company, Belgium, western Germany, and the Alps.

[Sidenote: Early education.]

All this of course developed the child's precocity. He was early
suffered and even encouraged to compose verses;[2] by ten he had
written a play, which has unfortunately been preserved. The hot-house
rearing which his parents believed in, and his facility in teaching
himself, tended to make a regular course of schooling a mere
annoyance; such schooling as he had did not begin till he was fifteen,
and lasted less than two years, and was broken by illness. But the
chief effect of the sheltered life and advanced education to which he
was subjected was to endow him with depth at the expense of breadth,
and to deprive him of a possibly vulgar, but certainly healthy,
contact with his kind, which, one must believe, would have checked a
certain disposition in him to egotism, sentimentality, and dogmatic
vehemence. "The bridle and blinkers were never taken off me," he
writes.[3]

[Sidenote: Student at Oxford.]

[Sidenote: Traveling in Europe.]

At Oxford--whither his cautious mother pursued him--Ruskin seems to
have been impressed in no very essential manner by curriculum or
college mates. With learning _per se_ he was always dissatisfied and
never had much to do; his course was distinguished not so much by
erudition as by culture. He easily won the Newdigate prize in poetry;
his rooms in Christ Church were hung with excellent examples of
Turner's landscapes,--the gift of his art-loving father,--of which he
had been an intimate student ever since the age of thirteen. But his
course was interrupted by an illness, apparently of a tuberculous
nature, which necessitated total relaxation and various trips in Italy
and Switzerland, where he seems to have been healed by walking among
his beloved Alps. For many years thereafter he passed months of his
time in these two countries, accompanied sometimes by his parents and
sometimes rather luxuriously, it seems, by valet and guide.

[Sidenote: Career as an author begins.]

Meanwhile he had commenced his career as author with the first volume
of _Modern Painters_, begun, the world knows, as a short defense of
Turner, originally intended for nothing more than a magazine article.
But the role of art-critic and law-giver pleased the youth,--he was
only twenty-four when the volume appeared,--and having no desire to
realize the ambition of his parents and become a bishop, and even less
to duplicate his father's career as vintner, he gladly seized the
opportunity thus offered him to develop his aesthetic vein and to
redeem the public mind from its vulgar apathy thereby. He continued
his work on _Modern Painters_, with some intermissions, for eighteen
years, and supplemented it with the equally famous _Seven Lamps of
Architecture_ in 1849, and _The Stones of Venice_ in 1853.

[Sidenote: Domestic troubles.]

This life of zealous work and brilliant recognition was interrupted in
1848 by Ruskin's amazing marriage to Miss Euphemia Gray, a union into
which he entered at the desire of his parents with a docility as
stupid as it was stupendous. Five years later the couple were quietly
divorced, that Mrs. Ruskin might marry Millais. All the author's
biographers maintain an indiscreet reserve in discussing the affair,
but there can be no concealment of the fact that its effect upon
Ruskin was profound in its depression. Experiences like this and his
later sad passion for Miss La Touche at once presage and indicate his
mental disorder, and no doubt had their share--a large one--in
causing Ruskin's dissatisfaction with everything, and above all with
his own life and work. Be this as it may, it is at this time in the
life of Ruskin that we must begin to reckon with the decline of his
aesthetic and the rise of his ethical impulse; his interest passes
from art to conduct. It is also the period in which he began his
career as lecturer, his chief interest being the social life of his
age.

[Sidenote: Ruskin's increasing interest in social questions.]

By 1860, he was publishing the papers on political economy, later
called _Unto this Last_, which roused so great a storm of protest
when they appeared in the _Cornhill Magazine_ that their publication
had to be suspended. The attitude of the public toward such works
as these,--its alternate excitement and apathy,--the death of his
parents, combined with the distressing events mentioned above,
darkened Ruskin's life and spoiled his interest in everything that
did not tend to make the national life more thoughtfully solemn.

    "It seems to me that now ... the thoughts of the true nature of
    our life, and of its powers and responsibilities should present
    themselves with absolute sadness and sternness."[4]

His lectures as Slade Professor of Art at Oxford, a post which he
held at various times from 1870 to 1883, failed to re-establish his
undistracted interest in things beautiful.

[Sidenote: Triumph of the reformer over the art-critic.]

The complete triumph of the reformer over the art-critic is marked by
_Fors Clavigera_, a series of letters to workingmen, begun New Year's
Day, 1871, in which it was proposed to establish a model colony of
peasants, whose lives should be made simple, honest, happy, and even
cultured, by a return to more primitive methods of tilling the soil
and of making useful and beautiful objects. The Guild of St. George,
established to "slay the dragon of industrialism," to dispose of
machinery, slums, and discontent, consumed a large part of Ruskin's
time and money. He had inherited a fortune of approximately a million
dollars, and he now began to dispose of it in various charitable
schemes,--establishing tea-shops, supporting young painters, planning
model tenements, but, above all, in elaborating his ideas for the
Guild. The result of it all--whatever particular reforms were effected
or manual industries established--was, to Ruskin's view, failure, and
his mind, weakening under the strain of its profound disappointments,
at last crashed in ruin.

[Sidenote: Death in 1900.]

It is needless to follow the broken author through the desolation
of his closing years to his death in 1900. Save for his charming
reminiscences, _Præterita_, his work was done; the long struggle was
over, the struggle of one man to reduce the complexities of a national
life to an apostolic simplicity, to make it beautiful and good,

    Till the high God behold it from beyond,
    And enter it.


  [1] _Præterita_. He was born February 8, 1819.

  [2] Ruskin himself quotes a not very brilliant specimen in _Modern
  Painters_, III, in "Moral of Landscape."

  [3] _Præterita_, § 53.

  [4] _The Mystery of Life._




II

THE UNITY OF RUSKIN'S WRITINGS


[Sidenote: Diversity of his writings.]

Ruskin is often described as an author of bewildering variety, whose
mind drifted waywardly from topic to topic--from painting to political
economy, from architecture to agriculture--with a license as
illogical as it was indiscriminating. To this impression, Ruskin
himself sometimes gave currency. He was, for illustration, once
announced to lecture on crystallography, but, as we are informed by
one present,[5] he opened by asserting that he was really about to
lecture on Cistercian architecture; nor did it greatly matter what the
title was; "for," said he, "if I had begun to speak about Cistercian
abbeys, I should have been sure to get on crystals presently; and if
I had begun upon crystals, I should soon have drifted into
architecture." Those who conceive of Ruskin as being thus a kind of
literary Proteus like to point to the year 1860, that of the
publication of his tracts on economics, as witnessing the greatest
and suddenest of his changes, that from reforming art to reforming
society; and it is true that this year affords a simple dividing-line
between Ruskin's earlier work, which is sufficiently described by the
three titles, _Modern Painters, The Seven Lamps of Architecture_, and
_The Stones of Venice_, and his later work, chiefly on social subjects
such as are discussed in _Unto This Last, The Crown of Wild Olive_,
and _Fors Clavigera_. And yet we cannot insist too often on the
essential unity of this work, for, viewed in the large, it betrays one
continuous development. The seeds of _Fors_ are in _The Stones of
Venice_.

[Sidenote: Underlying idea in all his works.]

The governing idea of Ruskin's first published work, _Modern Painters,
Volume I_, was a moral idea. The book was dedicated to the principle
that that art is greatest which deals with the greatest number of
greatest ideas,--those, we learn presently, which reveal divine
truth; the office of the painter, we are told,[6] is the same as that
of the preacher, for "the duty of both is to take for each discourse
one essential truth." As if recalling this argument that the painter
is a preacher, Carlyle described _The Stones of Venice_ as a "sermon
in stones." In the idea that all art, when we have taken due account
of technique and training, springs from a moral character, we find the
unifying principle of Ruskin's strangely diversified work. The very
title _The Seven Lamps of Architecture_, with its chapters headed
"Sacrifice," "Obedience," etc., is a sufficient illustration of
Ruskin's identification of moral principles with aesthetic principles.
A glance at the following pages of this book will show how Ruskin is
for ever halting himself to demand the moral significance of some fair
landscape, gorgeous painting, heaven-aspiring cathedral. In "Mountain
Glory," for example, he refers to the mountains as "kindly in simple
lessons to the workman," and inquires later at what times mankind has
offered worship in these mountain churches; of the English cathedral
he says, "Weigh the influence of those dark towers on all who have
passed through the lonely square at their feet for centuries";[7] of
St. Mark's, "And what effect has this splendour on those who pass
beneath it?"--and it will be noticed on referring to "The Two
Boyhoods," that, in seeking to define the difference between Giorgione
and Turner, the author instinctively has recourse to distinguishing
the _religious_ influences exerted on the two in youth.

[Sidenote: Underlying idea a moral one.]

Now it is clear that a student of the relation of art to life, of work
to the character of the workman and of his nation, may, and in fact
inevitably must, be led in time to attend to the producer rather than
to the product, to the cause rather than to the effect; and if we
grant, with Ruskin, that the sources of art, namely, the national
life, are denied, it will obviously be the part, not only of humanity
but of common sense, for such a student to set about purifying the
social life of the nation. Whether the reformation proposed by Ruskin
be the proper method of attack is not the question we are here
concerned with; our only object at present being to call attention to
the fact that such a lecture as that on "Traffic" in _The Crown of
Wild Olive_ is the logical outgrowth of such a chapter as "Ideas of
Beauty" in the first volume of _Modern Painters_. Between the author
who wrote in 1842, of the necessity of revealing new truths in
painting, "This, if it be an honest work of art, it must have done,
for no man ever yet worked honestly without giving some such help to
his race. God appoints to every one of his creatures a separate
mission, and if they discharge it honourably ... there will assuredly
come of it such burning as, in its appointed mode and measure, shall
shine before men, and be of service constant and holy,"[8] and the
author who wrote, "That country is the richest which nourishes the
greatest number of noble and happy human beings,"[9] or, "The
beginning of art is in getting our country clean, and our people
beautiful,"[10]--between these two, I say, there is no essential
difference. They are not contradictory but consistent.

[Sidenote: Art dependent upon personal and national greatness.]

Amidst the maze of subjects, then, which Ruskin, with kaleidoscopic
suddenness and variety, brings before the astonished gaze of his
readers, let them confidently hold this guiding clue. They will find
that Ruskin's "facts" are often not facts at all; they will discover
that many of Ruskin's choicest theories have been dismissed to the
limbo of exploded hypotheses; but they will seek long before they find
a more eloquent and convincing plea for the proposition that all great
art reposes upon a foundation of personal and national greatness.
Critics of Ruskin will show you that he began _Modern Painters_ while
he was yet ignorant of the classic Italians; that he wrote _The Stones
of Venice_ without realizing the full indebtedness of the Venetian to
the Byzantine architecture; that he proposed to unify the various
religious sects although he had no knowledge of theology; that he
attempted a reconstruction of society though he had had no scientific
training in political economy; but in all this neglect of mere fact
the sympathetic reader will discover that contempt for the letter
of the law which was characteristic of the nineteenth-century
prophet,--of Carlyle, of Arnold, and of Emerson,--and which, if it
be blindness, is that produced by an excess of light.


  [5] See Harrison's _Life_, p. 111. Cf. the opening of _The Mystery
  of Life_.

  [6] Part 2, sec. 1, chap. 4.

  [7] See p. 159.

  [8] _Modern Painters_, vol. 1, part 2, sec. 1, chap. 7.

  [9] _Unto This Last_.

  [10] See p. 262.




III

RUSKIN'S STYLE


[Sidenote: Sensuousness of his style.]

Many people regard the style of Ruskin as his chief claim to
greatness. If the time ever come when men no longer study him for
sermons in stones, they will nevertheless turn to his pages to enjoy
one of the most gorgeous prose styles of the nineteenth century. For a
parallel to the sensuous beauties of Ruskin's essays on art, one turns
instinctively to poetry; and of all the poets Ruskin is perhaps likest
Keats. His sentences, like the poet's, are thick-set with jeweled
phrases; they are full of subtle harmonies that respond, like a
Stradivarius, to the player's every mood. In its ornateness Ruskin's
style is like his favorite cathedral of Amiens, in the large stately,
in detail exquisite, profuse, and not without a touch of the
grotesque. It is the style of an artist.

[Sidenote: Ruskin's method of construction in description.]

A critical fancy may even discover in the construction of his finest
descriptions a method not unlike that of a painter at work upon his
canvas. He blocks them out in large masses, then sketches and colors
rapidly for general effects, treating detail at first more or less
vaguely and collectively, but passing in the end to the elaboration of
detail in the concrete, touching the whole with an imaginative gleam
that lends a momentary semblance of life to the thing described, after
the manner of the "pathetic fallacy." Thus it is in the famous
description of St. Mark's:[11] we are given first the largest general
impression, the "long, low pyramid of coloured light," which the
artist proceeds to "hollow beneath into five great vaulted porches,"
whence he leads the eye slowly upwards amidst a mass of bewildering
detail--"a confusion of delight"--from which there slowly emerge those
concrete details with which the author particularly wishes to impress
us, "the breasts of the Greek horses blazing in their breadth of
golden strength and St. Mark's lion lifted on a blue field covered
with stars." In lesser compass we are shown the environs of Venice,[12]
the general impression of the "long, low, sad-coloured line," being
presently broken by the enumeration of unanalyzed detail, "tufted
irregularly with brushwood and willows," and passing to concrete
detail in the hills of Arqua, "a dark cluster of purple pyramids." In
the still more miniature description of the original site of Venice[13]
we have the same method:

    "The black desert of their shore lies in its nakedness beneath
    the night, pathless, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor
    and fearful silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the
    tideless pools and the sea-birds flit from their margins with a
    questioning cry."

[Sidenote: His love of color.]

Equally characteristic of the painter is the ever-present use of
color. It is interesting merely to count the number and variety of
colors used in the descriptions. It will serve at least to call the
reader's attention to the felicitous choice of words used in
describing the opalescence of St. Mark's or the skillful combination
of the colors characteristic of the great Venetians in such a sentence
as, "the low bronzed gleaming of sea-rusted armor shot angrily under
their blood-red mantle-folds"[14]--a glimpse of a Giorgione.

[Sidenote: His love of prose rhythm.]

He is even more attentive to the ear than to the eye. He loves the
sentence of stately rhythms and long-drawn harmonies, and he omits no
poetic device that can heighten the charm of sound,--alliteration, as
in the famous description of the streets of Venice,

    "Far as the eye could reach, still the soft moving of stainless
    waters proudly pure; as not the flower, so neither the thorn nor
    the thistle could grow in those glancing fields";[15]

the balanced close for some long period,

    "to write her history on the white scrolls of the sea-surges and
    to word it in their thunder, and to gather and give forth, in the
    world-wide pulsation, the glory of the West and of the East, from
    the burning heart of her Fortitude and splendour";[16]

and the tendency, almost a mannerism, to add to the music of his own
rhythm, the deep organ-notes of Biblical text and paraphrase. But if
we wish to see how aptly Ruskin's style responds to the tone of his
subject, we need but remark the rich liquid sentence descriptive of
Giorgione's home,

    "brightness out of the north and balm from the south, and the stars
    of evening and morning clear in the limitless light of arched
    heaven and circling sea,"[17]

which he has set over against the harsh explosiveness of

    "Near the south-west corner of Covent Garden, a square brick pit
    or wall is formed by a close-set block of house to the back
    windows of which it admits a few rays of light--"

the birthplace of Turner.

[Sidenote: His beauty of style often distracts from the thought.]

But none knew better than Ruskin that a style so stiff with ornament
was likely to produce all manner of faults. In overloading his
sentences with jewelry he frequently obscures the sense; his beauties
often degenerate into mere prettiness; his sweetness cloys. His free
indulgence of the emotions, often at the expense of the intellect,
leads to a riotous extravagance of superlative. But, above all, his
richness distracts attention from matter to manner. In the case of an
author so profoundly in earnest, this could not but be unfortunate;
nothing enraged him more than to have people look upon the beauties of
his style rather than ponder the substance of his book. In a passage
of complacent self-scourging he says:

    "For I have had what, in many respects, I boldly call the
    misfortune, to set my words sometimes prettily together; not
    without a foolish vanity in the poor knack that I had of doing
    so, until I was heavily punished for this pride by finding that
    many people thought of the words only, and cared nothing for their
    meaning. Happily, therefore, the power of using such language--if
    indeed it ever were mine--is passing away from me; and whatever I
    am now able to say at all I find myself forced to say with great
    plainness."[18]

[Sidenote: His picturesque extravagance of style.]

But Ruskin's decision to speak with "great plainness" by no means made
the people of England attend to what he said rather than the way he
said it. He could be, and in his later work he usually was, strong
and clear; but the old picturesqueness and exuberance of passion were
with him still. The public discovered that it enjoyed Ruskin's
denunciations of machinery much as it had enjoyed his descriptions of
mountains, and, without obviously mending its ways, called loudly for
more. Lecture-rooms were crowded and editions exhausted by the ladies
and gentlemen of England, whose nerves were pleasantly thrilled with a
gentle surprise on being told that they had despised literature, art,
science, nature, and compassion, and that what they thought upon any
subject was "a matter of no serious importance"; that they could not
be said to have any thoughts at all--indeed, no right to think.[19]
The fiercer his anathemas, the greater the applause; the louder he
shouted, the better he pleased. Let him split the ears of the
groundlings, let him out-Herod Herod,--the judicious might grieve, but
all would be excitedly attentive. Their Jeremiah seemed at times like
to become a jester,--there was a suggestion of the ludicrous in the
sudden passage from birds to Greek coins, to mills, to Walter Scott,
to millionaire malefactors,--a suggestion of acrobatic tumbling and
somersault; but he always got a hearing. In lecturing to the students
of a military academy he had the pleasing audacity to begin:

    "Young soldiers, I do not doubt but that many of you came
    unwillingly to-night, and many of you in merely contemptuous
    curiosity, to hear what a writer on painting could possibly say,
    or would venture to say, respecting your great art of war";[20]

after which stinging challenge, one has no doubt, any feeling of
offense was swallowed up in admiration of the speaker's physical
courage.

[Sidenote: Influence of Carlyle upon Ruskin.]

[Sidenote: The unity of Ruskin's style.]

There can be little doubt that this later manner in which Ruskin
allowed his Puritan instincts to defeat his aestheticism, and indulged
to an alarming degree his gift of vituperation, was profoundly
influenced by his "master," Carlyle, who had long since passed into
his later and raucous manner. Carlyle's delight in the disciple's
diatribes probably encouraged the younger man in a vehemence of
invective to which his love of dogmatic assertion already rendered
him too prone. At his best, Ruskin, like Carlyle, reminds us of a
major prophet; at his worst he shrieks and heats the air. His high
indignations lead him into all manner of absurdity and self-contradiction.
An amusing instance of this may be given from _Sesame and Lilies_. In
the first lecture, which, it will be recalled, was given in aid of a
library fund, we find[21] the remark, "We are filthy and foolish enough
to thumb one another's books out of circulating libraries." His friends
and his enemies, the clergy (who "teach a false gospel for hire") and
the scientists, the merchants and the universities, Darwin and Dante,
all had their share in the indignant lecturer's indiscriminate abuse.
And yet in all the tropical luxuriance of his inconsistency, one can
never doubt the man's sincerity. He never wrote for effect. He may
dazzle us, but his fire is never pyrotechnical; it always springs from
the deep volcanic heart of him. His was a fervor too easily stirred and
often ill-directed, but its wild brilliance cannot long be mistaken for
the sky-rocket's; it flares madly in all directions, now beautifying,
now appalling, the night, the fine ardor of the painter passing into
the fierce invective of the prophet. But in the end it is seen that
Ruskin's style, like his subject-matter, is a unity,--an emanation from
a divine enthusiasm making for "whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are of good report."


  [11] See p. 162.

  [12] See p. 139.

  [13] See p. 147.

  [14] See p. 121.

  [15] See p. 122.

  [16] See p. 149.

  [17] See p. 122.

  [18] _The Mystery of Life_.

  [19] _Sesame and Lilies_, "Kings' Treasuries," §§ 25, 31.

  [20] _The Crown of Wild Olive_, "War."

  [21] "Kings' Treasuries," § 32.




SELECTIONS FROM MODERN PAINTERS


The five volumes of _Modern Painters_ appeared at various intervals
between 1843 and 1860, from the time Ruskin was twenty-four until he
was forty. The first volume was published in May, 1843; the second, in
April, 1846; the third, January 15, 1856; the fourth, April 14, 1856;
the last, in June, 1860. As his knowledge of his subject broadened and
deepened, we find the later volumes differing greatly in viewpoint
and style from the earlier; but, as stated in the preface to the last
volume, "in the main aim and principle of the book there is no
variation, from its first syllable to its last." Ruskin himself
maintained that the most important influence upon his thought in
preparation for his work in _Modern Painters_ was not from his "love
of art, but of mountains and seas"; and all the power of judgment he
had obtained in art, he ascribed to his "steady habit of always
looking for the subject principally, and for the art only as the means
of expressing it." The first volume was published as the work of "a
graduate of Oxford," Ruskin "fearing that I might not obtain fair
hearing if the reader knew my youth." The author's proud father did
not allow the secret to be kept long. The title Ruskin originally
chose for the volume was _Turner and the Ancients_. To this Smith,
Elder & Co., his publishers, objected, and the substitution of _Modern
Painters_ was their suggestion The following is the title-page of the
first volume in the original edition:

                    MODERN PAINTERS:
                  _Their Superiority_
          _In the Art of Landscape Painting_
                       _To_ all
                 _The Ancient Masters_
                 proved by examples of
     The True, the Beautiful, and the Intellectual,
                       From the
          Works of Modern Artists, especially
        From those of J.M.W. Turner, Esq., R.A.
                By a Graduate of Oxford
              (Quotation from Wordsworth)
        London: Smith, Elder & Co., 65 Cornhill.
                         1843.




THE EARTH-VEIL

VOLUME V, CHAPTER I


"To dress it and to keep it."[22]

That, then, was to be our work. Alas! what work have we set ourselves
upon instead! How have we ravaged the garden instead of kept
it--feeding our war-horses with its flowers, and splintering its trees
into spear-shafts!

"And at the East a flaming sword."[22]

Is its flame quenchless? and are those gates that keep the way indeed
passable no more? or is it not rather that we no more desire to enter?
For what can we conceive of that first Eden which we might not yet win
back, if we chose? It was a place full of flowers, we say. Well: the
flowers are always striving to grow wherever we suffer them; and the
fairer, the closer. There may, indeed, have been a Fall of Flowers, as
a Fall of Man; but assuredly creatures such as we are can now fancy
nothing lovelier than roses and lilies, which would grow for us side
by side, leaf overlapping leaf, till the Earth was white and red with
them, if we cared to have it so. And Paradise was full of pleasant
shades and fruitful avenues. Well: what hinders us from covering as
much of the world as we like with pleasant shade, and pure blossom,
and goodly fruit? Who forbids its valleys to be covered over with corn
till they laugh and sing? Who prevents its dark forests, ghostly and
uninhabitable, from being changed into infinite orchards, wreathing
the hills with frail-floreted snow, far away to the half-lighted
horizon of April, and flushing the face of all the autumnal earth with
glow of clustered food? But Paradise was a place of peace, we say, and
all the animals were gentle servants to us. Well: the world would yet
be a place of peace if we were all peacemakers, and gentle service
should we have of its creatures if we gave them gentle mastery. But so
long as we make sport of slaying bird and beast, so long as we choose
to contend rather with our fellows than with our faults, and make
battlefield of our meadows instead of pasture--so long, truly, the
Flaming Sword will still turn every way, and the gates of Eden remain
barred close enough, till we have sheathed the sharper flame of our
own passions, and broken down the closer gates of our own hearts.

I have been led to see and feel this more and more, as I consider the
service which the flowers and trees, which man was at first appointed
to keep, were intended to render to him in return for his care; and
the services they still render to him, as far as he allows their
influence, or fulfils his own task towards them. For what infinite
wonderfulness there is in this vegetation, considered, as indeed it
is, as the means by which the earth becomes the companion of man--his
friend and his teacher! In the conditions which we have traced in its
rocks, there could only be seen preparation for his existence;--the
characters which enable him to live on it safely, and to work with it
easily--in all these it has been inanimate and passive; but vegetation
is to it as an imperfect soul, given to meet the soul of man. The
earth in its depths must remain dead and cold, incapable except of
slow crystalline change; but at its surface, which human beings look
upon and deal with, it ministers to them through a veil of strange
intermediate being: which breathes, but has no voice; moves, but
cannot leave its appointed place; passes through life without
consciousness, to death without bitterness; wears the beauty of youth,
without its passion; and declines to the weakness of age, without its
regret.

And in this mystery of intermediate being, entirely subordinate to us,
with which we can deal as we choose, having just the greater power as
we have the less responsibility for our treatment of the unsuffering
creature, most of the pleasures which we need from the external world
are gathered, and most of the lessons we need are written, all kinds
of precious grace and teaching being united in this link between the
Earth and Man; wonderful in universal adaptation to his need, desire,
and discipline; God's daily preparation of the earth for him, with
beautiful means of life. First, a carpet to make it soft for him;
then, a coloured fantasy of embroidery thereon; then, tall spreading
of foliage to shade him from sun heat, and shade also the fallen rain;
that it may not dry quickly back into the clouds, but stay to nourish
the springs among the moss. Stout wood to bear this leafage: easily to
be cut, yet tough and light, to make houses for him, or instruments
(lance-shaft, or plough-handle, according to his temper); useless, it
had been, if harder; useless, if less fibrous; useless, if less
elastic. Winter comes, and the shade of leafage falls away, to let the
sun warm the earth; the strong boughs remain, breaking the strength of
winter winds. The seeds which are to prolong the race, innumerable
according to the need, are made beautiful and palatable, varied into
infinitude of appeal to the fancy of man, or provision for his
service: cold juice, or glowing spice, or balm, or incense, softening
oil, preserving resin, medicine of styptic, febrifuge, or lulling
charm: and all these presented in forms of endless change. Fragility
or force, softness and strength, in all degrees and aspects; unerring
uprightness, as of temple pillars, or unguided wandering of feeble
tendrils on the ground; mighty resistances of rigid arm and limb to
the storms of ages, or wavings to and fro with faintest pulse of
summer streamlet. Roots cleaving the strength of rock, or binding the
transience of the sand; crests basking in sunshine of the desert, or
hiding by dripping spring and lightless cave; foliage far tossing in
entangled fields beneath every wave of ocean--clothing, with
variegated, everlasting films, the peaks of the trackless mountains,
or ministering at cottage doors to every gentlest passion and simplest
joy of humanity.

Being thus prepared for us in all ways, and made beautiful, and good
for food, and for building, and for instruments in our hands, this
race of plants, deserving boundless affection and admiration from us,
becomes, in proportion to their obtaining it, a nearly perfect test of
our being in right temper of mind and way of life; so that no one can
be far wrong in either who loves the trees enough, and every one is
assuredly wrong in both who does not love them, if his life has
brought them in his way. It is clearly possible to do without them,
for the great companionship of the sea and sky are all that sailors
need; and many a noble heart has been taught the best it had to learn
between dark stone walls. Still if human life be cast among trees at
all, the love borne to them is a sure test of its purity. And it is a
sorrowful proof of the mistaken ways of the world that the "country,"
in the simple sense of a place of fields and trees, has hitherto been
the source of reproach to its inhabitants, and that the words
"countryman, rustic, clown, paysan, villager," still signify a rude
and untaught person, as opposed to the words "townsman" and "citizen".
We accept this usage of words, or the evil which it signifies,
somewhat too quietly; as if it were quite necessary and natural that
country-people should be rude, and townspeople gentle. Whereas I
believe that the result of each mode of life may, in some stages of
the world's progress, be the exact reverse; and that another use of
words may be forced upon us by a new aspect of facts, so that we may
find ourselves saying: "Such and such a person is very gentle and
kind--he is quite rustic; and such and such another person is very
rude and ill-taught--he is quite urbane."

At all events, cities have hitherto gained the better part of their
good report through our evil ways of going on in the world generally;
chiefly and eminently through our bad habit of fighting with each
other. No field, in the Middle Ages, being safe from devastation, and
every country lane yielding easier passage to the marauders,
peacefully-minded men necessarily congregated in cities, and walled
themselves in, making as few cross-country roads as possible: while
the men who sowed and reaped the harvests of Europe were only the
servants or slaves of the barons. The disdain of all agricultural
pursuits by the nobility, and of all plain facts by the monks, kept
educated Europe in a state of mind over which natural phenomena could
have no power; body and intellect being lost in the practice of war
without purpose, and the meditation of words without meaning. Men
learned the dexterity with sword and syllogism, which they mistook for
education, within cloister and tilt-yard; and looked on all the broad
space of the world of God mainly as a place for exercise of horses, or
for growth of food.

There is a beautiful type of this neglect of the perfectness of the
Earth's beauty, by reason of the passions of men, in that picture of
Paul Uccello's of the battle of Sant' Egidio,[23] in which the armies
meet on a country road beside a hedge of wild roses; the tender red
flowers tossing above the helmets, and glowing beneath the lowered
lances. For in like manner the whole of Nature only shone hitherto for
man between the tossing of helmet-crests; and sometimes I cannot but
think of the trees of the earth as capable of a kind of sorrow, in
that imperfect life of theirs, as they opened their innocent leaves in
the warm springtime, in vain for men; and all along the dells of
England her beeches cast their dappled shade only where the outlaw
drew his bow, and the king rode his careless chase; and by the sweet
French rivers their long ranks of poplar waved in the twilight, only
to show the flames of burning cities on the horizon, through the
tracery of their stems; amidst the fair defiles of the Apennines, the
twisted olive-trunks hid the ambushes of treachery; and on their
valley meadows, day by day, the lilies which were white at the dawn
were washed with crimson at sunset.

And indeed I had once purposed, in this work, to show what kind of
evidence existed respecting the possible influence of country life on
men; it seeming to me, then, likely that here and there a reader would
perceive this to be a grave question, more than most which we contend
about, political or social, and might care to follow it out with me
earnestly.

The day will assuredly come when men will see that it _is_ a
grave question; at which period, also, I doubt not, there will arise
persons able to investigate it. For the present, the movements of the
world seem little likely to be influenced by botanical law; or by any
other considerations respecting trees, than the probable price of
timber. I shall limit myself, therefore, to my own simple woodman's
work, and try to hew this book into its final shape, with the limited
and humble aim that I had in beginning it, namely, to prove how far
the idle and peaceable persons, who have hitherto cared about leaves
and clouds, have rightly seen, or faithfully reported of them.


  [22] _Genesis_ ii, 15; iii 24.

  [23] "In our own National Gallery. It is quaint and imperfect, but
  of great interest." [Ruskin.] Paolo Uccello (c. 1397-1475), a
  Florentine painter of the Renaissance, the first of the naturalists.
  His real name was Paolo di Dono, but he was called Uccello from his
  fondness for birds.




THE MOUNTAIN GLORY

VOLUME IV, CHAPTER 20


I have dwelt, in the foregoing chapter, on the sadness of the hills
with the greater insistence that I feared my own excessive love for
them might lead me into too favourable interpretation of their
influences over the human heart; or, at least, that the reader might
accuse me of fond prejudice, in the conclusions to which, finally, I
desire to lead him concerning them. For, to myself, mountains are the
beginning and the end of all natural scenery; in them, and in the
forms of inferior landscape that lead to them, my affections are
wholly bound up; and though I can look with happy admiration at the
lowland flowers, and woods, and open skies, the happiness is tranquil
and cold, like that of examining detached flowers in a conservatory,
or reading a pleasant book; and if the scenery be resolutely level,
insisting upon the declaration of its own flatness in all the detail
of it, as in Holland, or Lincolnshire, or Central Lombardy, it appears
to me like a prison, and I cannot long endure it. But the slightest
rise and fall in the road,--a mossy bank at the side of a crag of
chalk, with brambles at its brow, overhanging it,--a ripple over three
or four stones in the stream by the bridge,--above all, a wild bit of
ferny ground under a fir or two, looking as if, possibly, one might
see a hill if one got to the other side of the trees, will instantly
give me intense delight, because the shadow, or the hope, of the hills
is in them.

And thus, although there are few districts of Northern Europe, however
apparently dull or tame, in which I cannot find pleasure, though the
whole of Northern France (except Champagne), dull as it seems to most
travellers, is to me a perpetual Paradise; and, putting Lincolnshire,
Leicestershire, and one or two such other perfectly flat districts
aside, there is not an English county which I should not find
entertainment in exploring the cross-roads of, foot by foot; yet all
my best enjoyment would be owing to the imagination of the hills,
colouring, with their far-away memories, every lowland stone and herb.
The pleasant French coteau, green in the sunshine, delights me, either
by what real mountain character it has in itself (for in extent and
succession of promontory the flanks of the French valleys have quite
the sublimity of true mountain distances), or by its broken ground
and rugged steps among the vines, and rise of the leafage above,
against the blue sky, as it might rise at Vevay or Como. There is not
a wave of the Seine but is associated in my mind with the first rise
of the sandstones and forest pines of Fontaine-bleau; and with the
hope of the Alps, as one leaves Paris with the horses' heads to the
south-west, the morning sun flashing on the bright waves at Charenton.
If there be _no_ hope or association of this kind, and if I cannot
deceive myself into fancying that perhaps at the next rise of the road
there may be seen the film of a blue hill in the gleam of sky at the
horizon, the landscape, however beautiful, produces in me even a kind
of sickness and pain; and the whole view from Richmond Hill or Windsor
Terrace,--nay, the gardens of Alcinous, with their perpetual
summer,--or of the Hesperides (if they were flat, and not close to
Atlas), golden apples and all,--I would give away in an instant, for
one mossy granite stone a foot broad, and two leaves of lady-fern.[24]

I know that this is in great part idiosyncrasy; and that I must not
trust to my own feelings, in this respect, as representative of the
modern landscape instinct: yet I know it is not idiosyncrasy, in so
far as there may be proved to be indeed an increase of the absolute
beauty of all scenery in exact proportion to its mountainous
character, providing that character be _healthily_ mountainous. I do
not mean to take the Col de Bonhomme as representative of hills, any
more than I would take Romney Marsh as representative of plains; but
putting Leicestershire or Staffordshire fairly beside Westmoreland,
and Lombardy or Champagne fairly beside the Pays de Vaud or the Canton
Berne, I find the increase in the calculable sum of elements of beauty
to be steadily in proportion to the increase of mountainous character;
and that the best image which the world can give of Paradise is in the
slope of the meadows, orchards, and corn-fields on the sides of a
great Alp, with its purple rocks and eternal snows above; this
excellence not being in any wise a matter referable to feeling, or
individual preferences, but demonstrable by calm enumeration of the
number of lovely colours on the rocks, the varied grouping of the
trees, and quantity of noble incidents in stream, crag, or cloud,
presented to the eye at any given moment.

For consider, first, the difference produced in the whole tone of
landscape colour by the introductions of purple, violet, and deep
ultramarine blue, which we owe to mountains. In an ordinary lowland
landscape we have the blue of the sky; the green of grass, which I
will suppose (and this is an unnecessary concession to the lowlands)
entirely fresh and bright; the green of trees; and certain elements of
purple, far more rich and beautiful than we generally should think, in
their bark and shadows (bare hedges and thickets, or tops of trees, in
subdued afternoon sunshine, are nearly perfect purple, and of an
exquisite tone), as well as in ploughed fields, and dark ground in
general. But among mountains, in _addition_ to all this, large
unbroken spaces of pure violet and purple are introduced in their
distances; and even near, by films of cloud passing over the darkness
of ravines or forests, blues are produced of the most subtle
tenderness; these azures and purples[25] passing into rose-colour of
otherwise wholly unattainable delicacy among the upper summits, the
blue of the sky being at the same time purer and deeper than in the
plains. Nay, in some sense, a person who has never seen the
rose-colour of the rays of dawn crossing a blue mountain twelve or
fifteen miles away, can hardly be said to know what _tenderness_ in
colour means at all; _bright_ tenderness he may, indeed, see in the
sky or in a flower, but this grave tenderness of the far-away
hill-purples he cannot conceive.

Together with this great source of pre-eminence in _mass_ of colour,
we have to estimate the influence of the finished inlaying and
enamel-work of the colour-jewellery on every stone; and that of the
continual variety in species of flower; most of the mountain flowers
being, besides, separately lovelier than the lowland ones. The wood
hyacinth and wild rose are, indeed, the only _supreme_ flowers that
the lowlands can generally show; and the wild rose is also a
mountaineer, and more fragrant in the hills, while the wood hyacinth,
or grape hyacinth, at its best cannot match even the dark
bell-gentian, leaving the light-blue star-gentian in its uncontested
queenliness, and the Alpine rose and Highland heather wholly without
similitude. The violet, lily of the valley, crocus, and wood anemone
are, I suppose, claimable partly by the plains as well as the hills;
but the large orange lily and narcissus I have never seen but on hill
pastures, and the exquisite oxalisis pre-eminently a mountaineer.[26]

To this supremacy in mosses and flowers we have next to add an
inestimable gain in the continual presence and power of water. Neither
in its clearness, its colour, its fantasy of motion, its calmness of
space, depth, and reflection, or its wrath, can water be conceived by
a lowlander, out of sight of sea. A sea wave is far grander than any
torrent--but of the sea and its influences we are not now speaking;
and the sea itself, though it _can_ be clear, is never calm, among our
shores, in the sense that a mountain lake can be calm. The sea seems
only to pause; the mountain lake to sleep, and to dream. Out of sight
of the ocean a lowlander cannot be considered ever to have seen water
at all. The mantling of the pools in the rock shadows, with the golden
flakes of light sinking down through them like falling leaves, the
ringing of the thin currents among the shallows, the flash and the
cloud of the cascade, the earthquake and foam-fire of the cataract,
the long lines of alternate mirror and mist that lull the imagery of
the hills reversed in the blue of morning,--all these things belong to
those hills as their undivided inheritance.

To this supremacy in wave and stream is joined a no less manifest
pre-eminence in the character of trees. It is possible among plains,
in the species of trees which properly belong to them, the poplars of
Amiens, for instance, to obtain a serene simplicity of grace, which,
as I said, is a better help to the study of gracefulness, as such,
than any of the wilder groupings of the hills; so, also, there are
certain conditions of symmetrical luxuriance developed in the park and
avenue, rarely rivalled in their way among mountains; and yet the
mountain superiority in foliage is, on the whole, nearly as complete
as it is in water: for exactly as there are some expressions in the
broad reaches of a navigable lowland river, such as the Loire or
Thames, not, in their way, to be matched among the rock rivers, and
yet for all that a lowlander cannot be said to have truly seen the
element of water at all; so even in the richest parks and avenues he
cannot be said to have truly seen trees. For the resources of trees
are not developed until they have difficulty to contend with; neither
their tenderness of brotherly love and harmony, till they are forced
to choose their ways of various life where there is contracted room
for them, talking to each other with their restrained branches. The
various action of trees rooting themselves in inhospitable rocks,
stooping to look into ravines, hiding from the search of glacier
winds, reaching forth to the rays of rare sunshine, crowding down
together to drink at sweetest streams, climbing hand in hand among the
difficult slopes, opening in sudden dances round the mossy knolls,
gathering into companies at rest among the fragrant fields, gliding in
grave procession over the heavenward ridges--nothing of this can be
conceived among the unvexed and unvaried felicities of the lowland
forest: while to all these direct sources of greater beauty are added,
first the power of redundance,--the mere quantity of foliage visible
in the folds and on the promontories of a single Alp being greater
than that of an entire lowland landscape (unless a view from some
cathedral tower); and to this charm of redundance, that of clearer
_visibility_,--tree after tree being constantly shown in successive
height, one behind another, instead of the mere tops and flanks of
masses, as in the plains; and the forms of multitudes of them
continually defined against the clear sky, near and above, or against
white clouds entangled among their branches, instead of being confused
in dimness of distance.

Finally, to this supremacy in foliage we have to add the still less
questionable supremacy in clouds. There is no effect of sky possible
in the lowlands which may not in equal perfection be seen among the
hills; but there are effects by tens of thousands, for ever invisible
and inconceivable to the inhabitant of the plains, manifested among
the hills in the course of one day. The mere power of familiarity with
the clouds, of walking with them and above them, alters and renders
clear our whole conception of the baseless architecture of the sky;
and for the beauty of it, there is more in a single wreath of early
cloud, pacing its way up an avenue of pines, or pausing among the
points of their fringes, than in all the white heaps that fill the
arched sky of the plains from one horizon to the other. And of the
nobler cloud manifestations,--the breaking of their troublous seas
against the crags, their black spray sparkling with lightning; or the
going forth of the morning[27] along their pavements of moving marble,
level-laid between dome and dome of snow;--of these things there can
be as little imagination or understanding in an inhabitant of the
plains as of the scenery of another planet than his own.

And, observe, all these superiorities are matters plainly measurable
and calculable, not in any wise to be referred to estimate of
_sensation_. Of the grandeur or expression of the hills I have not
spoken; how far they are great, or strong, or terrible, I do not for
the moment consider, because vastness, and strength, and terror, are
not to all minds subjects of desired contemplation. It may make no
difference to some men whether a natural object be large or small,
whether it be strong or feeble. But loveliness of colour, perfectness
of form, endlessness of change, wonderfulness of structure, are
precious to all undiseased human minds; and the superiority of the
mountains in all these things to the lowland is, I repeat, as
measurable as the richness of a painted window matched with a white
one, or the wealth of a museum compared with that of a simply
furnished chamber. They seem to have been built for the human race, as
at once their schools and cathedrals; full of treasures of illuminated
manuscript for the scholar, kindly in simple lessons to the worker,
quiet in pale cloisters for the thinker, glorious in holiness for the
worshipper. And of these great cathedrals of the earth, with their
gates of rock, pavements of cloud, choirs of stream and stone, altars
of snow, and vaults of purple traversed by the continual stars,--of
these, as we have seen,[28] it was written, nor long ago, by one of the
best of the poor human race for whom they were built, wondering in
himself for whom their Creator _could_ have made them, and thinking to
have entirely discerned the Divine intent in them--"They are inhabited
by the Beasts."[29]

Was it then indeed thus with us, and so lately? Had mankind offered no
worship in their mountain churches? Was all that granite sculpture and
floral painting done by the angels in vain?

Not so. It will need no prolonged thought to convince us that in the
hills the purposes of their Maker have indeed been accomplished in
such measure as, through the sin or folly of men, He ever permits them
to be accomplished. It may not seem, from the general language held
concerning them, or from any directly traceable results, that
mountains have had serious influence on human intellect; but it will
not, I think, be difficult to show that their occult influence has
been both constant and essential to the progress of the race.


  [24] In tracing the _whole_ of the deep enjoyment to mountain
  association, I of course except whatever feelings are connected with
  the observance of rural life, or with that of architecture. None of
  these feelings arise out of the landscape properly so called: the
  pleasure with which we see a peasant's garden fairly kept, or a
  ploughman doing his work well, or a group of children playing at a
  cottage door, being wholly separate from that which we find in the
  fields or commons around them; and the beauty of architecture, or the
  associations connected with it, in like manner often ennobling the
  most tame scenery;--yet not so but that we may always distinguish
  between the abstract character of the unassisted landscape, and the
  charm which it derives from the architecture. Much of the majesty of
  French landscape consists in its grand and grey village churches and
  turreted farmhouses, not to speak of its cathedrals, castles, and
  beautifully placed cities. [Ruskin.]

  [25] One of the principal reasons for the false supposition that
  Switzerland is not picturesque, is the error of most sketchers and
  painters in representing pine forest in middle distance as dark green,
  or grey green, whereas its true colour is always purple, at distances
  of even two or three miles. Let any traveller coming down the
  Montanvert look for an aperture, three or four inches wide, between
  the near pine branches, through which, standing eight or ten feet
  from it, he can see the opposite forests on the Breven or Flegère.
  Those forests are not above two or two and a half miles from him;
  but he will find the aperture is filled by a tint of nearly pure
  azure or purple, not by green. [Ruskin.]

  [26] The Savoyard's name for its flower, "Pain du Bon Dieu," is very
  beautiful; from, I believe, the supposed resemblance of its white
  and scattered blossom to the fallen manna, [Ruskin.]

  [27] _Ezekiel_ vii, 10; _Hosea_ vi, 3.

  [28] In "The Mountain Gloom," the chapter immediately preceding.

  [29] Ruskin refers to _The Fulfilling of the Scripture_, a book by
  Robert Fleming [1630-94].




SUNRISE ON THE ALPS[30]

VOLUME I, SECTION 3, PART 2, CHAPTER 4


Stand upon the peak of some isolated mountain at daybreak, when the
night mists first rise from off the plains, and watch their white and
lake-like fields, as they float in level bays and winding gulfs about
the islanded summits of the lower hills, untouched yet by more than
dawn, colder and more quiet than a windless sea under the moon of
midnight; watch when the first sunbeam is sent upon the silver
channels, how the foam of their undulating surface parts and passes
away, and down under their depths the glittering city and green
pasture lie like Atlantis,[31] between the white paths of winding
rivers; the flakes of light falling every moment faster and broader
among the starry spires, as the wreathed surges break and vanish above
them, and the confused crests and ridges of the dark hills shorten
their grey shadows upon the plain.... Wait a little longer, and you
shall see those scattered mists rallying in the ravines, and floating
up towards you, along the winding valleys, till they crouch in quiet
masses, iridescent with the morning light,[32] upon the broad breasts
of the higher hills, whose leagues of massy undulation will melt back
and back into that robe of material light, until they fade away, lost
in its lustre, to appear again above, in the serene heaven, like a
wild, bright, impossible dream, foundationless and inaccessible, their
very bases vanishing in the unsubstantial and mocking blue of the deep
lake below.[33]... Wait yet a little longer, and you shall see those
mists gather themselves into white towers, and stand like fortresses
along the promontories, massy and motionless, only piled with every
instant higher and higher into the sky, and casting longer shadows
athwart the rocks; and out of the pale blue of the horizon you will
see forming and advancing a troop of narrow, dark, pointed vapours,
which will cover the sky, inch by inch, with their grey network, and
take the light off the landscape with an eclipse which will stop the
singing of the birds and the motion of the leaves, together; and then
you will see horizontal bars of black shadow forming under them, and
lurid wreaths create themselves, you know not how, along the shoulders
of the hills; you never see them form, but when you look back to a
place which was clear an instant ago, there is a cloud on it, hanging
by the precipices, as a hawk pauses over his prey.... And then you
will hear the sudden rush of the awakened wind, and you will see those
watch-towers of vapour swept away from their foundations, and waving
curtains of opaque rain let down to the valleys, swinging from the
burdened clouds in black bending fringes, or pacing in pale columns
along the lake level, grazing its surface into foam as they go. And
then, as the sun sinks, you shall see the storm drift for an instant,
from off the hills, leaving their broad sides smoking, and loaded yet
with snow-white, torn, steam-like rags of capricious vapour, now gone,
now gathered again; while the smouldering sun, seeming not far away,
but burning like a red-hot ball beside you, and as if you could reach
it, plunges through the rushing wind and rolling cloud with headlong
fall, as if it meant to rise no more, dyeing all the air about it with
blood.... And then you shall hear the fainting tempest die in the
hollow of the night, and you shall see a green halo kindling on the
summit of the eastern hills, brighter--brighter yet, till the large
white circle of the slow moon is lifted up among the barred clouds,
step by step, line by line; star after star she quenches with her
kindling light, setting in their stead an army of pale, penetrable,
fleecy wreaths in the heaven, to give light upon the earth, which move
together, hand in hand, company by company, troop by troop, so
measured in their unity of motion, that the whole heaven seems to roll
with them, and the earth to reel under them.... And then wait yet for
one hour, until the east again becomes purple, and the heaving
mountains, rolling against it in darkness, like waves of a wild sea,
are drowned one by one in the glory of its burning: watch the white
glaciers blaze in their winding paths about the mountains, like mighty
serpents with scales of fire: watch the columnar peaks of solitary
snow, kindling downwards, chasm by chasm, each in itself a new
morning; their long avalanches cast down in keen streams brighter than
the lightning, sending each his tribute of driven snow, like
altar-smoke, up to the heaven; the rose-light of their silent domes
flushing that heaven about them and above them, piercing with purer
light through its purple lines of lifted cloud, casting a new glory on
every wreath as it passes by, until the whole heaven, one scarlet
canopy, is interwoven with a roof of waving flame, and tossing, vault
beyond vault, as with the drifted wings of many companies of angels:
and then, when you can look no more for gladness, and when you are
bowed down with fear and love of the Maker and Doer of this, tell me
who has best delivered this His message unto men![34]


  [30] Some sentences of an argumentative nature have been omitted from
  this selection.

  [31] A mythical island in the Atlantic.

  [32] I have often seen the white, thin, morning cloud, edged with
  the seven colours of the prism. I am not aware of the cause of this
  phenomenon, for it takes place not when we stand with our backs to
  the sun, but in clouds near the sun itself, irregularly and over
  indefinite spaces, sometimes taking place in the body of the cloud.
  The colours are distinct and vivid, but have a kind of metallic
   lustre upon them. [Ruskin.]

  [33] Lake Lucerne. [Ruskin.]

  [34] The implication is that Turner has best delivered it.




THE GRAND STYLE[35]

VOLUME III, CHAPTER I


In taking up the clue of an inquiry, now intermitted for nearly ten
years, it may be well to do as a traveller would, who had to
recommence an interrupted journey in a guideless country; and,
ascending, as it were, some little hill beside our road, note how far
we have already advanced, and what pleasantest ways we may choose for
farther progress.

I endeavoured, in the beginning of the first volume, to divide the
sources of pleasure open to us in Art into certain groups, which might
conveniently be studied in succession. After some preliminary
discussion, it was concluded that these groups were, in the main,
three; consisting, first, of the pleasures taken in perceiving simple
resemblance to Nature (Ideas of Truth); secondly, of the pleasures
taken in the beauty of the things chosen to be painted (Ideas of
Beauty); and, lastly, of pleasures taken in the meanings and relations
of these things (Ideas of Relation).

The first volume, treating of the ideas of Truth, was chiefly occupied
with an inquiry into the various success with which different artists
had represented the facts of Nature,--an inquiry necessarily conducted
very imperfectly, owing to the want of pictorial illustration.

The second volume merely opened the inquiry into the nature of ideas
of Beauty and Relation, by analysing (as far as I was able to do so)
the two faculties of the human mind which mainly seized such ideas;
namely, the contemplative and imaginative faculties.

It remains for us to examine the various success of artists,
especially of the great landscape-painter whose works have been
throughout our principal subject, in addressing these faculties of the
human mind, and to consider who among them has conveyed the noblest
ideas of beauty, and touched the deepest sources of thought.

I do not intend, however, now to pursue the inquiry in a method so
laboriously systematic; for the subject may, it seems to me, be more
usefully treated by pursuing the different questions which rise out of
it just as they occur to us, without too great scrupulousness in
marking connections, or insisting on sequences. Much time is wasted by
human beings, in general, on establishment of systems; and it often
takes more labour to master the intricacies of an artificial
connection, than to remember the separate facts which are so carefully
connected. I suspect that system-makers, in general, are not of much
more use, each in his own domain, than, in that of Pomona, the old
women who tie cherries upon sticks, for the more convenient
portableness of the same. To cultivate well, and choose well, your
cherries, is of some importance; but if they can be had in their own
wild way of clustering about their crabbed stalk, it is a better
connection for them than any other; and, if they cannot, then, so that
they be not bruised, it makes to a boy of a practical disposition not
much difference whether he gets them by handfuls, or in beaded
symmetry on the exalting stick. I purpose, therefore, henceforward to
trouble myself little with sticks or twine, but to arrange my chapters
with a view to convenient reference, rather than to any careful
division of subjects, and to follow out, in any by-ways that may open,
on right hand or left, whatever question it seems useful at any moment
to settle.

And, in the outset, I find myself met by one which I ought to have
touched upon before--one of especial interest in the present state of
the Arts. I have said that the art is greatest which includes the
greatest ideas; but I have not endeavoured to define the nature of
this greatness in the ideas themselves. We speak of great truths, of
great beauties, great thoughts. What is it which makes one truth
greater than another, one thought greater than another? This question
is, I repeat, of peculiar importance at the present time; for, during
a period now of some hundred and fifty years, all writers on Art who
have pretended to eminence, have insisted much on a supposed
distinction between what they call the Great and the Low Schools;
using the terms "High Art," "Great or Ideal Style," and other such, as
descriptive of a certain noble manner of painting, which it was
desirable that all students of Art should be early led to reverence
and adopt; and characterizing as "vulgar," or "low," or "realist,"
another manner of painting and conceiving, which it was equally
necessary that all students should be taught to avoid.

But lately this established teaching, never very intelligible, has
been gravely called in question. The advocates and self-supposed
practisers of "High Art" are beginning to be looked upon with doubt,
and their peculiar phraseology to be treated with even a certain
degree of ridicule. And other forms of Art are partly developed among
us, which do not pretend to be high, but rather to be strong, healthy,
and humble. This matter of "highness" in Art, therefore, deserves our
most careful consideration. Has it been, or is it, a true highness, a
true princeliness, or only a show of it, consisting in courtly manners
and robes of state? Is it rocky height or cloudy height, adamant or
vapour, on which the sun of praise so long has risen and set? It will
be well at once to consider this.

And first, let us get, as quickly as may be, at the exact meaning with
which the advocates of "High Art" use that somewhat obscure and
figurative term.

I do not know that the principles in question are anywhere more
distinctly expressed than in two papers in the _Idler_, written by Sir
Joshua Reynolds, of course under the immediate sanction of Johnson;
and which may thus be considered as the utterance of the views then
held upon the subject by the artists of chief skill, and critics of
most sense, arranged in a form so brief and clear as to admit of their
being brought before the public for a morning's entertainment. I
cannot, therefore, it seems to me, do better than quote these two
letters, or at least the important parts of them, examining the exact
meaning of each passage as it occurs. There are, in all, in the
_Idler_ three letters on painting, Nos. 76, 79, and 82; of these,
the first is directed only against the impertinences of pretended
connoisseurs, and is as notable for its faithfulness as for its wit in
the description of the several modes of criticism in an artificial and
ignorant state of society: it is only, therefore, in the two last
papers that we find the expression of the doctrines which it is our
business to examine.

No. 79 (Saturday, October 20, 1759) begins, after a short preamble,
with the following passage:--

"Amongst the Painters, and the writers on Painting, there is one maxim
universally admitted and continually inculcated. _Imitate nature_
is the invariable rule; but I know none who have explained in what
manner this rule is to be understood; the consequence of which is,
that everyone takes it in the most obvious sense--that objects are
represented naturally, when they have such relief that they seem real.
It may appear strange, perhaps, to hear this sense of the rule
disputed; but it must be considered, that, if the excellency of a
Painter consisted only in this kind of imitation, Painting must lose
its rank, and be no longer considered as a liberal art, and sister to
Poetry: this imitation being merely mechanical, in which the slowest
intellect is always sure to succeed best; for the Painter of genius
cannot stoop to drudgery, in which the understanding has no part; and
what pretence has the Art to claim kindred with Poetry but by its
power over the imagination? To this power the Painter of genius
directs him; in this sense he studies Nature, and often arrives at his
end, even by being unnatural in the confined sense of the word.

"The grand style of Painting requires this minute attention to be
carefully avoided, and must be kept as separate from it as the style
of Poetry from that of History. (Poetical ornaments destroy that air
of truth and plainness which ought to characterize History; but the
very being of Poetry consists in departing from this plain narrative,
and adopting every ornament that will warm the imagination.)[36] To
desire to see the excellences of each style united--to mingle the
Dutch with the Italian school, is to join contrarieties which cannot
subsist together, and which destroy the efficacy of each other."

We find, first, from this interesting passage, that the writer
considers the Dutch and Italian masters as severally representative of
the low and high schools; next, that he considers the Dutch painters
as excelling in a mechanical imitation, "in which the slowest
intellect is always sure to succeed best"; and, thirdly, that he
considers the Italian painters as excelling in a style which
corresponds to that of imaginative poetry in literature, and which has
an exclusive right to be called the grand style.

I wish that it were in my power entirely to concur with the writer,
and to enforce this opinion thus distinctly stated. I have never been
a zealous partisan of the Dutch School, and should rejoice in claiming
Reynolds's authority for the assertion, that their manner was one "in
which the slowest intellect is always sure to succeed best." But
before his authority can be so claimed, we must observe exactly the
meaning of the assertion itself, and separate it from the company of
some others not perhaps so admissible. First, I say, we must observe
Reynolds's exact meaning, for (though the assertion may at first
appear singular) a man who uses accurate language is always more
liable to misinterpretation than one who is careless in his
expressions. We may assume that the latter means very nearly what we
at first suppose him to mean, for words which have been uttered
without thought may be received without examination. But when a writer
or speaker may be fairly supposed to have considered his expressions
carefully, and, after having revolved a number of terms in his mind,
to have chosen the one which _exactly_ means the thing he intends
to say, we may be assured that what costs him time to select, will
require from us time to understand, and that we shall do him wrong,
unless we pause to reflect how the word which he has actually employed
differs from other words which it seems he _might_ have employed.
It thus constantly happens that persons themselves unaccustomed to
think clearly, or speak correctly, misunderstand a logical and careful
writer, and are actually in more danger of being misled by language
which is measured and precise, than by that which is loose and
inaccurate.

Now, in the instance before us, a person not accustomed to good
writing might very rashly conclude that when Reynolds spoke of the
Dutch School as one "in which the slowest intellect was sure to
succeed best," he meant to say that every successful Dutch painter was
a fool. We have no right to take his assertion in that sense. He says,
the _slowest_ intellect. We have no right to assume that he meant
the _weakest_. For it is true, that in order to succeed in the
Dutch style, a man has need of qualities of mind eminently deliberate
and sustained. He must be possessed of patience rather than of power;
and must feel no weariness in contemplating the expression of a single
thought for several months together. As opposed to the changeful
energies of the imagination, these mental characters may be properly
spoken of as under the general term--slowness of intellect. But it by
no means follows that they are necessarily those of weak or foolish
men.

We observe, however, farther, that the imitation which Reynolds
supposes to be characteristic of the Dutch School is that which gives
to objects such relief that they seem real, and that he then speaks of
this art of realistic imitation as corresponding to _history_ in
literature.

Reynolds, therefore, seems to class these dull works of the Dutch
School under a general head, to which they are not commonly
referred--that of _historical_ painting; while he speaks of the works
of the Italian School not as historical, but as _poetical_ painting.
His next sentence will farther manifest his meaning.

"The Italian attends only to the invariable, the great and general
ideas which are fixed and inherent in universal Nature; the Dutch, on
the contrary, to literal truth and a minute exactness in the detail,
as I may say, of Nature modified by accident. The attention to these
petty peculiarities is the very cause of this naturalness so much
admired in the Dutch pictures, which, if we suppose it to be a beauty,
is certainly of a lower order, which ought to give place to a beauty
of a superior kind, since one cannot be obtained but by departing from
the other.

"If my opinion was asked concerning the works of Michael Angelo,
whether they would receive any advantage from possessing this
mechanical merit, I should not scruple to say, they would not only
receive no advantage, but would lose, in a great measure, the effect
which they now have on every mind susceptible of great and noble
ideas. His works may be said to be all genius and soul; and why should
they be loaded with heavy matter, which can only counteract his
purpose by retarding the progress of the imagination?"

Examining carefully this and the preceding passage, we find the
author's unmistakable meaning to be, that Dutch painting is _history_;
attending to literal truth and "minute exactness in the details of
nature modified by accident." That Italian painting is _poetry_,
attending only to the invariable; and that works which attend only to
the invariable are full of genius and soul; but that literal truth and
exact detail are "heavy matter which retards the progress of the
imagination."

This being then indisputably what Reynolds means to tell us, let us
think a little whether he is in all respects right. And first, as he
compares his two kinds of painting to history and poetry, let us see
how poetry and history themselves differ, in their use of _variable_
and _invariable_ details. I am writing at a window which commands a
view of the head of the Lake of Geneva; and as I look up from my
paper, to consider this point, I see, beyond it, a blue breadth of
softly moving water, and the outline of the mountains above Chillon,
bathed in morning mist. The first verses which naturally come into my
mind are--

    A thousand feet in depth below
    The massy waters meet and flow;
    So far the fathom line was sent
    From Chillon's snow-white battlement.[37]

Let us see in what manner this poetical statement is distinguished
from a historical one.

It is distinguished from a truly historical statement, first, in being
simply false. The water under the Castle of Chillon is not a thousand
feet deep, nor anything like it.[38] Herein, certainly, these lines
fulfil Reynolds's first requirement in poetry, "that it should be
inattentive to literal truth and minute exactness in detail." In
order, however, to make our comparison more closely in other points,
let us assume that what is stated is indeed a fact, and that it was to
be recorded, first historically, and then poetically.

Historically stating it, then, we should say: "The lake was sounded
from the walls of the Castle of Chillon, and found to be a thousand
feet deep."

Now, if Reynolds be right in his idea of the difference between
history and poetry, we shall find that Byron leaves out of this
statement certain _un_necessary details, and retains only the
invariable,--that is to say, the points which the Lake of Geneva and
Castle of Chillon have in common with all other lakes and castles.

Let us hear, therefore.

    A thousand feet in depth below.

"Below"? Here is, at all events, a word added (instead of anything
being taken away); invariable, certainly in the case of lakes, but not
absolutely necessary.

    The massy waters meet and flow.

"Massy"! why massy? Because deep water is heavy. The word is a good
word, but it is assuredly an added detail, and expresses a character,
not which the Lake of Geneva has in common with all other lakes, but
which it has in distinction from those which are narrow, or shallow.

"Meet and flow." Why meet and flow? Partly to make up a rhyme; partly
to tell us that the waters are forceful as well as massy, and
changeful as well as deep. Observe, a farther addition of details, and
of details more or less peculiar to the spot, or, according to
Reynolds's definition, of "heavy matter, retarding the progress of the
imagination."

    So far the fathom line was sent.

Why fathom line? All lines for sounding are not fathom lines. If the
lake was ever sounded from Chillon, it was probably sounded in mètres,
not fathoms. This is an addition of another particular detail, in
which the only compliance with Reynolds's requirement is, that there
is some chance of its being an inaccurate one.

    From Chillon's snow-white battlement.

Why snow-white? Because castle battlements are not usually snow-white.
This is another added detail, and a detail quite peculiar to Chillon,
and therefore exactly the most striking word in the whole passage.

"Battlement"! Why battlement? Because all walls have not battlements,
and the addition of the term marks the castle to be not merely a
prison, but a fortress.

This is a curious result. Instead of finding, as we expected, the
poetry distinguished from the history by the omission of details, we
find it consist entirely in the _addition_ of details; and instead of
being characterized by regard only of the invariable, we find its
whole power to consist in the clear expression of what is singular and
particular!

The reader may pursue the investigation for himself in other
instances. He will find in every case that a poetical is distinguished
from a merely historical statement, not by being more vague, but more
specific; and it might, therefore, at first appear that our author's
comparison should be simply reversed, and that the Dutch School should
be called poetical, and the Italian historical. But the term poetical
does not appear very applicable to the generality of Dutch painting;
and a little reflection will show us, that if the Italians represent
only the invariable, they cannot be properly compared even to
historians. For that which is incapable of change has no history, and
records which state only the invariable need not be written, and could
not be read.

It is evident, therefore, that our author has entangled himself in
some grave fallacy, by introducing this idea of invariableness as
forming a distinction between poetical and historical art. What the
fallacy is, we shall discover as we proceed; but as an invading army
should not leave an untaken fortress in its rear, we must not go on
with our inquiry into the views of Reynolds until we have settled
satisfactorily the question already suggested to us, in what the
essence of poetical treatment really consists. For though, as we have
seen, it certainly involves the addition of specific details, it
cannot be simply that addition which turns the history into poetry.
For it is perfectly possible to add any number of details to a
historical statement, and to make it more prosaic with every added
word. As, for instance, "The lake was sounded out of a flat-bottomed
boat, near the crab-tree at the corner of the kitchen-garden, and was
found to be a thousand feet nine inches deep, with a muddy bottom." It
thus appears that it is not the multiplication of details which
constitutes poetry; nor their subtraction which constitutes history,
but that there must be something either in the nature of the details
themselves, or the method of using them, which invests them with
poetical power or historical propriety.

It seems to me, and may seem to the reader, strange that we should
need to ask the question, "What is poetry?" Here is a word we have
been using all our lives, and, I suppose, with a very distinct idea
attached to it; and when I am now called upon to give a definition of
this idea, I find myself at a pause. What is more singular, I do not
at present recollect hearing the question often asked, though surely
it is a very natural one; and I never recollect hearing it answered,
or even attempted to be answered. In general, people shelter
themselves under metaphors, and while we hear poetry described as an
utterance of the soul, an effusion of Divinity, or voice of nature, or
in other terms equally elevated and obscure, we never attain anything
like a definite explanation of the character which actually
distinguishes it from prose.

I come, after some embarrassment, to the conclusion, that poetry is
"the suggestion, by the imagination, of noble grounds for the noble
emotions."[39] I mean, by the noble emotions, those four principal
sacred passions--Love, Veneration, Admiration, and Joy (this latter
especially, if unselfish); and their opposites--Hatred, Indignation
(or Scorn), Horror, and Grief,--this last, when unselfish, becoming
Compassion. These passions in their various combinations constitute
what is called "poetical feeling," when they are felt on noble
grounds, that is, on great and true grounds. Indignation, for
instance, is a poetical feeling, if excited by serious injury; but it
is not a poetical feeling if entertained on being cheated out of a
small sum of money. It is very possible the manner of the cheat may
have been such as to justify considerable indignation; but the feeling
is nevertheless not poetical unless the grounds of it be large as well
as just. In like manner, energetic admiration may be excited in
certain minds by a display of fireworks, or a street of handsome
shops; but the feeling is not poetical, because the grounds of it are
false, and therefore ignoble. There is in reality nothing to deserve
admiration either in the firing of packets of gunpowder, or in the
display of the stocks of warehouses. But admiration excited by the
budding of a flower is a poetical feeling, because it is impossible
that this manifestation of spiritual power and vital beauty can ever
be enough admired.

Farther, it is necessary to the existence of poetry that the grounds
of these feelings should be _furnished by the imagination_. Poetical
feeling, that is to say, mere noble emotion, is not poetry. It is
happily inherent in all human nature deserving the name, and is found
often to be purest in the least sophisticated. But the power of
assembling, by _the help of the imagination_, such images as will
excite these feelings, is the power of the poet or literally of the
"Maker."[40]

Now this power of exciting the emotions depends of course on the
richness of the imagination, and on its choice of those images which,
in combination, will be most effective, or, for the particular work to
be done, most fit. And it is altogether impossible for a writer not
endowed with invention to conceive what tools a true poet will make
use of, or in what way he will apply them, or what unexpected results
he will bring out by them; so that it is vain to say that the details
of poetry ought to possess, or ever do possess, any _definite_
character. Generally speaking, poetry runs into finer and more
delicate details than prose; but the details are not poetical because
they are more delicate, but because they are employed so as to bring
out an affecting result. For instance, no one but a true poet would
have thought of exciting our pity for a bereaved father by describing
his way of locking the door of his house:

    Perhaps to himself at that moment he said,
    The key I must take, for my Ellen is dead;
    But of this in my ears not a word did he speak;
    And he went to the chase with a tear on his cheek.[41]

In like manner, in painting, it is altogether impossible to say
beforehand what details a great painter may make poetical by his use
of them to excite noble emotions: and we shall, therefore, find
presently that a painting is to be classed in the great or inferior
schools, not according to the kind of details which it represents, but
according to the uses for which it employs them.

It is only farther to be noticed, that infinite confusion has been
introduced into this subject by the careless and illogical custom of
opposing painting to poetry, instead of regarding poetry as consisting
in a noble use, whether of colours or words. Painting is properly to
be opposed to _speaking_ or _writing_, but not to _poetry_. Both
painting and speaking are methods of expression. Poetry is the
employment of either for the noblest purposes.

This question being thus far determined, we may proceed with our paper
in the _Idler_.

"It is very difficult to determine the exact degree of enthusiasm that
the arts of Painting and Poetry may admit. There may, perhaps, be too
great indulgence as well as too great a restraint of imagination; if
the one produces incoherent monsters, the other produces what is full
as bad, lifeless insipidity. An intimate knowledge of the passions,
and good sense, but not common sense, must at last determine its
limits. It has been thought, and I believe with reason, that Michael
Angelo sometimes transgressed those limits; and, I think, I have seen
figures of him of which it was very difficult to determine whether
they were in the highest degree sublime or extremely ridiculous. Such
faults may be said to be the ebullitions of genius; but at least he
had this merit, that he never was insipid; and whatever passion his
works may excite, they will always escape contempt.

"What I have had under consideration is the sublimest style,
particularly that of Michael Angelo, the Homer of painting. Other
kinds may admit of this naturalness, which of the lowest kind is the
chief merit; but in painting, as in poetry, the highest style has the
least of common nature."

From this passage we gather three important indications of the
supposed nature of the Great Style. That it is the work of men in a
state of enthusiasm. That it is like the writing of Homer; and that it
has as little as possible of "common nature" in it.

First, it is produced by men in a state of enthusiasm. That is, by men
who feel _strongly_ and _nobly_; for we do not call a strong feeling
of envy, jealousy, or ambition, enthusiasm. That is, therefore, by men
who feel poetically. This much we may admit, I think, with perfect
safety. Great art is produced by men who feel acutely and nobly; and
it is in some sort an expression of this personal feeling. We can
easily conceive that there may be a sufficiently marked distinction
between such art, and that which is produced by men who do not feel at
all, but who reproduce, though ever so accurately, yet coldly, like
human mirrors, the scenes which pass before their eyes.

Secondly, Great Art is like the writing of Homer, and this chiefly
because it has little of "common nature" in it. We are not clearly
informed what is meant by common nature in this passage. Homer seems
to describe a great deal of what is common:--cookery, for instance,
very carefully in all its processes.[42] I suppose the passage in the
_Iliad_ which, on the whole, has excited most admiration, is that
which describes a wife's sorrow at parting from her husband, and a
child's fright at its father's helmet;[43] and I hope, at least, the
former feeling may be considered "common nature." But the true
greatness of Homer's style is, doubtless, held by our author to
consist in his imaginations of things not only uncommon but impossible
(such as spirits in brazen armour, or monsters with heads of men and
bodies of beasts), and in his occasional delineations of the human
character and form in their utmost, or heroic, strength and beauty. We
gather then on the whole, that a painter in the Great Style must be
enthusiastic, or full of emotion, and must paint the human form in its
utmost strength and beauty, and perhaps certain impossible forms
besides, liable by persons not in an equally enthusiastic state of
mind to be looked upon as in some degree absurd. This I presume to be
Reynolds's meaning, and to be all that he intends us to gather from
his comparison of the Great Style with the writings of Homer. But if
that comparison be a just one in all respects, surely two other
corollaries ought to be drawn from it, namely,--first, that these
Heroic or Impossible images are to be mingled with others very
unheroic and very possible; and, secondly, that in the representation
of the Heroic or Impossible forms, the greatest care must be taken in
_finishing the details_, so that a painter must not be satisfied with
painting well the countenance and the body of his hero, but ought to
spend the greatest part of his time (as Homer the greatest number of
verses) in elaborating the sculptured pattern on his shield.

Let us, however, proceed with our paper.

"One may very safely recommend a little more enthusiasm to the modern
Painters; too much is certainly not the vice of the present age. The
Italians seem to have been continually declining in this respect, from
the time of Michael Angelo to that of Carlo Maratti,[44] and from
thence to the very bathos of insipidity to which they are now sunk; so
that there is no need of remarking, that where I mentioned the Italian
painters in opposition to the Dutch, I mean not the moderns, but the
heads of the old Roman and Bolognian schools; nor did I mean to
include, in my idea of an Italian painter, the Venetian school, _which
may be said to be the Dutch part of the Italian genius_. I have only
to add a word of advice to the Painters,--that, however excellent they
may be in painting naturally, they would not flatter themselves very
much upon it; and to the Connoisseurs, that when they see a cat or a
fiddle painted so finely, that, as the phrase is, it looks as if you
could take it up, they would not for that reason immediately compare
the Painter to Raffaelle and Michael Angelo."

In this passage there are four points chiefly to be remarked. The
first, that in the year 1759 the Italian painters were, in our
author's opinion, sunk in the very bathos of insipidity. The second,
that the Venetian painters, _i.e._ Titian, Tintoret, and Veronese,
are, in our author's opinion, to be classed with the Dutch; that is to
say, are painters in a style "in which the slowest intellect is always
sure to succeed best." Thirdly, that painting naturally is not a
difficult thing, nor one on which a painter should pride himself. And,
finally, that connoisseurs, seeing a cat or a fiddle successfully
painted, ought not therefore immediately to compare the painter to
Raphael or Michael Angelo.

Yet Raphael painted fiddles very carefully in the foreground of his
St. Cecilia,--so carefully, that they quite look as if they might be
taken up. So carefully, that I never yet looked at the picture without
wishing that somebody _would_ take them up, and out of the way. And I
am under a very strong persuasion that Raphael did not think painting
"naturally" an easy thing. It will be well to examine into this point
a little; and for the present, with the reader's permission, we will
pass over the first two statements in this passage (touching the
character of Italian art in 1759, and of Venetian art in general), and
immediately examine some of the evidence existing as to the real
dignity of "natural" painting--that is to say, of painting carried to
the point at which it reaches a deceptive appearance of reality.


  [35] The full title of this chapter is "Of the Received Opinions
  touching the 'Grand Style.'"

  [36] I have put this sentence in a parenthesis, because it is
  inconsistent with the rest of the statement, and with the general
  teaching of the paper; since that which "attends only to the
  invariable" cannot certainly adopt "every ornament that will warm
  the imagination." [Ruskin.]

  [37] Stanza 6 of Byron's _Prisoner of Chillon_, quoted with a slight
  inaccuracy.

  [38] "Messrs. Mallet and Pictet, being on the lake, in front of the
  Castle of Chillon, on August 6, 1774, sunk a thermometer to the
  depth of 312 feet." ... --SAUSSURE, _Voyages dans les Alpes_, chap.
  ii, § 33. It appears from the next paragraph, that the thermometer
  was at the bottom of the lake. [Ruskin, altered.]

  [39] Ruskin later wrote: "It leaves out rhythm, which I now consider
  a defect in said definition; otherwise good."

  [40] Take, for instance, the beautiful stanza in the _Affliction of
  Margaret_:

    I look for ghosts, but none will force
      Their way to me. 'T is falsely said
    That ever there was intercourse
      Between the living and the dead;
    For, surely, then, I should have sight
    Of him I wait for, day and night.
    With love and longing infinite.

  This we call Poetry, because it is invented or _made_ by the writer,
  entering into the mind of a supposed person. Next, take an instance
  of the actual feeling truly experienced and simply expressed by a
  real person.

  "Nothing surprised me more than a woman of Argentière, whose
  cottage I went into to ask for milk, as I came down from the
  glacier of Argentière, in the month of March, 1764. An epidemic
  dysentery had prevailed in the village, and, a few months before,
  had taken away from her, her father, her husband, and her
  brothers, so that she was left alone, with three children in the
  cradle. Her face had something noble in it, and its expression
  bore the seal of a calm and profound sorrow. After having given me
  milk, she asked me whence I came, and what I came there to do, so
  early in the year. When she knew that I was of Geneva, she said to
  me, 'she could not believe that all Protestants were lost souls;
  that there were many honest people among us, and that God was too
  good and too great to condemn all without distinction.' Then,
  after a moment of reflection, she added, in shaking her head, 'But
  that which is very strange is that of so many who have gone away,
  none have ever returned. I,' she added, with an expression of
  grief, 'who have so mourned my husband and my brothers, who have
  never ceased to think of them, who every night conjure them with
  beseechings to tell me where they are, and in what state they are!
  Ah, surely, if they lived anywhere, they would not leave me thus!
  But, perhaps,' she added, 'I am not worthy of this kindness,
  perhaps the pure and innocent spirits of these children,' and she
  looked at the cradle, 'may have their presence, and the joy which
  is denied to _me_.'"--SAUSSURE, _Voyages dans les Alpes_, chap.
  xxiv.

  This we do not call Poetry, merely because it is not invented, but
  the true utterance of a real person. [Ruskin.]

  [41] The closing lines of Wordsworth's _Childless Father_.

  [42] _Iliad_, 1. 463 ff., 2. 425 ff.; _Odyssey_, 3. 455 ff., etc.

  [43] _Iliad_, 6. 468 ff.

  [44] 1625-1713. Known also as Carlo delle Madonne.




OF REALIZATION

VOLUME III, CHAPTER 2


In the outset of this inquiry, the reader must thoroughly understand
that we are not now considering _what_ is to be painted, but _how far_
it is to be painted. Not whether Raphael does right in representing
angels playing upon violins, or whether Veronese does right in
allowing cats and monkeys to join the company of kings: but whether,
supposing the subjects rightly chosen, they ought on the canvas to
look like real angels with real violins, and substantial cats looking
at veritable kings; or only like imaginary angels with soundless
violins, ideal cats, and unsubstantial kings.

Now, from the first moment when painting began to be a subject of
literary inquiry and general criticism, I cannot remember any writer,
not professedly artistical, who has not, more or less, in one part of
his book or another, countenanced the idea that the great end of art
is to produce a deceptive resemblance of reality. It may be, indeed,
that we shall find the writers, through many pages, explaining
principles of ideal beauty, and professing great delight in the
evidences of imagination. But whenever a picture is to be definitely
described,--whenever the writer desires to convey to others some
impression of an extraordinary excellence, all praise is wound up with
some such statements as these: "It was so exquisitely painted that you
expected the figures to move and speak; you approached the flowers to
enjoy their smell, and stretched your hand towards the fruit which had
fallen from the branches. You shrunk back lest the sword of the
warrior should indeed descend, and turned away your head that you
might not witness the agonies of the expiring martyr."

In a large number of instances, language such as this will be found to
be merely a clumsy effort to convey to others a sense of the
admiration, of which the writer does not understand the real cause in
himself. A person is attracted to a picture by the beauty of its
colour, interested by the liveliness of its story, and touched by
certain countenances or details which remind him of friends whom he
loved, or scenes in which he delighted. He naturally supposes that
what gives him so much pleasure must be a notable example of the
painter's skill; but he is ashamed to confess, or perhaps does not
know, that he is so much a child as to be fond of bright colours and
amusing incidents; and he is quite unconscious of the associations
which have so secret and inevitable a power over his heart. He casts
about for the cause of his delight, and can discover no other than
that he thought the picture like reality.

In another, perhaps, a still larger number of cases, such language
will be found to be that of simple ignorance--the ignorance of persons
whose position in life compels them to speak of art, without having
any real enjoyment of it. It is inexcusably required from people of
the world, that they should see merit in Claudes[45] and Titians; and
the only merit which many persons can either see or conceive in them
is, that they must be "like nature."

In other cases, the deceptive power of the art is really felt to be a
source of interest and amusement. This is the case with a large number
of the collectors of Dutch pictures. They enjoy seeing what is flat
made to look round, exactly as a child enjoys a trick of legerdemain:
they rejoice in flies which the spectator vainly attempts to brush
away,[46] and in dew which he endeavours to dry by putting the picture
in the sun. They take it for the greatest compliment to their
treasures that they should be mistaken for windows; and think the
parting of Abraham and Hagar adequately represented if Hagar seems to
be really crying.[47]

It is against critics and connoisseurs of this latter stamp (of whom,
in the year 1759, the juries of art were for the most part composed)
that the essay of Reynolds, which we have been examining, was justly
directed. But Reynolds had not sufficiently considered that neither
the men of this class, nor of the two other classes above described,
constitute the entire body of those who praise Art for its
realization; and that the holding of this apparently shallow and
vulgar opinion cannot, in all cases, be attributed to the want either
of penetration, sincerity, or sense. The collectors of Gerard Dows and
Hobbimas may be passed by with a smile; and the affectations of
Walpole and simplicities of Vasari[48] dismissed with contempt or with
compassion. But very different men from these have held precisely the
same language; and, one amongst the rest, whose authority is
absolutely, and in all points, overwhelming.

There was probably never a period in which the influence of art over
the minds of men seemed to depend less on its merely _imitative_
power, than the close of the thirteenth century. No painting or
sculpture at that time reached more than a rude resemblance of
reality. Its despised perspective, imperfect chiaroscuro, and
unrestrained flights of fantastic imagination, separated the artist's
work from nature by an interval which there was no attempt to
disguise, and little to diminish. And yet, at this very period, the
greatest poet of that, or perhaps of any other age, and the attached
friend of its greatest painter,[49] who must over and over again have
held full and free conversation with him respecting the objects of his
art, speaks in the following terms of painting, supposed to be carried
to its highest perfection:

  Qual di pennel fu maestro, e di stile
    Che ritraesse l'ombre, e i tratti, chi' ivi
    Mirar farieno uno ingegno sottile?
  Morti li morti, e i vivi parean vivi:
    Non vide me' di me, chi vide il vero,
    Quant' io calcai, fin che chinato givi.

  DANTE, _Purgatorio_, canto xii. 1. 64.

  What master of the pencil, or the style,
  Had traced the shades and lines that might have made
  The subtlest workman wonder? _Dead, the dead,_
  _The living seemed alive; with clearer view_
  _His eye beheld not, who beheld the truth_,
  Than mine what I did tread on, while I went
  Low bending.

  --CARY.

Dante has here clearly no other idea of the highest art than that it
should bring back, as in a mirror or vision, the aspect of things passed
or absent. The scenes of which he speaks are, on the pavement, for ever
represented by angelic power, so that the souls which traverse this
circle of the rock may see them, as if the years of the world had been
rolled back, and they again stood beside the actors in the moment of
action. Nor do I think that Dante's authority is absolutely necessary
to compel us to admit that such art as this _might_, indeed, be the
highest possible. Whatever delight we may have been in the habit of
taking in pictures, if it were but truly offered to us, to remove at
our will the canvas from the frame, and in lieu of it to behold, fixed
for ever, the image of some of those mighty scenes which it has been
our way to make mere themes for the artist's fancy; if, for instance,
we could again behold the Magdalene receiving her pardon at Christ's
feet, or the disciples sitting with Him at the table of Emmaus; and
this not feebly nor fancifully, but as if some silver mirror that had
leaned against the wall of the chamber, had been miraculously commanded
to retain for ever the colours that had flashed upon it for an
instant,--would we not part with our picture--Titian's or Veronese's
though it might be?

Yes, the reader answers, in the instance of such scenes as these, but
not if the scene represented were uninteresting. Not, indeed, if it
were utterly vulgar or painful; but we are not yet certain that the
art which represents what is vulgar or painful is itself of much
value; and with respect to the art whose aim is beauty, even of an
inferior order, it seems that Dante's idea of its perfection has still
much evidence in its favour. For among persons of native good sense,
and courage enough to speak their minds, we shall often find a
considerable degree of doubt as to the use of art, in consequence of
their habitual comparison of it with reality. "What is the use, to me,
of the painted landscape?" they will ask: "I see more beautiful and
perfect landscapes every day of my life in my forenoon walk." "What is
the use, to me, of the painted effigy of hero or beauty? I can see a
stamp of higher heroism, and light of purer beauty, on the faces round
me, utterly inexpressible by the highest human skill." Now, it is
evident that to persons of this temper the only valuable picture
would, indeed, be _mirrors_, reflecting permanently the images of the
things in which they took delight, and of the faces that they loved.
"Nay," but the reader interrupts (if he is of the Idealist school), "I
deny that more beautiful things are to be seen in nature than in art;
on the contrary, everything in nature is faulty, and art represents
nature as perfected." Be it so. Must, therefore, this perfected nature
be imperfectly represented? Is it absolutely required of the painter,
who has conceived perfection, that he should so paint it as to look
only like a picture? Or is not Dante's view of the matter right even
here, and would it not be well that the perfect conception of Pallas
should be so given as to look like Pallas herself, rather than merely
like the picture of Pallas?[50]

It is not easy for us to answer this question rightly, owing to the
difficulty of imagining any art which should reach the perfection
supposed. Our actual powers of imitation are so feeble that wherever
deception is attempted, a subject of a comparatively low or confined
order must be chosen. I do not enter at present into the inquiry how
far the powers of imitation extend; but assuredly up to the present
period they have been so limited that it is hardly possible for us to
conceive a deceptive art embracing a high range of subject. But let
the reader make the effort, and consider seriously what he would give
at any moment to have the power of arresting the fairest scenes, those
which so often rise before him only to vanish; to stay the cloud in
its fading, the leaf in its trembling, and the shadows in their
changing; to bid the fitful foam be fixed upon the river, and the
ripples be everlasting upon the lake; and then to bear away with him
no darkened or feeble sun-stain (though even that is beautiful), but a
counterfeit which should seem no counterfeit-the true and perfect
image of life indeed. Or rather (for the full majesty of such a power
is not thus sufficiently expressed) let him consider that it would be
in effect nothing else than a capacity of transporting himself at any
moment into any scene--a gift as great as can be possessed by a
disembodied spirit: and suppose, also, this necromancy embracing not
only the present but the past, and enabling us seemingly to enter into
the very bodily presence of men long since gathered to the dust; to
behold them in act as they lived, but--with greater privilege than
ever was granted to the companions of those transient acts of life--to
see them fastened at our will in the gesture and expression of an
instant, and stayed, on the eve of some great deed, in immortality of
burning purpose. Conceive, so far as it is possible, such power as
this, and then say whether the art which conferred it is to be spoken
lightly of, or whether we should not rather reverence, as half divine,
a gift which would go so far as to raise us into the rank, and invest
us with the felicities, of angels?

Yet such would imitative art be in its perfection. Not by any means an
easy thing, as Reynolds supposes it. Far from being easy, it is so
utterly beyond all human power that we have difficulty even in
conceiving its nature or results--the best art we as yet possess comes
so far short of it.

But we must not rashly come to the conclusion that such art would,
indeed, be the highest possible. There is much to be considered
hereafter on the other side; the only conclusion we are as yet
warranted in forming is, that Reynolds had no right to speak lightly
or contemptuously of imitative art; that in fact, when he did so, he
had not conceived its entire nature, but was thinking of some vulgar
conditions of it, which were the only ones known to him, and that,
therefore, his whole endeavour to explain the difference between great
and mean art has been disappointed; that he has involved himself in a
crowd of theories, whose issue he had not foreseen, and committed
himself to conclusions which, he never intended. There is an
instinctive consciousness in his own mind of the difference between
high and low art; but he is utterly incapable of explaining it, and
every effort which he makes to do so involves him in unexpected
fallacy and absurdity. It is _not_ true that Poetry does not concern
herself with minute details. It is _not_ true that high art seeks only
the Invariable. It is _not_ true that imitative art is an easy thing.
It is _not_ true that the faithful rendering of nature is an
employment in which "the slowest intellect is likely to succeed best."
All these successive assertions are utterly false and untenable, while
the plain truth, a truth lying at the very door, has all the while
escaped him,--that which was incidentally stated in the preceding
chapter,--namely, that the difference between great and mean art lies,
not in definable methods of handling, or styles of representation, or
choices of subjects, but wholly in the nobleness of the end to which
the effort of the painter is addressed. We cannot say that a painter
is great because he paints boldly, or paints delicately; because he
generalizes or particularizes; because he loves detail, or because he
disdains it. He is great if, by any of these means, he has laid open
noble truths, or aroused noble emotions. It does not matter whether he
paint the petal of a rose, or the chasms of a precipice, so that Love
and Admiration attend him as he labours, and wait for ever upon his
work. It does not matter whether he toil for months upon a few inches
of his canvas, or cover a palace front with colour in a day, so only
that it be with a solemn purpose that he has filled his heart with
patience, or urged his hand to haste. And it does not matter whether
he seek for his subjects among peasants or nobles, among the heroic or
the simple, in courts or in fields, so only that he behold all things
with a thirst for beauty, and a hatred of meanness and vice. There
are, indeed, certain methods of representation which are usually
adopted by the most active minds, and certain characters of subject
usually delighted in by the noblest hearts; but it is quite possible,
quite easy, to adopt the manner of painting without sharing the
activity of mind, and to imitate the choice of subject without
possessing the nobility of spirit; while, on the other hand, it is
altogether impossible to foretell on what strange objects the strength
of a great man will sometimes be concentrated, or by what strange
means he will sometimes express himself. So that true criticism of art
never can consist in the mere application of rules; it can be just
only when it is founded on quick sympathy with the innumerable
instincts and changeful efforts of human nature, chastened and guided
by unchanging love of all things that God has created to be beautiful,
and pronounced to be good.


  [45] Claude Gelée [1600-82], usually called Claude Lorrain, a French
  landscape painter and etcher.

  [46] Vasari, in his _Lives of the Painters_, tells how Giotto,
  when a student under Cimabue, once painted a fly on the nose of a
  figure on which the master was working, the fly being so realistic
  that Cimabue on returning to the painting attempted to brush it
  away.

  [47] Guercino's Hagar in the Brera gallery in Milan.

  [48] Gerard Dow [1613-75], a Dutch genre painter; Hobbima [1638-1709],
  a Dutch landscape painter; Walpole [1717-97], a famous English
  litterateur; Vasari [1511-74], an Italian painter, now considered
  full of mannerisms and without originality, mainly famous as author
  of _The Lives of the Painters_.

  [49] Giotto.

  [50] _Purgatorio_, 12. 31.




OF THE NOVELTY OF LANDSCAPE

VOLUME III, CHAPTER II


Having now obtained, I trust, clear ideas, up to a certain point, of
what is generally right and wrong in all art, both in conception and
in workmanship, we have to apply these laws of right to the particular
branch of art which is the subject of our present inquiry, namely,
landscape-painting. Respecting which, after the various meditations
into which we have been led on the high duties and ideals of art, it
may not improbably occur to us first to ask,--whether it be worth
inquiring about at all.

That question, perhaps the reader thinks, should have been asked and
answered before I had written, or he read, two volumes and a half
about it. So I _had_ answered it, in my own mind; but it seems time
now to give the grounds for this answer. If, indeed, the reader has
never suspected that landscape-painting was anything but good, right,
and healthy work, I should be sorry to put any doubt of its being so
into his mind; but if, as seems to me more likely, he, living in this
busy and perhaps somewhat calamitous age, has some suspicion that
landscape-painting is but an idle and empty business, not worth all
our long talk about it, then, perhaps, he will be pleased to have such
suspicion done away, before troubling himself farther with these
disquisitions.

I should rather be glad, than otherwise, that he _had_ formed some
suspicion on this matter. If he has at all admitted the truth of
anything hitherto said respecting great art, and its choices of
subject, it seems to me he ought, by this time, to be questioning with
himself whether road-side weeds, old cottages, broken stones, and such
other materials, be worthy matters for grave men to busy themselves in
the imitation of. And I should like him to probe this doubt to the
deep of it, and bring all his misgivings out to the broad light, that
we may see how we are to deal with them, or ascertain if indeed they
are too well founded to be dealt with.

And to this end I would ask him now to imagine himself entering, for
the first time in his life, the room of the Old Water-Colour
Society:[51] and to suppose that he has entered it, not for the sake of
a quiet examination of the paintings one by one, but in order to seize
such ideas as it may generally suggest respecting the state and
meaning of modern, as compared with elder, art. I suppose him, of
course, that he may be capable of such a comparison, to be in some
degree familiar with the different forms in which art has developed
itself within the periods historically known to us; but never, till
that moment, to have seen any completely modern work. So prepared, and
so unprepared, he would, as his ideas began to arrange themselves, be
first struck by the number of paintings representing blue mountains,
clear lakes, and ruined castles or cathedrals, and he would say to
himself: "There is something strange in the mind of these modern
people! Nobody ever cared about blue mountains before, or tried to
paint the broken stones of old walls." And the more he considered the
subject, the more he would feel the peculiarity; and, as he thought
over the art of Greeks and Romans, he would still repeat, with
increasing certainty of conviction: "Mountains! I remember none. The
Greeks did not seem, as artists, to know that such things were in the
world. They carved, or variously represented, men, and horses, and
beasts, and birds, and all kinds of living creatures,--yes, even down
to cuttle-fish; and trees, in a sort of way; but not so much as the
outline of a mountain; and as for lakes, they merely showed they knew
the difference between salt and fresh water by the fish they put into
each." Then he would pass on to mediæval art; and still he would be
obliged to repeat: "Mountains! I remember none. Some careless and
jagged arrangements of blue spires or spikes on the horizon, and, here
and there, an attempt at representing an overhanging rock with a hole
through it; but merely in order to divide the light behind some human
figure. Lakes! No, nothing of the kind,--only blue bays of sea put in
to fill up the background when the painter could not think of anything
else. Broken-down buildings! No; for the most part very complete and
well-appointed buildings, if any; and never buildings at all, but to
give place or explanation to some circumstance of human conduct." And
then he would look up again to the modern pictures, observing, with an
increasing astonishment, that here the human interest had, in many
cases, altogether disappeared. That mountains, instead of being used
only as a blue ground for the relief of the heads of saints, were
themselves the exclusive subjects of reverent contemplation; that
their ravines, and peaks, and forests, were all painted with an
appearance of as much enthusiasm as had formerly been devoted to the
dimple of beauty, or the frowns of asceticism; and that all the living
interest which was still supposed necessary to the scene, might be
supplied by a traveller in a slouched hat, a beggar in a scarlet
cloak, or, in default of these, even by a heron or a wild duck.

And if he could entirely divest himself of his own modern habits of
thought, and regard the subjects in question with the feelings of a
knight or monk of the Middle Ages, it might be a question whether
those feelings would not rapidly verge towards contempt. "What!" he
might perhaps mutter to himself, "here are human beings spending the
whole of their lives in making pictures of bits of stone and runlets
of water, withered sticks and flying fogs, and actually not a picture
of the gods or the heroes! none of the saints or the martyrs! none of
the angels and demons! none of councils or battles, or any other
single thing worth the thought of a man! Trees and clouds indeed! as
if I should not see as many trees as I cared to see, and more, in the
first half of my day's journey to-morrow, or as if it mattered to any
man whether the sky were clear or cloudy, so long as his armour did
not get too hot in the sun!"

There can be no question that this would have been somewhat the tone
of thought with which either a Lacedæmonian, a soldier of Rome in her
strength, or a knight of the thirteenth century, would have been apt
to regard these particular forms of our present art. Nor can there be
any question that, in many respects, their judgment would have been
just. It is true that the indignation of the Spartan or Roman would
have been equally excited against any appearance of luxurious
industry; but the mediæval knight would, to the full, have admitted
the nobleness of art; only he would have had it employed in decorating
his church or his prayer-book, not in imitating moors and clouds. And
the feelings of all the three would have agreed in this,--that their
main ground of offence must have been the want of _seriousness_ and
_purpose_ in what they saw. They would all have admitted the nobleness
of whatever conduced to the honour of the gods, or the power of the
nation; but they would not have understood how the skill of human life
could be wisely spent in that which did no honour either to Jupiter or
to the Virgin; and which in no wise tended, apparently, either to the
accumulation of wealth, the excitement of patriotism, or the
advancement of morality.

And exactly so far forth their judgment would be just, as the
landscape-painting could indeed be shown, for others as well as for
them, to be art of this nugatory kind; and so far forth unjust, as
that painting could be shown to depend upon, or cultivate, certain
sensibilities which neither the Greek nor mediæval knight possessed,
and which have resulted from some extraordinary change in human nature
since their time. We have no right to assume, without very accurate
examination of it, that this change has been an ennobling one. The
simple fact, that we are, in some strange way, different from all the
great races that have existed before us, cannot at once be received as
the proof of our own greatness; nor can it be granted, without any
question, that we have a legitimate subject of complacency in being
under the influence of feelings, with which neither Miltiades nor the
Black Prince, neither Homer nor Dante, neither Socrates nor St.
Francis, could for an instant have sympathized.

Whether, however, this fact be one to excite our pride or not, it is
assuredly one to excite our deepest interest. The fact itself is
certain. For nearly six thousand years the energies of man have
pursued certain beaten paths, manifesting some constancy of feeling
throughout all that period, and involving some fellowship at heart,
among the various nations who by turns succeeded or surpassed each
other in the several aims of art or policy. So that, for these
thousands of years, the whole human race might be to some extent
described in general terms. Man was a creature separated from all
others by his instinctive sense of an Existence superior to his own,
invariably manifesting this sense of the being of a God more strongly
in proportion to his own perfectness of mind and body; and making
enormous and self-denying efforts, in order to obtain some persuasion
of the immediate presence or approval of the Divinity. So that, on the
whole, the best things he did were done as in the presence, or for the
honour, of his gods; and, whether in statues, to help him to imagine
them, or temples raised to their honour, or acts of self-sacrifice
done in the hope of their love, he brought whatever was best and
skilfullest in him into their service, and lived in a perpetual
subjection to their unseen power. Also, he was always anxious to know
something definite about them; and his chief books, songs, and
pictures were filled with legends about them, or specially devoted to
illustration of their lives and nature.

Next to these gods, he was always anxious to know something about his
human ancestors; fond of exalting the memory, and telling or painting
the history of old rulers and benefactors; yet full of an enthusiastic
confidence in himself, as having in many ways advanced beyond the best
efforts of past time; and eager to record his own doings for future
fame. He was a creature eminently warlike, placing his principal pride
in dominion; eminently beautiful, and having great delight in his own
beauty; setting forth this beauty by every species of invention in
dress, and rendering his arms and accoutrements superbly decorative of
his form. He took, however, very little interest in anything but what
belonged to humanity; caring in no wise for the external world, except
as it influenced his own destiny; honouring the lightning because it
could strike him, the sea because it could drown him, the fountains
because they gave him drink, and the grass because it yielded him
seed; but utterly incapable of feeling any special happiness in the
love of such things, or any earnest emotion about them, considered as
separate from man; therefore giving no time to the study of
them;--knowing little of herbs, except only which were hurtful and
which healing; of stones, only which would glitter brightest in a
crown, or last the longest in a wall: of the wild beasts, which were
best for food, and which the stoutest quarry for the hunter;--thus
spending only on the lower creatures and inanimate things his waste
energy, his dullest thoughts, his most languid emotions, and reserving
all his acuter intellect for researches into his own nature and that
of the gods; all his strength of will for the acquirement of political
or moral power; all his sense of beauty for things immediately
connected with his own person and life; and all his deep affections
for domestic or divine companionship.

Such, in broad light and brief terms, was man for five thousand years.
Such he is no longer. Let us consider what he is now, comparing the
descriptions clause by clause.

I. He _was_ invariably sensible of the existence of gods, and went about
all his speculations or works holding this as an acknowledged fact, making
his best efforts in their service. _Now_ he is capable of going through
life with hardly any positive idea on this subject,--doubting, fearing,
suspecting, analyzing,--doing everything, in fact, _but_ believing;
hardly ever getting quite up to that point which hitherto was wont to be
the starting-point for all generations. And human work has accordingly
hardly any reference to spiritual beings, but is done either from a
patriotic or personal interest,--either to benefit mankind, or reach
some selfish end, not (I speak of human work in the broad sense) to
please the gods.

II. He _was_ a beautiful creature, setting forth this beauty by all
means in his power, and depending upon it for much of his authority
over his fellows. So that the ruddy cheek of David, and the ivory skin
of Atrides, and the towering presence of Saul, and the blue eyes of
Coeur de Lion, were among chief reasons why they should be kings; and
it was one of the aims of all education, and of all dress, to make the
presence of the human form stately and lovely. _Now_ it has become the
task of grave philosophy partly to depreciate or conceal this bodily
beauty; and even by those who esteem it in their hearts, it is not
made one of the great ends of education; man has become, upon the
whole, an ugly animal, and is not ashamed of his ugliness.

III. He _was_ eminently warlike. He is _now_ gradually becoming more
and more ashamed of all the arts and aims of battle. So that the
desire of dominion, which was once frankly confessed or boasted of as
a heroic passion, is now sternly reprobated or cunningly disclaimed.

IV. He _used_ to take no interest in anything but what immediately
concerned himself. _Now_, he has deep interest in the abstract nature
of things, inquires as eagerly into the laws which regulate the
economy of the material world, as into those of his own being, and
manifests a passionate admiration of inanimate objects, closely
resembling, in its elevation and tenderness, the affection which he
bears to those living souls with which he is brought into the nearest
fellowship.

It is this last change only which is to be the subject of our present
inquiry; but it cannot be doubted that it is closely connected with
all the others, and that we can only thoroughly understand its nature
by considering il in this connection. For, regarded by itself, we
might perhaps, too rashly assume it to be a natural consequence of the
progress of the race. There appears to be a diminution of selfishness
in it, and a more extended and heartfelt desire of understanding the
manner of God's working; and this the more, because one of the
permanent characters of this change is a greater accuracy in the
statement of external facts. When the eyes of men were fixed first
upon themselves, and upon nature solely and secondarily as bearing
upon their interests, it was of less consequence to them what the
ultimate laws of nature were, than what their immediate effects were
upon human beings. Hence they could rest satisfied with phenomena
instead of principles, and accepted without scrutiny every fable which
seemed sufficiently or gracefully to account for those phenomena. But
so far as the eyes of men are now withdrawn from themselves, and
turned upon the inanimate things about them, the results cease to be
of importance, and the laws become essential.

In these respects, it might easily appear to us that this change was
assuredly one of steady and natural advance. But when we contemplate
the others above noted, of which it is clearly one of the branches or
consequences, we may suspect ourselves of over-rashness in our
self-congratulation, and admit the necessity of a scrupulous analysis
both of the feeling itself and of its tendencies.

Of course a complete analysis, or anything like it, would involve a
treatise on the whole history of the world. I shall merely endeavour
to note some of the leading and more interesting circumstances bearing
on the subject, and to show sufficient practical ground for the
conclusion, that landscape-painting is indeed a noble and useful art,
though one not long known by man. I shall therefore examine, as best I
can, the effect of landscape, 1st, on the Classical mind; 2dly, on the
Mediæval mind; and lastly, on the Modern mind. But there is one point
of some interest respecting the effect of it on _any mind_, which must
be settled first; and this I will endeavour to do in the next chapter.


  [51] The Society of Painters in Water-Colours, often referred to as
  the Old Water-Colour Society. Ruskin was elected an honorary member
  in 1873.




OF THE PATHETIC FALLACY

VOLUME III, CHAPTER 12


Now, therefore, putting these tiresome and absurd words[52] quite
out of our way, we may go on at our ease to examine the point in
question,--namely, the difference between the ordinary, proper, and
true appearances of things to us; and the extraordinary, or false
appearances, when we are under the influence of emotion, or
contemplative fancy; false appearances, I say, as being entirely
unconnected with any real power or character in the object, and only
imputed to it by us.

For instance--

    The spendthrift crocus, bursting through the mould
    Naked and shivering, with his cup of gold.[53]

This is very beautiful, and yet very untrue. The crocus is not a
spendthrift, but a hardy plant; its yellow is not gold, but saffron.
How is it that we enjoy so much the having it put into our heads that
it is anything else than a plain crocus?

It is an important question. For, throughout our past reasonings about
art, we have always found that nothing could be good or useful, or
ultimately pleasurable, which was untrue. But here is something
pleasurable in written poetry which is nevertheless _un_true. And what
is more, if we think over our favourite poetry, we shall find it full
of this kind of fallacy, and that we like it all the more for being
so.

It will appear also, on consideration of the matter, that this fallacy
is of two principal kinds. Either, as in this case of the crocus, it
is the fallacy of wilful fancy, which involves no real expectation
that it will be believed; or else it is a fallacy caused by an excited
state of the feelings, making us, for the time, more or less
irrational. Of the cheating of the fancy we shall have to speak
presently; but, in this chapter, I want to examine the nature of the
other error, that which the mind admits when affected strongly by
emotion. Thus, for instance, in _Alton Locke_,--

    They rowed her in across the rolling foam--
    The cruel, crawling foam.[54]

The foam is not cruel, neither does it crawl. The state of mind which
attributes to it these characters of a living creature is one in which
the reason is unhinged by grief. All violent feelings have the same
effect. They produce in us a falseness in all our impressions of
external things, which I would generally characterize as the "pathetic
fallacy."

Now we are in the habit of considering this fallacy as eminently a
character of poetical description, and the temper of mind in which we
allow it, as one eminently poetical, because passionate. But I
believe, if we look well into the matter, that we shall find the
greatest poets do not often admit this kind of falseness,--that it is
only the second order of poets who much delight in it.[55]

Thus, when Dante describes the spirits falling from the bank of
Acheron "as dead leaves flutter from a bough,"[56] he gives the most
perfect image possible of their utter lightness, feebleness,
passiveness, and scattering agony of despair, without, however, for an
instant losing his own clear perception that _these_ are souls, and
_those_ are leaves; he makes no confusion of one with the other. But
when Coleridge speaks of

    The one red leaf, the last of its clan,
    That dances as often as dance it can,[57]

he has a morbid, that is to say, a so far false, idea about the leaf;
he fancies a life in it, and will, which there are not; confuses its
powerlessness with choice, its fading death with merriment, and the
wind that shakes it with music. Here, however, there is some beauty,
even in the morbid passage; but take an instance in Homer and Pope.
Without the knowledge of Ulysses, Elpenor, his youngest follower, has
fallen from an upper chamber in the Circean palace, and has been left
dead, unmissed by his leader or companions, in the haste of their
departure. They cross the sea to the Cimmerian land; and Ulysses
summons the shades from Tartarus. The first which appears is that of
the lost Elpenor. Ulysses, amazed, and in exactly the spirit of bitter
and terrified lightness which is seen in Hamlet,[58] addresses the
spirit with the simple, startled words:--

"Elpenor! How camest thou under the shadowy darkness? Hast thou come
faster on foot than I in my black ship?"[59]

Which Pope renders thus:--

    O, say, what angry power Elpenor led
    To glide in shades, and wander with the dead?
    How could thy soul, by realms and seas disjoined,
    Outfly the nimble sail, and leave the lagging wind?

I sincerely hope the reader finds no pleasure here, either in the
nimbleness of the sail, or the laziness of the wind! And yet how is it
that these conceits are so painful now, when they have been pleasant
to us in the other instances?

For a very simple reason. They are not a _pathetic_ fallacy at all,
for they are put into the mouth of the wrong passion--a passion which
never could possibly have spoken them--agonized curiosity. Ulysses
wants to know the facts of the matter; and the very last thing his
mind could do at the moment would be to pause, or suggest in anywise
what was _not_ a fact. The delay in the first three lines, and conceit
in the last, jar upon us instantly like the most frightful discord in
music. No poet of true imaginative power could possibly have written
the passage.[60]

Therefore we see that the spirit of truth must guide us in some sort,
even in our enjoyment of fallacy. Coleridge's fallacy has no discord
in it, but Pope's has set our teeth on edge. Without farther
questioning, I will endeavour to state the main bearings of this
matter.

The temperament which admits the pathetic fallacy, is, as I said
above, that of a mind and body in some sort too weak to deal fully
with what is before them or upon them; borne away, or over-clouded,
or over-dazzled by emotion; and it is a more or less noble state,
according to the force of the emotion which has induced it. For it
is no credit to a man that he is not morbid or inaccurate in his
perceptions, when he has no strength of feeling to warp them; and it
is in general a sign of higher capacity and stand in the ranks of
being, that the emotions should be strong enough to vanquish, partly,
the intellect, and make it believe what they choose. But it is still a
grander condition when the intellect also rises, till it is strong
enough to assert its rule against, or together with, the utmost
efforts of the passions; and the whole man stands in an iron glow,
white hot, perhaps, but still strong, and in no wise evaporating; even
if he melts, losing none of his weight.

So, then, we have the three ranks: the man who perceives rightly,
because he does not feel, and to whom the primrose is very accurately
the primrose,[61] because he does not love it. Then, secondly, the man
who perceives wrongly, because he feels, and to whom the primrose is
anything else than a primrose: a star, or a sun, or a fairy's shield,
or a forsaken maiden. And then, lastly, there is the man who perceives
rightly in spite of his feelings, and to whom the primrose is for ever
nothing else than itself--a little flower apprehended in the very
plain and leafy fact of it, whatever and how many soever the
associations and passions may be that crowd around it. And, in
general, these three classes may be rated in comparative order, as the
men who are not poets at all, and the poets of the second order, and
the poets of the first; only however great a man may be, there are
always some subjects which _ought_ to throw him off his balance; some,
by which his poor human capacity of thought should be conquered, and
brought into the inaccurate and vague state of perception, so that the
language of the highest inspiration becomes broken, obscure, and wild
in metaphor, resembling that of the weaker man, overborne by weaker
things.

And thus, in full, there are four classes: the men who feel nothing,
and therefore see truly; the men who feel strongly, think weakly, and
see untruly (second order of poets); the men who feel strongly, think
strongly, and see truly (first order of poets); and the men who,
strong as human creatures can be, are yet submitted to influences
stronger than they, and see in a sort untruly, because what they see
is inconceivably above them. This last is the usual condition of
prophetic inspiration.

I separate these classes, in order that their character may be clearly
understood; but of course they are united each to the other by
imperceptible transitions, and the same mind, according to the
influences to which it is subjected, passes at different times into
the various states. Still, the difference between the great and less
man is, on the whole, chiefly in this point of _alterability_. That is
to say, the one knows too much, and perceives and feels too much of
the past and future, and of all things beside and around that which
immediately affects him, to be in any wise shaken by it. His mind is
made up; his thoughts have an accustomed current; his ways are
stedfast; it is not this or that new sight which will at once
unbalance him. He is tender to impression at the surface, like a rock
with deep moss upon it; but there is too much mass of him to be moved.
The smaller man, with the same degree of sensibility, is at once
carried off his feet; he wants to do something he did not want to do
before; he views all the universe in a new light through his tears; he
is gay or enthusiastic, melancholy or passionate, as things come and
go to him. Therefore the high creative poet might even be thought, to
a great extent, impassive (as shallow people think Dante stern),
receiving indeed all feelings to the full, but having a great centre
of reflection and knowledge in which he stands serene, and watches the
feeling, as it were, from far off.

Dante, in his most intense moods, has entire command of himself, and
can look around calmly, at all moments, for the image or the word that
will best tell what he sees to the upper or lower world. But Keats and
Tennyson, and the poets of the second order, are generally themselves
subdued by the feelings under which they write, or, at least, write as
choosing to be so; and therefore admit certain expressions and modes
of thought which are in some sort diseased or false.

Now so long as we see that the _feeling_ is true, we pardon, or are
even pleased by, the confessed fallacy of sight which it induces: we
are pleased, for instance, with those lines of Kingsley's above quoted,
not because they fallaciously describe foam, but because they faithfully
describe sorrow. But the moment the mind of the speaker becomes cold,
that moment every such expression becomes untrue, as being for ever
untrue in the external facts. And there is no greater baseness in
literature than the habit of using these metaphorical expressions in
cool blood. An inspired writer, in full impetuosity of passion, may
speak wisely and truly of "raging waves of the sea foaming out their
own shame";[62] but it is only the basest writer who cannot speak of
the sea without talking of "raging waves," "remorseless floods,"
"ravenous billows," etc.; and it is one of the signs of the highest
power in a writer to check all such habits of thought, and to keep his
eyes fixed firmly on the _pure fact_, out of which if any feeling
conies to him or his reader, he knows it must be a true one.

To keep to the waves, I forget who it is who represents a man in
despair desiring that his body may be cast into the sea,

    _Whose changing mound, and foam that passed away_,
    Might mock the eye that questioned where I lay.

Observe, there is not a single false, or even overcharged, expression.
"Mound" of the sea wave is perfectly simple and true; "changing" is as
familiar as may be; "foam that passed away," strictly literal; and the
whole line descriptive of the reality with a degree of accuracy which
I know not any other verse, in the range of poetry, that altogether
equals. For most people have not a distinct idea of the clumsiness and
massiveness of a large wave. The word "wave" is used too generally of
ripples and breakers, and bendings in light drapery or grass: it does
not by itself convey a perfect image. But the word "mound" is heavy,
large, dark, definite; there is no mistaking the kind of wave meant,
nor missing the sight of it. Then the term "changing" has a peculiar
force also. Most people think of waves as rising and falling. But if
they look at the sea carefully, they will perceive that the waves do
not rise and fall. They change. Change both place and form, but they
do not fall; one wave goes on, and on, and still on; now lower, now
higher, now tossing its mane like a horse, now building itself
together like a wall, now shaking, now steady, but still the same
wave, till at last it seems struck by something, and changes, one
knows not how,--becomes another wave.

The close of the line insists on this image, and paints it still more
perfectly,--"foam that passed away." Not merely melting, disappearing,
but passing on, out of sight, on the career of the wave. Then, having
put the absolute ocean fact as far as he may before our eyes, the poet
leaves us to feel about it as we may, and to trace for ourselves the
opposite fact,--the image of the green mounds that do not change, and
the white and written stones that do not pass away; and thence to
follow out also the associated images of the calm life with the quiet
grave, and the despairing life with the fading foam--

    Let no man move his bones.

As for Samaria, her king is cut off like the foam upon the water.[63]

But nothing of this is actually told or pointed out, and the
expressions, as they stand, are perfectly severe and accurate, utterly
uninfluenced by the firmly governed emotion of the writer. Even the
word "mock" is hardly an exception, as it may stand merely for
"deceive" or "defeat," without implying any impersonation of the
waves.

It may be well, perhaps, to give one or two more instances to show the
peculiar dignity possessed by all passages, which thus limit their
expression to the pure fact, and leave the hearer to gather what he
can from it. Here is a notable one from the _Iliad_. Helen, looking
from the Scæan gate of Troy over the Grecian host, and telling Priam
the names of its captains, says at last:--

    "I see all the other dark-eyed Greeks; but two I cannot
    see,--Castor and Pollux,--whom one mother bore with me. Have they
    not followed from fair Lacedæmon, or have they indeed come in
    their sea-wandering ships, but now will not enter into the battle
    of men, fearing the shame and the scorn that is in Me?"

Then Homer:--

    "So she spoke. But them, already, the life-giving earth possessed,
    there in Lacedæmon, in the dear fatherland."[64]

Note, here, the high poetical truth carried to the extreme. The poet
has to speak of the earth in sadness, but he will not let that sadness
affect or change his thoughts of it. No; though Castor and Pollux be
dead, yet the earth is our mother still, fruitful, life-giving. These
are the facts of the thing. I see nothing else than these. Make what
you will of them.

Take another very notable instance from Casimir de la Vigne's terrible
ballad, "La Toilette de Constance." I must quote a few lines out of it
here and there, to enable the reader who has not the book by him, to
understand its close.

        "Vite, Anna! vite; au miroir!
           Plus vite, Anna. L'heure s'avance,
         Et je vais au bal ce soir
           Chez l'ambassadeur de France.

    "Y pensez-vous? ils sont fanés, ces noeuds;
      Ils sont d'hier; mon Dieu, comme tout passe!
    Que du réseau qui retient mes cheveux
      Les glands d'azur retombent avec grâce.
    Plus haut! Plus bas! Vous ne comprenez rien!
      Que sur mon front ce saphir étincelle:
    Vous me piquez, maladroite. Ah, c'est bien,
      Bien,--chère Anna! Je t'aime, je suis belle."

    "Celui qu'en vain je voudrais oublier ...
      (Anna, ma robe) il y sera, j'espère.
    (Ah, fi! profane, est-ce là mon collier?
      Quoi! ces grains d'or bénits par le Saint-Père!)
    II y sera; Dieu, s'il pressait ma main,
      En y pensant à peine je respire:
    Frère Anselmo doit m'entendre demain,
      Comment ferai-je, Anna, pour tout lui dire?...

        "Vite! un coup d'oeil au miroir,
           Le dernier.--J'ai l'assurance
        Qu'on va m'adorer ce soir
           Chez l'ambassadeur de France."

    Pres du foyer, Constance s'admirait.
      Dieu! sur sa robe il vole une étincelle!
    Au feu! Courez! Quand l'espoir l'enivrait,
      Tout perdre ainsi! Quoi! Mourir,--et si belle!
    L'horrible feu ronge avec volupté
      Ses bras, son sein, et l'entoure, et s'élève,
    Et sans pitié dévore sa beauté,
      Ses dix-huit ans, hélas, et son doux rêve!

        Adieu, bal, plaisir, amour!
           On disait, Pauvre Constance!
        Et l'on dansa, jusqu'au jour,
           Chez l'ambassadeur de France.[65]

Yes, that is the fact of it. Right or wrong, the poet does not say.
What you may think about it, he does not know. He has nothing to do
with that. There lie the ashes of the dead girl in her chamber. There
they danced, till the morning, at the Ambassador's of France. Make
what you will of it.

If the reader will look through the ballad, of which I have quoted
only about the third part, he will find that there is not, from
beginning to end of it, a single poetical (so called) expression,
except in one stanza. The girl speaks as simple prose as may be; there
is not a word she would not have actually used as she was dressing.
The poet stands by, impassive as a statue, recording her words just as
they come. At last the doom seizes her, and in the very presence of
death, for an instant, his own emotions conquer him. He records no
longer the facts only, but the facts as they seem to him. The fire
gnaws with _voluptuousness_--_without pity_. It is soon past. The fate
is fixed for ever; and he retires into his pale and crystalline
atmosphere of truth. He closes all with the calm veracity,

    They said, "Poor Constance!"

Now in this there is the exact type of the consummate poetical
temperament. For, be it clearly and constantly remembered, that the
greatness of a poet depends upon the two faculties, acuteness of
feeling, and command of it. A poet is great, first in proportion to
the strength of his passion, and then, that strength being granted, in
proportion to his government of it; there being, however, always a
point beyond which it would be inhuman and monstrous if he pushed this
government, and, therefore, a point at which all feverish and wild
fancy becomes just and true. Thus the destruction of the kingdom of
Assyria cannot be contemplated firmly by a prophet of Israel. The fact
is too great, too wonderful. It overthrows him, dashes him into a
confused element of dreams. All the world is, to his stunned thought,
full of strange voices. "Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and the
cedars of Lebanon, saying. 'Since thou art gone down to the grave, no
feller is come up against us.'"[66] So, still more, the thought of the
presence of Deity cannot be borne without this great astonishment.
"The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into
singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands."[67]

But by how much this feeling is noble when it is justified by the
strength of its cause, by so much it is ignoble when there is not
cause enough for it; and beyond all other ignobleness is the mere
affectation of it, in hardness of heart. Simply bad writing may almost
always, as above noticed, be known by its adoption of these fanciful
metaphorical expressions as a sort of current coin; yet there is even
a worse, at least a more harmful condition of writing than this, in
which such expressions are not ignorantly and feelinglessly caught up,
but, by some master, skilful in handling, yet insincere, deliberately
wrought out with chill and studied fancy; as if we should try to make
an old lava-stream look red-hot again, by covering it with dead
leaves, or white-hot, with hoar-frost.

When Young is lost in veneration, as he dwells on the character of a
truly good and holy man, he permits himself for a moment to be
overborne by the feeling so far as to exclaim--

    Where shall I find him? angels, tell me where.
    You know him; he is near you; point him out.
    Shall I see glories beaming from his brow,
    Or trace his footsteps by the rising flowers?[68]

This emotion has a worthy cause, and is thus true and right. But now
hear the cold-hearted Pope say to a shepherd girl--

    Where'er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade;
    Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade;
    Your praise the birds shall chant in every grove,
    And winds shall waft it to the powers above.
    But would you sing, and rival Orpheus' strain,
    The wondering forests soon should dance again;
    The moving mountains hear the powerful call,
    And headlong streams hang, listening, in their fall.[69]

This is not, nor could it for a moment be mistaken for, the language
of passion. It is simple falsehood, uttered by hypocrisy; definite
absurdity, rooted in affectation, and coldly asserted in the teeth of
nature and fact. Passion will indeed go far in deceiving itself; but
it must be a strong passion, not the simple wish of a lover to tempt
his mistress to sing. Compare a very closely parallel passage in
Wordsworth, in which the lover has lost his mistress:--

    Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid,
    When thus his moan he made:--

    "Oh, move, thou cottage, from behind yon oak,
      Or let the ancient tree uprooted lie,
    That in some other way yon smoke
      May mount into the sky.
    If still behind yon pine-tree's ragged bough,
      Headlong, the waterfall must come,
      Oh, let it, then, be dumb--
    Be anything, sweet stream, but that which thou art now."[70]

Here is a cottage to be moved, if not a mountain, and a water-fall to
be silent, if it is not to hang listening: but with what different
relation to the mind that contemplates them! Here, in the extremity of
its agony, the soul cries out wildly for relief, which at the same
moment it partly knows to be impossible, but partly believes possible,
in a vague impression that a miracle _might_ be wrought to give relief
even to a less sore distress,--that nature is kind, and God is kind,
and that grief is strong; it knows not well what _is_ possible to such
grief. To silence a stream, to move a cottage wall,--one might think
it could do as much as that!

I believe these instances are enough to illustrate the main point I
insist upon respecting the pathetic fallacy,--that so far as it is a
fallacy, it is always the sign of a morbid state of mind, and
comparatively of a weak one. Even in the most inspired prophet it is a
sign of the incapacity of his human sight or thought to bear what has
been revealed to it. In ordinary poetry, if it is found in the
thoughts of the poet himself, it is at once a sign of his belonging to
the inferior school; if in the thoughts of the characters imagined by
him, it is right or wrong according to the genuineness of the emotion
from which it springs; always, however, implying necessarily _some_
degree of weakness in the character.

Take two most exquisite instances from master hands. The Jessy of
Shenstone, and the Ellen of Wordsworth, have both been betrayed and
deserted. Jessy, in the course of her most touching complaint says:--

    If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
      Where bloom the jasmines that could once allure,
    "Hope not to find delight in us," they say,
      "For we are spotless, Jessy; we are pure."[71]

Compare with this some of the words of Ellen:--

    "Ah, why," said Ellen, sighing to herself,
    "Why do not words, and kiss, and solemn pledge,
    And nature, that is kind in woman's breast,
    And reason, that in man is wise and good,
    And fear of Him who is a righteous Judge,--
    Why do not these prevail for human life,
    To keep two hearts together, that began
    Their springtime with one love, and that have need
    Of mutual pity and forgiveness sweet
    To grant, or be received; while that poor bird--
    O, come and hear him! Thou who hast to me
    Been faithless, hear him;--though a lowly creature,
    One of God's simple children that yet know not
    The Universal Parent, _how_ he sings!
    As if he wished the firmament of heaven
    Should listen, and give back to him the voice
    Of his triumphant constancy and love;
    The proclamation that he makes, how far
    His darkness doth transcend our fickle light."[72]

The perfection of both these passages, as far as regards truth and
tenderness of imagination in the two poets, is quite insuperable. But
of the two characters imagined, Jessy is weaker than Ellen, exactly in
so far as something appears to her to be in nature which is not. The
flowers do not really reproach her. God meant them to comfort her, not
to taunt her; they would do so if she saw them rightly.

Ellen, on the other hand, is quite above the slightest erring emotion.
There is not the barest film of fallacy in all her thoughts. She
reasons as calmly as if she did not feel. And, although the singing of
the bird suggests to her the idea of its desiring to be heard in
heaven, she does not for an instant admit any veracity in the thought.
"As if," she says,--"I know he means nothing of the kind; but it does
verily seem as if." The reader will find, by examining the rest of the
poem, that Ellen's character is throughout consistent in this clear
though passionate strength.[73]

It then being, I hope, now made clear to the reader in all respects
that the pathetic fallacy is powerful only so far as it is pathetic,
feeble so far as it is fallacious, and, therefore, that the dominion
of Truth is entire, over this, as over every other natural and just
state of the human mind, we may go on to the subject for the dealing
with which this prefatory inquiry became necessary; and why necessary,
we shall see forthwith.


  [52] Three short sections discussing the use of the terms "Objective"
  and "Subjective" have been omitted from the beginning of this chapter.

  [53] Holmes (Oliver Wendell), quoted by Miss Mitford in her
  _Recollections of a Literary Life_. [Ruskin.] From _Astræa, a Poem
  delivered before the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Yale College_. The
  passage in which these lines are found was later published as
  _Spring_.

  [54] Kingsley's _Alton Locke_, chap. 26.

  [55] I admit two orders of poets, but no third; and by these two
  orders I mean the creative (Shakspere, Homer, Dante), and
  Reflective or Perceptive (Wordsworth, Keats, Tennyson). But both of
  these must be _first_-rate in their range, though their range is
  different; and with poetry second-rate in _quality_ no one ought to
  be allowed to trouble mankind. There is quite enough of the
  best,--much more than we can ever read or enjoy in the length of a
  life; and it is a literal wrong or sin in any person to encumber us
  with inferior work. I have no patience with apologies made by young
  pseudo-poets, "that they believe there is _some_ good in what they
  have written: that they hope to do better in time," etc. _Some_
  good! If there is not _all_ good, there is no good. If they ever
  hope to do better, why do they trouble us now? Let them rather
  courageously burn all they have done, and wait for the better days.
  There are few men, ordinarily educated, who in moments of strong
  feeling could not strike out a poetical thought, and afterwards
  polish it so as to be presentable. But men of sense know better
  than so to waste their time; and those who sincerely love poetry,
  know the touch of the master's hand on the chords too well to
  fumble among them after him. Nay, more than this, all inferior
  poetry is an injury to the good, inasmuch as it takes away the
  freshness of rhymes, blunders upon and gives a wretched commonalty
  to good thoughts; and, in general, adds to the weight of human
  weariness in a most woful and culpable manner. There are few
  thoughts likely to come across ordinary men, which have not already
  been expressed by greater men in the best possible way; and it is a
  wiser, more generous, more noble thing to remember and point out
  the perfect words, than to invent poorer ones, wherewith to
  encumber temporarily the world. [Ruskin.]

  [56] _Inferno_, 3. 112.

  [57] _Christabel_, 1. 49-50.

  [58] "Well said, old mole! can'st work i' the ground so
  fast?"--[Ruskin.]

  [59] _Odyssey_, 11. 57-58.

  [60] It is worth while comparing the way a similar question is put
  by the exquisite sincerity of Keats:--

      He wept, and his bright tears
  Went trickling down the golden bow he held.
  Thus, with half-shut, suffused eyes, he stood;
  While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by
  With solemn step an awful goddess came,
  And there was purport in her looks for him,
  Which he with eager guess began to read
  Perplex'd, the while melodiously he said,
  _"How cam'st thou over the unfooted sea?"_

                             _Hyperion_, 3. 42.--[Ruskin.]

  [61] See Wordsworth's _Peter Bell_, Part I:--

  A primrose by a river's brim
  A yellow primrose was to him,
  And it was nothing more.

  [62] _Jude_ 13.

  [63] _Kings_ xxiii, 18, and _Hosea_ x, 7.

  [64] _Iliad_, 3. 243. In the MS. Ruskin notes, "The insurpassably
  tender irony in the epithet--'life-giving earth'--of the grave";
  and then adds another illustration:--"Compare the hammer-stroke at
  the close of the [32d] chapter of _Vanity Fair_--'The darkness came
  down on the field and city, and Amelia was praying for George, who
  was lying on his face, dead, with a bullet through his heart. A
  great deal might have been said about it. The writer is very sorry
  for Amelia, neither does he want faith in prayer. He knows as well
  as any of us that prayer must be answered in some sort; but those
  are the facts. The man and woman sixteen miles apart---one on her
  knees on the floor, the other on his face in the clay. So much love
  in her heart, so much lead in his. Make what you can of it." [Cook
  and Wedderburn.]

  [65] The poem may be crudely paraphrased as follows:--

  "Quick, Anna, quick! to the mirror! It is late,
  And I'm to dance at the ambassador's ...
  I'm going to the ball ...

                            "They're faded, see,
  These ribbons--they belong to yesterday.
  Heavens, how all things pass! Now gracefully hang
  The blue tassels from the net that holds my hair.

  "Higher!--no, lower!--you get nothing right!...
  Now let this sapphire sparkle on my brow.
  You're pricking me, you careless
  thing! That's good!
  I love you, Anna dear. How fair I am....

  "I hope he'll be there, too--the one I've tried
  To forget! no use! (Anna, my gown!) he too ...
  (O fie, you wicked girl! my necklace, _this?_
  These golden beads the Holy Father blessed?)

  "He'll be there--Heavens! suppose he takes my hand
  --I scarce can draw my breath for thinking of it!
  And I confess to Father Anselmo
  To-morrow--how can I ever tell him _all_?...
  One last glance at the mirror.
  O, I'm sure That they'll adore me at the ball to-night."

  Before the fire she stands admiringly.
  O God! a spark has leapt into her gown.
  Fire, fire!--O run!--Lost thus when mad with hope?
  What, die? and she so fair? The hideous flames
  Rage greedily about her arms and breast,
  Envelop her, and leaping ever higher,
  Swallow up all her beauty, pitiless--
  Her eighteen years, alas! and her sweet dream.

  Adieu to ball, to pleasure, and to love!
  "Poor Constance!" said the dancers at the ball,
  "Poor Constance!"--and they danced till break of day.

  [66] _Isaiah_ xiv, 8.

  [67] _Isaiah_ lv, 12.

  [68] _Night Thoughts_, 2. 345.

  [69] Pastorals: _Summer, or Alexis_, 73 ff., with the omission of
  two couplets after the first.

  [70] From the poem beginning _'T is said that some have died for
  love_, Ruskin evidently quoted from memory, for there are several
  verbal slips in the passage quoted.

  [71] Stanza 16, of Shenstone's twenty-sixth Elegy.

  [72] _The Excursion_, 6. 869 ff.

  [73] I cannot quit this subject without giving two more instances,
  both exquisite, of the pathetic fallacy, which I have just come
  upon, in Maud:--

                    For a great speculation had fail'd;
  And ever he mutter'd and madden'd, and ever wann'd with despair;
  And out he walk'd, when the wind like a broken worldling wail'd,
  And the _flying gold of the ruin'd woodlands drove thro' the air._

      There has fallen a splendid tear
        From the passion-flower at the gate.
      _The red rose cries, "She is near, she is near!"
        And the white rose weeps, "She is late."
      The larkspur listens, "I hear, I hear!"
        And the lily whispers, "I wait."_          [Ruskin.]




OF CLASSICAL LANDSCAPE

VOLUME III, CHAPTER 13


My reason for asking the reader to give so much of his time to the
examination of the pathetic fallacy was, that, whether in literature
or in art, he will find it eminently characteristic of the modern
mind; and in the landscape, whether of literature or art, he will also
find the modern painter endeavouring to express something which he, as
a living creature imagines in the lifeless object, while the classical
and mediæval painters were content with expressing the unimaginary and
actual qualities of the object itself. It will be observed that,
according to the principle stated long ago, I use the words painter
and poet quite indifferently, including in our inquiry the landscape
of literature, as well as that of painting; and this the more because
the spirit of classical landscape has hardly been expressed in any
other way than by words.

Taking, therefore, this wide field, it is surely a very notable
circumstance, to begin with, that this pathetic fallacy is eminently
characteristic of modern painting. For instance, Keats, describing a
wave breaking out at sea, says of it:--

    Down whose green back the short-lived foam, all hoar,
    Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.[74]

That is quite perfect, as an example of the modern manner. The idea
of the peculiar action with which foam rolls down a long, large wave
could not have been given by any other words so well as by this
"wayward indolence." But Homer would never have written, never thought
of, such words. He could not by any possibility have lost sight of
the great fact that the wave, from the beginning to the end of it, do
what it might, was still nothing else than salt water; and that salt
water could not be either wayward or indolent. He will call the
waves "over-roofed," "full-charged," "monstrous," "compact-black,"
"dark-clear," "violet-coloured," "wine-coloured," and so on. But
every one of these epithets is descriptive of pure physical nature.
"Over-roofed" is the term he invariably uses of anything--rock, house,
or wave--that nods over at the brow; the other terms need no
explanation; they are as accurate and intense in truth as words can
be, but they never show the slightest feeling of anything animated in
the ocean. Black or clear, monstrous or violet-coloured, cold salt
water it is always, and nothing but that.

"Well, but the modern writer, by his admission of the tinge of
fallacy, has given an idea of something in the action of the wave
which Homer could not, and surely, therefore, has made a step in
advance? Also there appears to be a degree of sympathy and feeling in
the one writer, which there is not in the other; and as it has been
received for a first principle that writers are great in, proportion
to the intensity of their feelings, and Homer seems to have no
feelings about the sea but that it is black and deep, surely in this
respect also the modern writer is the greater?"

Stay a moment. Homer _had_ some feeling about the sea; a faith in the
animation of it much stronger than Keats's. But all this sense of
something living in it, he separates in his mind into a great abstract
image of a Sea Power. He never says the waves rage, or the waves are
idle. But he says there is somewhat in, and greater than, the waves,
which rages, and is idle, and _that_ he calls a god.

I do not think we ever enough endeavour to enter into what a Greek's
real notion of a god was. We are so accustomed to the modern mockeries
of the classical religion, so accustomed to hear and see the Greek
gods introduced as living personages, or invoked for help, by men who
believe neither in them nor in any other gods, that we seem to have
infected the Greek ages themselves with the breath, and dimmed them
with the shade, of our hypocrisy; and are apt to think that Homer, as
we know that Pope, was merely an ingenious fabulist; nay, more than
this, that all the nations of past time were ingenious fabulists also,
to whom the universe was a lyrical drama, and by whom whatsoever was
said about it was merely a witty allegory, or a graceful lie, of which
the entire upshot and consummation was a pretty statue in the middle
of the court, or at the end of the garden.

This, at least, is one of our forms of opinion about Greek faith; not,
indeed, possible altogether to any man of honesty or ordinary powers
of thought; but still so venomously inherent in the modern philosophy
that all the pure lightning of Carlyle cannot as yet quite burn it out
of any of us. And then, side by side with this mere infidel folly,
stands the bitter short-sightedness of Puritanism, holding the
classical god to be either simply an idol,--a block of stone
ignorantly, though sincerely, worshipped--or else an actual diabolic
or betraying power, usurping the place of God.

Both these Puritanical estimates of Greek deity are of course to some
extent true. The corruption of classical worship is barren idolatry;
and that corruption was deepened, and variously directed to their own
purposes, by the evil angels. But this was neither the whole, nor the
principal part, of Pagan worship. Pallas was not, in the pure Greek
mind, merely a powerful piece of ivory in a temple at Athens; neither
was the choice of Leonidas between the alternatives granted him by the
oracle, of personal death, or ruin to his country, altogether a work
of the Devil's prompting.

What, then, was actually the Greek god? In what way were these two
ideas of human form, and divine power, credibly associated in the
ancient heart, so as to become a subject of true faith irrespective
equally of fable, allegory, superstitious trust in stone, and
demoniacal influence?

It seems to me that the Greek had exactly the same instinctive feeling
about the elements that we have ourselves; that to Homer, as much as
to Casimir de la Vigne,[75] fire seemed ravenous and pitiless; to
Homer, as much as to Keats, the sea-wave appeared wayward or idle, or
whatever else it may be to the poetical passion. But then the Greek
reasoned upon this sensation, saying to himself: "I can light the
fire, and put it out; I can dry this water up, or drink it. It cannot
be the fire or the water that rages, or that is wayward. But it must
be something _in_ this fire and _in_ the water, which I cannot destroy
by extinguishing the one, or evaporating the other, any more than I
destroy myself by cutting off my finger; _I_ was _in_ my
finger,--something of me at least was; I had a power over it and felt
pain in it, though I am still as much myself when it is gone. So there
may be a power in the water which is not water, but to which the water
is as a body;--which can strike with it, move in it, suffer in it, yet
not be destroyed with it. This something, this Great Water Spirit, I
must not confuse with the waves, which are only its body. _They_ may
flow hither and thither, increase or diminish. _That_ must be
invisible--imperishable--a god. So of fire also; those rays which I
can stop, and in the midst of which I cast a shadow, cannot be divine,
nor greater than I. They cannot feel, but there may be something in
them that feels,--a glorious intelligence, as much nobler and more
swift than mine, as these rays, which are its body, are nobler and
swifter than my flesh;--the spirit of all light, and truth, and
melody, and revolving hours."

It was easy to conceive, farther, that such spirits should be able to
assume at will a human form, in order to hold intercourse with men, or
to perform any act for which their proper body, whether of fire,
earth, or air, was unfitted. And it would have been to place them
beneath, instead of above, humanity, if, assuming the form of man,
they could not also have tasted his pleasures. Hence the easy step to
the more or less material ideas of deities, which are apt at first to
shock us, but which are indeed only dishonourable so far as they
represent the gods as false and unholy. It is not the materialism, but
the vice, which degrades the conception; for the materialism itself is
never positive or complete. There is always some sense of exaltation
in the spiritual and immortal body; and of a power proceeding from the
visible form through all the infinity of the element ruled by the
particular god. The precise nature of the idea is well seen in the
passage of the _Iliad_ which describes the river Scamander defending
the Trojans against Achilles.[76] In order to remonstrate with the
hero, the god assumes a human form, which nevertheless is in some way
or other instantly recognized by Achilles as that of the river-god: it
is addressed at once as a river, not as a man; and its voice is the
voice of a river "out of the deep whirlpools."[77] Achilles refuses to
obey its commands; and from the human form it returns instantly into
its natural or divine one, and endeavours to overwhelm him with waves.
Vulcan defends Achilles, and sends fire against the river, which
suffers in its water-body, till it is able to bear no more. At last
even the "nerve of the river," or "strength of the river" (note the
expression), feels the fire, and this "strength of the river"
addresses Vulcan in supplications for respite. There is in this
precisely the idea of a vital part of the river-body, which acted and
felt, and which, if the fire reached, it was death, just as would be
the case if it touched a vital part of the human body. Throughout the
passage the manner of conception is perfectly clear and consistent;
and if, in other places, the exact connection between the ruling
spirit and the thing ruled is not so manifest, it is only because it
is almost impossible for the human mind to dwell long upon such
subjects without falling into inconsistencies, and gradually
slackening its effort to grasp the entire truth; until the more
spiritual part of it slips from its hold, and only the human form of
the god is left, to be conceived and described as subject to all the
errors of humanity. But I do not believe that the idea ever weakens
itself down to mere allegory. When Pallas is said to attack and strike
down Mars, it does not mean merely that Wisdom at that moment
prevailed against Wrath. It means that there are, indeed, two great
spirits, one entrusted to guide the human soul to wisdom and chastity,
the other to kindle wrath and prompt to battle. It means that these
two spirits, on the spot where, and at the moment when, a great
contest was to be decided between all that they each governed in man,
then and there (assumed) human form, and human weapons, and did verily
and materially strike at each other, until the Spirit of Wrath was
crushed. And when Diana is said to hunt with her nymphs in the woods,
it does not mean merely, as Wordsworth puts it,[78] that the poet or
shepherd saw the moon and stars glancing between the branches of the
trees, and wished to say so figuratively. It means that there is a
living spirit, to which the light of the moon is a body; which takes
delight in glancing between the clouds and following the wild beasts
as they wander through the night; and that this spirit sometimes
assumes a perfect human form, and in this form, with real arrows,
pursues and slays the wild beasts, which with its mere arrows of
moonlight it could not slay; retaining, nevertheless, all the while,
its power and being in the moonlight, and in all else that it
rules.

There is not the smallest inconsistency or unspirituality in this
conception. If there were, it would attach equally to the appearance
of the angels to Jacob, Abraham, Joshua, or Manoah.[79] In all those
instances the highest authority which governs our own faith requires
us to conceive divine power clothed with a human form (a form so real
that it is recognized for superhuman only by its "doing wondrously"),
and retaining, nevertheless, sovereignty and omnipresence in all the
world. This is precisely, as I understand it, the heathen idea of a
God; and it is impossible to comprehend any single part of the Greek
mind until we grasp this faithfully, not endeavouring to explain it
away in any wise, but accepting, with frank decision and definition,
the tangible existence of its deities;--blue-eyed--white-fleshed--
human-hearted,--capable at their choice of meeting man absolutely in
his own nature--feasting with him--talking with him--fighting with
him, eye to eye, or breast to breast, as Mars with Diomed;[80] or else,
dealing with him in a more retired spirituality, as Apollo sending the
plague upon the Greeks,[81] when his quiver rattles at his shoulders as
he moves, and yet the darts sent forth of it strike not as arrows, but
as plague; or, finally, retiring completely into the material universe
which they properly inhabit, and dealing with man through that, as
Scamander with Achilles, through his waves.

Nor is there anything whatever in the various actions recorded of the
gods, however apparently ignoble, to indicate weakness of belief in
them. Very frequently things which appear to us ignoble are merely the
simplicities of a pure and truthful age. When Juno beats Diana about
the ears with her own quiver,[82] for instance, we start at first, as
if Homer could not have believed that they were both real goddesses.
But what should Juno have done? Killed Diana with a look? Nay, she
neither wished to do so, nor could she have done so, by the very faith
of Diana's goddess-ship. Diana is as immortal as herself. Frowned
Diana into submission? But Diana has come expressly to try conclusions
with her, and will by no means be frowned into submission. Wounded her
with a celestial lance? That sounds more poetical, but it is in
reality partly more savage and partly more absurd, than Homer. More
savage, for it makes Juno more cruel, therefore less divine; and more
absurd, for it only seems elevated in tone, because we use the word
"celestial," which means nothing. What sort of a thing is a "celestial"
lance? Not a wooden one. Of what then? Of moonbeams, or clouds, or
mist. Well, therefore, Diana's arrows were of mist too; and her
quiver, and herself, and Juno, with her lance, and all, vanish into
mist. Why not have said at once, if that is all you mean, that two
mists met, and one drove the other back? That would have been rational
and intelligible, but not to talk of celestial lances. Homer had no
such misty fancy; he believed the two goddesses were there in true
bodies, with true weapons, on the true earth; and still I ask, what
should Juno have done? Not beaten Diana? No; for it is unlady-like.
Un-English-lady-like, yes; but by no means un-Greek-lady-like, nor
even un-natural-lady-like. If a modern lady does _not_ beat her
servant or her rival about the ears, it is oftener because she is too
weak, or too proud, than because she is of purer mind than Homer's
Juno. She will not strike them; but she will overwork the one or
slander the other without pity; and Homer would not have thought that
one whit more goddess-like than striking them with her open hand.

If, however, the reader likes to suppose that while the two goddesses
in personal presence thus fought with arrow and quiver, there was also
a broader and vaster contest supposed by Homer between the elements
they ruled; and that the goddess of the heavens, as she struck the
goddess of the moon on the flushing cheek, was at the same instant
exercising omnipresent power in the heavens themselves, and gathering
clouds, with which, filled with the moon's own arrows or beams, she
was encumbering and concealing the moon; he is welcome to this out
carrying of the idea, provided that he does not pretend to make it an
interpretation instead of a mere extension, nor think to explain away
my real, running, beautiful beaten Diana, into a moon behind
clouds.[83]

It is only farther to be noted, that the Greek conception of Godhead,
as it was much more real than we usually suppose, so it was much more
bold and familiar than to a modern mind would be possible. I shall
have something more to observe, in a little while, of the danger of
our modern habit of endeavouring to raise ourselves to something like
comprehension of the truth of divinity, instead of simply believing
the words in which the Deity reveals Himself to us. The Greek erred
rather on the other side, making hardly any effort to conceive divine
mind as above the human; and no more shrinking from frank intercourse
with a divine being, or dreading its immediate presence, than that of
the simplest of mortals. Thus Atrides, enraged at his sword's breaking
in his hand upon the helmet of Paris, after he had expressly invoked
the assistance of Jupiter, exclaims aloud, as he would to a king who
had betrayed him, "Jove, Father, there is not another god more
evil-minded than thou!"[84] and Helen, provoked at Paris's defeat, and
oppressed with pouting shame both for him and for herself, when Venus
appears at her side, and would lead her back to the delivered Paris,
impatiently tells the goddess to "go and take care of Paris
herself."[85]

The modern mind is naturally, but vulgarly and unjustly, shocked by
this kind of familiarity. Rightly understood, it is not so much a sign
of misunderstanding of the divine nature as of good understanding of
the human. The Greek lived, in all things, a healthy, and, in a
certain degree, a perfect life. He had no morbid or sickly feeling of
any kind. He was accustomed to face death without the slightest
shrinking, to undergo all kinds of bodily hardship without complaint,
and to do what he supposed right and honourable, in most cases, as a
matter of course. Confident of his own immortality, and of the power
of abstract justice, he expected to be dealt with in the next world as
was right, and left the matter much in his god's hands; but being thus
immortal, and finding in his own soul something which it seemed quite
as difficult to master, as to rule the elements, he did not feel that
it was an appalling superiority in those gods to have bodies of water,
or fire, instead of flesh, and to have various work to do among the
clouds and waves, out of his human way; or sometimes, even in a sort
of service to himself. Was not the nourishment of herbs and flowers a
kind of ministering to his wants; were not the gods in some sort his
husbandmen, and spirit-servants? Their mere strength or omnipresence
did not seem to him a distinction absolutely terrific. It might be the
nature of one being to be in two places at once, and of another to be
only in one; but that did not seem of itself to infer any absolute
lordliness of one nature above the other, any more than an insect must
be a nobler creature than a man, because it can see on four sides of
its head, and the man only in front. They could kill him or torture
him, it was true; but even that not unjustly, or not for ever. There
was a fate, and a Divine Justice, greater than they; so that if they
did wrong, and he right, he might fight it out with them, and have the
better of them at last. In a general way, they were wiser, stronger,
and better than he; and to ask counsel of them, to obey them, to
sacrifice to them, to thank them for all good, this was well: but to
be utterly downcast before them, or not to tell them his mind in plain
Greek if they seemed to him to be conducting themselves in an ungodly
manner--this would not be well.

Such being their general idea of the gods, we can now easily
understand the habitual tone of their feelings towards what was
beautiful in nature. With us, observe, the idea of the Divinity is apt
to get separated from the life of nature; and imagining our God upon a
cloudy throne, far above the earth, and not in the flowers or waters,
we approach those visible things with a theory that they are dead;
governed by physical laws, and so forth. But coming to them, we find
the theory fail; that they are not dead; that, say what we choose
about them, the instinctive sense of their being alive is too strong
for us; and in scorn of all physical law, the wilful fountain sings,
and the kindly flowers rejoice. And then, puzzled, and yet happy;
pleased, and yet ashamed of being so; accepting sympathy from nature
which we do not believe it gives, and giving sympathy to nature, which
we do not believe it receives,--mixing, besides, all manner of
purposeful play and conceit with these involuntary fellowships,--we
fall necessarily into the curious web of hesitating sentiment,
pathetic fallacy, and wandering fancy, which form a great part of our
modern view of nature. But the Greek never removed his god out of
nature at all; never attempted for a moment to contradict his
instinctive sense that God was everywhere. "The tree _is_ glad," said
he, "I know it is; I can cut it down: no matter, there was a nymph in
it. The water _does_ sing," said he; "I can dry it up; but no matter,
there was a naiad in it." But in thus clearly defining his belief,
observe, he threw it entirely into a human form, and gave his faith to
nothing but the image of his own humanity. What sympathy and
fellowship he had, were always for the spirit _in_ the stream, not for
the stream; always for the dryad _in_ the wood, not for the wood.
Content with this human sympathy, he approached the actual waves and
woody fibres with no sympathy at all. The spirit that ruled them, he
received as a plain fact. Them, also, ruled and material, he received
as plain facts; they, without their spirit, were dead enough. A rose
was good for scent, and a stream for sound and coolness; for the rest,
one was no more than leaves, the other no more than water; he could
not make anything else of them; and the divine power, which was
involved in their existence, having been all distilled away by him
into an independent Flora or Thetis, the poor leaves or waves were
left, in mere cold corporealness, to make the most of their being
discernibly red and soft, clear and wet, and unacknowledged in any
other power whatsoever.

Then, observe farther, the Greeks lived in the midst of the most
beautiful nature, and were as familiar with blue sea, clear air, and
sweet outlines of mountain, as we are with brick walls, black smoke,
and level fields. This perfect familiarity rendered all such scenes of
natural beauty unexciting, if not indifferent to them, by lulling and
overwearying the imagination as far as it was concerned with such
things; but there was another kind of beauty which they found it
required effort to obtain, and which, when thoroughly obtained, seemed
more glorious than any of this wild loveliness--the beauty of the
human countenance and form. This, they perceived, could only be
reached by continual exercise of virtue; and it was in Heaven's sight,
and theirs, all the more beautiful because it needed this self-denial
to obtain it. So they set themselves to reach this, and having gained
it, gave it their principal thoughts, and set it off with beautiful
dress as best they might. But making this their object, they were
obliged to pass their lives in simple exercise and disciplined
employments. Living wholesomely, giving themselves no fever fits,
either by fasting or over-eating, constantly in the open air, and full
of animal spirit and physical power, they became incapable of every
morbid condition of mental emotion. Unhappy love, disappointed
ambition, spiritual despondency, or any other disturbing sensation,
had little power over the well-braced nerves, and healthy flow of the
blood; and what bitterness might yet fasten on them was soon boxed or
raced out of a boy, and spun or woven out of a girl, or danced out of
both. They had indeed their sorrows, true and deep, but still, more
like children's sorrows than ours, whether bursting into open cry of
pain, or hid with shuddering under the veil, still passing over the
soul as clouds do over heaven, not sullying it, not mingling with
it;--darkening it perhaps long or utterly, but still not becoming one
with it, and for the most part passing away in dashing rain of tears,
and leaving the man unchanged; in no wise affecting, as our sorrow
does, the whole tone of his thought and imagination thenceforward.

How far our melancholy may be deeper and wider than theirs in its
roots and view, and therefore nobler, we shall consider presently; but
at all events, they had the advantage of us in being entirely free
from all those dim and feverish sensations which result from unhealthy
state of the body. I believe that a large amount of the dreamy and
sentimental sadness, tendency to reverie, and general patheticalness
of modern life results merely from derangement of stomach; holding to
the Greek life the same relation that the feverish night of an adult
does to a child's sleep.

Farther. The human beauty, which, whether in its bodily being or in
imagined divinity, had become, for the reasons we have seen, the
principal object of culture and sympathy to these Greeks, was, in its
perfection, eminently orderly, symmetrical, and tender. Hence,
contemplating it constantly in this state, they could not but feel a
proportionate fear of all that was disorderly, unbalanced, and rugged.
Having trained their stoutest soldiers into a strength so delicate and
lovely, that their white flesh, with their blood upon it, should look
like ivory stained with purple;[86] and having always around them, in
the motion and majesty of this beauty, enough for the full employment
of their imagination, they shrank with dread or hatred from all the
ruggedness of lower nature,--from the wrinkled forest bark, the jagged
hill-crest, and irregular, inorganic storm of sky; looking to these
for the most part as adverse powers, and taking pleasure only in such
portions of the lower world as were at once conducive to the rest and
health of the human frame, and in harmony with the laws of its gentler
beauty.

Thus, as far as I recollect, without a single exception, every Homeric
landscape, intended to be beautiful, is composed of a fountain, a
meadow, and a shady grove. This ideal is very interestingly marked, as
intended for a perfect one, in the fifth book of the _Odyssey_; when
Mercury himself stops for a moment, though on a message, to look at a
landscape "which even an immortal might be gladdened to behold."[87]
This landscape consists of a cave covered with a running vine, all
blooming into grapes, and surrounded by a grove of alder, poplar, and
sweet-smelling cypress. Four fountains of white (foaming) water,
springing _in succession_ (mark the orderliness), and close to one
another, flow away in different directions, through a meadow full of
violets and parsley (parsley, to mark its moisture, being elsewhere
called "marsh-nourished," and associated with the lotus[88]); the air
is perfumed not only by these violets, and by the sweet cypress, but
by Calypso's fire of finely chopped cedar-wood, which sends a smoke,
as of incense, through the island; Calypso herself is singing; and
finally, upon the trees are resting, or roosting, owls, hawks, and
"long-tongued sea-crows." Whether these last are considered as a part
of the ideal landscape, as marine singing birds, I know not; but the
approval of Mercury appears to be elicited chiefly by the fountains
and violet meadow.

Now the notable things in this description are, first, the evident
subservience of the whole landscape to human comfort, to the foot, the
taste, or the smell; and, secondly, that throughout the passage there
is not a single figurative word expressive of the things being in any
wise other than plain grass, fruit, or flower. I have used the term
"spring" of the fountains, because, without doubt, Homer means that
they sprang forth brightly, having their source at the foot of the
rocks (as copious fountains nearly always have); but Homer does not
say "spring," he says simply flow, and uses only one word for "growing
softly," or "richly," of the tall trees, the vine, and the violets.
There is, however, some expression of sympathy with the sea-birds; he
speaks of them in precisely the same terms, as in other places of
naval nations, saying they "have care of the works of the sea."

If we glance through the references to pleasant landscape which occur
in other parts of the _Odyssey_, we shall always be struck by this
quiet subjection of their every feature to human service, and by the
excessive similarity in the scenes. Perhaps the spot intended, after
this, to be most perfect, may be the garden of Alcinous, where the
principal ideas are, still more definitely, order, symmetry and
fruitfulness;[89] the beds being duly ranged between rows of vines,
which, as well as the pear, apple, and fig trees, bear fruit
continually, some grapes being yet sour, while others are getting
black; there are plenty of "_orderly_ square beds of herbs," chiefly
leeks, and two fountains, one running through the garden, and one
under the pavement of the palace to a reservoir for the citizens.
Ulysses, pausing to contemplate this scene, is described nearly in the
same terms as Mercury pausing to contemplate the wilder meadow; and it
is interesting to observe, that, in spite of all Homer's love of
symmetry, the god's admiration is excited by the free fountains, wild
violets, and wandering vine; but the mortal's, by the vines in rows,
the leeks in beds, and the fountains in pipes.

Ulysses has, however, one touching reason for loving vines in rows.
His father had given him fifty rows for himself, when he was a boy,
with corn between them (just as it now grows in Italy). Proving his
identity afterwards to his father, whom he finds at work in his
garden, "with thick gloves on, to keep his hands from the thorns," he
reminds him of these fifty rows of vines, and of the "thirteen
pear-trees and ten apple-trees" which he had given him: and Laertes
faints upon his neck.[90]

If Ulysses had not been so much of a gardener, it might have been
received as a sign of considerable feeling for landscape beauty, that,
intending to pay the very highest possible compliment to the Princess
Nausicaa (and having, indeed, the moment before gravely asked her
whether she was a goddess or not), he says that he feels, at seeing
her, exactly as he did when he saw the young palm tree growing at
Apollo's shrine at Delos.[91] But I think the taste for trim hedges
and upright trunks has its usual influence over him here also, and
that he merely means to tell the princess that she is delightfully
tall and straight.

The princess is, however, pleased by his address, and tells him to
wait outside the town, till she can speak to her father about him. The
spot to which she directs him is another ideal piece of landscape,
composed of a "beautiful grove of aspen poplars, a fountain, and a
meadow,"[92] near the road-side: in fact, as nearly as possible such a
scene as meets the eye of the traveller every instant on the
much-despised lines of road through lowland France; for instance, on
the railway between Arras and Amiens;--scenes, to my mind, quite
exquisite in the various grouping and grace of their innumerable
poplar avenues, casting sweet, tremulous shadows over their level
meadows and labyrinthine streams. We know that the princess means
aspen poplars, because soon afterwards we find her fifty maid-servants
at the palace, all spinning and in perpetual motion, compared to the
"leaves of the tall poplar"; and it is with exquisite feeling that it
is made afterwards[93] the chief tree in the groves of Proserpine; its
light and quivering leafage having exactly the melancholy expression
of fragility, faintness, and inconstancy which the ancients attributed
to the disembodied spirit.[94] The likeness to the poplars by the
streams of Amiens is more marked still in the _Iliad_, where the young
Simois, struck by Ajax, falls to the earth "like an aspen that has
grown in an irrigated meadow, smooth-trunked, the soft shoots
springing from its top, which some coach-making man has cut down with
his keen iron, that he may fit a wheel of it to a fair chariot, and it
lies parching by the side of the stream."[95] It is sufficiently
notable that Homer, living in mountainous and rocky countries, dwells
thus delightedly on all the _flat_ bits; and so I think invariably the
inhabitants of mountain countries do, but the inhabitants of the
plains do not, in any similar way, dwell delightedly on mountains. The
Dutch painters are perfectly contented with their flat fields and
pollards;[96] Rubens, though he had seen the Alps, usually composes
his landscapes of a hayfield or two, plenty of pollards and willows, a
distant spire, a Dutch house with a moat about it, a windmill, and a
ditch. The Flemish sacred painters are the only ones who introduce
mountains in the distance, as we shall see presently; but rather in a
formal way than with any appearance of enjoyment. So Shakspere never
speaks of mountains with the slightest joy, but only of lowland
flowers, flat fields, and Warwickshire streams. And if we talk to the
mountaineer, he will usually characterize his own country to us as a
"pays affreux," or in some equivalent, perhaps even more violent,
German term: but the lowland peasant does not think his country
frightful; he either will have no ideas beyond it, or about it; or
will think it a very perfect country, and be apt to regard any
deviation from its general principle of flatness with extreme
disfavour; as the Lincolnshire farmer in _Alton Locke_: "I'll shaw 'ee
some'at like a field o' beans, I wool--none o' this here darned ups
and downs o' hills, to shake a body's victuals out of his inwards--all
so vlat as a barn's vloor, for vorty mile on end--there's the country
to live in!"[97]

I do not say whether this be altogether right (though certainly not
wholly wrong), but it seems to me that there must be in the simple
freshness and fruitfulness of level land, in its pale upright trees,
and gentle lapse of silent streams, enough for the satisfaction of the
human mind in general; and I so far agree with Homer, that, if I had
to educate an artist to the full perception of the meaning of the word
"gracefulness" in landscape, I should send him neither to Italy nor to
Greece, but simply to those poplar groves between Arras and Amiens.

But to return more definitely to our Homeric landscape. When it is
perfect, we have, as in the above instances, the foliage and meadows
together; when imperfect, it is always either the foliage or the
meadow; pre-eminently the meadow, or arable field. Thus, meadows of
asphodel are prepared for the happier dead; and even Orion, a hunter
among the mountains in his lifetime, pursues the ghosts of beasts in
these asphodel meadows after death.[98] So the sirens sing in a
meadow; [99] and throughout the _Odyssey_ there is a general tendency
to the depreciation of poor Ithaca, because it is rocky, and only fit
for goats, and has "no meadows";[100] for which reason Telemachus
refuses Atrides's present of horses, congratulating the Spartan king
at the same time on ruling over a plain which has "plenty of lotus in
it, and rushes," with corn and barley. Note this constant dwelling on
the marsh plants, or, at least, those which grow in flat and
well-irrigated land, or beside streams: when Scamander, for instance,
is restrained by Vulcan, Homer says, very sorrowfully, that "all his
lotus, and reeds, and rushes were burnt";[101] and thus Ulysses, after
being shipwrecked and nearly drowned, and beaten about the sea for
many days and nights, on raft and mast, at last getting ashore at the
mouth of a large river, casts himself down first upon its _rushes_,
and then, in thankfulness, kisses the "corn-giving land," as most
opposed, in his heart, to the fruitless and devouring sea.[102]

In this same passage, also, we find some peculiar expressions of the
delight which the Greeks had in trees; for, when Ulysses first comes
in sight of land, which gladdens him "as the reviving of a father from
his sickness gladdens his children," it is not merely the sight of the
land itself which gives him such pleasure, but of the "land and
_wood_." Homer never throws away any words, at least in such a place
as this; and what in another poet would have been merely the filling
up of the deficient line with an otherwise useless word, is in him the
expression of the general Greek sense, that land of any kind was in no
wise grateful or acceptable till there was _wood_ upon it (or corn;
but the corn, in the flats, could not be seen so far as the black
masses of forest on the hill sides), and that, as in being rushy and
corn-giving, the low land, so in being woody, the high land was most
grateful to the mind of the man who for days and nights had been
wearied on the engulphing sea. And this general idea of wood and corn,
as the types of the fatness of the whole earth, is beautifully marked
in another place of the _Odyssey_,[103] where the sailors in a desert
island, having no flour of corn to offer as a meat offering with their
sacrifices, take the leaves of the trees, and scatter them over the
burnt offering instead.

But still, every expression of the pleasure which Ulysses has in this
landing and resting, contains uninterruptedly the reference to the
utility and sensible pleasantness of all things, not to their beauty.
After his first grateful kiss given to the corn-growing land, he
considers immediately how he is to pass the night; for some minutes
hesitating whether it will be best to expose himself to the misty
chill from the river, or run the risk of wild beasts in the wood. He
decides for the wood, and finds in it a bower formed by a sweet and a
wild olive tree, interlacing their branches, or--perhaps more
accurately translating Homer's intensely graphic expression--"changing
their branches with each other" (it is very curious how often, in an
entanglement of wood, one supposes the branches to belong to the wrong
trees) and forming a roof penetrated by neither rain, sun, nor wind.
Under this bower Ulysses collects the "_vain_ (or _frustrate_)
outpouring of the dead leaves"--another exquisite expression, used
elsewhere of useless grief or shedding of tears;--and, having got
enough together, makes his bed of them, and goes to sleep, having
covered himself up with them, "as embers are covered up with
ashes."[104]

Nothing can possibly be more intensely possessive of the _facts_ than
this whole passage: the sense of utter deadness and emptiness, and
frustrate fall in the leaves; of dormant life in the human body,--the
fire, and heroism, and strength of it, lulled under the dead brown
heap, as embers under ashes, and the knitting of interchanged and
close strength of living boughs above. But there is not the smallest
apparent sense of there being _beauty_ elsewhere than in the human
being. The wreathed wood is admired simply as being a perfect roof for
it; the fallen leaves only as being a perfect bed for it; and there is
literally no more excitement of emotion in Homer, as he describes
them, nor does he expect us to be more excited or touched by hearing
about them, than if he had been telling us how the chambermaid at the
Bull aired the four-poster, and put on two extra blankets.

Now, exactly this same contemplation of subservience to human use
makes the Greek take some pleasure in _rocks_, when they assume one
particular form, but one only--that of a _cave_. They are evidently
quite frightful things to him under any other condition, and most of
all if they are rough and jagged; but if smooth, looking "sculptured,"
like the sides of a ship, and forming a cave or shelter for him, he
begins to think them endurable. Hence, associating the ideas of rich
and sheltering wood, sea, becalmed and made useful as a port by
protecting promontories of rock, and smoothed caves or grottoes in the
rocks themselves, we get the pleasantest idea which the Greek could
form of a landscape, next to a marsh with poplars in it; not, indeed,
if possible, ever to be without these last; thus, in commending the
Cyclops' country as one possessed of every perfection, Homer erst
says: "They have soft _marshy_ meadows near the sea, and good, rich,
crumbling, ploughing-land, giving fine deep crops, and vines always
giving fruit"; then, "a port so quiet, that they have no need of
cables in it; and at the head of the port, a beautiful clear spring
just _under a cave_, and _aspen poplars all round it_."[105]

This, it will be seen, is very nearly Homer's usual "ideal"; but,
going into the middle of the island, Ulysses comes on a rougher and
less agreeable bit, though still fulfilling certain required
conditions of endurableness; a "cave shaded with laurels,"[106] which,
having no poplars about it, is, however, meant to be somewhat
frightful, and only fit to be inhabited by a Cyclops. So in the
country of the Læstrygons, Homer, preparing his reader gradually for
something very disagreeable, represents the rocks as bare and "exposed
to the sun";[107] only with some smooth and slippery roads over them,
by which the trucks bring down wood from the higher hills. Any one
familiar with Swiss slopes of hills must remember how often he has
descended, sometimes faster than was altogether intentional, by these
same slippery woodman's truck roads.

And thus, in general, whenever the landscape is intended to be lovely,
it verges towards the ploughed lands and poplars; or, at worst, to
_woody_ rocks; but, if intended to be painful, the rocks are bare and
"sharp." This last epithet, constantly used by Homer for mountains,
does not altogether correspond, in Greek, to the English term, nor is
it intended merely to characterize the sharp mountain summits; for it
never would be applied simply to the edge or point of a sword, but
signifies rather "harsh," "bitter," or "painful," being applied
habitually to fate, death, and in _Odyssey_ xi. 333, to a halter; and,
as expressive of general objectionableness and unpleasantness, to all
high, dangerous, or peaked mountains, as the Maleian promontory (a
much-dreaded one), the crest of Parnassus, the Tereian mountain, and a
grim or untoward, though, by keeping off the force of the sea,
protective, rock at the mouth of the Jardanus; as well as habitually
to inaccessible or impregnable fortresses built on heights.

In all this I cannot too strongly mark the utter absence of any
trace of the feeling for what we call the picturesque, and the
constant dwelling of the writer's mind on what was available,
pleasant, or useful: his ideas respecting all landscape being not
uncharacteristially summed, finally, by Pallas herself; when, meeting
Ulysses, who after his long wandering does not recognize his own
country, and meaning to describe it as politely and soothingly as
possible, she says:[108]--"This Ithaca of ours is, indeed, a rough
country enough, and not good for driving in; but, still, things might
be worse: it has plenty of corn, and good wine, and _always rain_,
and soft nourishing dew; and it has good feeding for goats and oxen,
and all manner of wood, and springs fit to drink at all the year
round."

We shall see presently how the blundering, pseudo-picturesque,
pseudo-classical minds of Claude and the Renaissance landscape-painters,
wholly missing Homer's practical common sense, and equally incapable
of feeling the quiet natural grace and sweetness of his asphodel
meadows, tender aspen poplars, or running vines,--fastened on his
_ports_ and _caves_, as the only available features of his scenery;
and appointed the type of "classical landscape" thenceforward to
consist in a bay of insipid sea, and a rock with a hole through
it.[109]

It may indeed be thought that I am assuming too hastily that this was
the general view of the Greeks respecting landscape, because it was
Homer's. But I believe the true mind of a nation, at any period, is
always best ascertainable by examining that of its greatest men; and
that simpler and truer results will be attainable for us by simply
comparing Homer, Dante, and Walter Scott, than by attempting (what my
limits must have rendered absurdly inadequate, and in which, also,
both my time and knowledge must have failed me) an analysis of the
landscape in the range of contemporary literature. All that I can do,
is to state the general impression, which has been made upon me by my
desultory reading, and to mark accurately the grounds for this
impression in the works of the greatest men. Now it is quite true that
in others of the Greeks, especially in Æschylus and Aristophanes,
there is infinitely more of modern feeling, of pathetic fallacy, love
of picturesque or beautiful form, and other such elements, than there
is in Homer; but then these appear to me just the parts of them which
were not Greek, the elements of their minds by which (as one division
of the human race always must be with subsequent ones) they are
connected with the mediævals and moderns. And without doubt, in his
influence over future mankind, Homer is eminently the Greek of Greeks:
if I were to associate any one with him it would be Herodotus, and I
believe all I have said of the Homeric landscape will be found equally
true of the Herodotean, as assuredly it will be of the Platonic;--the
contempt, which Plato sometimes expresses by the mouth of Socrates,
for the country in general, except so far as it is shady, and has
cicadas and running streams to make pleasant noises in it, being
almost ludicrous. But Homer is the great type, and the more notable
one because of his influence on Virgil, and, through him, on Dante,
and all the after ages: and, in like manner, if we can get the
abstract of mediæval landscape out of Dante, it will serve us as well
as if we had read all the songs of the troubadours, and help us to the
farther changes in derivative temper, down to all modern time.

I think, therefore, the reader may safely accept the conclusions about
Greek landscape which I have got for him out of Homer; and in these he
will certainly perceive something very different from the usual
imaginations we form of Greek feelings. We think of the Greeks as
poetical, ideal, imaginative, in the way that a modern poet or
novelist is; supposing that their thoughts about their mythology and
world were as visionary and artificial as ours are: but I think the
passages I have quoted show that it was not so, although it may be
difficult for us to apprehend the strange minglings in them of the
elements of faith, which, in our days, have been blended with other
parts of human nature in a totally different guise. Perhaps the Greek
mind may be best imagined by taking, as its groundwork, that of a
good, conscientious, but illiterate Scotch Presbyterian Border farmer
of a century or two back, having perfect faith in the bodily
appearances of Satan and his imps; and in all kelpies, brownies, and
fairies. Substitute for the indignant terrors in this man's mind, a
general persuasion of the _Divinity_, more or less beneficent, yet
faultful, of all these beings; that is to say, take away his belief in
the demoniacal malignity of the fallen spiritual world, and lower, in
the same degree, his conceptions of the angelical, retaining for him
the same firm faith in both; keep his ideas about flowers and
beautiful scenery much as they are,--his delight in regular ploughed
land and meadows, and a neat garden (only with rows of gooseberry
bushes instead of vines), being, in all probability, about accurately
representative of the feelings of Ulysses; then, let the military
spirit that is in him, glowing against the Border forager, or the foe
of old Flodden and Chevy-Chase,[110] be made more principal, with a
higher sense of nobleness in soldiership, not as a careless
excitement, but a knightly duty; and increased by high cultivation of
every personal quality, not of mere shaggy strength, but graceful
strength, aided by a softer climate, and educated in all proper
harmony of sight and sound: finally, instead of an informed Christian,
suppose him to have only the patriarchal Jewish knowledge of the
Deity, and even this obscured by tradition, but still thoroughly
solemn and faithful, requiring his continual service as a priest of
burnt sacrifice and meat offering; and I think we shall get a pretty
close approximation to the vital being of a true old Greek; some
slight difference still existing in a feeling which the Scotch farmer
would have of a pleasantness in blue hills and running streams, wholly
wanting in the Greek mind; and perhaps also some difference of views
on the subjects of truth and honesty. But the main points, the easy,
athletic, strongly logical and argumentative, yet fanciful and
credulous, characters of mind, would be very similar in both; and the
most serious change in the substance of the stuff among the
modifications above suggested as necessary to turn the Scot into the
Greek, is that effect of softer climate and surrounding luxury,
inducing the practice of various forms of polished art,--the more
polished, because the practical and realistic tendency of the Hellenic
mind (if my interpretation of it be right) would quite prevent it from
taking pleasure in any irregularities of form, or imitations of the
weeds and wildnesses of that mountain nature with which it thought
itself born to contend. In its utmost refinement of work, it sought
eminently for orderliness; carried the principle of the leeks in
squares, and fountains in pipes, perfectly out in its streets and
temples; formalized whatever decoration it put into its minor
architectural mouldings, and reserved its whole heart and power to
represent the action of living men, or gods, though not unconscious,
meanwhile, of

    The simple, the sincere delight;
    The habitual scene of hill and dale;
    The rural herds, the vernal gale;
    The tangled vetches' purple bloom;
    The fragrance of the bean's perfume,--
    Theirs, theirs alone, who cultivate the soil,
    And drink the cup of thirst, and eat the bread of toil.[111]


  [74] _Endymion_, 2. 349-350.

  [75] See p. 68.

  [76] _Iliad_, 21. 212-360.

  [77] Compare _Lay of the Last Minstrel_, canto i. stanza 15, and
  canto v. stanza 2. In the first instance, the river-spirit is
  accurately the Homeric god, only Homer would have believed in
  it,--Scott did not, at least not altogether. [Ruskin.]

  [78] _The Excursion_, 4. 861-871.

  [79] _Genesis_ xxviii, 12; xxxii, 1; xxii, 11; _Joshua_ v, 13 ff.;
  _Judges_ xiii, 3 ff.

  [80] _Iliad_, 5. 846.

  [81] _Iliad_, 1. 43.

  [82] _Iliad_, 21. 489 ff.

  [83] Compare the exquisite lines of Longfellow on the sunset in
  _The Golden Legend_:--

  The day is done; and slowly from the scene
  The stooping sun up-gathers his spent shafts.
  And puts them back into his golden quiver. [Ruskin.]

  [84] _Iliad_, 3. 365.

  [85] _Iliad_, 3. 406 ff.

  [86] _Iliad_, 4. 141. [Ruskin.]

  [87] _Odyssey_, 5. 63-74.

  [88] _Iliad_, 2. 776. [Ruskin.]

  [89] _Odyssey_ 7. 112-132.

  [90] _Odyssey_, 24. 334 ff.

  [91] _Odyssey_, 6. 162.

  [92] _Odyssey_, 6. 291-292.

  [93] _Odyssey_, 10. 510. [Ruskin.]

  [94] Compare the passage in Dante referred to above, p. 60.
  [Ruskin.]

  [95] _Iliad_, 4. 482-487.

  [96] Pollards, trees polled or cut back at some height above the
  ground, producing a thick growth of young branches in a rounded
  mass.

  [97] Quoted, with some omission, from chapter 12.

  [98] _Odyssey_, 11. 572; 24. 13. The couch of Ceres, with Homer's
  usual faithfulness, is made of a _ploughed_ field, 5. 127.
  [Ruskin.]

  [99] _Odyssey_, 12. 45.

  [100] _Odyssey_, 4. 605.

  [101] _Iliad_, 21. 351.

  [102] _Odyssey_, 5. 398, 463. [Ruskin.]

  [103] _Odyssey_, 12. 357. [Ruskin.]

  [104] _Odyssey_, 5. 481-493.

  [105] _Odyssey_, 9. 132, etc. Hence Milton's

  From haunted spring, and dale, Edged with poplar pale. [Ruskin.]

  _Hymn on The Morning of Christ's Nativity_, 184-185.

  [106] _Odyssey_, 9. 182.

  [107] _Odyssey_, 10. 87-88.

  [108] _Odyssey_, 13. 236, etc. [Ruskin.]

  [109] Educated, as we shall see hereafter, first in this school.
  Turner gave the hackneyed composition a strange power and
  freshness, in his Glaucus and Scylla. [Ruskin.]

  [110] Flodden, Flodden Field, a plain in Northumberland, famous as
  the battlefield where James IV of Scotland was defeated by an
  English army under the Earl of Surrey, Sept. 9, 1513. The sixth
  canto of Scott's _Marmion_ gives a fairly accurate description of
  the action.

  _Chevy-Chase_, a famous old English ballad recounting the incidents
  of the battle of Otterburn [Aug. 19, 1388] in which the Scots under
  the Earl of Douglas defeated the English under the Percies.

  [111] Shenstone's _Rural Elegance_, 201 ff., quoted with some
  slight inaccuracies.




OF MODERN LANDSCAPE

VOLUME III, CHAPTER 16


We turn our eyes, therefore, as boldly and as quickly as may be, from
these serene fields and skies of mediæval art, to the most
characteristic examples of modern landscape. And, I believe, the first
thing that will strike us, or that ought to strike us, is _their
cloudiness_.

Out of perfect light and motionless air, we find ourselves on a sudden
brought under sombre skies, and into drifting wind; and, with fickle
sunbeams flashing in our face, or utterly drenched with sweep of rain,
we are reduced to track the changes of the shadows on the grass, or
watch the rents of twilight through angry cloud. And we find that
whereas all the pleasure of the mediæval was in _stability,
definiteness_, and _luminousness_, we are expected to rejoice in
darkness, and triumph in mutability; to lay the foundation of
happiness in things which momentarily change or fade; and to expect
the utmost satisfaction and instruction from what it is impossible to
arrest, and difficult to comprehend.

We find, however, together with this general delight in breeze and
darkness, much attention to the real form of clouds, and careful
drawing of effects of mist; so that the appearance of objects, as seen
through it, becomes a subject of science with us; and the faithful
representation of that appearance is made of primal importance, under
the name of aërial perspective. The aspects of sunset and sunrise,
with all their attendant phenomena of cloud and mist, are watchfully
delineated; and in ordinary daylight landscape, the sky is considered
of so much importance, that a principal mass of foliage, or a whole
foreground, is unhesitatingly thrown into shade merely to bring out
the form of a white cloud. So that, if a general and characteristic
name were needed for modern landscape art, none better could be
invented than "the service of clouds."

And this name would, unfortunately, be characteristic of our art in
more ways than one. In the last chapter, I said that all the Greeks
spoke kindly about the clouds, except Aristophanes; and he, I am sorry
to say (since his report is so unfavourable), is the only Greek who
had studied them attentively. He tells us, first, that they are "great
goddesses to idle men"; then, that they are "mistresses of disputings,
and logic, and monstrosities, and noisy chattering"; declares that
whoso believes in their divinity must first disbelieve in Jupiter, and
place supreme power in the hands of an unknown god "Whirlwind"; and,
finally, he displays their influence over the mind of one of their
disciples, in his sudden desire "to speak ingeniously concerning
smoke."[112]

There is, I fear, an infinite truth in this Aristophanic judgment
applied to our modern cloud-worship. Assuredly, much of the love of
mystery in our romances, our poetry, our art, and, above all, in our
metaphysics, must come under that definition so long ago given by the
great Greek, "speaking ingeniously concerning smoke." And much of the
instinct, which, partially developed in painting, may be now seen
throughout every mode of exertion of mind,--the easily encouraged
doubt, easily excited curiosity, habitual agitation, and delight in
the changing and the marvellous, as opposed to the old quiet serenity
of social custom and religious faith,--is again deeply defined in
those few words, the "dethroning of Jupiter," the "coronation of the
whirlwind."

Nor of whirlwind merely, but also of darkness or ignorance respecting
all stable facts. That darkening of the foreground to bring out the
white cloud, is, in one aspect of it, a type of the subjection of all
plain and positive fact, to what is uncertain and unintelligible. And,
as we examine farther into the matter, we shall be struck by another
great difference between the old and modern landscape, namely, that in
the old no one ever thought of drawing anything but as well _as he
could_. That might not be _well_, as we have seen in the case of
rocks; but it was as well as he _could_, and always distinctly. Leaf,
or stone, or animal, or man, it was equally drawn with care and
clearness, and its essential characters shown. If it was an oak tree,
the acorns were drawn; if a flint pebble, its veins were drawn; if an
arm of the sea, its fish were drawn; if a group of figures, their
faces and dresses were drawn--to the very last subtlety of expression
and end of thread that could be got into the space, far off or near.
But now our ingenuity is all "concerning smoke." Nothing is truly
drawn but that; all else is vague, slight, imperfect; got with as
little pains as possible. You examine your closest foreground, and
find no leaves; your largest oak, and find no acorns; your human
figure, and find a spot of red paint instead of a face; and in all
this, again and again, the Aristophanic words come true, and the
clouds seem to be "great goddesses to idle men."

The next thing that will strike us, after this love of clouds, is the
love of liberty. Whereas the mediæval was always shutting himself into
castles, and behind fosses, and drawing brickwork neatly, and beds of
flowers primly, our painters delight in getting to the open fields and
moors; abhor all hedges and moats; never paint anything but free-growing
trees, and rivers gliding "at their own sweet will"; eschew formality
down to the smallest detail; break and displace the brickwork which
the mediæval would have carefully cemented; leave unpruned the
thickets he would have delicately trimmed; and, carrying the love of
liberty even to license, and the love of wildness even to ruin, take
pleasure at last in every aspect of age and desolation which emancipates
the objects of nature from the government of men;--on the castle wall
displacing its tapestry with ivy, and spreading, through the garden,
the bramble for the rose.

Connected with this love of liberty we find a singular manifestation
of love of mountains, and see our painters traversing the wildest
places of the globe in order to obtain subjects with craggy foregrounds
and purple distances. Some few of them remain content with pollards
and flat land; but these are always men of third-rate order; and the
leading masters, while they do not reject the beauty of the low
grounds, reserve their highest powers to paint Alpine peaks or Italian
promontories. And it is eminently noticeable, also, that this pleasure
in the mountains is never mingled with fear, or tempered by a spirit
of meditation, as with the mediæval; but it is always free and
fearless, brightly exhilarating, and wholly unreflective; so that the
painter feels that his mountain foreground may be more consistently
animated by a sportsman than a hermit; and our modern society in
general goes to the mountains, not to fast, but to feast, and leaves
their glaciers covered with chicken-bones and egg-shells.

Connected with this want of any sense of solemnity in mountain
scenery, is a general profanity of temper in regarding all the rest of
nature; that is to say, a total absence of faith in the presence of
any deity therein. Whereas the mediæval never painted a cloud, but
with the purpose of placing an angel in it; and a Greek never entered
a wood without expecting to meet a god in it; we should think the
appearance of an angel in the cloud wholly unnatural, and should be
seriously surprised by meeting a god anywhere. Our chief ideas about
the wood are connected with poaching. We have no belief that the
clouds contain more than so many inches of rain or hail, and from our
ponds and ditches expect nothing more divine than ducks and
watercresses.

Finally: connected with this profanity of temper is a strong tendency
to deny the sacred element of colour, and make our boast in blackness.
For though occasionally glaring or violent, modern colour is on the
whole eminently sombre, tending continually to grey or brown, and by
many of our best painters consistently falsified, with a confessed
pride in what they call chaste or subdued tints; so that, whereas a
mediæval paints his sky bright blue and his foreground bright green,
gilds the towers of his castles, and clothes his figures with purple
and white, we paint our sky grey, our foreground black, and our
foliage brown, and think that enough is sacrificed to the sun in
admitting the dangerous brightness of a scarlet cloak or a blue
jacket.

These, I believe, are the principal points which would strike us
instantly, if we were to be brought suddenly into an exhibition of
modern landscapes out of a room filled with mediæval work. It is
evident that there are both evil and good in this change; but how much
evil, or how much good, we can only estimate by considering, as in the
former divisions of our inquiry, what are the real roots of the habits
of mind which have caused them.

And first, it is evident that the title "Dark Ages," given to the
mediæval centuries, is, respecting art, wholly inapplicable. They
were, on the contrary, the bright ages; ours are the dark ones. I do
not mean metaphysically, but literally. They were the ages of gold;
ours are the ages of umber.

This is partly mere mistake in us; we build brown brick walls, and
wear brown coats, because we have been blunderingly taught to do so,
and go on doing so mechanically. There is, however, also some cause
for the change in our own tempers. On the whole, these are much
_sadder_ ages than the early ones; not sadder in a noble and deep way,
but in a dim wearied way,--the way of ennui, and jaded intellect, and
uncomfortableness of soul and body. The Middle Ages had their wars and
agonies, but also intense delights. Their gold was dashed with blood;
but ours is sprinkled with dust. Their life was inwoven with white and
purple: ours is one seamless stuff of brown. Not that we are without
apparent festivity, but festivity more or less forced, mistaken,
embittered, incomplete--not of the heart. How wonderfully, since
Shakspere's time, have we lost the power of laughing at bad jests! The
very finish of our wit belies our gaiety.

The profoundest reason of this darkness of heart is, I believe, our
want of faith. There never yet was a generation of men (savage or
civilized) who, taken as a body, so wofully fulfilled the words
"having no hope, and without God in the world,"[113] as the present
civilized European race. A Red Indian or Otaheitan savage has more
sense of a Divine existence round him, or government over him, than
the plurality of refined Londoners and Parisians: and those among us
who may in some sense be said to believe, are divided almost without
exception into two broad classes, Romanist and Puritan; who, but for
the interference of the unbelieving portions of society, would, either
of them, reduce the other sect as speedily as possible to ashes; the
Romanist having always done so whenever he could, from the beginning
of their separation, and the Puritan at this time holding himself in
complacent expectation of the destruction of Rome by volcanic fire.
Such division as this between persons nominally of one religion, that
is to say, believing in the same God, and the same Revelation, cannot
but become a stumbling-block of the gravest kind to all thoughtful and
far-sighted men,--a stumbling-block which they can only surmount under
the most favourable circumstances of early education. Hence, nearly
all our powerful men in this age of the world are unbelievers; the
best of them in doubt and misery; the worst in reckless defiance; the
plurality, in plodding hesitation, doing, as well as they can, what
practical work lies ready to their hands. Most of our scientific men
are in this last class; our popular authors either set themselves
definitely against all religious form, pleading for simple truth and
benevolence (Thackeray, Dickens), or give themselves up to bitter and
fruitless statement of facts (De Balzac), or surface-painting (Scott),
or careless blasphemy, sad or smiling (Byron, Béranger). Our earnest
poets and deepest thinkers are doubtful and indignant (Tennyson,
Carlyle); one or two, anchored, indeed, but anxious or weeping
(Wordsworth, Mrs. Browning); and of these two, the first is not so
sure of his anchor, but that now and then it drags with him, even to
make him cry out,--

                  Great God, I had rather be
    A Pagan suckled in some creed outworn;
      So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
    Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn.[114]

In politics, religion is now a name; in art, a hypocrisy or affectation.
Over German religious pictures the inscription, "See how Pious I am,"
can be read at a glance by any clear-sighted person. Over French and
English religious pictures the inscription, "See how Impious I am," is
equally legible. All sincere and modest art is, among us, profane.[115]

This faithlessness operates among us according to our tempers,
producing either sadness or levity, and being the ultimate root alike
of our discontents and of our wantonnesses. It is marvellous how full
of contradiction it makes us: we are first dull, and seek for wild and
lonely places because we have no heart for the garden; presently we
recover our spirits, and build an assembly room among the mountains,
because we have no reverence for the desert. I do not know if there be
game on Sinai, but I am always expecting to hear of some one's shooting
over it.

There is, however, another, and a more innocent root of our delight in
wild scenery.

All the Renaissance principles of art tended, as I have before often
explained, to the setting Beauty above Truth, and seeking for it
always at the expense of truth. And the proper punishment of such
pursuit--the punishment which all the laws of the universe rendered
inevitable--was, that those who thus pursued beauty should wholly lose
sight of beauty. All the thinkers of the age, as we saw previously,
declared that it did not exist. The age seconded their efforts, and
banished beauty, so far as human effort could succeed in doing so,
from the face of the earth, and the form of man. To powder the hair,
to patch the cheek, to hoop the body, to buckle the foot, were all
part and parcel of the same system which reduced streets to brick
walls, and pictures to brown stains. One desert of Ugliness was extended
before the eyes of mankind; and their pursuit of the beautiful, so
recklessly continued, received unexpected consummation in high-heeled
shoes and periwigs,--Gower Street, and Gaspar Poussin.[116]

Reaction from this state was inevitable, if any true life was left in
the races of mankind; and, accordingly, though still forced, by rule
and fashion, to the producing and wearing all that is ugly, men steal
out, half-ashamed of themselves for doing so, to the fields and
mountains; and, finding among these the colour, and liberty, and
variety, and power, which are for ever grateful to them, delight in
these to an extent never before known; rejoice in all the wildest
shattering of the mountain side, as an opposition to Gower Street,
gaze in a rapt manner at sunsets and sunrises, to see there the blue,
and gold, and purple, which glow for them no longer on knight's armour
or temple porch; and gather with care out of the fields, into their
blotted herbaria, the flowers which the five orders of architecture
have banished from their doors and casements.

The absence of care for personal beauty, which is another great
characteristic of the age, adds to this feeling in a twofold way:
first, by turning all reverent thoughts away from human nature; and
making us think of men as ridiculous or ugly creatures, getting
through the world as well as they can, and spoiling it in doing so;
not ruling it in a kingly way and crowning all its loveliness. In the
Middle Ages hardly anything but vice could be caricatured, because
virtue was always visibly and personally noble: now virtue itself is
apt to inhabit such poor human bodies, that no aspect of it is
invulnerable to jest; and for all fairness we have to seek to the
flowers, for all sublimity, to the hills.

The same want of care operates, in another way, by lowering the
standard of health, increasing the susceptibility to nervous or
sentimental impressions, and thus adding to the other powers of nature
over us whatever charm may be felt in her fostering the melancholy
fancies of brooding idleness.

It is not, however, only to existing inanimate nature that our want of
beauty in person and dress has driven us. The imagination of it, as it
was seen in our ancestors, haunts us continually; and while we yield
to the present fashions, or act in accordance with the dullest modern
principles of economy and utility, we look fondly back to the manners
of the ages of chivalry, and delight in painting, to the fancy, the
fashions we pretend to despise, and the splendours we think it wise to
abandon. The furniture and personages of our romance are sought, when
the writer desires to please most easily, in the centuries which we
profess to have surpassed in everything; the art which takes us into
the present times is considered as both daring and degraded; and while
the weakest words please us, and are regarded as poetry, which recall
the manners of our forefathers, or of strangers, it is only as
familiar and vulgar that we accept the description of our own.

In this we are wholly different from all the races that preceded us.
All other nations have regarded their ancestors with reverence as
saints or heroes; but have nevertheless thought their own deeds and
ways of life the fitting subjects for their arts of painting or of
verse. We, on the contrary, regard our ancestors as foolish and
wicked, but yet find our chief artistic pleasures in descriptions of
their ways of life.

The Greeks and mediævals honoured, but did not imitate their
forefathers; we imitate, but do not honour.

With this romantic love of beauty, forced to seek in history, and in
external nature, the satisfaction it cannot find in ordinary life, we
mingle a more rational passion, the due and just result of newly
awakened powers of attention. Whatever may first lead us to the
scrutiny of natural objects, that scrutiny never fails of its reward.
Unquestionably they are intended to be regarded by us with both
reverence and delight; and every hour we give to them renders their
beauty more apparent, and their interest more engrossing. Natural
science--which can hardly be considered to have existed before modern
times--rendering our knowledge fruitful in accumulation, and exquisite
in accuracy, has acted for good or evil, according to the temper of
the mind which received it; and though it has hardened the
faithlessness of the dull and proud, has shown new grounds for
reverence to hearts which were thoughtful and humble. The neglect of
the art of war, while it has somewhat weakened and deformed the
body,[117] has given us leisure and opportunity for studies to which,
before, time and space were equally wanting; lives which once were
early wasted on the battle-field are now passed usefully in the study;
nations which exhausted themselves in annual warfare now dispute with
each other the discovery of new planets; and the serene philosopher
dissects the plants, and analyzes the dust, of lands which were of old
only traversed by the knight in hasty march, or by the borderer in
heedless rapine.

The elements of progress and decline being thus strangely mingled in
the modern mind, we might beforehand anticipate that one of the
notable characters of our art would be its inconsistency; that efforts
would be made in every direction, and arrested by every conceivable
cause and manner of failure; that in all we did, it would become next
to impossible to distinguish accurately the grounds for praise or for
regret; that all previous canons of practice and methods of thought
would be gradually overthrown, and criticism continually defied by
successes which no one had expected, and sentiments which no one could
define.

Accordingly, while, in our inquiries into Greek and mediæval art, I
was able to describe, in general terms, what all men did or felt, I
find now many characters in many men; some, it seems to me, founded on
the inferior and evanescent principles of modernism, on its
recklessness, impatience, or faithlessness; others founded on its
science, its new affection for nature, its love of openness and
liberty. And among all these characters, good or evil, I see that
some, remaining to us from old or transitional periods, do not
properly belong to us, and will soon fade away, and others, though not
yet distinctly developed, are yet properly our own, and likely to grow
forward into greater strength.

For instance: our reprobation of bright colour is, I think, for the
most part, mere affectation, and must soon be done away with.
Vulgarity, dulness, or impiety, will indeed always express themselves
through art in brown and grey, as in Rembrandt, Caravaggio, and
Salvator; but we are not wholly vulgar, dull, or impious; nor, as
moderns, are we necessarily obliged to continue so in any wise. Our
greatest men, whether sad or gay, still delight, like the great men of
all ages, in brilliant hues. The colouring of Scott and Byron is full
and pure; that of Keats and Tennyson rich even to excess. Our
practical failures in colouring are merely the necessary consequences
of our prolonged want of practice during the periods of Renaissance
affectation and ignorance; and the only durable difference between old
and modern colouring, is the acceptance of certain hues, by the
modern, which please him by expressing that melancholy peculiar to his
more reflective or sentimental character, and the greater variety of
them necessary to express his greater science.

Again: if we ever become wise enough to dress consistently and
gracefully, to make health a principal object in education, and to
render our streets beautiful with art, the external charm of past
history will in great measure disappear. There is no essential reason,
because we live after the fatal seventeenth century, that we should
never again be able to confess interest in sculpture, or see
brightness in embroidery; nor, because now we choose to make the night
deadly with our pleasures, and the day with our labours, prolonging
the dance till dawn, and the toil to twilight, that we should never
again learn how rightly to employ the sacred trusts of strength,
beauty, and time. Whatever external charm attaches itself to the past,
would then be seen in proper subordination to the brightness of
present life; and the elements of romance would exist, in the earlier
ages, only in the attraction which must generally belong to whatever
is unfamiliar; in the reverence which a noble nation always pays to
its ancestors; and in the enchanted light which races, like
individuals, must perceive in looking back to the days of their
childhood.

Again: the peculiar levity with which natural scenery Is regarded by a
large number of modern minds cannot be considered as entirely
characteristic of the age, inasmuch as it never can belong to its
greatest intellects. Men of any high mental power must be serious,
whether in ancient or modern days: a certain degree of reverence for
fair scenery is found in all our great writers without exception,--even
the one who has made us laugh oftenest, taking us to the valley of
Chamouni, and to the sea beach, there to give peace after suffering,
and change revenge into pity.[118] It is only the dull, the uneducated,
or the worldly, whom it is painful to meet on the hillsides; and
levity, as a ruling character, cannot be ascribed to the whole nation,
but only to its holiday-making apprentices, and its House of Commons.

We need not, therefore, expect to find any single poet or painter
representing the entire group of powers, weaknesses, and inconsistent
instincts which govern or confuse our modern life. But we may expect
that in the man who seems to be given by Providence as the type of the
age (as Homer and Dante were given, as the types of classical and
mediæval mind), we shall find whatever is fruitful and substantial to
be completely present, together with those of our weaknesses, which
are indeed nationally characteristic, and compatible with general
greatness of mind, just as the weak love of fences, and dislike of
mountains, were found compatible with Dante's greatness in other
respects.

Farther: as the admiration of mankind is found, in our times, to have
in great part passed from men to mountains, and from human emotion to
natural phenomena, we may anticipate that the great strength of art
will also be warped in this direction; with this notable result for
us, that whereas the greatest painters or painter of classical and
mediæval periods, being wholly devoted to the representation of
humanity, furnished us with but little to examine in landscape, the
greatest painters or painter of modern times will in all probability
be devoted to landscape principally: and farther, because in
representing human emotion words surpass painting, but in representing
natural scenery painting surpasses words, we may anticipate also that
the painter and poet (for convenience' sake I here use the words in
opposition) will somewhat change their relations of rank in
illustrating the mind of the age; that the painter will become of more
importance, the poet of less; and that the relations between the men
who are the types and firstfruits of the age in word and work,--namely,
Scott and Turner,--will be, in many curious respects, different from
those between Homer and Phidias, or Dante and Giotto.[119]


  [112] _Clouds_, 316-318; 380 ff.; 320-321.

  [113] _Ephesians_ ii, 12.

  [114] Wordsworth's "The world is too much with us."

  [115] Pre-Raphaelitism, of course, excepted, which is a new phase
  of art, in no wise considered in this chapter. Blake was sincere,
  but full of wild creeds, and somewhat diseased in brain. [Ruskin.]

  [116] Gower Street, a London street selected as typical of modern
  ugliness.

  Gaspar Poussin [1613-75], a French landscape painter, of the
  pseudo-classical school.

  [117] Of course this is meant only of the modern citizen or
  country-gentleman, as compared with a citizen of Sparta or old
  Florence. I leave it to others to say whether the "neglect of the
  art of war" may or may not, in a yet more fatal sense, be predicated
  of the English nation. War, _without_ art, we seem, with God's help,
  able still to wage nobly. [Ruskin.]

  [118] See _David Copperfield_, chap. 55 and 58. [Ruskin.]

  [119] Ruskin proceeds to discuss Scott as he has discussed Homer.
  The chapter on Turner that follows here is an almost equally good
  illustration of Ruskin's ideas.




THE TWO BOYHOODS

VOLUME V, PART 9, CHAPTER 9


Born half-way between the mountains and the sea--that young George of
Castelfranco--of the Brave Castle:--Stout George they called him,
George of Georges, so goodly a boy he was--Giorgione.[120]

Have you ever thought what a world his eyes opened on--fair, searching
eyes of youth? What a world of mighty life, from those mountain roots
to the shore;--of loveliest life, when he went down, yet so young, to
the marble city--and became himself as a fiery heart to it?

A city of marble, did I say? nay, rather a golden city, paved with
emerald. For truly, every pinnacle and turret glanced or glowed,
overlaid with gold, or bossed with jasper. Beneath, the unsullied sea
drew in deep breathing, to and fro, its eddies of green wave.
Deep-hearted, majestic, terrible as the sea,--the men of Venice moved
in sway of power and war; pure as her pillars of alabaster, stood her
mothers and maidens; from foot to brow, all noble, walked her knights;
the low bronzed gleaming of sea-rusted armour shot angrily under their
blood-red mantle-folds. Fearless, faithful, patient, impenetrable,
implacable,--every word a fate--sate her senate. In hope and honour,
lulled by flowing of wave around their isles of sacred sand, each with
his name written and the cross graved at his side, lay her dead. A
wonderful piece of world. Rather, itself a world. It lay along the face
of the waters, no larger, as its captains saw it from their masts at
evening, than a bar of sunset that could not pass away; but for its
power, it must have seemed to them as if they were sailing in the
expanse of heaven, and this a great planet, whose orient edge widened
through ether. A world from which all ignoble care and petty thoughts
were banished, with all the common and poor elements of life. No
foulness, nor tumult, in those tremulous streets, that filled, or fell,
beneath the moon; but rippled music of majestic change, or thrilling
silence. No weak walls could rise above them; no low-roofed cottage,
nor straw-built shed. Only the strength as of rock, and the finished
setting of stones most precious. And around them, far as the eye could
reach, still the soft moving of stainless waters, proudly pure; as not
the flower, so neither the thorn nor the thistle, could grow in the
glancing fields. Ethereal strength of Alps, dreamlike, vanishing in
high procession beyond the Torcellan shore; blue islands of Paduan
hills, poised in the golden west. Above, free winds and fiery clouds
ranging at their will;--brightness out of the north, and balm from the
south, and the stars of the evening and morning clear in the limitless
light of arched heaven and circling sea.

Such was Giorgione's school--such Titian's home.

Near the south-west corner of Covent Garden, a square brick pit or well
is formed by a close-set block of houses, to the back windows of which
it admits a few rays of light. Access to the bottom of it is obtained
out of Maiden Lane, through a low archway and an iron gate; and if you
stand long enough under the archway to accustom your eyes to the
darkness you may see on the left hand a narrow door, which formerly
gave quiet access to a respectable barber's shop, of which the front
window, looking into Maiden Lane, is still extant, filled, in this year
(1860), with a row of bottles, connected, in some defunct manner, with
a brewer's business. A more fashionable neighbourhood, it is said,
eighty years ago than now--never certainly a cheerful one--wherein a
boy being born on St. George's day, 1775, began soon after to take
interest in the world of Covent Garden, and put to service such
spectacles of life as it afforded.

No knights to be seen there, nor, I imagine, many beautiful ladies;
their costume at least disadvantageous, depending much on incumbency of
hat and feather, and short waists; the majesty of men founded similarly
on shoebuckles and wigs;--impressive enough when Reynolds will do his
best for it; but not suggestive of much ideal delight to a boy.

"Bello ovile dov' io dormii agnello";[121] of things beautiful, besides
men and women, dusty sunbeams up or down the street on summer mornings;
deep furrowed cabbage-leaves at the greengrocer's; magnificence of
oranges in wheelbarrows round the corner; and Thames' shore within
three minutes' race.

None of these things very glorious; the best, however, that England, it
seems, was then able to provide for a boy of gift: who, such as they
are, loves them--never, indeed, forgets them. The short waists modify
to the last his visions of Greek ideal. His foregrounds had always a
succulent cluster or two of greengrocery at the corners. Enchanted
oranges gleam in Covent Gardens of the Hesperides; and great ships go
to pieces in order to scatter chests of them on the waves.[122] That mist
of early sunbeams in the London dawn crosses, many and many a time, the
clearness of Italian air; and by Thames' shore, with its stranded
barges and glidings of red sail, dearer to us than Lucerne lake or
Venetian lagoon,--by Thames' shore we will die.

With such circumstance round him in youth, let us note what necessary
effects followed upon the boy. I assume him to have had Giorgione's
sensibility (and more than Giorgione's, if that be possible) to colour
and form. I tell you farther, and this fact you may receive trustfully,
that his sensibility to human affection and distress was no less keen
than even his sense for natural beauty--heart-sight deep as eyesight.

Consequently, he attaches himself with the faithfullest child-love to
everything that bears an image of the place he was born in. No matter
how ugly it is,--has it anything about it like Maiden Lane, or like
Thames' shore? If so, it shall be painted for their sake. Hence, to the
very close of life, Turner could endure ugliness which no one else, of
the same sensibility, would have borne with for an instant. Dead brick
walls, blank square windows, old clothes, market-womanly types of
humanity--anything fishy and muddy, like Billingsgate or Hungerford
Market, had great attraction for him; black barges, patched sails, and
every possible condition of fog.

You will find these tolerations and affections guiding or sustaining
him to the last hour of his life; the notablest of all such endurances
being that of dirt. No Venetian ever draws anything foul; but Turner
devoted picture after picture to the illustration of effects of
dinginess, smoke, soot, dust, and dusty texture; old sides of boats,
weedy roadside vegetation, dunghills, straw-yards, and all the soilings
and stains of every common labour.

And more than this, he not only could endure, but enjoyed and looked
for _litter_, like Covent Garden wreck after the market. His pictures
are often full of it, from side to side; their foregrounds differ from
all others in the natural way that things have of lying about in them.
Even his richest vegetation, in ideal work, is confused; and he
delights in shingle, debris, and heaps of fallen stones. The last words
he ever spoke to me about a picture were in gentle exultation about his
St. Gothard: "that _litter_ of stones which I endeavoured to
represent."

The second great result of this Covent Garden training was understanding
of and regard for the poor, whom the Venetians, we saw, despised; whom,
contrarily, Turner loved, and more than loved--understood. He got no
romantic sight of them, but an infallible one, as he prowled about the
end of his lane, watching night effects in the wintry streets; nor
sight of the poor alone, but of the poor in direct relations with the
rich. He knew, in good and evil, what both classes thought of, and how
they dwelt with, each other.

Reynolds and Gainsborough, bred in country villages, learned there the
country boy's reverential theory of "the squire," and kept it. They
painted the squire and the squire's lady as centres of the movements of
the universe, to the end of their lives. But Turner perceived the
younger squire in other aspects about his lane, occurring prominently
in its night scenery, as a dark figure, or one of two, against the
moonlight. He saw also the working of city commerce, from endless
warehouse, towering over Thames, to the back shop in the lane, with its
stale herrings--highly interesting these last; one of his father's best
friends, whom he often afterwards visited affectionately at Bristol,
being a fishmonger and glue-boiler; which gives us a friendly turn of
mind towards herring-fishing, whaling, Calais poissardes, and many
other of our choicest subjects in after life; all this being connected
with that mysterious forest below London Bridge on one side;--and, on
the other, with these masses of human power and national wealth which
weigh upon us, at Covent Garden here, with strange compression, and
crush us into narrow Hand Court.

"That mysterious forest below London Bridge"--better for the boy than
wood of pine, or grove of myrtle. How he must have tormented the
watermen, beseeching them to let him crouch anywhere in the bows,
quiet as a log, so only that he might get floated down there among the
ships, and round and round the ships, and with the ships, and by the
ships, and under the ships, staring, and clambering;--these the only
quite beautiful things he can see in all the world, except the sky;
but these, when the sun is on their sails, filling or falling,
endlessly disordered by sway of tide and stress of anchorage,
beautiful unspeakably; which ships also are inhabited by glorious
creatures--red-faced sailors, with pipes, appearing over the gunwales,
true knights, over their castle parapets--the most angelic beings in
the whole compass of London world. And Trafalgar happening long before
we can draw ships, we, nevertheless, coax all current stories out of
the wounded sailors, do our best at present to show Nelson's funeral
streaming up the Thames; and vow that Trafalgar shall have its tribute
of memory some day. Which, accordingly, is accomplished--once, with
all our might, for its death; twice, with all our might, for its
victory; thrice, in pensive farewell to the old Téméraire, and, with
it, to that order of things.[123]

Now this fond companying with sailors must have divided his time, it
appears to me, pretty equally between Covent Garden and Wapping
(allowing for incidental excursions to Chelsea on one side, and
Greenwich on the other), which time he would spend pleasantly, but not
magnificently, being limited in pocket-money, and leading a kind of
"Poor-Jack" life on the river.

In some respects, no life could be better for a lad. But it was not
calculated to make his ear fine to the niceties of language, nor form
his moralities on an entirely regular standard. Picking up his first
scraps of vigorous English chiefly at Deptford and in the markets, and
his first ideas of female tenderness and beauty among nymphs of the
barge and the barrow,--another boy might, perhaps, have become what
people usually term "vulgar." But the original make and frame of
Turner's mind being not vulgar, but as nearly as possible a combination
of the minds of Keats and Dante, joining capricious waywardness, and
intense openness to every fine pleasure of sense, and hot defiance of
formal precedent, with a quite infinite tenderness, generosity, and
desire of justice and truth--this kind of mind did not become vulgar,
but very tolerant of vulgarity, even fond of it in some forms; and on
the outside, visibly infected by it, deeply enough; the curious result,
in its combination of elements, being to most people wholly
incomprehensible. It was as if a cable had been woven of blood-crimson
silk, and then tarred on the outside. People handled it, and the tar
came off on their hands; red gleams were seen through the black,
underneath, at the places where it had been strained. Was it
ochre?--said the world--or red lead?

Schooled thus in manners, literature, and general moral principles at
Chelsea and Wapping, we have finally to inquire concerning the most
important point of all. We have seen the principal differences between
this boy and Giorgione, as respects sight of the beautiful,
understanding of poverty, of commerce, and of order of battle; then
follows another cause of difference in our training--not slight,--the
aspect of religion, namely, in the neighbourhood of Covent Garden. I
say the aspect; for that was all the lad could judge by. Disposed, for
the most part, to learn chiefly by his eyes, in this special matter he
finds there is really no other way of learning. His father had taught
him "to lay one penny upon another." Of mother's teaching, we hear of
none; of parish pastoral teaching, the reader may guess how much.

I chose Giorgione rather than Veronese to help me in carrying out this
parallel; because I do not find in Giorgione's work any of the early
Venetian monarchist element. He seems to me to have belonged more to an
abstract contemplative school. I may be wrong in this; it is no
matter;--suppose it were so, and that he came down to Venice somewhat
recusant, or insentient, concerning the usual priestly doctrines of his
day,--how would the Venetian religion, from an outer intellectual
standing-point, have _looked_ to him?

He would have seen it to be a religion indisputably powerful in human
affairs; often very harmfully so; sometimes devouring widows'
houses,[124] and consuming the strongest and fairest from among the
young; freezing into merciless bigotry the policy of the old: also, on
the other hand, animating national courage, and raising souls,
otherwise sordid, into heroism: on the whole, always a real and great
power; served with daily sacrifice of gold, time, and thought; putting
forth its claims, if hypocritically, at least in bold hypocrisy, not
waiving any atom of them in doubt or fear; and, assuredly, in large
measure, sincere, believing in itself, and believed: a goodly system,
moreover, in aspect; gorgeous, harmonious, mysterious;--a thing which
had either to be obeyed or combated, but could not be scorned. A
religion towering over all the city--many-buttressed--luminous in
marble stateliness, as the dome of our Lady of Safety[125] shines over
the sea; many-voiced also, giving, over all the eastern seas, to the
sentinel his watchword, to the soldier his war-cry; and, on the lips of
all who died for Venice, shaping the whisper of death.

I suppose the boy Turner to have regarded the religion of his city also
from an external intellectual standing-point.

What did he see in Maiden Lane?

Let not the reader be offended with me; I am willing to let him
describe, at his own pleasure, what Turner saw there; but to me, it
seems to have been this. A religion maintained occasionally, even the
whole length of the lane, at point of constable's staff; but, at other
times, placed under the custody of the beadle, within certain black and
unstately iron railings of St. Paul's, Covent Garden. Among the
wheelbarrows and over the vegetables, no perceptible dominance of
religion; in the narrow, disquieted streets, none; in the tongues,
deeds, daily ways of Maiden Lane, little. Some honesty, indeed, and
English industry, and kindness of heart, and general idea of justice;
but faith, of any national kind, shut up from one Sunday to the next,
not artistically beautiful even in those Sabbatical exhibitions; its
paraphernalia being chiefly of high pews, heavy elocution, and cold
grimness of behaviour.

What chiaroscuro belongs to it--(dependent mostly on candlelight),--we
will, however, draw considerately; no goodliness of escutcheon, nor
other respectability being omitted, and the best of their results
confessed, a meek old woman and a child being let into a pew, for whom
the reading by candlelight will be beneficial.[126]

For the rest, this religion seems to him
discreditable--discredited--not believing in itself; putting forth its
authority in a cowardly way, watching how far it might be tolerated,
continually shrinking, disclaiming, fencing, finessing; divided against
itself, not by stormy rents, but by thin fissures, and splittings of
plaster from the walls. Not to be either obeyed, or combated, by an
ignorant, yet clear-sighted youth: only to be scorned. And scorned not
one whit the less, though also the dome dedicated to it looms high over
distant winding of the Thames; as St. Mark's campanile rose, for goodly
landmark, over mirage of lagoon. For St. Mark ruled over life; the
Saint of London over death; St. Mark over St. Mark's Place, but St.
Paul over St. Paul's Churchyard.

Under these influences pass away the first reflective hours of life,
with such conclusion as they can reach. In consequence of a fit of
illness, he was taken--I cannot ascertain in what year[127]--to live with
an aunt, at Brentford; and here, I believe, received some schooling,
which he seems to have snatched vigorously; getting knowledge, at least
by translation, of the more picturesque classical authors, which he
turned presently to use, as we shall see. Hence also, walks about
Putney and Twickenham in the summer time acquainted him with the look
of English meadow-ground in its restricted states of paddock and park;
and with some round-headed appearances of trees, and stately entrances
to houses of mark: the avenue at Bushy, and the iron gates and carved
pillars of Hampton,[128] impressing him apparently with great awe and
admiration; so that in after life his little country house is,--of all
places in the world,--at Twickenham! Of swans and reedy shores he now
learns the soft motion and the green mystery, in a way not to be
forgotten.

And at last fortune wills that the lad's true life shall begin; and one
summer's evening, after various wonderful stage-coach experiences on
the north road, which gave him a love of stage-coaches ever after, he
finds himself sitting alone among the Yorkshire hills.[129] For the
first time, the silence of Nature round him, her freedom sealed to him,
her glory opened to him. Peace at last; no roll of cart-wheel, nor
mutter of sullen voices in the back shop; but curlew-cry in space of
heaven, and welling of bell-toned streamlet by its shadowy rock.
Freedom at last. Dead-wall, dark railing, fenced field, gated garden,
all passed away like the dream, of a prisoner; and behold, far as foot
or eye can race or range, the moor, and cloud. Loveliness at last. It
is here, then, among these deserted vales! Not among men. Those pale,
poverty-struck, or cruel faces;--that multitudinous, marred
humanity--are not the only things that God has made. Here is something
He has made which no one has marred. Pride of purple rocks, and river
pools of blue, and tender wilderness of glittering trees, and misty
lights of evening on immeasurable hills.

Beauty, and freedom, and peace; and yet another teacher, graver than
these. Sound preaching at last here, in Kirkstall crypt, concerning
fate and life. Here, where the dark pool reflects the chancel pillars,
and the cattle lie in unhindered rest, the soft sunshine on their
dappled bodies, instead of priests' vestments; their white furry hair
ruffled a little, fitfully, by the evening wind deep-scented from the
meadow thyme.

Consider deeply the import to him of this, his first sight of ruin, and
compare it with the effect of the architecture that was around
Giorgione. There were indeed aged buildings, at Venice, in his time,
but none in decay. All ruin was removed, and its place filled as
quickly as in our London; but filled always by architecture loftier and
more wonderful than that whose place it took, the boy himself happy to
work upon the walls of it; so that the idea of the passing away of the
strength of men and beauty of their works never could occur to him
sternly. Brighter and brighter the cities of Italy had been rising and
broadening on hill and plain, for three hundred years. He saw only
strength and immortality, could not but paint both; conceived the form
of man as deathless, calm with power, and fiery with life.

Turner saw the exact reverse of this. In the present work of men,
meanness, aimlessness, unsightliness: thin-walled, lath-divided,
narrow-garreted houses of clay; booths of a darksome Vanity Fair,
busily base.

But on Whitby Hill, and by Bolton Brook,[130] remained traces of other
handiwork. Men who could build had been there; and who also had
wrought, not merely for their own days. But to what purpose? Strong
faith, and steady hands, and patient souls--can this, then, be all you
have left! this the sum of your doing on the earth!--a nest whence the
night-owl may whimper to the brook, and a ribbed skeleton of consumed
arches, looming above the bleak banks of mist, from its cliff to the
sea?

As the strength of men to Giorgione, to Turner their weakness and
vileness, were alone visible. They themselves, unworthy or ephemeral;
their work, despicable, or decayed. In the Venetian's eyes, all beauty
depended on man's presence and pride; in Turner's, on the solitude he
had left, and the humiliation he had suffered.

And thus the fate and issue of all his work were determined at once. He
must be a painter of the strength of nature, there was no beauty
elsewhere than in that; he must paint also the labour and sorrow and
passing away of men: this was the great human truth visible to him.

Their labour, their sorrow, and their death. Mark the three. Labour; by
sea and land, in field and city, at forge and furnace, helm and plough.
No pastoral indolence nor classic pride shall stand between him and the
troubling of the world; still less between him and the toil of his
country,--blind, tormented, unwearied, marvellous England.

Also their Sorrow; Ruin of all their glorious work, passing away of
their thoughts and their honour, mirage of pleasure, FALLACY OF HOPE;
gathering of weed on temple step; gaining of wave on deserted strand;
weeping of the mother for the children, desolate by her breathless
first-born in the streets of the city,[131] desolate by her last sons
slain, among the beasts of the field.[132]

And their Death. That old Greek question again;--yet unanswered. The
unconquerable spectre still flitting among the forest trees at
twilight; rising ribbed out of the sea-sand;--white, a strange
Aphrodite,--out of the sea-foam; stretching its grey, cloven wings
among the clouds; turning the light of their sunsets into blood. This
has to be looked upon, and in a more terrible shape than ever Salvator
or Dürer saw it.[133] The wreck of one guilty country does not infer the
ruin of all countries, and need not cause general terror respecting the
laws of the universe. Neither did the orderly and narrow succession of
domestic joy and sorrow in a small German community bring the question
in its breadth, or in any unresolvable shape, before the mind of Dürer.
But the English death--the European death of the nineteenth
century--was of another range and power; more terrible a thousandfold
in its merely physical grasp and grief; more terrible, incalculably, in
its mystery and shame. What were the robber's casual pang, or the range
of the flying skirmish, compared to the work of the axe, and the sword,
and the famine, which was done during this man's youth on all the hills
and plains of the Christian earth, from Moscow to Gibraltar? He was
eighteen years old when Napoleon came down on Arcola. Look on the map
of Europe and count the blood-stains on it, between Arcola and
Waterloo.[134]

Not alone those blood-stains on the Alpine snow, and the blue of the
Lombard plain. The English death was before his eyes also. No decent,
calculable, consoled dying; no passing to rest like that of the aged
burghers of Nuremberg town. No gentle processions to churchyards among
the fields, the bronze crests bossed deep on the memorial tablets, and
the skylark singing above them from among the corn. But the life
trampled out in the slime of the street, crushed to dust amidst the
roaring of the wheel, tossed countlessly away into howling winter wind
along five hundred leagues of rock-fanged shore. Or, worst of all,
rotted down to forgotten graves through years of ignorant patience, and
vain seeking for help from man, for hope in God--infirm, imperfect
yearning, as of motherless infants starving at the dawn; oppressed
royalties of captive thought, vague ague-fits of bleak, amazed despair.

A goodly landscape this, for the lad to paint, and under a goodly
light. Wide enough the light was, and clear; no more Salvator's lurid
chasm on jagged horizon, nor Dürer's spotted rest of sunny gleam on
hedgerow and field; but light over all the world. Full shone now its
awful globe, one pallid charnel-house,--a ball strewn bright with human
ashes, glaring in poised sway beneath the sun, all blinding-white with
death from pole to pole,--death, not of myriads of poor bodies only,
but of will, and mercy, and conscience; death, not once inflicted on
the flesh, but daily, fastening on the spirit; death, not silent or
patient, waiting his appointed hour, but voiceful, venomous; death with
the taunting word, and burning grasp, and infixed sting.

"Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe."[135] The word is spoken
in our ears continually to other reapers than the angels,--to the busy
skeletons that never tire for stooping. When the measure of iniquity is
full, and it seems that another day might bring repentance and
redemption,--"Put ye in the sickle." When the young life has been
wasted all away, and the eyes are just opening upon the tracks of ruin,
and faint resolution rising in the heart for nobler things,--"Put ye in
the sickle." When the roughest blows of fortune have been borne long
and bravely, and the hand is just stretched to grasp its goal,--"Put ye
in the sickle." And when there are but a few in the midst of a nation,
to save it, or to teach, or to cherish; and all its life is bound up in
those few golden ears,--"Put ye in the sickle, pale reapers, and pour
hemlock for your feast of harvest home."

This was the sight which opened on the young eyes, this the watchword
sounding within the heart of Turner in his youth.

So taught, and prepared for his life's labour, sate the boy at last
alone among his fair English hills; and began to paint, with cautious
toil, the rocks, and fields, and trickling brooks, and soft white
clouds of heaven.


  [120] c. 1478-1511.

  [121] Dante, alluding to Florence, _Paradiso_, 25. 5. "From the
  fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered." Longfellow's tr.

  [122] Allusions to pictures by Turner, The Garden of the
  Hesperides, and The Meuse: Orange-Merchantman going to pieces on
  the Bar.

  [123] The pictures referred to are: The Death of Nelson, The Battle
  of Trafalgar, and The Fighting Téméraire being towed to its Last
  Berth (see cut). The first and third are in the National Gallery,
  London.

  [124] _Matthew_ xxiii, 14.

  [125] Santa Maria della Salute, a church conspicuously situated at
  the junction of the Grand Canal and the Giudecca.

  [126] _Liber Studiorum_. "Interior of a church." It is worthy of
  remark that Giorgione and Titian are always delighted to have an
  opportunity of drawing priests. The English Church may, perhaps,
  accept it as matter of congratulation that this is the only
  instance in which Turner drew a clergyman. [Ruskin.]

  [127] 1785.

  [128] Wolsey's famous palace, twelve miles from London.

  [129] I do not mean that this is his first acquaintance with the
  country, but the first impressive and touching one, after his mind
  was formed. The earliest sketches I found in the National
  Collection are at Clifton and Bristol; the next, at Oxford.
  [Ruskin.]

  [130] The reference is to the two famous ruined abbeys of
  Yorkshire--Whitby and Bolton.

  [131] The Tenth Plague of Egypt. [Ruskin.]

  [132] Rizpah, the Daughter of Aiah. [Ruskin.]

  [133] Dürer [1471-1528], German painter, engraver, and designer.
  Salvator [1615-73], Italian painter, etcher, satirical poet, and
  musical composer.

  [134] _I.e._, between November 17, 1796, and June 18, 1815.

  [135] _Joel_ iii, 13.




SELECTIONS FROM

THE STONES OF VENICE


The first volume of _The Stones of Venice_ appeared in March, 1851; the
first day of May of the same year we find the following entry in
Ruskin's diary: "About to enter on the true beginning of the second
part of my Venetian work. May God help me to finish it--to His glory,
and man's good." The main part of the volume was composed at Venice in
the winter of 1851-52, though it did not appear until the end of July,
1853. His work on architecture, including _The Seven Lamps_, it will be
noted, intervenes between the composition of the second and third
volumes of _Modern Painters_; and Ruskin himself always looked upon
the work as an interlude, almost as an interruption. But he also came
to believe that this digression had really led back to the heart of
the truth for all art. Its main theme, as in _The Seven Lamps of
Architecture_, is its illustration of the principle that architecture
expresses certain states in the moral temper of the people by and for
whom it is produced. It may surprise us to-day to know that when Ruskin
wrote of the glories of Venetian architecture, the common "professional
opinion was that St. Mark's and the Ducal Palace were as ugly and
repulsive as they were contrary to rule and order." In a private letter
Gibbon writes of the Square of St. Mark's as "a large square decorated
with the worst architecture I ever saw." The architects of his own time
regarded Ruskin's opinions as dictated by wild caprice, and almost
evincing an unbalanced mind. Probably the core of all this
architectural work is to be found in his chapter "On the Nature of
Gothic," in the main reproduced in this volume. And we find here again
a point of fundamental significance--that his artistic analysis led him
inevitably on to social inquiries. He proved to himself that the main
virtue of Gothic lay in the unrestricted play of the individual
imagination; that the best results were produced when every artist was
a workman and every workman an artist. Twenty years after the
publication of this book, he wrote in a private letter that his main
purpose "was to show the dependence of (architectural) beauty on the
happiness and fancy of the workman, and to show also that no architect
could claim the title to authority of _Magister_ unless he himself
wrought at the head of his men, captain of manual skill, as the best
knight is captain of armies." He himself called the chapter "precisely
and accurately the most important in the whole book." Mr. Frederic
Harrison says that in it is "the creed, if it be not the origin, of a
new industrial school of thought."




THE THRONE

VOLUME II, CHAPTER I


In the olden days of travelling, now to return no more, in which
distance could not be vanquished without toil, but in which that toil
was rewarded, partly by the power of deliberate survey of the countries
through which the journey lay, and partly by the happiness of the
evening hours, when from the top of the last hill he had surmounted,
the traveller beheld the quiet village where he was to rest, scattered
among the meadows beside its valley stream; or, from the long hoped for
turn in the dusty perspective of the causeway, saw, for the first time,
the towers of some famed city, faint in the rays of sunset--hours of
peaceful and thoughtful pleasure, for which the rush of the arrival in
the railway station is perhaps not always, or to all men, an
equivalent,--in those days, I say, when there was something more to be
anticipated and remembered in the first aspect of each successive
halting-place, than a new arrangement of glass roofing and iron girder,
there were few moments of which the recollection was more fondly
cherished by the traveller, than that which, as I endeavoured to
describe in the close of the last chapter, brought him within sight of
Venice, as his gondola shot into the open lagoon from the canal of
Mestre. Not but that the aspect of the city itself was generally the
source of some slight disappointment, for, seen in this direction, its
buildings are far less characteristic than those of the other great
towns of Italy; but this inferiority was partly disguised by distance,
and more than atoned for by the strange rising of its walls and towers
out of the midst, as it seemed, of the deep sea, for it was impossible
that the mind or the eye could at once comprehend the shallowness of
the vast sheet of water which stretched away in leagues of rippling
lustre to the north and south, or trace the narrow line of islets
bounding it to the east. The salt breeze, the white moaning sea-birds,
the masses of black weed separating and disappearing gradually, in
knots of heaving shoal, under the advance of the steady tide, all
proclaimed it to be indeed the ocean on whose bosom the great city
rested so calmly; not such blue, soft, lake-like ocean as bathes the
Neapolitan promontories, or sleeps beneath the marble rocks of Genoa,
but a sea with the bleak power of our own northern waves, yet subdued
into a strange spacious rest, and changed from its angry pallor into a
field of burnished gold, as the sun declined behind the belfry tower of
the lonely island church, fitly named "St. George of the Seaweed." As
the boat drew nearer to the city, the coast which the traveller had
just left sank behind him into one long, low, sad-coloured line, tufted
irregularly with brushwood and willows: but, at what seemed its
northern extremity, the hills of Arqua rose in a dark cluster of purple
pyramids, balanced on the bright mirage of the lagoon; two or three
smooth surges of inferior hill extended themselves about their roots,
and beyond these, beginning with the craggy peaks above Vicenza, the
chain of the Alps girded the whole horizon to the north--a wall of
jagged blue, here and there showing through its clefts a wilderness of
misty precipices, fading far back into the recesses of Cadore, and
itself rising and breaking away eastward, where the sun struck opposite
upon its snow, into mighty fragments of peaked light, standing up
behind the barred clouds of evening, one after another, countless, the
crown of the Adrian Sea, until the eye turned back from pursuing them,
to rest upon the nearer burning of the campaniles of Murano, and on the
great city, where it magnified itself along the waves, as the quick
silent pacing of the gondola drew nearer and nearer. And at last, when
its walls were reached, and the outmost of its untrodden streets was
entered, not through towered gate or guarded rampart, but as a deep
inlet between two rocks of coral in the Indian sea; when first upon the
traveller's sight opened the long ranges of columned palaces,--each
with its black boat moored at the portal,--each with its image cast
down, beneath its feet, upon that green pavement which every breeze
broke into new fantasies of rich tessellation; when first, at the
extremity of the bright vista, the shadowy Rialto threw its colossal
curve slowly forth from behind the palace of the Camerlenghi;[136] that
strange curve, so delicate, so adamantine, strong as a mountain cavern,
graceful as a bow just bent; when first, before its moonlike
circumference was all risen, the gondolier's cry, "Ah! Stalì,"[137]
struck sharp upon the ear, and the prow turned aside under the mighty
cornices that half met over the narrow canal, where the splash of the
water followed close and loud, ringing along the marble by the boat's
side; and when at last that boat darted forth upon the breadth of
silver sea, across which the front of the Ducal Palace, flushed with
its sanguine veins, looks to the snowy dome of Our Lady of
Salvation,[138] it was no marvel that the mind should be so deeply
entranced by the visionary charm of a scene so beautiful and so
strange, as to forget the darker truths of its history and its being.
Well might it seem that such a city had owed her existence rather to
the rod of the enchanter, than the fear of the fugitive; that the
waters which encircled her had been chosen for the mirror of her state,
rather than the shelter of her nakedness; and that all which in nature
was wild or merciless,--Time and Decay, as well as the waves and
tempests,--had been won to adorn her instead of to destroy, and might
still spare, for ages to come, that beauty which seemed to have fixed
for its throne the sands of the hour-glass as well as of the sea.

And although the last few eventful years, fraught with change to the
face of the whole earth, have been more fatal in their influence on
Venice than the five hundred that preceded them; though the noble
landscape of approach to her can now be seen no more, or seen only by a
glance, as the engine slackens its rushing on the iron line; and though
many of her palaces are for ever defaced, and many in desecrated ruins,
there is still so much of magic in her aspect, that the hurried
traveller, who must leave her before the wonder of that first aspect
has been worn away, may still be led to forget the humility of her
origin, and to shut his eyes to the depth of her desolation. They, at
least, are little to be envied, in whose hearts the great charities of
the imagination lie dead, and for whom the fancy has no power to
repress the importunity of painful impressions, or to raise what is
ignoble, and disguise what is discordant, in a scene so rich in its
remembrances, so surpassing in its beauty. But for this work of the
imagination there must be no permission during the task which is before
us. The impotent feelings of romance, so singularly characteristic of
this century, may indeed gild, but never save, the remains of those
mightier ages to which they are attached like climbing flowers; and
they must be torn away from the magnificent fragments, if we would see
them as they stood in their own strength. Those feelings, always as
fruitless as they are fond, are in Venice not only incapable of
protecting, but even of discerning, the objects to which they ought to
have been attached. The Venice of modern fiction and drama is a thing
of yesterday, a mere efflorescence of decay, a stage dream which the
first ray of daylight must dissipate into dust. No prisoner, whose name
is worth remembering, or whose sorrow deserved sympathy, ever crossed
that "Bridge of Sighs," which is the centre of the Byronic ideal of
Venice;[139] no great merchant of Venice ever saw that Rialto under which
the traveller now passes with breathless interest: the statue which
Byron makes Faliero address as of one of his great ancestors was
erected to a soldier of fortune a hundred and fifty years after
Faliero's death;[140] and the most conspicuous parts of the city have
been so entirely altered in the course of the last three centuries,
that if Henry Dandolo or Francis Foscari[141] could be summoned from
their tombs, and stood each on the deck of his galley at the entrance
of the Grand Canal, that renowned entrance, the painter's favourite
subject, the novelist's favourite scene, where the water first narrows
by the steps of the Church of La Salute,--the mighty Doges would not
know in what part of the world they stood, would literally not
recognize one stone of the great city, for whose sake, and by whose
ingratitude, their grey hairs had been brought down with bitterness to
the grave. The remains of _their_ Venice lie hidden behind the cumbrous
masses which were the delight of the nation in its dotage; hidden in
many a grass-grown court, and silent pathway, and lightless canal,
where the slow waves have sapped their foundations for five hundred
years, and must soon prevail over them for ever. It must be our task to
glean and gather them forth, and restore out of them some faint image
of the lost city; more gorgeous a thousandfold than that which now
exists, yet not created in the day-dream of the prince, nor by the
ostentation of the noble, but built by iron hands and patient hearts,
contending against the adversity of nature and the fury of man, so that
its wonderfulness cannot be grasped by the indolence of imagination,
but only after frank inquiry into the true nature of that wild and
solitary scene, whose restless tides and trembling sands did indeed
shelter the birth of the city, but long denied her dominion.

When the eye falls casually on a map of Europe, there is no feature by
which it is more likely to be arrested than the strange sweeping loop
formed by the junction of the Alps and Apennines, and enclosing the
great basin of Lombardy. This return of the mountain chain upon itself
causes a vast difference in the character of the distribution of its
debris on its opposite sides. The rock fragments and sediment which the
torrents on the other side of the Alps bear into the plains are
distributed over a vast extent of country, and, though here and there
lodged in beds of enormous thickness, soon permit the firm substrata to
appear from underneath them; but all the torrents which descend from
the southern side of the High Alps, and from the northern slope of the
Apennines, meet concentrically in the recess or mountain bay which the
two ridges enclose; every fragment which thunder breaks out of their
battlements, and every grain of dust which the summer rain washes from
their pastures, is at last laid at rest in the blue sweep of the
Lombardic plain; and that plain must have risen within its rocky
barriers as a cup fills with wine, but for two contrary influences
which continually depress, or disperse from its surface, the
accumulation of the ruins of ages.

I will not tax the reader's faith in modern science by insisting on the
singular depression of the surface of Lombardy, which appears for many
centuries to have taken place steadily and continually; the main fact
with which we have to do is the gradual transport, by the Po and its
great collateral rivers, of vast masses of the finer sediment to the
sea. The character of the Lombardic plains is most strikingly expressed
by the ancient walls of its cities, composed for the most part of large
rounded Alpine pebbles alternating with narrow courses of brick; and
was curiously illustrated in 1848, by the ramparts of these same
pebbles thrown up four or five feet high round every field, to check
the Austrian cavalry in the battle under the walls of Verona.[142] The
finer dust among which these pebbles are dispersed is taken up by the
rivers, fed into continual strength by the Alpine snow, so that,
however pure their waters may be when they issue from the lakes at the
foot of the great chain, they become of the colour and opacity of clay
before they reach the Adriatic; the sediment which they bear is at once
thrown down as they enter the sea, forming a vast belt of low land
along the eastern coast of Italy. The powerful stream of the Po of
course builds forward the fastest; on each side of it, north and south,
there is a tract of marsh, fed by more feeble streams, and less liable
to rapid change than the delta of the central river. In one of these
tracts is built RAVENNA, and in the other VENICE.

What circumstances directed the peculiar arrangement of this great belt
of sediment in the earliest times, it is not here the place to inquire.
It is enough for us to know that from the mouths of the Adige to those
of the Piave there stretches, at a variable distance of from three to
five miles from the actual shore, a bank of sand, divided into long
islands by narrow channels of sea. The space between this bank and the
true shore consists of the sedimentary deposits from these and other
rivers, a great plain of calcareous mud, covered, in the neighbourhood
of Venice, by the sea at high water, to the depth in most places of a
foot or a foot and a half, and nearly everywhere exposed at low tide,
but divided by an intricate network of narrow and winding channels,
from which the sea never retires. In some places, according to the run
of the currents, the land has risen into marshy islets, consolidated,
some by art, and some by time, into ground firm enough to be built
upon, or fruitful enough to be cultivated: in others, on the contrary,
it has not reached the sea level; so that, at the average low water,
shallow lakelets glitter among its irregularly exposed fields of
seaweed. In the midst of the largest of these, increased in importance
by the confluence of several large river channels towards one of the
openings in the sea bank, the city of Venice itself is built, on a
crowded cluster of islands; the various plots of higher ground which
appear to the north and south of this central cluster, have at
different periods been also thickly inhabited, and now bear, according
to their size, the remains of cities, villages, or isolated convents
and churches, scattered among spaces of open ground, partly waste and
encumbered by ruins, partly under cultivation for the supply of the
metropolis.

The average rise and fall of the tide is about three feet (varying
considerably with the seasons); but this fall, on so flat a shore, is
enough to cause continual movement in the waters, and in the main
canals to produce a reflux which frequently runs like a mill stream. At
high water no land is visible for many miles to the north or south of
Venice, except in the form of small islands crowned with towers or
gleaming with villages: there is a channel, some three miles wide,
between the city and the mainland, and some mile and a half wide
between it and the sandy breakwater called the Lido, which divides the
lagoon from the Adriatic, but which is so low as hardly to disturb the
impression of the city's having been built in the midst of the ocean,
although the secret of its true position is partly, yet not painfully,
betrayed by the clusters of piles set to mark the deepwater channels,
which undulate far away in spotty chains like the studded backs of huge
sea-snakes, and by the quick glittering of the crisped and crowded
waves that flicker and dance before the strong winds upon the uplifted
level of the shallow sea. But the scene is widely different at low
tide. A fall of eighteen or twenty inches is enough to show ground over
the greater part of the lagoon; and at the complete ebb the city is
seen standing in the midst of a dark plain of sea-weed, of gloomy
green, except only where the larger branches of the Brenta and its
associated streams converge towards the port of the Lido. Through this
salt and sombre plain the gondola and the fishing-boat advance by
tortuous channels, seldom more than four or five feet deep, and often
so choked with slime that the heavier keels furrow the bottom till
their crossing tracks are seen through the clear sea water like the
ruts upon a wintry road, and the oar leaves blue gashes upon the ground
at every stroke, or is entangled among the thick weed that fringes the
banks with the weight of its sullen waves, leaning to and fro upon the
uncertain sway of the exhausted tide. The scene is often profoundly
oppressive, even at this day, when every plot of higher ground bears
some fragment of fair building: but, in order to know what it was once,
let the traveller follow in his boat at evening the windings of some
unfrequented channel far into the midst of the melancholy plain; let
him remove, in his imagination, the brightness of the great city that
still extends itself in the distance, and the walls and towers from the
islands that are near; and so wait, until the bright investiture and
sweet warmth of the sunset are withdrawn from the waters, and the black
desert of their shore lies in its nakedness beneath the night,
pathless, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor and fearful
silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the tideless pools,
or the sea-birds flit from their margins with a questioning cry; and he
will be enabled to enter in some sort into the horror of heart with
which this solitude was anciently chosen by man for his habitation.
They little thought, who first drove the stakes into the sand, and
strewed the ocean reeds for their rest, that their children were to be
the princes of that ocean, and their palaces its pride; and yet, in the
great natural laws that rule that sorrowful wilderness, let it be
remembered what strange preparation had been made for the things which
no human imagination could have foretold, and how the whole existence
and fortune of the Venetian nation were anticipated or compelled, by
the setting of those bars and doors to the rivers and the sea. Had
deeper currents divided their islands, hostile navies would again and
again have reduced the rising city into servitude; had stronger surges
beaten their shores, all the richness and refinement of the Venetian
architecture must have been exchanged for the walls and bulwarks of an
ordinary sea-port. Had there been no tide, as in other parts of the
Mediterranean, the narrow canals of the city would have become noisome,
and the marsh in which it was built pestiferous. Had the tide been only
a foot or eighteen inches higher in its rise, the water-access to the
doors of the palaces would have been impossible: even as it is, there
is sometimes a little difficulty, at the ebb, in landing without
setting foot upon the lower and slippery steps; and the highest tides
sometimes enter the courtyards, and overflow the entrance halls.
Eighteen inches more of difference between the level of the flood and
ebb would have rendered the doorsteps of every palace, at low water, a
treacherous mass of weeds and limpets, and the entire system of
water-carriage for the higher classes, in their easy and daily
intercourse, must have been done away with. The streets of the city
would have been widened, its network of canals filled up, and all the
peculiar character of the place and the people destroyed.

The reader may perhaps have felt some pain in the contrast between this
faithful view of the site of the Venetian Throne, and the romantic
conception of it which we ordinarily form; but this pain, if he have
felt it, ought to be more than counterbalanced by the value of the
instance thus afforded to us at once of the inscrutableness and the
wisdom of the ways of God. If, two thousand years ago, we had been
permitted to watch the slow settling of the slime of those turbid
rivers into the polluted sea, and the gaining upon its deep and fresh
waters of the lifeless, impassable, unvoyageable plain, how little
could we have understood the purpose with which those islands were
shaped out of the void, and the torpid waters enclosed with their
desolate walls of sand! How little could we have known, any more than
of what now seems to us most distressful, dark, and objectless, the
glorious aim which was then in the mind of Him in whose hand are all
the corners of the earth! how little imagined that in the laws which
were stretching forth the gloomy margins of those fruitless banks, and
feeding the bitter grass among their shallows, there was indeed a
preparation, and _the only preparation possible_, for the founding of a
city which was to be set like a golden clasp on the girdle of the
earth, to write her history on the white scrolls of the sea-surges, and
to word it in their thunder, and to gather and give forth, in
world-wide pulsation, the glory of the West and of the East, from the
burning heart of her Fortitude and Splendour.


  [136] The palace of the Camerlenghi, beside the Rialto, is a
  graceful work of the early Renaissance (1525) passing into Roman
  Renaissance. [Adapted from Ruskin.]

  [137] Signifying approximately "Keep to the right."

  [138] See note 1, p. 129.

  [139] _Childe Harold_, 4. 1.

  [140] _Marino Faliero_, 3. 1. 22 ff.

  [141] Dandolo [c. 1108-1205] and Foscari [1372-1457] were among the
  most famous of Venetian Doges.

  [142] In the battle of Custozza, 1848, the Austrians defeated the
  Piedmontese.




ST. MARK'S

VOLUME II, CHAPTER 4


"And so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus." If as the shores
of Asia lessened upon his sight, the spirit of prophecy had entered
into the heart of the weak disciple who had turned back when his hand
was on the plough, and who had been judged, by the chiefest of Christ's
captains, unworthy thenceforward to go forth with him to the work,[143]
how wonderful would he have thought it, that by the lion symbol in
future ages he was to be represented among men! how woful, that the
war-cry of his name should so often reanimate the rage of the soldier,
on those very plains where he himself had failed in the courage of the
Christian, and so often dye with fruitless blood that very Cypriot Sea,
over whose waves, in repentance and shame, he was following the Son of
Consolation!

That the Venetians possessed themselves of his body in the ninth
century, there appears no sufficient reason to doubt, nor that it was
principally in consequence of their having done so, that they chose him
for their patron saint. There exists, however, a tradition that before
he went into Egypt he had founded the church at Aquileia, and was thus
in some sort the first bishop of the Venetian isles and people. I
believe that this tradition stands on nearly as good grounds as that of
St. Peter having been the first bishop of Rome[144]; but, as usual, it is
enriched by various later additions and embellishments, much resembling
the stories told respecting the church of Murano. Thus we find it
recorded by the Santo Padre who compiled the _Vife de' Santi spettanti
alle Chiese di Venezia_,[145] that "St. Mark having seen the people of
Aquileia well grounded in religion, and being called to Rome by St.
Peter, before setting off took with him the holy bishop Hermagoras, and
went in a small boat to the marshes of Venice. There were at that
period some houses built upon a certain high bank called Rialto, and
the boat being driven by the wind was anchored in a marshy place, when
St. Mark, snatched into ecstasy, heard the voice of an angel saying to
him: 'Peace be to thee, Mark; here shall thy body rest.'" The angel
goes on to foretell the building of "una stupenda, ne più veduta
Città"[146]; but the fable is hardly ingenious enough to deserve farther
relation.

But whether St. Mark was first bishop of Aquileia or not, St. Theodore
was the first patron of the city; nor can he yet be considered as
having entirely abdicated his early right, as his statue, standing on a
crocodile, still companions the winged lion on the opposing pillar of
the piazzetta. A church erected to this Saint is said to have occupied,
before the ninth century, the site of St. Mark's; and the traveller,
dazzled by the brilliancy of the great square, ought not to leave it
without endeavouring to imagine its aspect in that early time, when it
was a green field cloister-like and quiet,[147] divided by a small canal,
with a line of trees on each side; and extending between the two
churches of St. Theodore and St. Gemanium, as the little piazza of
Torcello lies between its "palazzo" and cathedral.

But in the year 813, when the seat of government was finally removed to
the Rialto, a Ducal Palace, built on the spot where the present one
stands, with a Ducal Chapel beside it,[148] gave a very different
character to the Square of St. Mark; and fifteen years later, the
acquisition of the body of the Saint, and its deposition in the Ducal
Chapel, perhaps not yet completed, occasioned the investiture of that
chapel with all possible splendour. St. Theodore was deposed from his
patronship, and his church destroyed, to make room for the
aggrandizement of the one attached to the Ducal Palace, and
thenceforward known as "St. Mark's."[149]

This first church was however destroyed by fire, when the Ducal Palace
was burned in the revolt against Candiano, in 976. It was partly
rebuilt by his successor, Pietro Orseolo, on a larger scale; and, with
the assistance of Byzantine architects, the fabric was carried on under
successive Doges for nearly a hundred years; the main building being
completed in 1071, but its incrustation with marble not till
considerably later. It was consecrated on the 8th of October, 1085,[150]
according to Sansovino and the author of the _Chiesa Ducale di S.
Marco_, in 1094 according to Lazari, but certainly between 1084 and
1096, those years being the limits of the reign of Vital Falier; I
incline to the supposition that it was soon after his accession to the
throne in 1085, though Sansovino writes, by mistake, Ordelafo instead
of Vital Falier. But, at all events, before the close of the eleventh
century the great consecration of the church took place. It was again
injured by fire in 1106, but repaired; and from that time to the fall
of Venice there was probably no Doge who did not in some slight degree
embellish or alter the fabric, so that few parts of it can be
pronounced boldly to be of any given date. Two periods of interference
are, however, notable above the rest: the first, that in which the
Gothic school had superseded the Byzantine towards the close of the
fourteenth century, when the pinnacles, upper archivolts, and window
traceries were added to the exterior, and the great screen with various
chapels and tabernacle-work, to the interior; the second, when the
Renaissance school superseded the Gothic, and the pupils of Titian
and Tintoret substituted, over one half of the church, their own
compositions for the Greek mosaics with which it was originally
decorated;[151] happily, though with no good will, having left enough
to enable us to imagine and lament what they destroyed. Of this
irreparable loss we shall have more to say hereafter; meantime, I wish
only to fix in the reader's mind the succession of periods of
alterations as firmly and simply as possible.

We have seen that the main body of the church may be broadly stated to
be of the eleventh century, the Gothic additions of the fourteenth, and
the restored mosaics of the seventeenth. There is no difficulty in
distinguishing at a glance the Gothic portions from the Byzantine; but
there is considerable difficulty in ascertaining how long, during the
course of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, additions were made to
the Byzantine church, which cannot be easily distinguished from the
work of the eleventh century, being purposely executed in the same
manner. Two of the most important pieces of evidence on this point are,
a mosaic in the south transept, and another over the northern door of
the façade; the first representing the interior, the second the
exterior, of the ancient church.

It has just been stated that the existing building was consecrated by
the Doge Vital Falier. A peculiar solemnity was given to that act of
consecration, in the minds of the Venetian people, by what appears to
have been one of the best arranged and most successful impostures ever
attempted by the clergy of the Romish church. The body of St. Mark had,
without doubt, perished in the conflagration of 976; but the revenues
of the church depended too much upon the devotion excited by these
relics to permit the confession of their loss. The following is the
account given by Corner, and believed to this day by the Venetians, of
the pretended miracle by which it was concealed.

"After the repairs undertaken by the Doge Orseolo, the place in which
the body of the holy Evangelist rested had been altogether forgotten;
so that the Doge Vital Falier was entirely ignorant of the place of the
venerable deposit. This was no light affliction, not only to the pious
Doge, but to all the citizens and people; so that at last, moved by
confidence in the Divine mercy, they determined to implore, with prayer
and fasting, the manifestation of so great a treasure, which did not
now depend upon any human effort. A general fast being therefore
proclaimed, and a solemn procession appointed for the 25th day of June,
while the people assembled in the church interceded with God in fervent
prayers for the desired boon, they beheld, with as much amazement as
joy, a slight shaking in the marbles of a pillar (near the place where
the altar of the Cross is now), which, presently falling to the earth,
exposed to the view of the rejoicing people the chest of bronze in
which the body of the Evangelist was laid."

Of the main facts of this tale there is no doubt. They were embellished
afterwards, as usual, by many fanciful traditions; as, for instance,
that, when the sarcophagus was discovered, St. Mark extended his hand
out of it, with a gold ring on one of the fingers, which he permitted a
noble of the Dolfin family to remove; and a quaint and delightful story
was further invented of this ring, which I shall not repeat here, as it
is now as well known as any tale of the Arabian Nights. But the fast
and the discovery of the coffin, by whatever means effected, are facts;
and they are recorded in one of the best-preserved mosaics of the
north[152] transept, executed very certainly not long after the event
had taken place, closely resembling in its treatment that of the Bayeux
tapestry, and showing, in a conventional manner, the interior of the
church, as it then was, filled by the people, first in prayer, then in
thanksgiving, the pillar standing open before them, and the Doge, in
the midst of them, distinguished by his crimson bonnet embroidered with
gold, but more unmistakably by the inscription "Dux" over his head, as
uniformly is the case in the Bayeux tapestry, and most other pictorial
works of the period. The church is, of course, rudely represented, and
the two upper stories of it reduced to a small scale in order to form a
background to the figures; one of those bold pieces of picture history
which we in our pride of perspective, and a thousand things besides,
never dare attempt. We should have put in a column or two, of the real
or perspective size, and subdued it into a vague background: the old
workman crushed the church together that he might get it all in, up to
the cupolas; and has, therefore, left us some useful notes of its
ancient form, though any one who is familiar with the method of drawing
employed at the period will not push the evidence too far. The two
pulpits are there, however, as they are at this day, and the fringe of
mosaic flowerwork which then encompassed the whole church, but which
modern restorers have destroyed, all but one fragment still left in the
south aisle. There is no attempt to represent the other mosaics on the
roof, the scale being too small to admit of their being represented
with any success; but some at least of those mosaics had been executed
at that period, and their absence in the representation of the entire
church is especially to be observed, in order to show that we must not
trust to any negative evidence in such works. M. Lazari has rashly
concluded that the central archivolt of St. Mark's _must_ be posterior
to the year 1205, because it does not appear in the representation of
the exterior of the church over the northern door;[153] but he justly
observes that this mosaic (which is the other piece of evidence we
possess respecting the ancient form of the building) cannot itself be
earlier than 1205, since it represents the bronze horses which were
brought from Constantinople in that year. And this one fact renders it
very difficult to speak with confidence respecting the date of any part
of the exterior of St. Mark's; for we have above seen that it was
consecrated in the eleventh century, and yet here is one of its most
important exterior decorations assuredly retouched, if not entirely
added, in the thirteenth, although its style would have led us to
suppose it had been an original part of the fabric. However, for all
our purposes, it will be enough for the reader to remember that the
earliest parts of the building belong to the eleventh, twelfth, and
first part of the thirteenth century; the Gothic portions to the
fourteenth; some of the altars and embellishments to the fifteenth and
sixteenth; and the modern portion of the mosaics to the seventeenth.

This, however, I only wish him to recollect in order that I may speak
generally of the Byzantine architecture of St. Mark's, without leading
him to suppose the whole church to have been built and decorated by
Greek artists. Its later portions, with the single exception of the
seventeenth-century mosaics, have been so dexterously accommodated to
the original fabric that the general effect is still that of a
Byzantine building; and I shall not, except when it is absolutely
necessary, direct attention to the discordant points, or weary the
reader with anatomical criticism. Whatever in St. Mark's arrests the
eye, or affects the feelings, is either Byzantine, or has been modified
by Byzantine influence; and our inquiry into its architectural merits
need not therefore be disturbed by the anxieties of antiquarianism, or
arrested by the obscurities of chronology.

And now I wish that the reader, before I bring him into St. Mark's
Place, would imagine himself for a little time in a quiet English
cathedral town, and walk with me to the west front of its cathedral.
Let us go together up the more retired street, at the end of which we
can see the pinnacles of one of the towers, and then through the low
grey gateway, with its battlemented top and small latticed window in
the centre, into the inner private-looking road or close, where nothing
goes in but the carts of the tradesmen who supply the bishop and the
chapter, and where there are little shaven grass-plots, fenced in by
neat rails, before old-fashioned groups of somewhat diminutive and
excessively trim houses, with little oriel and bay windows jutting out
here and there, and deep wooden cornices and eaves painted cream colour
and white, and small porches to their doors in the shape of
cockle-shells, or little, crooked, thick, indescribable wooden gables
warped a little on one side; and so forward till we come to larger
houses, also old-fashioned, but of red brick, and with gardens behind
them, and fruit walls, which show here and there, among the nectarines,
the vestiges of an old cloister arch or shaft, and looking in front on
the cathedral square itself, laid out in rigid divisions of smooth
grass and gravel walk, yet not uncheerful, especially on the sunny
side, where the canons' children are walking with their nursery-maids.
And so, taking care not to tread on the grass, we will go along the
straight walk to the west front, and there stand for a time, looking up
at its deep-pointed porches and the dark places between their pillars
where there were statues once, and where the fragments, here and there,
of a stately figure are still left, which has in it the likeness of a
king, perhaps indeed a king on earth, perhaps a saintly king long ago
in heaven; and so higher and higher up to the great mouldering wall of
rugged sculpture and confused arcades, shattered, and grey, and grisly
with heads of dragons and mocking fiends, worn by the rain and swirling
winds into yet unseemlier shape, and coloured on their stony scales by
the deep russet-orange lichen, melancholy gold; and so, higher still,
to the bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses itself among the
bosses of their traceries, though they are rude and strong, and only
sees like a drift of eddying black points, now closing, now scattering,
and now settling suddenly into invisible places among the bosses and
flowers, the crowd of restless birds that fill the whole square with
that strange clangour of theirs, so harsh and yet so soothing, like the
cries of birds on a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea.

Think for a little while of that scene, and the meaning of all its
small formalisms, mixed with its serene sublimity. Estimate its
secluded, continuous, drowsy felicities, and its evidence of the sense
and steady performance of such kind of duties as can be regulated by
the cathedral clock; and weigh the influence of those dark towers on
all who have passed through the lonely square at their feet for
centuries, and on all who have seen them rising far away over the
wooded plain, or catching on their square masses the last rays of the
sunset, when the city at their feet was indicated only by the mist at
the bend of the river. And then let us quickly recollect that we are in
Venice, and land at the extremity of the Calla Lunga San Moisè, which
may be considered as there answering to the secluded street that led us
to our English cathedral gateway.

We find ourselves in a paved alley, some seven feet wide where it is
widest, full of people, and resonant with cries of itinerant
salesmen,--a shriek in their beginning, and dying away into a kind of
brazen ringing, all the worse for its confinement between the high
houses of the passage along which we have to make our way. Over-head,
an inextricable confusion of rugged shutters, and iron balconies and
chimney flues, pushed out on brackets to save room, and arched windows
with projecting sills of Istrian stone, and gleams of green leaves here
and there where a fig-tree branch escapes over a lower wall from some
inner cortile, leading the eye up to the narrow stream of blue sky high
over all. On each side, a row of shops, as densely set as may be,
occupying, in fact, intervals between the square stone shafts, about
eight feet high, which carry the first floors: intervals of which one
is narrow and serves as a door; the other is, in the more respectable
shops, wainscotted to the height of the counter and glazed above, but
in those of the poorer tradesmen left open to the ground, and the wares
laid on benches and tables in the open air, the light in all cases
entering at the front only, and fading away in a few feet from the
threshold into a gloom which the eye from without cannot penetrate, but
which is generally broken by a ray or two from a feeble lamp at the
back of the shop, suspended before a print of the Virgin. The less
pious shopkeeper sometimes leaves his lamp unlighted, and is contented
with a penny print; the more religious one has his print coloured and
set in a little shrine with a gilded or figured fringe, with perhaps a
faded flower or two on each side, and his lamp burning brilliantly.
Here, at the fruiterer's, where the dark-green water-melons are heaped
upon the counter like cannon balls, the Madonna has a tabernacle of
fresh laurel leaves; but the pewterer next door has let his lamp out,
and there is nothing to be seen in his shop but the dull gleam of the
studded patterns on the copper pans, hanging from his roof in the
darkness. Next comes a "Vendita Frittole e Liquori,"[154] where the
Virgin, enthroned in a very humble manner beside a tallow candle on a
back shelf, presides over certain ambrosial morsels of a nature too
ambiguous to be defined or enumerated. But a few steps farther on, at
the regular wine-shop of the calle, where we are offered "Vino
Nostrani a Soldi 28-32," the Madonna is in great glory, enthroned above
ten or a dozen large red casks of three-year-old vintage, and flanked
by goodly ranks of bottles of Maraschino, and two crimson lamps; and
for the evening, when the gondoliers will come to drink out, under her
auspices, the money they have gained during the day, she will have a
whole chandelier.

A yard or two farther, we pass the hostelry of the Black Eagle, and,
glancing as we pass through the square door of marble, deeply moulded,
in the outer wall, we see the shadows of its pergola of vines resting
on an ancient well, with a pointed shield carved on its side; and so
presently emerge on the bridge and Campo San Moisè, whence to the
entrance into St. Mark's Place, called the Bocca di Piazza (mouth of
the square), the Venetian character is nearly destroyed, first by the
frightful facade of San Moisè, which we will pause at another time to
examine, and then by the modernizing of the shops as they near the
piazza, and the mingling with the lower Venetian populace of lounging
groups of English and Austrians. We will push fast through them into
the shadow of the pillars at the end of the "Bocca di Piazza," and then
we forget them all; for between those pillars there opens a great
light, and, in the midst of it, as we advance slowly, the vast tower of
St. Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the level field of
chequered stones; and, on each side, the countless arches prolong
themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and irregular houses
that pressed together above us in the dark alley had been struck back
into sudden obedience and lovely order, and all their rude casements
and broken walls had been transformed into arches charged with goodly
sculpture, and fluted shafts of delicate stone.

And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops of ordered arches
there rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great square seems
to have opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it far
away;--a multitude of pillars and white domes, clustered into a long
low pyramid of coloured light; a treasure-heap, it seems, partly of
gold, and partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into
five great vaulted porches, ceiled with fair mosaic, and beset with
sculpture of alabaster, clear as amber and delicate as ivory,--sculpture
fantastic and involved, of palm leaves and lilies, and grapes and
pomegranates, and birds clinging and fluttering among the branches, all
twined together into an endless network of buds and plumes; and, in the
midst of it, the solemn forms of angels, sceptred, and robed to the
feet, and leaning to each other across the gates, their figures
indistinct among the gleaming of the golden ground through the leaves
beside them, interrupted and dim, like the morning light as it faded
back among the branches of Eden, when first its gates were
angel-guarded long ago. And round the walls of the porches there are
set pillars of variegated stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green
serpentine spotted with flakes of snow, and marbles, that half refuse
and half yield to the sunshine, Cleopatra-like, "their bluest veins to
kiss"[155]--the shadow, as it steals back from them, revealing line
after line of azure undulation, as a receding tide leaves the waved
sand; their capitals rich with interwoven tracery, rooted knots of
herbage, and drifting leaves of acanthus and vine, and mystical signs,
all beginning and ending in the Cross; and above them, in the broad
archivolts, a continuous chain of language and of life--angels, and the
signs of heaven, and the labours of men, each in its appointed season
upon the earth; and above these, another range of glittering pinnacles,
mixed with white arches edged with scarlet flowers,--a confusion of
delight, amidst which the breasts of the Greek horses are seen blazing
in their breadth of golden strength, and the St. Mark's Lion, lifted on
a blue field covered with stars, until at last, as if in ecstasy, the
crests of the arches break into a marble foam, and toss themselves far
into the blue sky in flashes and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the
breakers on the Lido shore had been frost-bound before they fell, and
the sea-nymphs had inlaid them with coral and amethyst.

Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an interval!
There is a type of it in the very birds that haunt them; for, instead
of the restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and sable-winged, drifting on the
bleak upper air, the St. Mark's porches are full of doves, that nestle
among the marble foliage, and mingle the soft iridescence of their
living plumes, changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less
lovely, that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years.

And what effect has this splendour on those who pass beneath it? You
may walk from sunrise to sunset, to and fro, before the gateway of St.
Mark's, and you will not see an eye lifted to it, nor a countenance
brightened by it. Priest and layman, soldier and civilian, rich and
poor, pass by it alike regardlessly. Up to the very recesses of the
porches, the meanest tradesmen of the city push their counters; nay,
the foundations of its pillars are themselves the seats--not "of them
that sell doves"[156] for sacrifice, but of the vendors of toys and
caricatures. Round the whole square in front of the church there is
almost a continuous line of cafés, where the idle Venetians of the
middle classes lounge, and read empty journals; in its centre the
Austrian bands play during the time of vespers, their martial music
jarring with the organ notes,--the march drowning the miserere, and the
sullen crowd thickening round them,--a crowd, which, if it had its
will, would stiletto every soldier that pipes to it. And in the
recesses of the porches, all day long, knots of men of the lowest
classes, unemployed and listless, lie basking in the sun like lizards;
and unregarded children,--every heavy glance of their young eyes full
of desperation and stony depravity, and their throats hoarse with
cursing,--gamble, and fight, and snarl, and sleep, hour after hour,
clashing their bruised centesimi upon the marble ledges of the church
porch. And the images of Christ and His angels look down upon it
continually.


  [143] _Acts_ xiii, 13 and xv, 38, 39. [Ruskin.]

  [144] The reader who desires to investigate it may consult
  Galliciolli, _Delle Memorie Venete_ (Venice, 1795), tom. 2, p. 332,
  and the authorities quoted by him. [Ruskin.]

  [145] _Venice_, 1761 tom. 1, p. 126. [Ruskin.]

  [146] A wonderful City, such as was never seen before.

  [147] St. Mark's Place, "partly covered by turf, and planted with a
  few trees; and on account of its pleasant aspect called Brollo or
  Broglio, that is to say, Garden." The canal passed through it, over
  which is built the bridge of the Malpassi. Galliciolli, lib. I,
  cap. viii. [Ruskin.]

  [148] My authorities for this statement are given below, in the
  chapter on the Ducal Palace. [Ruskin.]

  [149] In the Chronicles, _Sancti Marci Ducalis Cappdla_. [Ruskin.]

  [150] "To God the Lord, the glorious Virgin Annunciate, and the
  Protector St. Mark."--Corner, p. 14. It is needless to trouble the
  reader with the various authorities for the above statements: I
  have consulted the best. The previous inscription once existing on
  the church itself:

    Anno milleno transacto bisque trigeno Desuper undecimo fuit facta
    primo,

  is no longer to be seen, and is conjectured by Corner, with much
  probability, to have perished "in qualche ristauro." [Ruskin.]

  [151] Signed Bartolomeus Bozza, 1634, 1647, 1656, etc. [Ruskin.]

  [152] An obvious slip. The mosaic is on the west wall of the south
  transept. [Cook and Wedderburn.]

  [153] _Guida di Venezia_, p. 6. [Ruskin.]

  [154] Fritters and liquors for sale.

  [155] _Antony and Cleopatra_, 2. 5. 29.

  [156] Matthew xxi, 12 and _John_ ii, 16.




CHARACTERISTICS OF GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE

VOLUME II, CHAPTER 6


I believe, then, that the characteristic or moral elements of Gothic
are the following, placed in the order of their importance:

  1. Savageness.
  2. Changefulness.
  3. Naturalism.
  4. Grotesqueness.
  5. Rigidity.
  6. Redundance.

These characters are here expressed as belonging to the building; as
belonging to the builder, they would be expressed thus:--1. Savageness,
or Rudeness. 2. Love of Change. 3. Love of Nature. 4. Disturbed
Imagination. 5. Obstinacy. 6. Generosity. And I repeat, that the
withdrawal of any one, or any two, will not at once destroy the Gothic
character of a building, but the removal of a majority of them will. I
shall proceed to examine them in their order.

1. SAVAGENESS. I am not sure when the word "Gothic" was first
generically applied to the architecture of the North; but I presume
that, whatever the date of its original usage, it was intended to imply
reproach, and express the barbaric character of the nations among whom
that architecture arose. It never implied that they were literally of
Gothic lineage, far less that their architecture had been originally
invented by the Goths themselves; but it did imply that they and their
buildings together exhibited a degree of sternness and rudeness, which,
in contradistinction to the character of Southern and Eastern nations,
appeared like a perpetual reflection of the contrast between the Goth
and the Roman in their first encounter. And when that fallen Roman, in
the utmost impotence of his luxury, and insolence of his guilt, became
the model for the imitation of civilized Europe, at the close of the
so-called Dark Ages, the word Gothic became a term of unmitigated
contempt, not unmixed with aversion. From that contempt, by the
exertion of the antiquaries and architects of this century, Gothic
architecture has been sufficiently vindicated; and perhaps some among
us, in our admiration of the magnificent science of its structure, and
sacredness of its expression, might desire that the term of ancient
reproach should be withdrawn, and some other, of more apparent
honourableness, adopted in its place. There is no chance, as there is
no need, of such a substitution. As far as the epithet was used
scornfully, it was used falsely; but there is no reproach in the word,
rightly understood; on the contrary, there is a profound truth, which
the instinct of mankind almost unconsciously recognizes. It is true,
greatly and deeply true, that the architecture of the North is rude and
wild; but it is not true, that, for this reason, we are to condemn it,
or despise. Far otherwise: I believe it is in this very character that
it deserves our profoundest reverence.

The charts of the world which have been drawn up by modern science have
thrown into a narrow space the expression of a vast amount of
knowledge, but I have never yet seen any one pictorial enough to enable
the spectator to imagine the kind of contrast in physical character
which exists between Northern and Southern countries. We know the
differences in detail, but we have not that broad glance and grasp
which would enable us to feel them in their fulness. We know that
gentians grow on the Alps, and olives on the Apennines; but we do not
enough conceive for ourselves that variegated mosaic of the world's
surface which a bird sees in its migration, that difference between the
district of the gentian and of the olive which the stork and the
swallow see far off, as they lean upon the sirocco wind. Let us, for a
moment, try to raise ourselves even above the level of their flight,
and imagine the Mediterranean lying beneath us like an irregular lake,
and all its ancient promontories sleeping in the sun: here and there an
angry spot of thunder, a grey stain of storm, moving upon the burning
field; and here and there a fixed wreath of white volcano smoke,
surrounded by its circle of ashes; but for the most part a great
peacefulness of light, Syria and Greece, Italy and Spain, laid like
pieces of a golden pavement into the sea-blue, chased, as we stoop
nearer to them, with bossy beaten work of mountain chains, and glowing
softly with terraced gardens, and flowers heavy with frankincense,
mixed among masses of laurel, and orange, and plumy palm, that abate
with their grey-green shadows the burning of the marble rocks, and of
the ledges of porphyry sloping under lucent sand. Then let us pass
farther towards the north, until we see the orient colours change
gradually into a vast belt of rainy green, where the pastures of
Switzerland, and poplar valleys of France, and dark forests of the
Danube and Carpathians stretch from the mouths of the Loire to those of
the Volga, seen through clefts in grey swirls of rain-cloud and flaky
veils of the mist of the brooks, spreading low along the pasture lands:
and then, farther north still, to see the earth heave into mighty
masses of leaden rock and heathy moor, bordering with a broad waste of
gloomy purple that belt of field and wood, and splintering into
irregular and grisly islands amidst the northern seas, beaten by storm,
and chilled by ice-drift, and tormented by furious pulses of contending
tide, until the roots of the last forests fail from among the hill
ravines, and the hunger of the north wind bites their peaks into
barrenness; and, at last, the wall of ice, durable like iron, sets,
deathlike, its white teeth against us out of the polar twilight. And,
having once traversed in thought this gradation of the zoned iris of
the earth in all its material vastness, let us go down nearer to it,
and watch the parallel change in the belt of animal life; the
multitudes of swift and brilliant creatures that glance in the air and
sea, or tread the sands of the southern zone; striped zebras and
spotted leopards, glistening serpents, and birds arrayed in purple and
scarlet. Let us contrast their delicacy and brilliancy of colour, and
swiftness of motion, with the frost-cramped strength, and shaggy
covering, and dusky plumage of the northern tribes; contrast the
Arabian horse with the Shetland, the tiger and leopard with the wolf
and bear, the antelope with the elk, the bird of paradise with the
osprey: and then, submissively acknowledging the great laws by which
the earth and all that it bears are ruled throughout their being. Let
us not condemn, but rejoice in the expression by man of his own rest in
the statutes of the lands that gave him birth. Let us watch him with
reverence as he sets side by side the burning gems, and smooths with
soft sculpture the jasper pillars, that are to reflect a ceaseless
sunshine, and rise into a cloudless sky: but not with less reverence
let us stand by him, when, with rough strength and hurried stroke, he
smites an uncouth animation out of the rocks which he has torn from
among the moss of the moorland, and heaves into the darkened air the
pile of iron buttress and rugged wall, instinct with work of an
imagination as wild and wayward as the northern sea; creations of
ungainly shape and rigid limb, but full of wolfish life; fierce as the
winds that beat, and changeful as the clouds that shade them.

There is, I repeat, no degradation, no reproach in this, but all
dignity and honourableness: and we should err grievously in refusing
either to recognize as an essential character of the existing
architecture of the North, or to admit as a desirable character in that
which it yet may be, this wildness of thought, and roughness of work;
this look of mountain brotherhood between the cathedral and the Alp;
this magnificence of sturdy power, put forth only the more
energetically because the fine finger-touch was chilled away by the
frosty wind, and the eye dimmed by the moor-mist, or blinded by the
hail; this outspeaking of the strong spirit of men who may not gather
redundant fruitage from the earth, nor bask in dreamy benignity of
sunshine, but must break the rock for bread, and cleave the forest for
fire, and show, even in what they did for their delight, some of the
hard habits of the arm and heart that grew on them as they swung the
axe or pressed the plough.

If, however, the savageness of Gothic architecture, merely as an
expression of its origin among Northern nations, may be considered, in
some sort, a noble character, it possesses a higher nobility still,
when considered as an index, not of climate, but of religious
principle.

In the 13th and 14th paragraphs of Chapter XXL of the first volume of
this work, it was noticed that the systems of architectural ornament,
properly so called, might be divided into three:--1. Servile ornament,
in which the execution or power of the inferior workman is entirely
subjected to the intellect of the higher;--2. Constitutional ornament,
in which the executive inferior power is, to a certain point,
emancipated and independent, having a will of its own, yet confessing
its inferiority and rendering obedience to higher powers;--and 3.
Revolutionary ornament, in which no executive inferiority is admitted
at all. I must here explain the nature of these divisions at somewhat
greater length.

Of Servile ornament, the principal schools are the Greek, Ninevite, and
Egyptian; but their servility is of different kinds. The Greek
master-workman was far advanced in knowledge and power above the
Assyrian or Egyptian. Neither he nor those for whom he worked could
endure the appearance of imperfection in anything; and, therefore, what
ornament he appointed to be done by those beneath him was composed of
mere geometrical forms,--balls, ridges, and perfectly symmetrical
foliage,--which could be executed with absolute precision by line and
rule, and were as perfect in their way, when completed, as his own
figure sculpture. The Assyrian and Egyptian, on the contrary, less
cognizant of accurate form in anything, were content to allow their
figure sculpture to be executed by inferior workmen, but lowered the
method of its treatment to a standard which every workman could reach,
and then trained him by discipline so rigid, that there was no chance
of his falling beneath the standard appointed. The Greek gave to the
lower workman no subject which he could not perfectly execute. The
Assyrian gave him subjects which he could only execute imperfectly, but
fixed a legal standard for his imperfection. The workman was, in both
systems, a slave.[157]

But in the mediæval, or especially Christian, system of ornament, this
slavery is done away with altogether; Christianity having recognized,
in small things as well as great, the individual value of every soul.
But it not only recognizes its value; it confesses its imperfection, in
only bestowing dignity upon the acknowledgment of unworthiness. That
admission of lost power and fallen nature, which the Greek or Ninevite
felt to be intensely painful, and, as far as might be, altogether
refused, the Christian makes daily and hourly contemplating the fact of
it without fear, as tending, in the end, to God's greater glory.
Therefore, to every spirit which Christianity summons to her service,
her exhortation is: Do what you can, and confess frankly what you are
unable to do; neither let your effort be shortened for fear of failure,
nor your confession silenced for fear of shame. And it is, perhaps, the
principal admirableness of the Gothic schools of architecture, that
they thus receive the results of the labour of inferior minds; and out
of fragments full of imperfection, and betraying that imperfection in
every touch, indulgently raise up a stately and unaccusable whole.

But the modern English mind has this much in common with that of the
Greek, that it intensely desires, in all things, the utmost completion
or perfection compatible with their nature. This is a noble character
in the abstract, but becomes ignoble when it causes us to forget the
relative dignities of that nature itself, and to prefer the perfectness
of the lower nature to the imperfection of the higher; not considering
that as, judged by such a rule, all the brute animals would be
preferable to man, because more perfect in their functions and kind,
and yet are always held inferior to him, so also in the works of man,
those which are more perfect in their kind are always inferior to those
which are, in their nature, liable to more faults and shortcomings. For
the finer the nature, the more flaws it will show through the clearness
of it; and it is a law of this universe, that the best things shall be
seldomest seen in their best form. The wild grass grows well and
strongly, one year with another; but the wheat is, according to the
greater nobleness of its nature, liable to the bitterer blight. And
therefore, while in all things that we see or do, we are to desire
perfection, and strive for it, we are nevertheless not to set the
meaner thing, in its narrow accomplishment, above the nobler thing, in
its mighty progress; not to esteem smooth minuteness above shattered
majesty; not to prefer mean victory to honourable defeat; not to lower
the level of our aim, that we may the more surely enjoy the complacency
of success. But, above all, in our dealings with the souls of other
men, we are to take care how we check, by severe requirement or narrow
caution, efforts which might otherwise lead to a noble issue; and,
still more, how we withhold our admiration from great excellencies,
because they are mingled with rough faults. Now, in the make and nature
of every man, however rude or simple, whom we employ in manual labour,
there are some powers for better things: some tardy imagination, torpid
capacity of emotion, tottering steps of thought, there are, even at the
worst; and in most cases it is all our own fault that they are tardy or
torpid. But they cannot be strengthened, unless we are content to take
them in their feebleness, and unless we prize and honour them in their
imperfection above the best and most perfect manual skill. And this is
what we have to do with all our labourers; to look for the _thoughtful_
part of them, and get that out of them, whatever we lose for it,
whatever faults and errors we are obliged to take with it. For the best
that is in them cannot manifest itself, but in company with much error.
Understand this clearly; You can teach a man to draw a straight line,
and to cut one; to strike a curved line, and to carve it; and to copy
and carve any number of given lines or forms, with admirable speed and
perfect precision; and you find his work perfect of its kind: but if
you ask him to think about any of those forms, to consider if he cannot
find any better in his own head, he stops; his execution becomes
hesitating; he thinks, and ten to one he thinks wrong; ten to one he
makes a mistake in the first touch he gives to his work as a thinking
being. But you have made a man of him for all that. He was only a
machine before, an animated tool.

And observe, you are put to stern choice in this matter. You must
either make a tool of the creature, or a man of him. You cannot make
both. Men were not intended to work with the accuracy of tools, to be
precise and perfect in all their actions. If you will have that
precision out of them, and make their fingers measure degrees like
cog-wheels, and their arms strike curves like compasses, you must
unhumanize them. All the energy of their spirits must be given to make
cogs and compasses of themselves. All their attention and strength must
go to the accomplishment of the mean act. The eye of the soul must be
bent upon the finger-point, and the soul's force must fill all the
invisible nerves that guide it, ten hours a day, that it may not err
from its steely precision, and so soul and sight be worn away, and the
whole human being be lost at last--a heap of sawdust, so far as its
intellectual work in this world is concerned; saved only by its Heart,
which cannot go into the form of cogs and compasses, but expands, after
the ten hours are over, into fireside humanity. On the other hand, if
you will make a man of the working creature, you cannot make a tool.
Let him but begin to imagine, to think, to try to do anything worth
doing; and the engine-turned precision is lost at once. Out come all
his roughness, all his dulness, all his incapability; shame upon shame,
failure upon failure, pause after pause: but out comes the whole
majesty of him also; and we know the height of it only when we see the
clouds settling upon him. And, whether the clouds be bright or dark,
there will be transfiguration behind and within them.

And now, reader, look round this English room of yours, about which you
have been proud so often, because the work of it was so good and
strong, and the ornaments of it so finished. Examine again all those
accurate mouldings, and perfect polishings, and unerring adjustments of
the seasoned wood and tempered steel. Many a time you have exulted over
them, and thought how great England was, because her slightest work was
done so thoroughly. Alas! if read rightly, these perfectnesses are
signs of a slavery in our England a thousand times more bitter and more
degrading than that of the scourged African, or helot Greek. Men may be
beaten, chained, tormented, yoked like cattle, slaughtered like summer
flies, and yet remain in one sense, and the best sense, free. But to
smother their souls within them, to blight and hew into rotting
pollards the suckling branches of their human intelligence, to make the
flesh and skin which, after the worm's work on it, is to see God,[158]
into leathern thongs to yoke machinery with,--this it is to be
slave-masters indeed; and there might be more freedom in England,
though her feudal lords' lightest words were worth men's lives, and
though the blood of the vexed husbandman dropped in the furrows of her
fields, than there is while the animation of her multitudes is sent
like fuel to feed the factory smoke, and the strength of them is given
daily to be wasted into the fineness of a web, or racked into the
exactness of a line.

And, on the other hand, go forth again to gaze upon the old cathedral
front, where you have smiled so often at the fantastic ignorance of the
old sculptors: examine once more those ugly goblins, and formless
monsters, and stern statues, anatomiless and rigid; but do not mock at
them, for they are signs of the life and liberty of every workman who
struck the stone; a freedom of thought, and rank in scale of being,
such as no laws, no charters, no charities can secure; but which it
must be the first aim of all Europe at this day to regain for her
children.

Let me not be thought to speak wildly or extravagantly. It is verily
this degradation of the operative into a machine, which, more than any
other evil of the times, is leading the mass of the nations everywhere
into vain, incoherent, destructive struggling for a freedom of which
they cannot explain the nature to themselves. Their universal outcry
against wealth, and against nobility, is not forced from them either by
the pressure of famine, or the sting of mortified pride. These do much,
and have done much in all ages; but the foundations of society were
never yet shaken as they are at this day. It is not that men are ill
fed, but that they have no pleasure in the work by which they make
their bread, and therefore look to wealth as the only means of
pleasure. It is not that men are pained by the scorn of the upper
classes, but they cannot endure their own; for they feel that the kind
of labour to which they are condemned is verily a degrading one, and
makes them less than men. Never had the upper classes so much sympathy
with the lower, or charity for them, as they have at this day, and yet
never were they so much hated by them: for, of old, the separation
between the noble and the poor was merely a wall built by law; now it
is a veritable difference in level of standing, a precipice between
upper and lower grounds in the field of humanity, and there is
pestilential air at the bottom of it. I know not if a day is ever to
come when the nature of right freedom will be understood, and when men
will see that to obey another man, to labour for him, yield reverence
to him or to his place, is not slavery. It is often the best kind of
liberty,--liberty from care. The man who says to one, Go, and he goeth,
and to another, Come, and he cometh,[159] has, in most cases, more sense
of restraint and difficulty than the man who obeys him. The movements
of the one are hindered by the burden on his shoulder; of the other, by
the bridle on his lips: there is no way by which the burden may be
lightened; but we need not suffer from the bridle if we do not champ at
it. To yield reverence to another, to hold ourselves and our lives at
his disposal, is not slavery; often it is the noblest state in which a
man can live in this world. There is, indeed, a reverence which is
servile, that is to say irrational or selfish: but there is also noble
reverence, that is to say, reasonable and loving; and a man is never so
noble as when he is reverent in this kind; nay, even if the feeling
pass the bounds of mere reason, so that it be loving, a man is raised
by it. Which had, in reality, most of the serf nature in him,--the
Irish peasant who was lying in wait yesterday for his landlord, with
his musket muzzle thrust through the ragged hedge; or that old mountain
servant, who 200 years ago, at Inverkeithing, gave up his own life and
the lives of his seven sons for his chief?--as each fell, calling forth
his brother to the death, "Another for Hector!"[160] And therefore, in
all ages and all countries, reverence has been paid and sacrifice made
by men to each other, not only without complaint, but rejoicingly; and
famine, and peril, and sword, and all evil, and all shame, have been
borne willingly in the causes of masters and kings; for all these gifts
of the heart ennobled the men who gave not less than the men who
received them, and nature prompted, and God rewarded the sacrifice. But
to feel their souls withering within them, unthanked, to find their
whole being sunk into an unrecognized abyss, to be counted off into a
heap of mechanism, numbered with its wheels, and weighed with its
hammer strokes;--this nature bade not,--this God blesses not,--this
humanity for no long time is able to endure.

We have much studied and much perfected, of late, the great civilized
invention of the division of labour; only we give it a false name. It
is not, truly speaking; the labour that is divided; but the
men:--Divided into mere segments of men--broken into small fragments
and crumbs of life; so that all the little piece of intelligence that
is left in a man is not enough to make a pin, or a nail, but exhausts
itself in making the point of a pin or the head of a nail. Now it is a
good and desirable thing, truly, to make many pins in a day; but if we
could only see with what crystal sand their points were polished,--sand
of human soul, much to be magnified before it can be discerned for what
it is,--we should think there might be some loss in it also. And the
great cry that rises from all our manufacturing cities, louder than
their furnace blast, is all in very deed for this,--that we manufacture
everything there except men; we blanch cotton, and strengthen steel,
and refine sugar, and shape pottery; but to brighten, to strengthen, to
refine, or to form a single living spirit, never enters into our
estimate of advantages. And all the evil to which that cry is urging
our myriads can be met only in one way: not by teaching nor preaching,
for to teach them is but to show them their misery, and to preach to
them, if we do nothing more than preach, is to mock at it. It can be
met only by a right understanding, on the part of all classes, of what
kinds of labour are good for men, raising them, and making them happy;
by a determined sacrifice of such convenience, or beauty, or cheapness
as is to be got only by the degradation of the workman; and by equally
determined demand for the products and results of healthy and ennobling
labour.

And how, it will be asked, are these products to be recognized, and
this demand to be regulated? Easily: by the observance of three broad
and simple rules:

  1. Never encourage the manufacture of any article not absolutely
  necessary, in the production of which _Invention_ has no share.

  2. Never demand an exact finish for its own sake, but only for some
  practical or noble end.

  3. Never encourage imitation or copying of any kind, except for the
  sake of preserving record of great works.

The second of these principles is the only one which directly rises out
of the consideration of our immediate subject; but I shall briefly
explain the meaning and extent of the first also, reserving the
enforcement of the third for another place.

  1. Never encourage the manufacture of anything not necessary, in the
  production of which invention has no share.

For instance. Glass beads are utterly unnecessary, and there is no
design or thought employed in their manufacture. They are formed by
first drawing out the glass into rods; these rods are chopped up into
fragments of the size of beads by the human hand, and the fragments are
then rounded in the furnace. The men who chop up the rods sit at their
work all day, their hands vibrating with a perpetual and exquisitely
timed palsy, and the beads dropping beneath their vibration like hail.
Neither they, nor the men who draw out the rods or fuse the fragments,
have the smallest occasion for the use of any single human faculty; and
every young lady, therefore, who buys glass beads is engaged in the
slave-trade, and in a much more cruel one than that which we have so
long been endeavouring to put down.

But glass cups and vessels may become the subjects of exquisite
invention; and if in buying these we pay for the invention, that is to
say for the beautiful form, or colour, or engraving, and not for mere
finish of execution, we are doing good to humanity.

So, again, the cutting of precious stones, in all ordinary cases,
requires little exertion of any mental faculty; some tact and judgment
in avoiding flaws, and so on, but nothing to bring out the whole mind.
Every person who wears cut jewels merely for the sake of their value
is, therefore, a slave-driver.

But the working of the goldsmith, and the various designing of grouped
jewellery and enamel-work, may become the subject of the most noble
human intelligence. Therefore, money spent in the purchase of
well-designed plate, of precious engraved vases, cameos, or enamels,
does good to humanity; and, in work of this kind, jewels may be
employed to heighten its splendour; and their cutting is then a price
paid for the attainment of a noble end, and thus perfectly allowable.

I shall perhaps press this law farther elsewhere, but our immediate
concern is chiefly with the second, namely, never to demand an exact
finish, when it does not lead to a noble end. For observe, I have only
dwelt upon the rudeness of Gothic, or any other kind of imperfectness,
as admirable, where it was impossible to get design or thought without
it. If you are to have the thought of a rough and untaught man, you
must have it in a rough and untaught way; but from an educated man, who
can without effort express his thoughts in an educated way, take the
graceful expression, and be thankful. Only _get_ the thought, and do
not silence the peasant because he cannot speak good grammar, or until
you have taught him his grammar. Grammar and refinement are good
things, both, only be sure of the better thing first. And thus in art,
delicate finish is desirable from the greatest masters, and is always
given by them. In some places Michael Angelo, Leonardo, Phidias,
Perugino, Turner, all finished with the most exquisite care; and the
finish they give always leads to the fuller accomplishment of their
noble purpose. But lower men than these cannot finish, for it requires
consummate knowledge to finish consummately, and then we must take
their thoughts as they are able to give them. So the rule is simple:
Always look for invention first, and after that, for such execution as
will help the invention, and as the inventor is capable of without
painful effort, and _no more_. Above all, demand no refinement of
execution where there is no thought, for that is slaves' work,
unredeemed. Rather choose rough work than smooth work, so only that the
practical purpose be answered, and never imagine there is reason to be
proud of anything that may be accomplished by patience and sand-paper.

I shall only give one example, which however will show the reader what
I mean, from the manufacture already alluded to, that of glass. Our
modern glass is exquisitely clear in its substance, true in its form,
accurate in its cutting. We are proud of this. We ought to be ashamed
of it. The old Venice glass was muddy, inaccurate in all its forms, and
clumsily cut, if at all. And the old Venetian was justly proud of it.
For there is this difference between the English and Venetian workman,
that the former thinks only of accurately matching his patterns, and
getting his curves perfectly true and his edges perfectly sharp, and
becomes a mere machine for rounding curves and sharpening edges; while
the old Venetian cared not a whit whether his edges were sharp or not,
but he invented a new design for every glass that he made, and never
moulded a handle or a lip without a new fancy in it. And therefore,
though some Venetian glass is ugly and clumsy enough when made by
clumsy and uninventive workmen, other Venetian glass is so lovely in
its forms that no price is too great for it; and we never see the same
form in it twice. Now you cannot have the finish and the varied form
too. If the workman is thinking about his edges, he cannot be thinking
of his design; if of his design, he cannot think of his edges. Choose
whether you will pay for the lovely form or the perfect finish, and
choose at the same moment whether you will make the worker a man or a
grindstone.

Nay, but the reader interrupts me,--"If the workman can design
beautifully, I would not have him kept at the furnace. Let him be taken
away and made a gentleman, and have a studio, and design his glass
there, and I will have it blown and cut for him by common workmen, and
so I will have my design and my finish too."

All ideas of this kind are founded upon two mistaken suppositions: the
first, that one man's thoughts can be, or ought to be, executed by
another man's hands; the second, that manual labour is a degradation,
when it is governed by intellect.

On a large scale, and in work determinable by line and rule, it is
indeed both possible and necessary that the thoughts of one man should
be carried out by the labour of others; in this sense I have already
defined the best architecture to be the expression of the mind of
manhood by the hands of childhood. But on a smaller scale, and in a
design which cannot be mathematically defined, one man's thoughts can
never be expressed by another: and the difference between the spirit of
touch of the man who is inventing, and of the man who is obeying
directions, is often all the difference between a great and a common
work of art. How wide the separation is between original and
second-hand execution, I shall endeavour to show elsewhere; it is not
so much to our purpose here as to mark the other and more fatal error
of despising manual labour when governed by intellect; for it is no
less fatal an error to despise it when thus regulated by intellect,
than to value it for its own sake. We are always in these days
endeavouring to separate the two; we want one man to be always
thinking, and another to be always working, and we call one a
gentleman, and the other an operative; whereas the workman ought often
to be thinking, and the thinker often to be working, and both should be
gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is, we make both ungentle, the one
envying, the other despising, his brother; and the mass of society is
made up of morbid thinkers, and miserable workers. Now it is only by
labour that thought can be made healthy, and only by thought that
labour can be made happy, and the two cannot be separated with
impunity. It would be well if all of us were good handicraftsmen in
some kind, and the dishonour of manual labour done away with
altogether; so that though there should still be a trenchant
distinction of race between nobles and commoners, there should not,
among the latter, be a trenchant distinction of employment, as between
idle and working men, or between men of liberal and illiberal
professions. All professions should be liberal, and there should be
less pride felt in peculiarity of employment, and more in excellence of
achievement. And yet more, in each several profession, no master should
be too proud to do its hardest work. The painter should grind his own
colours; the architect work in the mason's yard with his men; the
master-manufacturer be himself a more skilful operative than any man in
his mills; and the distinction between one man and another be only in
experience and skill, and the authority and wealth which these must
naturally and justly obtain.

I should be led far from the matter in hand, if I were to pursue this
interesting subject. Enough, I trust, has been said to show the reader
that the rudeness or imperfection which at first rendered the term
"Gothic" one of reproach is indeed, when rightly understood, one of the
most noble characters of Christian architecture, and not only a noble
but an _essential_ one. It seems a fantastic paradox, but it is
nevertheless a most important truth, that no architecture can be truly
noble which is not imperfect. And this is easily demonstrable. For
since the architect, whom we will suppose capable of doing all in
perfection, cannot execute the whole with his own hands, he must either
make slaves of his workmen in the old Greek, and present English
fashion, and level his work to a slave's capacities, which is to
degrade it; or else he must take his workmen as he finds them, and let
them show their weaknesses together with their strength, which will
involve the Gothic imperfection, but render the whole work as noble as
the intellect of the age can make it.

But the principle may be stated more broadly still. I have confined the
illustration of it to architecture, but I must not leave it as if true
of architecture only. Hitherto I have used the words imperfect and
perfect merely to distinguish between work grossly unskilful, and work
executed with average precision and science; and I have been pleading
that any degree of unskilfulness should be admitted, so only that the
labourer's mind had room for expression. But, accurately speaking, no
good work whatever can be perfect, and _the demand for perfection is
always a sign of a misunderstanding of the ends of art_.

This for two reasons, both based on everlasting laws. The first, that
no great man ever stops working till he has reached his point of
failure: that is to say, his mind is always far in advance of his
powers of execution, and the latter will now and then give way in
trying to follow it; besides that he will always give to the inferior
portions of his work only such inferior attention as they require; and
according to his greatness he becomes so accustomed to the feeling of
dissatisfaction with the best he can do, that in moments of lassitude
or anger with himself he will not care though the beholder be
dissatisfied also. I believe there has only been one man who would not
acknowledge this necessity, and strove always to reach perfection,
Leonardo; the end of his vain effort being merely that he would take
ten years to a picture and leave it unfinished. And therefore, if we
are to have great men working at all, or less men doing their best, the
work will be imperfect, however beautiful. Of human work none but what
is bad can be perfect, in its own bad way.[161]

The second reason is, that imperfection is in some sort essential to
all that we know of life. It is the sign of life in a mortal body, that
is to say, of a state of progress and change. Nothing that lives is, or
can be, rigidly perfect; part of it is decaying, part nascent. The
foxglove blossom,--a third part bud, a third part past, a third part in
full bloom,--is a type of the life of this world. And in all things
that live there are certain irregularities and deficiencies which are
not only signs of life, but sources of beauty. No human face is exactly
the same in its lines on each side, no leaf perfect in its lobes, no
branch in its symmetry. All admit irregularity as they imply change;
and to banish imperfection is to destroy expression, to check exertion,
to paralyze vitality. All things are literally better, lovelier, and
more beloved for the imperfections which have been divinely appointed,
that the law of human life may be Effort, and the law of human
judgment, Mercy.

Accept this then for a universal law, that neither architecture nor any
other noble work of man can be good unless it be imperfect; and let us
be prepared for the otherwise strange fact, which we shall discern
clearly as we approach the period of the Renaissance, that the first
cause of the fall of the arts of Europe was a relentless requirement of
perfection, incapable alike either of being silenced by veneration for
greatness, or softened into forgiveness of simplicity.

Thus far then of the Rudeness or Savageness, which is the first mental
element of Gothic architecture. It is an element in many other healthy
architectures also, as in Byzantine and Romanesque; but true Gothic
cannot exist without it.

The second mental element above named was CHANGEFULNESS, or Variety.

I have already enforced the allowing independent operation to the
inferior workman, simply as a duty _to him_, and as ennobling the
architecture by rendering it more Christian. We have now to consider
what reward we obtain for the performance of this duty, namely, the
perpetual variety of every feature of the building.

Wherever the workman is utterly enslaved, the parts of the building
must of course be absolutely like each other; for the perfection of his
execution can only be reached by exercising him in doing one thing, and
giving him nothing else to do. The degree in which the workman is
degraded may be thus known at a glance, by observing whether the
several parts of the building are similar or not; and if, as in Greek
work, all the capitals are alike, and all the mouldings unvaried, then
the degradation is complete; if, as in Egyptian or Ninevite work,
though the manner of executing certain figures is always the same, the
order of design is perpetually varied, the degradation is less total;
if, as in Gothic work, there is perpetual change both in design and
execution, the workman must have been altogether set free.

How much the beholder gains from the liberty of the labourer may
perhaps be questioned in England, where one of the strongest instincts
in nearly every mind is that Love of Order which makes us desire that
our house windows should pair like our carriage horses, and allows us
to yield our faith unhesitatingly to architectural theories which fix a
form for everything, and forbid variation from it. I would not impeach
love of order: it is one of the most useful elements of the English
mind; it helps us in our commerce and in all purely practical matters;
and it is in many cases one of the foundation stones of morality. Only
do not let us suppose that love of order is love of art. It is true
that order, in its highest sense, is one of the necessities of art,
just as time is a necessity of music; but love of order has no more to
do with our right enjoyment of architecture or painting, than love of
punctuality with the appreciation of an opera. Experience, I fear,
teaches us that accurate and methodical habits in daily life are seldom
characteristic of those who either quickly perceive, or richly possess,
the creative powers of art; there is, however, nothing inconsistent
between the two instincts, and nothing to hinder us from retaining our
business habits, and yet fully allowing and enjoying the noblest gifts
of Invention. We already do so, in every other branch of art except
architecture, and we only do _not_ so there because we have been taught
that it would be wrong. Our architects gravely inform us that, as there
are four rules of arithmetic, there are five orders of architecture;
we, in our simplicity, think that this sounds consistent, and believe
them. They inform us also that there is one proper form for Corinthian
capitals, another for Doric, and another for Ionic. We, considering
that there is also a proper form for the letters A, B, and C, think
that this also sounds consistent, and accept the proposition.
Understanding, therefore, that one form of the said capitals is proper,
and no other, and having a conscientious horror of all impropriety, we
allow the architect to provide us with the said capitals, of the proper
form, in such and such a quantity, and in all other points to take care
that the legal forms are observed; which having done, we rest in forced
confidence that we are well housed.

But our higher instincts are not deceived. We take no pleasure in the
building provided for us, resembling that which we take in a new book
or a new picture. We may be proud of its size, complacent in its
correctness, and happy in its convenience. We may take the same
pleasure in its symmetry and workmanship as in a well-ordered room, or
a skilful piece of manufacture. And this we suppose to be all the
pleasure that architecture was ever intended to give us. The idea of
reading a building as we would read Milton or Dante, and getting the
same kind of delight out of the stones as out of the stanzas, never
enters our minds for a moment. And for good reason;--There is indeed
rhythm in the verses, quite as strict as the symmetries or rhythm of
the architecture, and a thousand times more beautiful, but there is
something else than rhythm. The verses were neither made to order, nor
to match, as the capitals were; and we have therefore a kind of
pleasure in them other than a sense of propriety. But it requires a
strong effort of common sense to shake ourselves quit of all that we
have been taught for the last two centuries, and wake to the perception
of a truth just as simple and certain as it is new: that great art,
whether expressing itself in words, colours, or stones, does _not_ say
the same thing over and over again; that the merit of architectural, as
of every other art, consists in its saying new and different things;
that to repeat itself is no more a characteristic of genius in marble
than it is of genius in print; and that we may, without offending any
laws of good taste, require of an architect, as we do of a novelist,
that he should be not only correct, but entertaining.

Yet all this is true, and self-evident; only hidden from us, as many
other self-evident things are, by false teaching. Nothing is a great
work of art, for the production of which either rules or models can be
given. Exactly so far as architecture works on known rules, and from
given models, it is not an art, but a manufacture; and it is, of the
two procedures, rather less rational (because more easy) to copy
capitals or mouldings from Phidias, and call ourselves architects, than
to copy heads and hands from Titian, and call ourselves painters.

Let us then understand at once that change or variety is as much a
necessity to the human heart and brain in buildings as in books; that
there is no merit, though there is some occasional use, in monotony;
and that we must no more expect to derive either pleasure or profit
from an architecture whose ornaments are of one pattern, and whose
pillars are of one proportion, than we should out of a universe in
which the clouds were all of one shape, and the trees all of one size.

And this we confess in deeds, though not in words. All the pleasure
which the people of the nineteenth century take in art, is in pictures,
sculpture, minor objects of virtù, or mediæval architecture, which we
enjoy under the term picturesque: no pleasure is taken anywhere in
modern buildings, and we find all men of true feeling delighting to
escape out of modern cities into natural scenery: hence, as I shall
hereafter show, that peculiar love of landscape, which is
characteristic of the age. It would be well, if, in all other matters,
we were as ready to put up with what we dislike, for the sake of
compliance with established law, as we are in architecture.

How so debased a law ever came to be established, we shall see when we
come to describe the Renaissance schools; here we have only to note, as
the second most essential element of the Gothic spirit, that it broke
through that law wherever it found it in existence; it not only dared,
but delighted in, the infringement of every servile principle; and
invented a series of forms of which the merit was, not merely that they
were new, but that they were _capable of perpetual novelty_. The
pointed arch was not merely a bold variation from the round, but it
admitted of millions of variations in itself; for the proportions of a
pointed arch are changeable to infinity, while a circular arch is
always the same. The grouped shaft was not merely a bold variation from
the single one, but it admitted of millions of variations in its
grouping, and in the proportions resultant from its grouping. The
introduction of tracery was not only a startling change in the
treatment of window lights, but admitted endless changes in the
interlacement of the tracery bars themselves. So that, while in all
living Christian architecture the love of variety exists, the Gothic
schools exhibited that love in culminating energy; and their influence,
wherever it extended itself, may be sooner and farther traced by this
character than by any other; the tendency to the adoption of Gothic
types being always first shown by greater irregularity, and richer
variation in the forms of the architecture it is about to supersede,
long before the appearance of the pointed arch or of any other
recognizable _outward_ sign of the Gothic mind.

We must, however, herein note carefully what distinction there is
between a healthy and a diseased love of change; for as it was in
healthy love of change that the Gothic architecture rose, it was partly
in consequence of diseased love of change that it was destroyed. In
order to understand this clearly, it will be necessary to consider the
different ways in which change and monotony are presented to us in
nature; both having their use, like darkness and light, and the one
incapable of being enjoyed without the other: change being most
delightful after some prolongation of monotony, as light appears most
brilliant after the eyes have been for some time closed.

I believe that the true relations of monotony and change may be most
simply understood by observing them in music. We may therein notice
first, that there is a sublimity and majesty in monotony, which there
is not in rapid or frequent variation. This is true throughout all
nature. The greater part of the sublimity of the sea depends on its
monotony; so also that of desolate moor and mountain scenery; and
especially the sublimity of motion, as in the quiet, unchanged fall and
rise of an engine beam. So also there is sublimity in darkness which
there is not in light.

Again, monotony after a certain time, or beyond a certain degree,
becomes either uninteresting or intolerable, and the musician is
obliged to break it in one or two ways: either while the air or passage
is perpetually repeated, its notes are variously enriched and
harmonized; or else, after a certain number of repeated passages, an
entirely new passage is introduced, which is more or less delightful
according to the length of the previous monotony. Nature, of course,
uses both these kinds of variation perpetually. The sea-waves,
resembling each other in general mass, but none like its brother in
minor divisions and curves, are a monotony of the first kind; the great
plain, broken by an emergent rock or clump of trees, is a monotony of
the second.

Farther: in order to the enjoyment of the change in either case, a
certain degree of patience is required from the hearer or observer. In
the first case, he must be satisfied to endure with patience the
recurrence of the great masses of sound or form, and to seek for
entertainment in a careful watchfulness of the minor details. In the
second case, he must bear patiently the infliction of the monotony for
some moments, in order to feel the full refreshment of the change. This
is true even of the shortest musical passage in which the element of
monotony is employed. In cases of more majestic monotony, the patience
required is so considerable that it becomes a kind of pain,--a price
paid for the future pleasure.

Again: the talent of the composer is not in the monotony, but in the
changes: he may show feeling and taste by his use of monotony in
certain places or degrees; that is to say, by his _various_ employment
of it; but it is always in the new arrangement or invention that his
intellect is shown, and not in the monotony which relieves it.

Lastly: if the pleasure of change be too often repeated, it ceases to
be delightful, for then change itself becomes monotonous, and we are
driven to seek delight in extreme and fantastic degrees of it. This is
the diseased love of change of which we have above spoken.

From these facts we may gather generally that monotony is, and ought to
be, in itself painful to us, just as darkness is; that an architecture
which is altogether monotonous is a dark or dead architecture; and of
those who love it, it may be truly said, "they love darkness rather
than light." But monotony in certain measure, used in order to give
value to change, and above all, that _transparent_ monotony, which,
like the shadows of a great painter, suffers all manner of dimly
suggested form to be seen through the body of it, is an essential in
architectural as in all other composition; and the endurance of
monotony has about the same place in a healthy mind that the endurance
of darkness has: that is to say, as a strong intellect will have
pleasure in the solemnities of storm and twilight, and in the broken
and mysterious lights that gleam among them, rather than in mere
brilliancy and glare, while a frivolous mind will dread the shadow and
the storm; and as a great man will be ready to endure much darkness of
fortune in order to reach greater eminence of power or felicity, while
an inferior man will not pay the price; exactly in like manner a great
mind will accept, or even delight in, monotony which would be wearisome
to an inferior intellect, because it has more patience and power of
expectation, and is ready to pay the full price for the great future
pleasure of change. But in all cases it is not that the noble nature
loves monotony, anymore than it loves darkness or pain. But it can bear
with it, and receives a high pleasure in the endurance or patience, a
pleasure necessary to the well-being of this world; while those who
will not submit to the temporary sameness, but rush from one change to
another, gradually dull the edge of change itself, and bring a shadow
and weariness over the whole world from which there is no more escape.

From these general uses of variety in the economy of the world, we may
at once understand its use and abuse in architecture. The variety of
the Gothic schools is the more healthy and beautiful, because in many
cases it is entirely unstudied, and results, not from the mere love of
change, but from practical necessities. For in one point of view Gothic
is not only the best, but the _only rational_ architecture, as being
that which can fit itself most easily to all services, vulgar or noble.
Undefined in its slope of roof, height of shaft, breadth of arch, or
disposition of ground plan, it can shrink into a turret, expand into a
hall, coil into a staircase, or spring into a spire, with undegraded
grace and unexhausted energy; and whenever it finds occasion for change
in its form or purpose, it submits to it without the slightest sense of
loss either to its unity or majesty,--subtle and flexible like a fiery
serpent, but ever attentive to the voice of the charmer. And it is one
of the chief virtues of the Gothic builders, that they never suffered
ideas of outside symmetries and consistencies to interfere with the
real use and value of what they did. If they wanted a window, they
opened one; a room, they added one; a buttress, they built one; utterly
regardless of any established conventionalities of external appearance,
knowing (as indeed it always happened) that such daring interruptions
of the formal plan would rather give additional interest to its
symmetry than injure it. So that, in the best times of Gothic, a
useless window would rather have been opened in an unexpected place for
the sake of the surprise, than a useful one forbidden for the sake of
symmetry. Every successive architect, employed upon a great work, built
the pieces he added in his own way, utterly regardless of the style
adopted by his predecessors; and if two towers were raised in nominal
correspondence at the sides of a cathedral front, one was nearly sure
to be different from the other, and in each the style at the top to be
different from the style at the bottom.

These marked variations were, however, only permitted as part of the
great system of perpetual change which ran through every member of
Gothic design, and rendered it as endless a field for the beholder's
inquiry as for the builder's imagination: change, which in the best
schools is subtle and delicate, and rendered more delightful by
intermingling of a noble monotony; in the more barbaric schools is
somewhat fantastic and redundant; but, in all, a necessary and constant
condition of the life of the school. Sometimes the variety is in one
feature, sometimes in another; it may be in the capitals or crockets,
in the niches or the traceries, or in all together, but in some one or
other of the features it will be found always. If the mouldings are
constant, the surface sculpture will change; if the capitals are of a
fixed design, the traceries will change; if the traceries are
monotonous, the capitals will change; and if even, as in some fine
schools, the early English for example, there is the slightest
approximation to an unvarying type of mouldings, capitals, and floral
decoration, the variety is found in the disposition of the masses, and
in the figure sculpture.

I must now refer for a moment, before we quit the consideration of
this, the second mental element of Gothic, to the opening of the third
chapter of the _Seven Lamps of Architecture_, in which the distinction
was drawn (§ 2) between man gathering and man governing; between his
acceptance of the sources of delight from nature, and his development
of authoritative or imaginative power in their arrangement: for the two
mental elements, not only of Gothic, but of all good architecture,
which we have just been examining, belong to it, and are admirable in
it, chiefly as it is, more than any other subject of art, the work of
man, and the expression of the average power of man. A picture or poem
is often little more than a feeble utterance of man's admiration of
something out of himself; but architecture approaches more to a
creation of his own, born of his necessities, and expressive of his
nature. It is also, in some sort, the work of the whole race, while the
picture or statue are the work of one only, in most cases more highly
gifted than his fellows. And therefore we may expect that the first two
elements of good architecture should be expressive of some great truths
commonly belonging to the whole race, and necessary to be understood or
felt by them in all their work that they do under the sun. And observe
what they are: the confession of Imperfection, and the confession of
Desire of Change. The building of the bird and the bee needs not
express anything like this. It is perfect and unchanging. But just
because we are something better than birds or bees, our building must
confess that we have not reached the perfection we can imagine, and
cannot rest in the condition we have attained. If we pretend to have
reached either perfection or satisfaction, we have degraded ourselves
and our work. God's work only may express that; but ours may never have
that sentence written upon it,--"And behold, it was very good." And,
observe again, it is not merely as it renders the edifice a book of
various knowledge, or a mine of precious thought, that variety is
essential to its nobleness. The vital principle is not the love of
_Knowledge_, but the love of _Change_. It is that strange _disquietude_
of the Gothic spirit that is its greatness; that restlessness of the
dreaming mind, that wanders hither and thither among the niches, and
flickers feverishly around the pinnacles, and frets and fades in
labyrinthine knots and shadows along wall and roof, and yet is not
satisfied, nor shall be satisfied. The Greek could stay in his triglyph
furrow, and be at peace; but the work of the Gothic heart is fretwork
still, and it can neither rest in, nor from, its labour, but must pass
on, sleeplessly, until its love of change shall be pacified for ever in
the change that must come alike on them that wake and them that
sleep....

Last, because the least essential, of the constituent elements of this
noble school, was placed that of REDUNDANCE,--the uncalculating
bestowal of the wealth of its labour. There is, indeed, much Gothic,
and that of the best period, in which this element is hardly traceable,
and which depends for its effect almost exclusively on loveliness of
simple design and grace of uninvolved proportion; still, in the most
characteristic buildings, a certain portion of their effect depends
upon accumulation of ornament; and many of those which have most
influence on the minds of men, have attained it by means of this
attribute alone. And although, by careful study of the school, it is
possible to arrive at a condition of taste which shall be better
contented by a few perfect lines than by a whole façade covered with
fretwork, the building which only satisfies such a taste is not to be
considered the best. For the very first requirement of Gothic
architecture being, as we saw above, that it shall both admit the aid,
and appeal to the admiration, of the rudest as well as the most refined
minds, the richness of the work is, paradoxical as the statement may
appear, a part of its humility. No architecture is so haughty as that
which is simple; which refuses to address the eye, except in a few
clear and forceful lines; which implies, in offering so little to our
regards, that all it has offered is perfect; and disdains, either by
the complexity of the attractiveness of its features, to embarrass our
investigation, or betray us into delight. That humility, which is the
very life of the Gothic school, is shown not only in the imperfection,
but in the accumulation, of ornament. The inferior rank of the workman
is often shown as much in the richness, as the roughness, of his work;
and if the co-operation of every hand, and the sympathy of every heart,
are to be received, we must be content to allow the redundance which
disguises the failure of the feeble, and wins the regard of the
inattentive. There are, however, far nobler interests mingling, in the
Gothic heart, with the rude love of decorative accumulation: a
magnificent enthusiasm, which feels as if it never could do enough to
reach the fulness of its ideal; an unselfishness of sacrifice, which
would rather cast fruitless labour before the altar than stand idle in
the market; and, finally, a profound sympathy with the fulness and
wealth of the material universe, rising out of that Naturalism whose
operation we have already endeavoured to define. The sculptor who
sought for his models among the forest leaves, could not but quickly
and deeply feel that complexity need not involve the loss of grace, nor
richness that of repose; and every hour which he spent in the study of
the minute and various work of Nature, made him feel more forcibly the
barrenness of what was best in that of man: nor is it to be wondered
at, that, seeing her perfect and exquisite creations poured forth in a
profusion which conception could not grasp nor calculation sum, he
should think that it ill became him to be niggardly of his own rude
craftsmanship; and where he saw throughout the universe a faultless
beauty lavished on measureless spaces of broidered field and blooming
mountain, to grudge his poor and imperfect labour to the few stones
that he had raised one upon another, for habitation or memorial. The
years of his life passed away before his task was accomplished; but
generation succeeded generation with unwearied enthusiasm, and the
cathedral front was at last lost in the tapestry of its traceries, like
a rock among the thickets and herbage of spring.


  [157] The third kind of ornament, the Renaissance, is that in which
  the inferior detail becomes principal, the executor of every minor
  portion being required to exhibit skill and possess knowledge as
  great as that which is possessed by the master of the design; and
  in the endeavour to endow him with this skill and knowledge, his
  own original power is overwhelmed, and the whole building becomes a
  wearisome exhibition of well-educated imbecility. We must fully
  inquire into the nature of this form of error, when we arrive at
  the examination of the Renaissance schools. [Ruskin.]

  [158] Job xix, 26.

  [159] _Matthew_ viii, 9.

  [160] Vide Preface to _Fair Maid of Perth_. [Ruskin.]

  [161] The Elgin marbles are supposed by many persons to be "perfect".
  In the most important portions they indeed approach perfection,
  but only there. The draperies are unfinished, the hair and wool
  of the animals are unfinished, and the entire bas-reliefs of the
  frieze are roughly cut. [Ruskin.]




SELECTIONS FROM THE SEVEN LAMPS OF ARCHITECTURE


    This book began to assume shape in Ruskin's mind as early as 1846;
    he actually wrote it in the six months between November, 1848, and
    April, 1849. It is the first of five illustrated volumes embodying
    the results of seven years devoted to the study of the principles
    and ideals of Gothic Architecture, the other volumes being _The
    Stones of Venice_ and _Examples of the Architecture of Venice_
    (1851). In the first edition of _The Seven Lamps_ the plates were
    not only all drawn but also etched by his own hand. Ruskin at a
    later time wrote that the purpose of _The Seven Lamps_ was "to
    show that certain right states of temper and moral feeling were
    the magic powers by which all good architecture had been
    produced." He is really applying here the same tests of truth and
    sincerity that he employed in _Modern Painters_. Chronologically,
    this volume and the others treating of architecture come between
    the composition of Volumes II and III of _Modern Painters_.
    Professor Charles Eliot Norton writes that the _Seven Lamps_ is
    "the first treatise in English to teach the real significance of
    architecture as the most trustworthy record of the life and faith
    of nations." The following selections form the closing chapters of
    the volume, and have a peculiar interest as anticipating the
    social and political ideas which came to colour all his later
    work.




THE LAMP OF MEMORY


Among the hours of his life to which the writer looks back with
peculiar gratitude, as having been marked by more than ordinary fulness
of joy or clearness of teaching, is one passed, now some years ago,
near time of sunset, among the broken masses of pine forest which skirt
the course of the Ain, above the village of Champagnole, in the Jura.
It is a spot which has all the solemnity, with none of the savageness,
of the Alps; where there is a sense of a great power beginning to be
manifested in the earth, and of a deep and majestic concord in the rise
of the long low lines of piny hills; the first utterance of those
mighty mountain symphonies, soon to be more loudly lifted and wildly
broken along the battlements of the Alps. But their strength is as yet
restrained; and the far reaching ridges of pastoral mountain succeed
each other, like the long and sighing swell which moves over quiet
waters from some far off stormy sea. And there is a deep tenderness
pervading that vast monotony. The destructive forces and the stern
expression of the central ranges are alike withdrawn. No
frost-ploughed, dust-encumbered paths of ancient glacier fret the soft
Jura pastures; no splintered heaps of ruin break the fair ranks of her
forest; no pale, defiled, or furious rivers rend their rude and
changeful ways among her rocks. Patiently, eddy by eddy, the clear
green streams wind along their well-known beds; and under the dark
quietness of the undisturbed pines, there spring up, year by year, such
company of joyful flowers as I know not the like of among all the
blessings of the earth. It was spring time, too; and all were coming
forth in clusters crowded for very love; there was room enough for all,
but they crushed their leaves into all manner of strange shapes only to
be nearer each other. There was the wood anemone, star after star,
closing every now and then into nebulae; and there was the oxalis,
troop by troop, like virginal processions of the Mois de Marie,[162] the
dark vertical clefts in the limestone choked up with them as with heavy
snow, and touched with ivy on the edges--ivy as light and lovely as the
vine; and, ever and anon, a blue gush of violets, and cowslip bells in
sunny places; and in the more open ground, the vetch, and comfrey, and
mezereon, and the small sapphire buds of the Polygala Alpina, and the
wild strawberry, just a blossom or two all showered amidst the golden
softness of deep, warm, amber-coloured moss. I came out presently on
the edge of the ravine: the solemn murmur of its waters rose suddenly
from beneath, mixed with the singing of the thrushes among the pine
boughs; and, on the opposite side of the valley, walled all along as it
was by grey cliffs of limestone, there was a hawk sailing slowly off
their brow, touching them nearly with his wings, and with the shadows
of the pines flickering upon his plumage from above; but with the fall
of a hundred fathoms under his breast, and the curling pools of the
green river gliding and glittering dizzily beneath him, their foam
globes moving with him as he flew. It would be difficult to conceive a
scene less dependent upon any other interest than that of its own
secluded and serious beauty; but the writer well remembers the sudden
blankness and chill which were cast upon it when he endeavoured, in
order more strictly to arrive at the sources of its impressiveness, to
imagine it, for a moment, a scene in some aboriginal forest of the New
Continent. The flowers in an instant lost their light, the river its
music; the hills became oppressively desolate; a heaviness in the
boughs of the darkened forest showed how much of their former power had
been dependent upon a life which was not theirs, how much of the glory
of the imperishable, or continually renewed, creation is reflected from
things more precious in their memories than it, in its renewing. Those
ever springing flowers and ever flowing streams had been dyed by the
deep colours of human endurance, valour, and virtue; and the crests of
the sable hills that rose against the evening sky received a deeper
worship, because their far shadows fell eastward over the iron wall of
Joux, and the four-square keep of Granson.

It is as the centralization and protectress of this sacred influence,
that Architecture is to be regarded by us with the most serious
thought. We may live without her, and worship without her, but we
cannot remember without her. How cold is all history, how lifeless all
imagery, compared to that which the living nation writes, and the
uncorrupted marble bears!--how many pages of doubtful record might we
not often spare, for a few stones left one upon another! The ambition
of the old Babel builders was well directed for this world:[163] there
are but two strong conquerors of the forgetfulness of men, Poetry and
Architecture; and the latter in some sort includes the former, and is
mightier in its reality: it is well to have, not only what men have
thought and felt, but what their hands have handled, and their strength
wrought, and their eyes beheld, all the days of their life. The age of
Homer is surrounded with darkness, his very personality with doubt. Not
so that of Pericles: and the day is coming when we shall confess, that
we have learned more of Greece out of the crumbled fragments of her
sculpture than even from her sweet singers or soldier historians. And
if indeed there be any profit in our knowledge of the past, or any joy
in the thought of being remembered hereafter, which can give strength
to present exertion, or patience to present endurance, there are two
duties respecting national architecture whose importance it is
impossible to overrate: the first, to render the architecture of the
day, historical; and, the second, to preserve, as the most precious of
inheritances, that of past ages.

It is in the first of these two directions that Memory may truly be
said to be the Sixth Lamp of Architecture; for it is in becoming
memorial or monumental that a true perfection is attained by civil and
domestic buildings; and this partly as they are, with such a view,
built in a more stable manner, and partly as their decorations are
consequently animated by a metaphorical or historical meaning.

As regards domestic buildings, there must always be a certain
limitation to views of this kind in the power, as well as in the
hearts, of men; still I cannot but think it an evil sign of a people
when their houses are built to last for one generation only. There is a
sanctity in a good man's house which cannot be renewed in every
tenement that rises on its ruins: and I believe that good men would
generally feel this; and that having spent their lives happily and
honourably, they would be grieved, at the close of them, to think that
the place of their earthly abode, which had seen, and seemed almost to
sympathize in, all their honour, their gladness, or their
suffering,--that this, with all the record it bare of them, and of all
material things that they had loved and ruled over, and set the stamp
of themselves upon--was to be swept away, as soon as there was room
made for them in the grave; that no respect was to be shown to it, no
affection felt for it, no good to be drawn from it by their children;
that though there was a monument in the church, there was no warm
monument in the hearth and house to them; that all that they ever
treasured was despised, and the places that had sheltered and comforted
them were dragged down to the dust. I say that a good man would fear
this; and that, far more, a good son, a noble descendant, would fear
doing it to his father's house. I say that if men lived like men
indeed, their houses would be temples--temples which we should hardly
dare to injure, and in which it would make us holy to be permitted to
live; and there must be a strange dissolution of natural affection, a
strange unthankfulness for all that homes have given and parents
taught, a strange consciousness that we have been unfaithful to our
fathers' honour, or that our own lives are not such as would make our
dwellings sacred to our children, when each man would fain build to
himself, and build for the little revolution of his own life only.
And I look upon those pitiful concretions of lime and clay which spring
up, in mildewed forwardness, out of the kneaded fields about our
capital--upon those thin, tottering, foundationless shells of splintered
wood and imitated stone--upon those gloomy rows of formalized
minuteness, alike without difference and without fellowship, as
solitary as similar--not merely with the careless disgust of an
offended eye, not merely with sorrow for a desecrated landscape, but
with a painful foreboding that the roots of our national greatness must
be deeply cankered when they are thus loosely struck in their native
ground; that those comfortless and unhonoured dwellings are the signs
of a great and spreading spirit of popular discontent; that they mark
the time when every man's aim is to be in some more elevated sphere
than his natural one, and every man's past life is his habitual scorn;
when men build in the hope of leaving the places they have built, and
live in the hope of forgetting the years that they have lived; when the
comfort, the peace, the religion of home have ceased to be felt; and
the crowded tenements of a struggling and restless population differ
only from the tents of the Arab or the Gipsy by their less healthy
openness to the air of heaven, and less happy choice of their spot of
earth; by their sacrifice of liberty without the gain of rest, and of
stability without the luxury of change.

This is no slight, no consequenceless evil; it is ominous, infectious,
and fecund of other fault and misfortune. When men do not love their
hearths, nor reverence their thresholds, it is a sign that they have
dishonoured both, and that they have never acknowledged the true
universality of that Christian worship which was indeed to supersede
the idolatry, but not the piety, of the pagan. Our God is a household
God, as well as a heavenly one; He has an altar in every man's
dwelling; let men look to it when they rend it lightly and pour out its
ashes. It is not a question of mere ocular delight, it is no question
of intellectual pride, or of cultivated and critical fancy, how, and
with what aspect of durability and of completeness, the domestic
buildings of a nation shall be raised. It is one of those moral duties,
not with more impunity to be neglected because the perception of them
depends on a finely toned and balanced conscientiousness, to build our
dwellings with care, and patience, and fondness, and diligent
completion, and with a view to their duration at least for such a
period as, in the ordinary course of national revolutions, might be
supposed likely to extend to the entire alteration of the direction of
local interests. This at the least; but it would be better if, in every
possible instance, men built their own houses on a scale commensurate
rather with their condition at the commencement, than their attainments
at the termination, of their worldly career; and built them to stand as
long as human work at its strongest can be hoped to stand; recording to
their children what they had been, and from what, if so it had been
permitted them, they had risen. And when houses are thus built, we may
have that true domestic architecture, the beginning of all other, which
does not disdain to treat with respect and thoughtfulness the small
habitation as well as the large, and which invests with the dignity of
contented manhood the narrowness of worldly circumstance.

I look to this spirit of honourable, proud, peaceful self-possession,
this abiding wisdom of contented life, as probably one of the chief
sources of great intellectual power in all ages, and beyond dispute as
the very primal source of the great architecture of old Italy and
France. To this day, the interest of their fairest cities depends, not
on the isolated richness of palaces, but on the cherished and exquisite
decoration of even the smallest tenements of their proud periods. The
most elaborate piece of architecture in Venice is a small house at the
head of the Grand Canal, consisting of a ground floor with two storeys
above, three windows in the first, and two in the second. Many of the
most exquisite buildings are on the narrower canals, and of no larger
dimensions. One of the most interesting pieces of fifteenth-century
architecture in North Italy, is a small house in a back street, behind
the market-place of Vicenza; it bears date 1481, and the motto, _Il.
n'est. rose. sans. épine_; it has also only a ground floor and two
storeys, with three windows in each, separated by rich flower-work, and
with balconies, supported, the central one by an eagle with open wings,
the lateral ones by winged griffins standing on cornucopiæ. The idea
that a house must be large in order to be well built, is altogether of
modern growth, and is parallel with the idea, that no picture can be
historical, except of a size admitting figures larger than life.

I would have, then, our ordinary dwelling-houses built to last, and
built to be lovely; as rich and full of pleasantness as may be, within
and without; with what degree of likeness to each other in style and
manner, I will say presently, under another head;[164] but, at all
events, with such differences as might suit and express each man's
character and occupation, and partly his history. This right over the
house, I conceive, belongs to its first builder, and is to be respected
by his children; and it would be well that blank stones should be left
in places, to be inscribed with a summary of his life and of its
experience, raising thus the habitation into a kind of monument, and
developing, into more systematic instructiveness, that good custom
which was of old universal, and which still remains among some of the
Swiss and Germans, of acknowledging the grace of God's permission to
build and possess a quiet resting-place, in such sweet words as may
well close our speaking of these things. I have taken them from the
front of a cottage lately built among the green pastures which descend
from the village of Grindelwald to the lower glacier:--

    Mit herzlichem Vertrauen
    Hat Johannes Mooter und Maria Rubi
    Dieses Haus bauen lassen.
    Der liebe Gott woll uns bewahren
    Vor allem Unglück und Gefahren,
    Und es in Segen lassen stehn
    Auf der Reise durch diese Jammerzeit
    Nach dem himmlischen Paradiese,
    Wo alle Frommen wohnen,
    Da wird Gott sie belohnen
    Mil der Friedenskrone
        Zu alle Ewigkeit.[165]

In public buildings the historical purpose should be still more
definite. It is one of the advantages of Gothic architecture,--I use
the word Gothic in the most extended sense as broadly opposed to
classical,--that it admits of a richness of record altogether
unlimited. Its minute and multitudinous sculptural decorations afford
means of expressing, either symbolically or literally, all that need be
known of national feeling or achievement. More decoration will, indeed,
be usually required than can take so elevated a character; and much,
even in the most thoughtful periods, has been left to the freedom of
fancy, or suffered to consist of mere repetitions of some national
bearing or symbol. It is, however, generally unwise, even in mere
surface ornament, to surrender the power and privilege of variety which
the spirit of Gothic architecture admits; much more in important
features--capitals of columns or bosses, and string-courses, as of
course in all confessed has-reliefs. Better the rudest work that tells
a story or records a fact, than the richest without meaning. There
should not be a single ornament put upon great civic buildings, without
some intellectual intention. Actual representation of history has in
modern times been checked by a difficulty, mean indeed, but steadfast;
that of unmanageable costume: nevertheless, by a sufficiently bold
imaginative treatment, and frank use of symbols, all such obstacles may
be vanquished; not perhaps in the degree necessary to produce sculpture
in itself satisfactory, but at all events so as to enable it to become
a grand and expressive element of architectural composition. Take, for
example, the management of the capitals of the ducal palace at Venice.
History, as such, was indeed entrusted to the painters of its interior,
but every capital of its arcades was filled with meaning. The large
one, the corner stone of the whole, next the entrance, was devoted to
the symbolization of Abstract Justice; above it is a sculpture of the
Judgment of Solomon, remarkable for a beautiful subjection in its
treatment to its decorative purpose. The figures, if the subject had
been entirely composed of them, would have awkwardly interrupted the
line of the angle, and diminished its apparent strength; and therefore
in the midst of them, entirely without relation to them, and indeed
actually between the executioner and interceding mother, there rises
the ribbed trunk of a massy tree, which supports and continues the
shaft of the angle, and whose leaves above overshadow and enrich the
whole. The capital below bears among its leafage a throned figure of
Justice, Trajan doing justice to the widow, Aristotle "che die legge,"
and one or two other subjects now unintelligible from decay. The
capitals next in order represent the virtues and vices in succession,
as preservative or destructive of national peace and power, concluding
with Faith, with the inscription "Fides optima in Deo est." A figure is
seen on the opposite side of the capital, worshipping the sun. After
these, one or two capitals are fancifully decorated with birds, and
then come a series representing, first the various fruits, then the
national costumes, and then the animals of the various countries
subject to Venetian rule.

Now, not to speak of any more important public building, let us imagine
our own India House adorned in this way, by historical or symbolical
sculpture: massively built in the first place; then chased with
has-reliefs of our Indian battles, and fretted with carvings of
Oriental foliage, or inlaid with Oriental stones; and the more
important members of its decoration composed of groups of Indian life
and landscape, and prominently expressing the phantasms of Hindoo
worship in their subjection to the Cross. Would not one such work be
better than a thousand histories? If, however, we have not the
invention necessary for such efforts, or if, which is probably one of
the most noble excuses we can offer for our deficiency in such matters,
we have less pleasure in talking about ourselves, even in marble, than
the Continental nations, at least we have no excuse for any want of
care in the points which insure the building's endurance. And as this
question is one of great interest in its relations to the choice of
various modes of decoration, it will be necessary to enter into it at
some length.

The benevolent regards and purposes of men in masses seldom can be
supposed to extend beyond their own generation. They may look to
posterity as an audience, may hope for its attention, and labour for
its praise: they may trust to its recognition of unacknowledged merit,
and demand its justice for contemporary wrong. But all this is mere
selfishness, and does not involve the slightest regard to, or
consideration of, the interest of those by whose numbers we would fain
swell the circle of our flatterers, and by whose authority we would
gladly support our presently disputed claims. The idea of self-denial
for the sake of posterity, of practising present economy for the sake
of debtors yet unborn, of planting forests that our descendants may
live under their shade, or of raising cities for future nations to
inhabit, never, I suppose, efficiently takes place among publicly
recognized motives of exertion. Yet these are not the less our duties;
nor is our part fitly sustained upon the earth, unless the range of our
intended and deliberate usefulness include, not only the companions but
the successors, of our pilgrimage. God has lent us the earth for our
life; it is a great entail. It belongs as much to those who are to come
after us, and whose names are already written in the book of creation,
as to us; and we have no right, by anything that we do or neglect, to
involve them in unnecessary penalties, or deprive them of benefits
which it was in our power to bequeath. And this the more, because it is
one of the appointed conditions of the labour of men that, in
proportion to the time between the seed-sowing and the harvest, is the
fulness of the fruit; and that generally, therefore, the farther off we
place our aim, and the less we desire to be ourselves the witnesses of
what we have laboured for, the more wide and rich will be the measure
of our success. Men cannot benefit those that are with them as they can
benefit those who come after them; and of all the pulpits from which
human voice is ever sent forth, there is none from which it reaches so
far as from the grave.

Nor is there, indeed, any present loss, in such respect for futurity.
Every human action gains in honour, in grace, in all true magnificence,
by its regard to things that are to come. It is the far sight, the
quiet and confident patience, that, above all other attributes,
separate man from man, and near him to his Maker; and there is no
action nor art, whose majesty we may not measure by this test.
Therefore, when we build, let us think that we build for ever. Let it
not be for present delight, nor for present use alone; let it be such
work as our descendants will thank us for, and let us think, as we lay
stone on stone, that a time is to come when those stones will be held
sacred because our hands have touched them, and that men will say as
they look upon the labour and wrought substance of them, "See! this our
fathers did for us." For, indeed, the greatest glory of a building is
not in its stones, nor in its gold. Its glory is in its Age, and in
that deep sense of voicefulness, of stern watching, of mysterious
sympathy, nay, even of approval or condemnation, which we feel in walls
that have long been washed by the passing waves of humanity. It is in
their lasting witness against men, in their quiet contrast with the
transitional character of all things, in the strength which, through
the lapse of seasons and times, and the decline and birth of dynasties,
and the changing of the face of the earth, and of the limits of the
sea, maintains its sculptured shapeliness for a time insuperable,
connects forgotten and following ages with each other, and half
constitutes the identity, as it concentrates the sympathy, of nations:
it is in that golden stain of time, that we are to look for the real
light, and colour, and preciousness of architecture; and it is not
until a building has assumed this character, till it has been entrusted
with the fame, and hallowed by the deeds of men, till its walls have
been witnesses of suffering, and its pillars rise out of the shadows of
death, that its existence, more lasting as it is than that of the
natural objects of the world around it, can be gifted with even so much
as these possess, of language and of life.

For that period, then, we must build; not, indeed, refusing to
ourselves the delight of present completion, nor hesitating to follow
such portions of character as may depend upon delicacy of execution to
the highest perfection of which they are capable, even although we may
know that in the course of years such details must perish; but taking
care that for work of this kind we sacrifice no enduring quality, and
that the building shall not depend for its impressiveness upon anything
that is perishable. This would, indeed, be the law of good composition
under any circumstances, the arrangement of the larger masses being
always a matter of greater importance than the treatment of the
smaller; but in architecture there is much in that very treatment which
is skilful or otherwise in proportion to its just regard to the
probable effects of time: and (which is still more to be considered)
there is a beauty in those effects themselves, which nothing else can
replace, and which it is our wisdom to consult and to desire. For
though, hitherto, we have been speaking of the sentiment of age only,
there is an actual beauty in the marks of it, such and so great as to
have become not unfrequently the subject of especial choice among
certain schools of art, and to have impressed upon those schools the
character usually and loosely expressed by the term "picturesque."....

Now, to return to our immediate subject, it so happens that, in
architecture, the superinduced and accidental beauty is most commonly
inconsistent with the preservation of original character, and the
picturesque is therefore sought in ruin, and supposed to consist in
decay. Whereas, even when so sought, it consists in the mere sublimity
of the rents, or fractures, or stains, or vegetation, which assimilate
the architecture with the work of Nature, and bestow upon it those
circumstances of colour and form which are universally beloved by the
eye of man. So far as this is done, to the extinction of the true
characters of the architecture, it is picturesque, and the artist who
looks to the stem of the ivy instead of the shaft of the pillar, is
carrying out in more daring freedom the debased sculptor's choice of
the hair instead of the countenance. But so far as it can be rendered
consistent with the inherent character, the picturesque or extraneous
sublimity of architecture has just this of nobler function in it than
that of any other object whatsoever, that it is an exponent of age, of
that in which, as has been said, the greatest glory of the building
consists; and, therefore, the external signs of this glory, having
power and purpose greater than any belonging to their mere sensible
beauty, may be considered as taking rank among pure and essential
characters; so essential to my mind, that I think a building cannot be
considered as in its prime until four or five centuries have passed
over it; and that the entire choice and arrangement of its details
should have reference to their appearance after that period, so that
none should be admitted which would suffer material injury either by
the weather-staining, or the mechanical degradation which the lapse of
such a period would necessitate.

It is not my purpose to enter into any of the questions which the
application of this principle involves. They are of too great interest
and complexity to be even touched upon within my present limits, but
this is broadly to be noticed, that those styles of architecture which
are picturesque in the sense above explained with respect to sculpture,
that is to say, whose decoration depends on the arrangement of points
of shade rather than on purity of outline, do not suffer, but commonly
gain in richness of effect when their details are partly worn away;
hence such styles, pre-eminently that of French Gothic, should always
be adopted when the materials to be employed are liable to degradation,
as brick, sandstone, or soft limestone; and styles in any degree
dependent on purity of line, as the Italian Gothic, must be practised
altogether in hard and undecomposing materials, granite, serpentine, or
crystalline marbles. There can be no doubt that the nature of the
accessible materials influenced the formation of both styles; and it
should still more authoritatively determine our choice of either.

It does not belong to my present plan to consider at length the second
head of duty of which I have above spoken; the preservation of the
architecture we possess: but a few words may be forgiven, as especially
necessary in modern times. Neither by the public, nor by those who have
the care of public monuments, is the true meaning of the word
_restoration_ understood. It means the most total destruction which a
building can suffer: a destruction out of which no remnants can be
gathered: a destruction accompanied with false description of the thing
destroyed. Do not let us deceive ourselves in this important matter; it
is _impossible_, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore
anything that has ever been great or beautiful in architecture. That
which I have above insisted upon as the life of the whole, that spirit
which is given only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be
recalled. Another spirit may be given by another time, and it is then a
new building; but the spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up,
and commanded to direct other hands, and other thoughts. And as for
direct and simple copying, it is palpably impossible. What copying can
there be of surfaces that have been worn half an inch down? The whole
finish of the work was in the half inch that is gone; if you attempt to
restore that finish, you do it conjecturally; if you copy what is left,
granting fidelity to be possible (and what care, or watchfulness, or
cost can secure it,) how is the new work better than the old? There was
yet in the old _some_ life, some mysterious suggestion of what it had
been, and of what it had lost; some sweetness in the gentle lines which
rain and sun had wrought. There can be none in the brute hardness of
the new carving. Look at the animals which I have given in Plate XIV.,
as an instance of living work, and suppose the markings of the scales
and hair once worn away, or the wrinkles of the brows, and who shall
ever restore them? The first step to restoration, (I have seen it, and
that again and again--seen it on the Baptistery of Pisa, seen it on
the Casa d'Oro at Venice, seen it on the Cathedral of Lisieux,) is to
dash the old work to pieces; the second is usually to put up the
cheapest and basest imitation which can escape detection, but in all
cases, however careful, and however laboured, an imitation still, a
cold model of such parts as _can_ be modelled, with conjectural
supplements; and my experience has as yet furnished me with only one
instance, that of the Palais de Justice at Rouen, in which even this,
the utmost degree of fidelity which is possible, has been attained, or
even attempted.[166]

Do not let us talk then of restoration. The thing is a Lie from
beginning to end. You may make a model of a building as you may of a
corpse, and your model may have the shell of the old walls within it as
your cast might have the skeleton, with what advantage I neither see
nor care: but the old building is destroyed, and that more totally and
mercilessly than if it had sunk into a heap of dust, or melted into a
mass of clay: more has been gleaned out of desolated Nineveh than ever
will be out of re-built Milan. But, it is said, there may come a
necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the necessity full in the
face, and understand it on its own terms. It is a necessity for
destruction. Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw its
stones into neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you
will; but do it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in their place. And
look that necessity in the face before it comes, and you may prevent
it. The principle of modern times, (a principle which, I believe, at
least in France, to be _systematically acted on by the masons_, in
order to find themselves work, as the abbey of St. Ouen was pulled down
by the magistrates of the town by way of giving work to some vagrants,)
is to neglect buildings first, and restore them afterwards. Take proper
care of your monuments, and you will not need to restore them. A few
sheets of lead put in time upon the roof, a few dead leaves and sticks
swept in time out of a water-course, will save both roof and walls from
ruin. Watch an old building with an anxious care; guard it as best you
may, and at _any_ cost, from every influence of dilapidation. Count its
stones as you would jewels of a crown; set watches about it as if at
the gates of a besieged city; bind it together with iron where it
loosens; stay it with timber where it declines; do not care about the
unsightliness of the aid: better a crutch than a lost limb; and do this
tenderly, and reverently, and continually, and many a generation will
still be born and pass away beneath its shadow. Its evil day must come
at last; but let it come declaredly and openly, and let no dishonouring
and false substitute deprive it of the funeral offices of memory.

Of more wanton or ignorant ravage it is vain to speak; my words will
not reach those who commit them, and yet, be it heard or not, I must
not leave the truth unstated, that it is again no question of
expediency or feeling whether we shall preserve the buildings of past
times or not. _We have no right whatever to touch them_. They are not
ours. They belong partly to those who built them, and partly to all the
generations of mankind who are to follow us. The dead have still their
right in them: that which they laboured for, the praise of achievement
or the expression of religious feeling, or whatsoever else it might be
which in those buildings they intended to be permanent, we have no
right to obliterate. What we have ourselves built, we are at liberty to
throw down; but what other men gave their strength and wealth and life
to accomplish, their right over does not pass away with their death;
still less is the right to the use of what they have left vested in us
only. It belongs to all their successors. It may hereafter be a subject
of sorrow, or a cause of injury, to millions, that we have consulted
our present convenience by casting down such buildings as we choose to
dispense with. That sorrow, that loss, we have no right to inflict. Did
the cathedral of Avranches[167] belong to the mob who destroyed it, any
more than it did to us, who walk in sorrow to and fro over its
foundation? Neither does any building whatever belong to those mobs who
do violence to it. For a mob it is, and must be always; it matters not
whether enraged, or in deliberate folly; whether countless, or sitting
in committees; the people who destroy anything causelessly are a mob,
and Architecture is always destroyed causelessly. A fair building is
necessarily worth the ground it stands upon, and will be so until
Central Africa and America shall have become as populous as Middlesex:
nor is any cause whatever valid as a ground for its destruction. If
ever valid, certainly not now, when the place both of the past and
future is too much usurped in our minds by the restless and
discontented present. The very quietness of nature is gradually
withdrawn from us; thousands who once in their necessarily prolonged
travel were subjected to an influence, from the silent sky and
slumbering fields, more effectual than known or confessed, now bear
with them even there the ceaseless fever of their life; and along the
iron veins that traverse the frame of our country, beat and flow the
fiery pulses of its exertion, hotter and faster every hour. All
vitality is concentrated through those throbbing arteries into the
central cities; the country is passed over like a green sea by narrow
bridges, and we are thrown back in continually closer crowds upon the
city gates. The only influence which can in any wise _there_ take the
place of that of the woods and fields, is the power of ancient
Architecture. Do not part with it for the sake of the formal square, or
of the fenced and planted walk, nor of the goodly street nor opened
quay. The pride of a city is not in these. Leave them to the crowd; but
remember that there will surely be some within the circuit of the
disquieted walls who would ask for some other spots than these wherein
to walk; for some other forms to meet their sight familiarly: like
him[168] who sat so often where the sun struck from the west to watch the
lines of the dome of Florence drawn on the deep sky, or like those, his
Hosts, who could bear daily to behold, from their palace chambers, the
places where their fathers lay at rest, at the meeting of the dark
streets of Verona.


  [162] May-day processions in honour of the Virgin.

  [163] _Genesis_ xi, 4.

  [164] See pp. 225 ff.

  [165] In heartfelt trust Johannes Mooter and Maria Rubi had this
  house erected. May dear God shield us from all perils and
  misfortune; and let His blessing rest upon it during the journey
  through this wretched life up to heavenly Paradise where the pious
  dwell. There will God reward them with the Crown of Peace to all
  eternity.

  [166] Baptistery of Pisa, circular, of marble, with dome two
  hundred feet high, embellished with numerous columns, is a notable
  work of the twelfth century. The pulpit is a masterpiece of Nicola
  Pisano. Casa d'Oro at Venice is noted for its elegance. It was
  built in the fourteenth century. The Cathedral of Lisieux dates
  chiefly from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and contains
  many works of art. The Palais de Justice is of the fifteenth
  century. It was built for the Parliament of the Province.

  [167] This cathedral, destroyed in 1799, was one of the most
  beautiful in all Normandy.

  [168] Dante.




THE LAMP OF OBEDIENCE


It has been my endeavour to show in the preceding pages how every form
of noble architecture is in some sort the embodiment of the Polity,
Life, History, and Religious Faith of nations. Once or twice in doing
this, I have named a principle to which I would now assign a definite
place among those which direct that embodiment; the last place, not
only as that to which its own humility would incline, but rather as
belonging to it in the aspect of the crowning grace of all the rest;
that principle, I mean, to which Polity owes its stability, Life its
happiness, Faith its acceptance, Creation its continuance,--Obedience.

Nor is it the least among the sources of more serious satisfaction
which I have found in the pursuit of a subject that at first appeared
to bear but slightly on the grave interests of mankind, that the
conditions of material perfection which it leads me in conclusion to
consider, furnish a strange proof how false is the conception, how
frantic the pursuit, of that treacherous phantom which men call
Liberty: most treacherous, indeed, of all phantoms; for the feeblest
ray of reason might surely show us, that not only its attainment, but
its being, was impossible. There is no such thing in the universe.
There can never be. The stars have it not; the earth has it not; the
sea has it not; and we men have the mockery and semblance of it only
for our heaviest punishment.

In one of the noblest poems[169] for its imagery and its music belonging
to the recent school of our literature, the writer has sought in the
aspect of inanimate nature the expression of that Liberty which, having
once loved, he had seen among men in its true dyes of darkness. But
with what strange fallacy of interpretation! since in one noble line of
his invocation he has contradicted the assumptions of the rest, and
acknowledged the presence of a subjection, surely not less severe
because eternal. How could he otherwise? since if there be any one
principle more widely than another confessed by every utterance, or
more sternly than another imprinted on every atom, of the visible
creation, that principle is not Liberty, but Law.

The enthusiast would reply that by Liberty he meant the Law of Liberty.
Then why use the single and misunderstood word? If by liberty you mean
chastisement of the passions, discipline of the intellect, subjection
of the will; if you mean the fear of inflicting, the shame of
committing, a wrong; if you mean respect for all who are in authority,
and consideration for all who are in dependence; veneration for the
good, mercy to the evil, sympathy with the weak; if you mean
watchfulness over all thoughts, temperance in all pleasures, and
perseverance in all toils; if you mean, in a word, that Service which
is defined in the liturgy of the English church to be perfect Freedom,
why do you name this by the same word by which the luxurious mean
license, and the reckless mean change; by which the rogue means rapine,
and the fool, equality; by which the proud mean anarchy, and the
malignant mean violence? Call it by any name rather than this, but its
best and truest, is Obedience. Obedience is, indeed, founded on a kind
of freedom, else it would become mere subjugation, but that freedom is
only granted that obedience may be more perfect; and thus, while a
measure of license is necessary to exhibit the individual energies of
things, the fairness and pleasantness and perfection of them all
consist in their Restraint. Compare a river that has burst its banks
with one that is bound by them, and the clouds that are scattered over
the face of the whole heaven with those that are marshalled into ranks
and orders by its winds. So that though restraint, utter and
unrelaxing, can never be comely, this is not because it is in itself an
evil, but only because, when too great, it overpowers the nature of the
thing restrained, and so counteracts the other laws of which that
nature is itself composed. And the balance wherein consists the
fairness of creation is between the laws of life and being in the
things governed, and the laws of general sway to which they are
subjected; and the suspension or infringement of either, kind of law,
or, literally, disorder, is equivalent to, and synonymous with,
disease; while the increase of both honour and beauty is habitually on
the side of restraint (or the action of superior law) rather than of
character (or the action of inherent law). The noblest word in the
catalogue of social virtue is "Loyalty," and the sweetest which men
have learned in the pastures of the wilderness is "Fold."

Nor is this all; but we may observe, that exactly in proportion to the
majesty of things in the scale of being, is the completeness of their
obedience to the laws that are set over them. Gravitation is less
quietly, less instantly obeyed by a grain of dust than it is by the sun
and moon; and the ocean falls and flows under influences which the lake
and river do not recognize. So also in estimating the dignity of any
action or occupation of men, there is perhaps no better test than the
question "are its laws strait?" For their severity will probably be
commensurate with the greatness of the numbers whose labour it
concentrates or whose interest it concerns.

This severity must be singular, therefore, in the case of that art,
above all others, whose productions are the most vast and the most
common; which requires for its practice the co-operation of bodies of
men, and for its perfection the perseverance of successive generations.
And, taking into account also what we have before so often observed of
Architecture, her continual influence over the emotions of daily life,
and her realism, as opposed to the two sister arts which are in
comparison but the picturing of stories and of dreams, we might
beforehand expect that we should find her healthy state and action
dependent on far more severe laws than theirs: that the license which
they extend to the workings of individual mind would be withdrawn by
her; and that, in assertion of the relations which she holds with all
that is universally important to man, she would set forth, by her own
majestic subjection, some likeness of that on which man's social
happiness and power depend. We might, therefore, without the light of
experience, conclude, that Architecture never could flourish except
when it was subjected to a national law as strict and as minutely
authoritative as the laws which regulate religion, policy, and social
relations; nay, even more authoritative than these, because both
capable of more enforcement, as over more passive matter; and needing
more enforcement, as the purest type not of one law nor of another, but
of the common authority of all. But in this matter experience speaks
more loudly than reason. If there be any one condition which, in
watching the progress of architecture, we see distinct and general; if,
amidst the counter-evidence of success attending opposite accidents of
character and circumstance, any one conclusion may be constantly and
indisputably drawn, it is this; that the architecture of a nation is
great only when it is as universal and as established as its language;
and when provincial differences of style are nothing more than so many
dialects. Other necessities are matters of doubt: nations have been
alike successful in their architecture in times of poverty and of
wealth; in times of war and of peace; in times of barbarism and of
refinement; under governments the most liberal or the most arbitrary;
but this one condition has been constant, this one requirement clear in
all places and at all times, that the work shall be that of a _school_,
that no individual caprice shall dispense with, or materially vary,
accepted types and customary decorations; and that from the cottage to
the palace, and from the chapel to the basilica, and from the garden
fence to the fortress wall, every member and feature of the
architecture of the nation shall be as commonly current, as frankly
accepted, as its language or its coin.

A day never passes without our hearing our English architects called
upon to be original, and to invent a new style: about as sensible and
necessary an exhortation as to ask of a man who has never had rags
enough on his back to keep out cold, to invent a new mode of cutting a
coat. Give him a whole coat first, and let him concern himself about
the fashion of it afterwards. We want no new style of architecture. Who
wants a new style of painting or sculpture? But we want some style. It
is of marvellously little importance, if we have a code of laws and
they be good laws, whether they be new or old, foreign or native, Roman
or Saxon, or Norman, or English laws. But it is of considerable
importance that we should have a code of laws of one kind or another,
and that code accepted and enforced from one side of the island to
another, and not one law made ground of judgment at York and another in
Exeter. And in like manner it does not matter one marble splinter
whether we have an old or new architecture, but it matters everything
whether we have an architecture truly so called or not; that is,
whether an architecture whose laws might be taught at our schools from
Cornwall to Northumberland, as we teach English spelling and English
grammar, or an architecture which is to be invented fresh every time we
build a workhouse or a parish school. There seems to me to be a
wonderful misunderstanding among the majority of architects at the
present day as to the very nature and meaning of Originality, and of
all wherein it consists. Originality in expression does not depend on
invention of new words; nor originality in poetry on invention of new
measures; nor, in painting, on invention of new colours, or new modes
of using them. The chords of music, the harmonies of colour, the
general principles of the arrangement of sculptural masses, have been
determined long ago, and, in all probability, cannot be added to any
more than they can be altered. Granting that they may be, such
additions or alterations are much more the work of time and of
multitudes than of individual inventors. We may have one Van Eyck,[170]
who will be known as the introducer of a new style once in ten
centuries, but he himself will trace his invention to some accidental
by-play or pursuit; and the use of that invention will depend
altogether on the popular necessities or instincts of the period.
Originality depends on nothing of the kind. A man who has the gift,
will take up any style that is going, the style of his day, and will
work in that, and be great in that, and make everything that he does in
it look as fresh as if every thought of it had just come down from
heaven. I do not say that he will not take liberties with his
materials, or with his rules: I do not say that strange changes will
not sometimes be wrought by his efforts, or his fancies, in both. But
those changes will be instructive, natural, facile, though sometimes
marvellous; they will never be sought after as things necessary to his
dignity or to his independence; and those liberties will be like the
liberties that a great speaker takes with the language, not a defiance
of its rules for the sake of singularity; but inevitable, uncalculated,
and brilliant consequences of an effort to express what the language,
without such infraction, could not. There may be times when, as I have
above described, the life of an art is manifested in its changes, and
in its refusal of ancient limitations: so there are in the life of an
insect; and there is great interest in the state of both the art and
the insect at those periods when, by their natural progress and
constitutional power, such changes are about to be wrought. But as that
would be both an Uncomfortable and foolish caterpillar which, instead
of being contented with a caterpillar's life and feeding on
caterpillar's food, was always striving to turn itself into a
chrysalis; and as that would be an unhappy chrysalis which should lie
awake at night and roll restlessly in its cocoon, in efforts to turn
itself prematurely into a moth; so will that art be unhappy and
unprosperous which, instead of supporting itself on the food, and
contenting itself with the customs, which have been enough for the
support and guidance of other arts before it and like it, is struggling
and fretting under the natural limitations of its existence, and
striving to become something other than it is. And though it is the
nobility of the highest creatures to look forward to, and partly to
understand the changes which are appointed for them, preparing for them
beforehand; and if, as is usual with _appointed_ changes, they be into
a higher state, even desiring them, and rejoicing in the hope of them,
yet it is the strength of every creature, be it changeful or not, to
rest for the time being, contented with the conditions of its
existence, and striving only to bring about the changes which it
desires, by fulfilling to the uttermost the duties for which its
present state is appointed and continued.

Neither originality, therefore, nor change, good though both may be,
and this is commonly a most merciful and enthusiastic supposition with
respect to either, is ever to be sought in itself, or can ever be
healthily obtained by any struggle or rebellion against common laws. We
want neither the one nor the other. The forms of architecture already
known are good enough for us, and for far better than any of us: and it
will be time enough to think of changing them for better when we can
use them as they are. But there are some things which we not only want,
but cannot do without; and which all the struggling and raving in the
world, nay more, which all the real talent and resolution in England,
will never enable us to do without: and these are Obedience, Unity,
Fellowship, and Order. And all our schools of design, and committees of
taste; all our academies and lectures, and journalisms, and essays; all
the sacrifices which we are beginning to make, all the truth which
there is in our English nature, all the power of our English will, and
the life of our English intellect, will in this matter be as useless as
efforts and emotions in a dream, unless we are contented to submit
architecture and all art, like other things, to English law.

I say architecture and all art; for I believe architecture must be the
beginning of arts, and that the others must follow her in their time
and order; and I think the prosperity of our schools of painting and
sculpture, in which no one will deny the life, though many the health,
depends upon that of our architecture. I think that all will languish
until that takes the lead, and (this I do not _think_, but I proclaim,
as confidently as I would assert the necessity, for the safety of
society, of an understood and strongly administered legal government)
our architecture _will_ languish, and that in the very dust, until the
first principle of common sense be manfully obeyed, and an universal
system of form and workmanship be everywhere adopted and enforced. It
may be said that this is impossible. It may be so--I fear it is so: I
have nothing to do with the possibility or impossibility of it; I
simply know and assert the necessity of it. If it be impossible,
English art is impossible. Give it up at once. You are wasting time,
and money, and energy upon it, and though you exhaust centuries and
treasures, and break hearts for it, you will never raise it above the
merest dilettanteism. Think not of it. It is a dangerous vanity, a mere
gulph in which genius after genius will be swallowed up, and it will
not close. And so it will continue to be, unless the one bold and broad
step be taken at the beginning. We shall not manufacture art out of
pottery and printed stuffs; we shall not reason out art by our
philosophy; we shall not stumble upon art by our experiments, nor
create it by our fancies: I do not say that we can even build it out of
brick and stone; but there is a chance for us in these, and there is
none else; and that chance rests on the bare possibility of obtaining
the consent, both of architects and of the public, to choose a style,
and to use it universally.

How surely its principles ought at first to be limited, we may easily
determine by the consideration of the necessary modes of teaching any
other branch of general knowledge. When we begin to teach children
writing, we force them to absolute copyism, and require absolute
accuracy in the formation of the letters; as they obtain command of the
received modes of literal expression, we cannot prevent their falling
into such variations as are consistent with their feeling, their
circumstances, or their characters. So, when a boy is first taught to
write Latin, an authority is required of him for every expression he
uses; as he becomes master of the language he may take a license, and
feel his right to do so without any authority, and yet write better
Latin than when he borrowed every separate expression. In the same way
our architects would have to be taught to write the accepted style. We
must first determine what buildings are to be considered Augustan in
their authority; their modes of construction and laws of proportion are
to be studied with the most penetrating care; then the different forms
and uses of their decorations are to be classed and catalogued, as a
German grammarian classes the powers of prepositions; and under this
absolute, irrefragable authority, we are to begin to work; admitting
not so much as an alteration in the depth of a cavetto,[171] or the
breadth of a fillet. Then, when our sight is once accustomed to the
grammatical forms and arrangements, and our thoughts familiar with the
expression of them all; when we can speak this dead language naturally,
and apply it to whatever ideas we have to render, that is to say, to
every practical purpose of life; then, and not till then, a license
might be permitted, and individual authority allowed to change or to
add to the received forms, always within certain limits; the
decorations, especially, might be made subjects of variable fancy, and
enriched with ideas either original or taken from other schools. And
thus, in process of time and by a great national movement, it might
come to pass that a new style should arise, as language itself changes;
we might perhaps come to speak Italian instead of Latin, or to speak
modern instead of old English; but this would be a matter of entire
indifference, and a matter, besides, which no determination or desire
could either hasten or prevent. That alone which it is in our power to
obtain, and which it is our duty to desire, is an unanimous style of
some kind, and such comprehension and practice of it as would enable us
to adapt its features to the peculiar character of every several
building, large or small, domestic, civil or ecclesiastical.


  [169] Coleridge's _Ode to France_.

  [170] Hubert Van Eyck [1366-1440]. The great Flemish master.

  [171] A hollowed moulding. [New Eng. Dict.]




SELECTIONS FROM LECTURES ON ART


    Ruskin was first elected to the Slade Professorship of Fine Art in
    Oxford in 1869, and held the chair continuously until 1878, when
    he resigned because of ill-health, and again from 1883 to 1885.
    The _Lectures on Art_ were announced in the _Oxford University
    Gazette_ of January 28, 1870, the general subject of the course
    being "The Limits and Elementary Practice of Art," with Leonardo's
    _Trattato della Pittura_ as the text-book. The lectures were
    delivered between February 8 and March 23, 1870. They appeared in
    book form in July of the same year. These lectures contain much of
    his best and most mature thought, of his most painstaking research
    and keenest analysis. Talking with a friend in later years, he
    said: "I have taken more pains with the Oxford Lectures than with
    anything else I have ever done": and in the preface to the edition
    of 1887 he began: "The following lectures were the most important
    piece of my literary work, done with unabated power, best motive,
    and happiest concurrence of circumstance." Ruskin took his
    professorship very seriously. He spent almost infinite labour in
    composing his more formal lectures, and during the eight years
    in which he held the chair he published six volumes of them, not
    to mention three Italian guide-books, which came under his
    interpretation of his professional duties;--"the real duty
    involved in my Oxford Professorship cannot be completely done by
    giving lectures in Oxford only, but ... I ought also to give what
    guidance I may to travellers in Italy." Not only by lecturing and
    writing did he fill the chair, but he taught individuals, founded
    and endowed a Drawing mastership, and presented elaborately
    catalogued collections to illustrate his subject. His lecture
    classes were always large, and his work had a marked influence in
    the University.



INAUGURAL


We see lately a most powerful impulse given to the production of
costly works of art by the various causes which promote the sudden
accumulation of wealth in the hands of private persons. We have thus a
vast and new patronage, which, in its present agency, is injurious to
our schools; but which is nevertheless in a great degree earnest and
conscientious, and far from being influenced chiefly by motives of
ostentation. Most of our rich men would be glad to promote the true
interests of art in this country; and even those who buy for vanity,
found their vanity on the possession of what they suppose to be best.

It is therefore in a great measure the fault of artists themselves if
they suffer from this partly unintelligent, but thoroughly
well-intended patronage. If they seek to attract it by eccentricity,
to deceive it by superficial qualities, or take advantage of it by
thoughtless and facile production, they necessarily degrade themselves
and it together, and have no right to complain afterwards that it will
not acknowledge better-grounded claims. But if every painter of real
power would do only what he knew to be worthy of himself, and refuse
to be involved in the contention for undeserved or accidental success,
there is indeed, whatever may have been thought or said to the
contrary, true instinct enough in the public mind to follow such firm
guidance. It is one of the facts which the experience of thirty years
enables me to assert without qualification, that a really good picture
is ultimately always approved and bought, unless it is wilfully
rendered offensive to the public by faults which the artist has been
either too proud to abandon or too weak to correct.

The development of whatever is healthful and serviceable in the two
modes of impulse which we have been considering, depends however,
ultimately, on the direction taken by the true interest in art which
has lately been aroused by the great and active genius of many of our
living, or but lately lost, painters, sculptors, and architects. It
may perhaps surprise, but I think it will please you to hear me, or
(if you will forgive me, in my own Oxford, the presumption of fancying
that some may recognize me by an old name) to hear the author of
_Modern Painters_ say, that his chief error in earlier days was not in
over-estimating, but in too slightly acknowledging the merit of living
men. The great painter whose power, while he was yet among us, I was
able to perceive,[172] was the first to reprove me for my disregard of
the skill of his fellow-artists; and, with this inauguration of the
study of the art of all time,--a study which can only by true modesty
end in wise admiration,--it is surely well that I connect the record
of these words of his, spoken then too truly to myself, and true
always more or less for all who are untrained in that toil,--"You
don't know how difficult it is."

You will not expect me, within the compass of this lecture, to give
you any analysis of the many kinds of excellent art (in all the three
great divisions) which the complex demands of modern life, and yet
more varied instincts of modern genius, have developed for pleasure or
service. It must be my endeavour, in conjunction with my colleagues in
other Universities, hereafter to enable you to appreciate these
worthily; in the hope that also the members of the Royal Academy, and
those of the Institute of British Architects, may be induced to
assist, and guide, the efforts of the Universities, by organizing such
a system of art education for their own students, as shall in future
prevent the waste of genius in any mistaken endeavours; especially
removing doubt as to the proper substance and use of materials; and
requiring compliance with certain elementary principles of right, in
every picture and design exhibited with their sanction. It is not
indeed possible for talent so varied as that of English artists to be
compelled into the formalities of a determined school; but it must
certainly be the function of every academical body to see that their
younger students are guarded from what must in every school be error;
and that they are practised in the best methods of work hitherto
known, before their ingenuity is directed to the invention of others.

I need scarcely refer, except for the sake of completeness in my
statement, to one form of demand for art which is wholly
unenlightened, and powerful only for evil;--namely, the demand of the
classes occupied solely in the pursuit of pleasure, for objects and
modes of art that can amuse indolence or excite passion. There is no
need for any discussion of these requirements, or of their forms of
influence, though they are very deadly at present in their operation
on sculpture, and on jewellers' work. They cannot be checked by blame,
nor guided by instruction; they are merely the necessary results of
whatever defects exist in the temper and principles of a luxurious
society; and it is only by moral changes, not by art-criticism, that
their action can be modified.

Lastly, there is a continually increasing demand for popular art,
multipliable by the printing-press, illustrative of daily events, of
general literature, and of natural science. Admirable skill, and some
of the best talent of modern times, are occupied in supplying this
want; and there is no limit to the good which may be effected by
rightly taking advantage of the powers we now possess of placing good
and lovely art within the reach of the poorest classes. Much has been
already accomplished; but great harm has been done also,--first, by
forms of art definitely addressed to depraved tastes; and, secondly,
in a more subtle way, by really beautiful and useful engravings which
are yet not good enough to retain their influence on the public
mind;--which weary it by redundant quantity of monotonous average
excellence, and diminish or destroy its power of accurate attention to
work of a higher order.

Especially this is to be regretted in the effect produced on the
schools of line engraving, which had reached in England an executive
skill of a kind before unexampled, and which of late have lost much of
their more sterling and legitimate methods. Still, I have seen plates
produced quite recently, more beautiful, I think, in some qualities
than anything ever before attained by the burin:[173] and I have not the
slightest fear that photography, or any other adverse or competitive
operation, will in the least ultimately diminish,--I believe they will,
on the contrary, stimulate and exalt--the grand old powers of the wood
and the steel.

Such are, I think, briefly the present conditions of art with which
we have to deal; and I conceive it to be the function of this
Professorship, with respect to them, to establish both a practical and
critical school of fine art for English gentlemen: practical, so that,
if they draw at all, they may draw rightly; and critical, so that,
being first directed to such works of existing art as will best reward
their study, they may afterwards make their patronage of living
artists delightful to themselves in their consciousness of its
justice, and, to the utmost, beneficial to their country, by being
given only to the men who deserve it; in the early period of their
lives, when they both need it most and can be influenced by it to the
best advantage.

And especially with reference to this function of patronage, I believe
myself justified in taking into account future probabilities as to the
character and range of art in England; and I shall endeavour at once to
organize with you a system of study calculated to develope chiefly the
knowledge of those branches in which the English schools have shown,
and are likely to show, peculiar excellence.

Now, in asking your sanction both for the nature of the general plans I
wish to adopt, and for what I conceive to be necessary limitations of
them, I wish you to be fully aware of my reasons for both: and I will
therefore risk the burdening of your patience while I state the
directions of effort in which I think English artists are liable to
failure, and those also in which past experience has shown they are
secure of success.

I referred, but now, to the effort we are making to improve the designs
of our manufactures. Within certain limits I believe this improvement
may indeed take effect: so that we may no more humour momentary
fashions by ugly results of chance instead of design; and may produce
both good tissues, of harmonious colours, and good forms and substance
of pottery and glass. But we shall never excel in decorative design.
Such design is usually produced by people of great natural powers of
mind, who have no variety of subjects to employ themselves on, no
oppressive anxieties, and are in circumstances either of natural
scenery or of daily life, which cause pleasurable excitement. _We_
cannot design because we have too much to think of, and we think of it
too anxiously. It has long been observed how little real anxiety exists
in the minds of the partly savage races which excel in decorative art;
and we must not suppose that the temper of the middle ages was a
troubled one, because every day brought its dangers or its changes. The
very eventfulness of the life rendered it careless, as generally is
still the case with soldiers and sailors. Now, when there are great
powers of thought, and little to think of, all the waste energy and
fancy are thrown into the manual work, and you have as much intellect
as would direct the affairs of a large mercantile concern for a day,
spent all at once, quite unconsciously, in drawing an ingenious spiral.

Also, powers of doing fine ornamental work are only to be reached by a
perpetual discipline of the hand as well as of the fancy; discipline as
attentive and painful as that which a juggler has to put himself
through, to overcome the more palpable difficulties of his profession.
The execution of the best artists is always a splendid tour-de-force,
and much that in painting is supposed to be dependent on material is
indeed only a lovely and quite inimitable legerdemain. Now, when powers
of fancy, stimulated by this triumphant precision of manual dexterity,
descend uninterruptedly from generation to generation, you have at
last, what is not so much a trained artist as a new species of animal,
with whose instinctive gifts you have no chance of contending. And thus
all our imitations of other peoples' work are futile. We must learn
first to make honest English wares, and afterward to decorate them as
may please the then approving Graces.

Secondly--and this is an incapacity of a graver kind, yet having its
own good in it also--we shall never be successful in the highest fields
of ideal or theological art.

For there is one strange, but quite essential, character in us--ever
since the Conquest, if not earlier:--a delight in the forms of burlesque
which are connected in some degree with the foulness in evil. I think
the most perfect type of a true English mind in its best possible
temper, is that of Chaucer; and you will find that, while it is for
the most part full of thoughts of beauty, pure and wild like that of
an April morning, there are, even in the midst of this, sometimes
momentarily jesting passages which stoop to play with evil--while the
power of listening to and enjoying the jesting of entirely gross
persons, whatever the feeling may be which permits it, afterwards
degenerates into forms of humour which render some of quite the
greatest, wisest, and most moral of English writers now almost useless
for our youth. And yet you will find that whenever Englishmen are
wholly without this instinct, their genius is comparatively weak and
restricted.

Now, the first necessity for the doing of any great work in ideal art,
is the looking upon all foulness with horror, as a contemptible though
dreadful enemy. You may easily understand what I mean, by comparing
the feelings with which Dante regards any form of obscenity or of base
jest, with the temper in which the same things are regarded by
Shakspere. And this strange earthly instinct of ours, coupled as it
is, in our good men, with great simplicity and common sense, renders
them shrewd and perfect observers and delineators of actual nature,
low or high; but precludes them from that speciality of art which is
properly called sublime. If ever we try anything in the manner of
Michael Angelo or of Dante, we catch a fall, even in literature, as
Milton in the battle of the angels, spoiled from Hesiod:[174] while in
art, every attempt in this style has hitherto been the sign either of
the presumptuous egotism of persons who had never really learned to be
workmen, or it has been connected with very tragic forms of the
contemplation of death,--it has always been partly insane, and never
once wholly successful.

But we need not feel any discomfort in these limitations of our
capacity. We can do much that others cannot, and more than we have
ever yet ourselves completely done. Our first great gift is in the
portraiture of living people--a power already so accomplished in both
Reynolds and Gainsborough, that nothing is left for future masters but
to add the calm of perfect workmanship to their vigour and felicity of
perception. And of what value a true school of portraiture may become
in the future, when worthy men will desire only to be known, and
others will not fear to know them, for what they truly were, we cannot
from any past records of art influence yet conceive. But in my next
address it will be partly my endeavour to show you how much more
useful, because more humble, the labour of great masters might have
been, had they been content to bear record of the souls that were
dwelling with them on earth, instead of striving to give a deceptive
glory to those they dreamed of in heaven.

Secondly, we have an intense power of invention and expression in
domestic drama; (King Lear and Hamlet being essentially domestic in
their strongest motives of interest). There is a tendency at this
moment towards a noble development of our art in this direction,
checked by many adverse conditions, which may be summed in one,--the
insufficiency of generous civic or patriotic passion in the heart of
the English people; a fault which makes its domestic affections
selfish, contracted, and, therefore, frivolous.

Thirdly, in connection with our simplicity and good-humour, and partly
with that very love of the grotesque which debases our ideal, we have a
sympathy with the lower animals which is peculiarly our own; and which,
though it has already found some exquisite expression in the works of
Bewick and Landseer, is yet quite undeveloped. This sympathy, with the
aid of our now authoritative science of physiology, and in association
with our British love of adventure, will, I hope, enable us to give to
the future inhabitants of the globe an almost perfect record of the
present forms of animal life upon it, of which many are on the point of
being extinguished....

While I myself hold this professorship, I shall direct you in these
exercises very definitely to natural history, and to landscape; not
only because in these two branches I am probably able to show you
truths which might be despised by my successors; but because I think
the vital and joyful study of natural history quite the principal
element requiring introduction, not only into University, but into
national, education, from highest to lowest; and I even will risk
incurring your ridicule by confessing one of my fondest dreams, that I
may succeed in making some of you English youths like better to look at
a bird than to shoot it; and even desire to make wild creatures tame,
instead of tame creatures wild. And for the study of landscape, it is,
I think, now calculated to be of use in deeper, if not more important
modes, than that of natural science, for reasons which I will ask you
to let me state at some length.

Observe first;--no race of men which is entirety bred in wild country,
far from cities, ever enjoys landscape. They may enjoy the beauty of
animals, but scarcely even that: a true peasant cannot see the beauty
of cattle; but only the qualities expressive of their serviceableness.
I waive discussion of this to-day; permit my assertion of it, under my
confident guarantee of future proof. Landscape can only be enjoyed by
cultivated persons; and it is only by music, literature, and painting,
that cultivation can be given. Also, the faculties which are thus
received are hereditary; so that the child of an educated race has an
innate instinct for beauty, derived from arts practised hundreds of
years before its birth. Now farther note this, one of the loveliest
things in human nature. In the children of noble races, trained by
surrounding art, and at the same time in the practice of great deeds,
there is an intense delight in the landscape of their country as
_memorial_; a sense not taught to them, nor teachable to any others;
but, in them, innate; and the seal and reward of persistence in great
national life;--the obedience and the peace of ages having extended
gradually the glory of the revered ancestors also to the ancestral
land; until the Motherhood of the dust, the mystery of the Demeter from
whose bosom we came, and to whose bosom we return, surrounds and
inspires, everywhere, the local awe of field and fountain; the
sacredness of landmark that none may remove, and of wave that none may
pollute; while records of proud days, and of dear persons, make every
rock monumental with ghostly inscription, and every path lovely with
noble desolateness.

Now, however checked by lightness of temperament, the instinctive love
of landscape in us has this deep root, which, in your minds, I will
pray you to disencumber from whatever may oppress or mortify it, and to
strive to feel with all the strength of your youth that a nation is
only worthy of the soil and the scenes that it has inherited, when,
by all its acts and arts, it is making them more lovely for its
children....

But if either our work, or our inquiries, are to be indeed successful
in their own field, they must be connected with others of a sterner
character. Now listen to me, if I have in these past details lost or
burdened your attention; for this is what I have chiefly to say to you.
The art of any country _is the exponent of its social and political
virtues_. I will show you that it is so in some detail, in the second
of my subsequent course of lectures; meantime accept this as one of the
things, and the most important of all things, I can positively declare
to you. The art, or general productive and formative energy, of any
country, is an exact exponent of its ethical life. You can have noble
art only from noble persons, associated under laws fitted to their time
and circumstances. And the best skill that any teacher of art could
spend here in your help, would not end in enabling you even so much as
rightly to draw the water-lilies in the Cherwell (and though it did,
the work when done would not be worth the lilies themselves) unless
both he and you were seeking, as I trust we shall together seek, in the
laws which regulate the finest industries, the clue to the laws which
regulate all industries, and in better obedience to which we shall
actually have henceforward to live: not merely in compliance with our
own sense of what is right, but under the weight of quite literal
necessity. For the trades by which the British people has believed it
to be the highest of destinies to maintain itself, cannot now long
remain undisputed in its hands; its unemployed poor are daily becoming
more violently criminal; and a certain distress in the middle classes,
arising, _partly from their vanity in living always up to their
incomes, and partly from, their folly in imagining that they can
subsist in idleness upon usury_, will at last compel the sons and
daughters of English families to acquaint themselves with the
principles of providential economy; and to learn that food can only be
got out of the ground, and competence only secured by frugality; and
that although it is not possible for all to be occupied in the highest
arts, nor for any, guiltlessly, to pass their days in a succession of
pleasures, the most perfect mental culture possible to men is founded
on their useful energies, and their best arts and brightest happiness
are consistent, and consistent only, with their virtue.

This, I repeat, gentlemen, will soon become manifest to those among us,
and there are yet many, who are honest-hearted. And the future fate of
England depends upon the position they then take, and on their courage
in maintaining it.

There is a destiny now possible to us--the highest ever set before a
nation to be accepted or refused. We are still undegenerate in race; a
race mingled of the best northern blood. We are not yet dissolute in
temper, but still have the firmness to govern, and the grace to obey.
We have been taught a religion of pure mercy, which we must either now
betray, or learn to defend by fulfilling. And we are rich in an
inheritance of honour, bequeathed to us through a thousand years of
noble history, which it should be our daily thirst to increase with
splendid avarice, so that Englishmen, if it be a sin to covet honour,
should be the most offending souls alive.[175] Within the last few years
we have had the laws of natural science opened to us with a rapidity
which has been blinding by its brightness; and means of transit and
communication given to us, which have made but one kingdom of the
habitable globe. One kingdom;--but who is to be its king? Is there to
be no king in it, think you, and every man to do that which is right in
his own eyes? Or only kings of terror, and the obscene empires of
Mammon and Belial? Or will you, youths of England, make your country
again a royal throne of kings; a sceptred isle, for all the world a
source of light, a centre of peace; mistress of Learning and of the
Arts;--faithful guardian of great memories in the midst of irreverent
and ephemeral visions;--faithful servant of time-tried principles,
under temptation from fond experiments and licentious desires; and
amidst the cruel and clamorous jealousies of the nations, worshipped in
her strange valour of goodwill toward men?[176]

"Vexilla regis prodeunt."[177] Yes, but of which king? There are the
two oriflammes; which shall we plant on the farthest islands--the one
that floats in heavenly fire, or that hangs heavy with foul tissue of
terrestrial gold? There is indeed a course of beneficent glory open to
us, such as never was yet offered to any poor group of mortal souls.
But it must be--it _is_ with us, now. "Reign or Die." And if it shall
be said of this country, "Fece per viltate, il gran rifiuto,"[178]
that refusal of the crown will be, of all yet recorded in history,
the shamefullest and most untimely.

And this is what she must either do, or perish: she must found
colonies as fast and as far as she is able, formed of her most
energetic and worthiest men;--seizing every piece of fruitful waste
ground she can set her foot on, and there teaching these her
colonists that their chief virtue is to be fidelity to their country,
and that their first aim is to be to advance the power of England by
land and sea: and that, though they live on a distant plot of ground,
they are no more to consider themselves therefore disfranchised from
their native land, than the sailors of her fleets do, because they
float on distant waves. So that literally, these colonies must be
fastened fleets; and every man of them must be under authority of
captains and officers, whose better command is to be over fields and
streets instead of ships of the line; and England, in these her
motionless navies (or, in the true and mightiest sense, motionless
_churches_, ruled by pilots on the Galilean lake[179] of all the
world), is to "expect every man to do his duty";[180] recognizing
that duty is indeed possible no less in peace than war; and that if we
can get men, for little pay, to cast themselves against cannon-mouths
for love of England, we may find men also who will plough and sow for
her, who will behave kindly and righteously for her, who will bring up
their children to love her, and who will gladden themselves in the
brightness of her glory, more than in all the light of tropic skies.

But that they may be able to do this, she must make her own majesty
stainless; she must give them thoughts of their home of which they can
be proud. The England who is to be mistress of half the earth, cannot
remain herself a heap of cinders, trampled by contending and miserable
crowds; she must yet again become the England she was once, and in all
beautiful ways,--more: so happy, so secluded, and so pure, that in her
sky--polluted by no unholy clouds--she may be able to spell rightly of
every star that heaven doth show; and in her fields, ordered and wide
and fair, of every herb that sips the dew;[181] and under the green
avenues of her enchanted garden, a sacred Circe, true Daughter of the
Sun, she must guide the human arts, and gather the divine knowledge, of
distant nations, transformed from savageness to manhood, and redeemed
from despairing into Peace.

You think that an impossible ideal. Be it so; refuse to accept it if
you will; but see that you form your own in its stead. All that I ask
of you is to have a fixed purpose of some kind for your country and
yourselves; no matter how restricted, so that it be fixed and
unselfish. I know what stout hearts are in you, to answer acknowledged
need; but it is the fatallest form of error in English youth to hide
their hardihood till it fades for lack of sunshine, and to act in
disdain of purpose, till all purpose is vain. It is not by deliberate,
but by careless selfishness; not by compromise with evil, but by dull
following of good, that the weight of national evil increases upon us
daily. Break through at least this pretence of existence; determine
what you will be, and what you would win. You will not decide wrongly
if you resolve to decide at all. Were even the choice between lawless
pleasure and loyal suffering, you would not, I believe, choose basely.
But your trial is not so sharp. It is between drifting in confused
wreck among the castaways of Fortune, who condemns to assured ruin
those who know not either how to resist her, or obey; between this, I
say, and the taking of your appointed part in the heroism of Rest; the
resolving to share in the victory which is to the weak rather than the
strong; and the binding yourselves by that law, which, thought on
through lingering night and labouring day, makes a man's life to be as
a tree planted by the water-side, that bringeth forth his fruit in his
season;--

    "ET FOLIUM EJUS NON DEFLUET,
    ET OMNIA, QUÆCUNQUE FACIET, PROSPERABUNTUR."[182]


  [172] Turner.

  [173] The tool of the engraver on copper.

  [174] See _Paradise Lost_, 6. 207 ff., and Hesiod's _Theogony_, 676 ff.

  [175] _Henry V_, 4. 3. 29.

  [176] _Luke_ ii, 14.

  [177] "Forward go the banners of the King," or more commonly, "The
  royal banners forward go." One of the seven great hymns of the Church.
  See the Episcopal Hymnal, 94.

  [178] Dante, _Inferno_, 3. 60. "Who made through cowardice the great
  refusal." Longfellow's tr.

  [179] _Lyridas_, 109.

  [180] Nelson's famous signal at Trafalgar.

  [181] Milton's _Il Penseroso_, 170 ff.

  [182] _Psalms_ i, 3.



THE RELATION OF ART TO MORALS


And now I pass to the arts with which I have special concern, in
which, though the facts are exactly the same, I shall have more
difficulty in proving my assertion, because very few of us are as
cognizant of the merit of painting as we are of that of language; and
I can only show you whence that merit springs, after having thoroughly
shown you in what it consists. But, in the meantime, I have simply to
tell you, that the manual arts are as accurate exponents of ethical
state, as other modes of expression; first, with absolute precision,
of that of the workman; and then with precision, disguised by many
distorting influences, of that of the nation to which it belongs.

And, first, they are a perfect exponent of the mind of the workman:
but, being so, remember, if the mind be great or complex, the art is
not an easy book to read; for we must ourselves possess all the mental
characters of which we are to read the signs. No man can read the
evidence of labour who is not himself laborious, for he does not know
what the work cost: nor can he read the evidence of true passion if he
is not passionate; nor of gentleness if he is not gentle: and the most
subtle signs of fault and weakness of character he can only judge by
having had the same faults to fight with. I myself, for instance, know
impatient work, and tired work, better than most critics, because I am
myself always impatient, and often tired:--so also, the patient and
indefatigable touch of a mighty master becomes more wonderful to me
than to others. Yet, wonderful in no mean measure it will be to you
all, when I make it manifest;--and as soon as we begin our real work,
and you have learned what it is to draw a true line, I shall be able
to make manifest to you,--and undisputably so,--that the day's work of
a man like Mantegna or Paul Veronese consists of an unfaltering,
uninterrupted, succession of movements of the hand more precise than
those of the finest fencer: the pencil leaving one point and arriving
at another, not only with unerring precision at the extremity of the
line, but with an unerring and yet varied course--sometimes over
spaces a foot or more in extent--yet a course so determined everywhere
that either of these men could, and Veronese often does, draw a
finished profile, or any other portion of the contour of the face,
with one line, not afterwards changed. Try, first, to realize to
yourselves the muscular precision of that action, and the intellectual
strain of it; for the movement of a fencer is perfect in practised
monotony; but the movement of the hand of a great painter is at every
instant governed by direct and new intention. Then imagine that
muscular firmness and subtlety, and the instantaneously selective and
ordinant energy of the brain, sustained all day long, not only without
fatigue, but with a visible joy in the exertion, like that which an
eagle seems to take in the wave of his wings; and this all life long,
and through long life, not only without failure of power, but with
visible increase of it, until the actually organic changes of old age.
And then consider, so far as you know anything of physiology, what
sort of an ethical state of body and mind that means!--ethic through
ages past! what fineness of race there must be to get it, what
exquisite balance and symmetry of the vital powers! And then, finally,
determine for yourselves whether a manhood like that is consistent
with any viciousness of soul, with any mean anxiety, any gnawing lust,
any wretchedness of spite or remorse, any consciousness of rebellion
against law of God or man, or any actual, though unconscious violation
of even the least law to which obedience is essential for the glory of
life, and the pleasing of its Giver.

It is, of course, true that many of the strong masters had deep faults
of character, but their faults always show in their work. It is true
that some could not govern their passions; if so, they died young, or
they painted ill when old. But the greater part of our misapprehension
in the whole matter is from our not having well known who the great
painters were, and taking delight in the petty skill that was bred in
the fumes of the taverns of the North, instead of theirs who breathed
empyreal air, sons of the morning, under the woods of Assisi and the
crags of Cadore.

It is true however also, as I have pointed out long ago, that the
strong masters fall into two great divisions, one leading simple and
natural lives, the other restrained in a Puritanism of the worship of
beauty; and these two manners of life you may recognize in a moment
by their work. Generally the naturalists are the strongest; but there
are two of the Puritans, whose work if I can succeed in making
clearly understandable to you during my three years[183] here, it is
all I need care to do. But of these two Puritans one I cannot name
to you, and the other I at present will not. One I cannot, for no one
knows his name, except the baptismal one, Bernard, or "dear little
Bernard"--Bernardino, called from his birthplace, (Luino, on the Lago
Maggiore,) Bernard of Luino. The other is a Venetian, of whom many of
you probably have never heard, and of whom, through me, you shall not
hear, until I have tried to get some picture by him over to England.

Observe then, this Puritanism in the worship of beauty, though
sometimes weak, is always honourable and amiable, and the exact
reverse of the false Puritanism, which consists in the dread or
disdain of beauty. And in order to treat my subject rightly, I ought
to proceed from the skill of art to the choice of its subject, and
show you how the moral temper of the workman is shown by his seeking
lovely forms and thoughts to express, as well as by the force of his
hand in expression. But I need not now urge this part of the proof on
you, because you are already, I believe, sufficiently conscious of the
truth in this matter, and also I have already said enough of it in my
writings; whereas I have not at all said enough of the infallibleness
of fine technical work as a proof of every other good power. And
indeed it was long before I myself understood the true meaning of the
pride of the greatest men in their mere execution, shown for a
permanent lesson to us, in the stories which, whether true or not,
indicate with absolute accuracy the general conviction of great
artists;--the stories of the contest of Apelles and Protogenes[184] in
a line only, (of which I can promise you, you shall know the meaning
to some purpose in a little while),--the story of the circle of
Giotto,[185] and especially, which you may perhaps not have observed,
the expression of Dürer in his inscription on the drawings sent him by
Raphael. These figures, he says, "Raphael drew and sent to Albert
Dürer in Nurnberg, to show him"--What? Not his invention, nor his
beauty of expression, but "sein Hand zu weisen," "to show him his
_hand_." And you will find, as you examine farther, that all inferior
artists are continually trying to escape from the necessity of sound
work, and either indulging themselves in their delights in subject, or
pluming themselves on their noble motives for attempting what they
cannot perform; (and observe, by the way, that a great deal of what is
mistaken for conscientious motive is nothing but a very pestilent,
because very subtle, condition of vanity); whereas the great men
always understand at once that the first morality of a painter, as of
everybody else, is to know his business; and so earnest are they in
this, that many, whose lives you would think, by the results of their
work, had been passed in strong emotion, have in reality subdued
themselves, though capable of the very strongest passions, into a calm
as absolute as that of a deeply sheltered mountain lake, which
reflects every agitation of the clouds in the sky, and every change of
the shadows on the hills, but AS itself motionless.

Finally, you must remember that great obscurity has been brought upon
the truth in this matter by the want of integrity and simplicity in
our modern life. I mean integrity in the Latin sense, wholeness.
Everything is broken up, and mingled in confusion, both in our habits
and thoughts; besides being in great part imitative: so that you not
only cannot tell what a man is, but sometimes you cannot tell whether
he _is_, at all!--whether you have indeed to do with a spirit, or
only with an echo. And thus the same inconsistencies appear now,
between the work of artists of merit and their personal characters, as
those which you find continually disappointing expectation in the
lives of men of modern literary power;--the same conditions of society
having obscured or misdirected the best qualities of the imagination,
both in our literature and art. Thus there is no serious question with
any of us as to the personal character of Dante and Giotto, of
Shakespeare and Holbein; but we pause timidly in the attempt to
analyze the moral laws of the art skill in recent poets, novelists,
and painters.

Let me assure you once for all, that as you grow older, if you enable
yourselves to distinguish by the truth of your own lives, what is true
in those of other men, you will gradually perceive that all good has
its origin in good, never in evil; that the fact of either literature
or painting being truly fine of their kind, whatever their mistaken
aim, or partial error, is proof of their noble origin: and that, if
there is indeed sterling value in the thing done, it has come of a
sterling worth in the soul that did it, however alloyed or defiled by
conditions of sin which are sometimes more appalling or more strange
than those which all may detect in their own hearts, because they are
part of a personality altogether larger than ours, and as far beyond
our judgment in its darkness as beyond our following in its light. And
it is sufficient warning against what some might dread as the probable
effect of such a conviction on your own minds, namely, that you might
permit yourselves in the weaknesses which you imagined to be allied to
genius, when they took the form of personal temptations;--it is
surely, I say, sufficient warning against so mean a folly, to discern,
as you may with little pains, that, of all human existences, the lives
of men of that distorted and tainted nobility of intellect are
probably the most miserable.

I pass to the second, and for us the more practically important
question, What is the effect of noble art upon other men; what has it
done for national morality in time past: and what effect is the
extended knowledge or possession of it likely to have upon us now?
And here we are at once met by the facts, which are as gloomy as
indisputable, that, while many peasant populations, among whom
scarcely the rudest practice of art has ever been attempted, have
lived in comparative innocence, honour, and happiness, the worst
foulness and cruelty of savage tribes have been frequently associated
with fine ingenuities of decorative design; also, that no people has
ever attained the higher stages of art skill, except at a period of
its civilization which was sullied by frequent, violent, and even
monstrous crime; and, lastly, that the attaining of perfection in art
power, has been hitherto, in every nation, the accurate signal of the
beginning of its ruin.

Respecting which phenomena, observe first, that although good never
springs out of evil, it is developed to its highest by contention with
evil. There are some groups of peasantry, in far-away nooks of
Christian countries, who are nearly as innocent as lambs; but the
morality which gives power to art is the morality of men, not of
cattle.

Secondly, the virtues of the inhabitants of many country districts are
apparent, not real; their lives are indeed artless, but not innocent;
and it is only the monotony of circumstances, and the absence of
temptation, which prevent the exhibition of evil passions not less
real because often dormant, nor less foul because shown only in petty
faults, or inactive malignities.

But you will observe also that _absolute_ artlessness, to men in any
kind of moral health, is impossible; they have always, at least, the
art by which they live--agriculture or seamanship; and in these
industries, skilfully practised, you will find the law of their moral
training; while, whatever the adversity of circumstances, every
rightly-minded peasantry, such as that of Sweden, Denmark, Bavaria, or
Switzerland, has associated with its needful industry a quite studied
school of pleasurable art in dress; and generally also in song, and
simple domestic architecture.

Again, I need not repeat to you here what I endeavoured to explain in
the first lecture in the book I called _The Two Paths_, respecting the
arts of savage races: but I may now note briefly that such arts are
the result of an intellectual activity which has found no room to
expand, and which the tyranny of nature or of man has condemned to
disease through arrested growth. And where neither Christianity, nor
any other religion conveying some moral help, has reached, the animal
energy of such races necessarily flames into ghastly conditions of
evil, and the grotesque or frightful forms assumed by their art are
precisely indicative of their distorted moral nature.

But the truly great nations nearly always begin from a race possessing
this imaginative power; and for some time their progress is very slow,
and their state not one of innocence, but of feverish and faultful
animal energy. This is gradually subdued and exalted into bright human
life; the art instinct purifying itself with the rest of the nature,
until social perfectness is nearly reached; and then comes the period
when conscience and intellect are so highly developed, that new forms
of error begin in the inability to fulfil the demands of the one, or
to answer the doubts of the other. Then the wholeness of the people is
lost; all kinds of hypocrisies and oppositions of science develope
themselves; their faith is questioned on one side, and compromised
with on the other; wealth commonly increases at the same period to a
destructive extent; luxury follows; and the ruin of the nation is then
certain: while the arts, all this time, are simply, as I said at first,
the exponents of each phase of its moral state, and no more control it
in its political career than the gleam of the firefly guides its
oscillation. It is true that their most splendid results are usually
obtained in the swiftness of the power which is hurrying to the
precipice; but to lay the charge of the catastrophe to the art by
which it is illumined, is to find a cause for the cataract in the hues
of its iris. It is true that the colossal vices belonging to periods
of great national wealth (for wealth, you will find, is the real root
of all evil)[186] can turn every good gift and skill of nature or of
man to evil purpose. If, in such times, fair pictures have been
misused, how much more fair realities? And if Miranda is immoral to
Caliban is that Miranda's fault?


  [183] As Slade Professor, Ruskin held a three years' appointment at
  Oxford.

  [184] This story comes from Pliny, _Natural History_, 35. 36; the
  two rival painters alternately showing their skill by the drawing
  of lines of increasing fineness.

  [185] This story comes from Vasari's _Lives of the Painters_. See
  Blashfield and Hopkins's ed. vol. 1, p. 61. Giotto was asked by a
  messenger of the Pope for a specimen of his work, and sent a perfect
  circle, drawn free hand.

  [186] _Timothy_ vi, 10.



THE RELATION OF ART TO USE


Our subject of inquiry to-day, you will remember, is the mode in
which fine art is founded upon, or may contribute to, the practical
requirements of human life.

Its offices in this respect are mainly twofold: it gives Form to
knowledge, and Grace to utility; that is to say, it makes permanently
visible to us things which otherwise could neither be described by
our science, nor retained by our memory; and it gives delightfulness
and worth to the implements of daily use, and materials of dress,
furniture and lodging. In the first of these offices it gives
precision and charm to truth; in the second it gives precision and
charm to service. For, the moment we make anything useful thoroughly,
it is a law of nature that we shall be pleased with ourselves, and
with the thing we have made; and become desirous therefore to adorn
or complete it, in some dainty way, with finer art expressive of our
pleasure.

And the point I wish chiefly to bring before you today is this close
and healthy connection of the fine arts with material use; but I must
first try briefly to put in clear light the function of art in giving
Form to truth.

Much that I have hitherto tried to teach has been disputed on the
ground that I have attached too much importance to art as representing
natural facts, and too little to it as a source of pleasure. And I
wish, in the close of these four prefatory lectures, strongly to
assert to you, and, so far as I can in the time, convince you, that
the entire vitality of art depends upon its being either full of
truth, or full of use; and that, however pleasant, wonderful, or
impressive it may be in itself, it must yet be of inferior kind, and
tend to deeper inferiority, unless it has clearly one of these main
objects,--either to _state a true thing_, or to _adorn a serviceable
one_. It must never exist alone,--never for itself; it exists rightly
only when it is the means of knowledge, or the grace of agency for
life.

Now, I pray you to observe--for though I have said this often before,
I have never yet said it clearly enough--every good piece of art, to
whichever of these ends it may be directed, involves first essentially
the evidence of human skill, and the formation of an actually
beautiful thing by it.

Skill and beauty, always, then; and, beyond these, the formative arts
have always one or other of the two objects which I have just defined
to you--truth, or serviceableness; and without these aims neither
the skill nor their beauty will avail; only by these can either
legitimately reign. All the graphic arts begin in keeping the outline
of shadow that we have loved, and they end in giving to it the aspect
of life; and all the architectural arts begin in the shaping of the
cup and the platter, and they end in a glorified roof.

Therefore, you see, in the graphic arts you have Skill, Beauty, and
Likeness; and in the architectural arts Skill, Beauty, and Use: and
you _must_ have the three in each group, balanced and co-ordinate; and
all the chief errors of art consist in losing or exaggerating one of
these elements.

For instance, almost the whole system and hope of modern life are
founded on the notion that you may substitute mechanism for skill,
photograph for picture, cast-iron for sculpture. That is your main
nineteenth-century faith, or infidelity. You think you can get
everything by grinding--music, literature, and painting. You will find
it grievously not so; you can get nothing but dust by mere grinding.
Even to have the barley-meal out of it, you must have the barley
first; and that comes by growth, not grinding. But essentially, we
have lost our delight in Skill; in that majesty of it which I was
trying to make clear to you in my last address, and which long
ago[187] I tried to express, under the head of ideas of power. The
entire sense of that, we have lost, because we ourselves do not take
pains enough to do right, and have no conception of what the right
costs; so that all the joy and reverence we ought to feel in looking
at a strong man's work have ceased in us. We keep them yet a little in
looking at a honeycomb or a bird's-nest; we understand that these
differ, by divinity of skill, from a lump of wax or a cluster of
sticks. But a picture, which is a much more wonderful thing than a
honeycomb or a bird's-nest,--have we not known people, and sensible
people too, who expected to be taught to produce that, in six lessons?

Well, you must have the skill, you must have the beauty, which is the
highest moral element; and then, lastly, you must have the verity or
utility, which is not the moral, but the vital element; and this
desire for verity and use is the one aim of the three that always
leads in great schools, and in the minds of great masters, without any
exception. They will permit themselves in awkwardness, they will
permit themselves in ugliness;--but they will never permit themselves
in uselessness or in unveracity.

And farther, as their skill increases, and as their grace, so much
more their desire for truth. It is impossible to find the three
motives in fairer balance and harmony than in our own Reynolds. He
rejoices in showing you his skill; and those of you who succeed in
learning what painters' work really is, will one day rejoice also,
even to laughter--that highest laughter which springs of pure delight,
in watching the fortitude and the fire of a hand which strikes forth
its will upon the canvas as easily as the wind strikes it on the sea.
He rejoices in all abstract beauty and rhythm and melody of design; he
will never give you a colour that is not lovely, nor a shade that is
unnecessary, nor a line that is ungraceful. But all his power and all
his invention are held by him subordinate,--and the more obediently
because of their nobleness,-to his true leading purpose of setting
before you such likeness of the living presence of an English
gentleman or an English lady, as shall be worthy of being looked upon
for ever.

But farther, you remember, I hope--for I said it in a way that I
thought would shock you a little, that you might remember it--my
statement, that art had never done more than this, never more than
given the likeness of a noble human being. Not only so, but it very
seldom does so much as this, and the best pictures that exist of the
great schools are all portraits, or groups of portraits, often of very
simple and nowise noble persons. You may have much more brilliant and
impressive qualities in imaginative pictures; you may have figures
scattered like clouds, or garlanded like flowers; you may have light
and shade as of a tempest, and colour, as of the rainbow; but all that
is child's play to the great men, though it is astonishment to us.
Their real strength is tried to the utmost, and as far as I know, it
is never elsewhere brought out so thoroughly, as in painting one man
or woman, and the soul that was in them; nor that always the highest
soul, but often only a thwarted one that was capable of height; or
perhaps not even that, but faultful and poor, yet seen through, to the
poor best of it, by the masterful sight. So that in order to put
before you in your Standard series the best art possible, I am
obliged, even from the very strongest men, to take the portraits,
before I take the idealism. Nay, whatever is best in the great
compositions themselves has depended on portraiture; and the study
necessary to enable you to understand invention will also convince you
that the mind of man never invented a greater thing than the form of
man, animated by faithful life. Every attempt to refine or exalt such
healthy humanity has weakened or caricatured it; or else consists only
in giving it, to please our fancy, the wings of birds, or the eyes of
antelopes. Whatever is truly great in either Greek or Christian art,
is also restrictedly human; and even the raptures of the redeemed
souls who enter "celestemente ballando,"[188] the gate of Angelico's
Paradise, were seen first in the terrestrial, yet most pure, mirth of
Florentine maidens.

I am aware that this cannot but at present appear gravely questionable
to those of my audience who are strictly cognizant of the phases of
Greek art; for they know that the moment of its decline is accurately
marked, by its turning from abstract form to portraiture. But the
reason of this is simple. The progressive course of Greek art was in
subduing monstrous conceptions to natural ones; it did this by general
laws; it reached absolute truth of generic human form, and if its
ethical force had remained, would have advanced into healthy
portraiture. But at the moment of change the national life ended in
Greece; and portraiture, there, meant insult to her religion, and
flattery to her tyrants. And her skill perished, not because she
became true in sight, but because she became vile in heart....

But I have told you enough, it seems to me, at least to-day, of this
function of art in recording fact; let me now finally, and with all
distinctness possible to me, state to you its main business of
all;--its service in the actual uses of daily life.

You are surprised, perhaps, to hear me call this its main business.
That is indeed so, however. The giving brightness to picture is much,
but the giving brightness to life more. And remember, were it as
patterns only, you cannot, without the realities, have the pictures.
_You cannot have a landscape by Turner without a country for him to
paint; you cannot have a portrait by Titian, without a man to be
pourtrayed_. I need not prove that to you, I suppose, in these short
terms; but in the outcome I can get no soul to believe that the
beginning of art _is in getting our country clean, and our people
beautiful_. I have been ten years trying to get this very plain
certainty--I do not say believed--but even thought of, as anything but
a monstrous proposition. To get your country clean, and your people
lovely;--I assure you that is a necessary work of art to begin with!
There has indeed been art in countries where people lived in dirt to
serve God, but never in countries where they lived in dirt to serve
the devil. There has indeed been art where the people were not all
lovely,--where even their lips were thick--and their skins black,
because the sun had looked upon them;[189] but never in a country
where the people were pale with miserable toil and deadly shade, and
where the lips of youth, instead of being full with blood, were
pinched by famine, or warped with poison. And now, therefore, note
this well, the gist of all these long prefatory talks. I said that the
two great moral instincts were those of Order and Kindness. Now, all
the arts are founded on agriculture by the hand, and on the graces and
kindness of feeding, and dressing, and lodging your people. Greek art
begins in the gardens of Alcinous--perfect order, leeks in beds, and
fountains in pipes.[190] And Christian art, as it arose out of
chivalry, was only possible so far as chivalry compelled both kings
and knights to care for the right personal training of their people;
it perished utterly when those kings and knights became [Greek:
daemoboroi], devourers of the people. And it will become possible
again only, when, literally, the sword is beaten into the
ploughshare,[191] when your St. George of England shall justify his
name,[192] and Christian art shall be known as its Master was, in
breaking of bread.[193]

Now look at the working out of this broad principle in minor detail;
observe how, from highest to lowest, health of art has first depended
on reference to industrial use. There is first the need of cup and
platter, especially of cup; for you can put your meat on the
Harpies',[194] or any other, tables; but you must have your cup to
drink from. And to hold it conveniently, you must put a handle to it;
and to fill it when it is empty you must have a large pitcher of some
sort; and to carry the pitcher you may most advisably have two
handles. Modify the forms of these needful possessions according to
the various requirements of drinking largely and drinking delicately;
of pouring easily out, or of keeping for years the perfume in; of
storing in cellars, or bearing from fountains; of sacrificial
libation, of Pan-athenaic treasure of oil, and sepulchral treasure of
ashes,--and you have a resultant series of beautiful form and
decoration, from the rude amphora of red earth up to Cellini's vases
of gems and crystal, in which series, but especially in the more
simple conditions of it, are developed the most beautiful lines and
most perfect types of severe composition which have yet been attained
by art.

But again, that you may fill your cup with pure water, you must go to
the well or spring; you need a fence round the well; you need some
tube or trough, or other means of confining the stream at the spring.
For the conveyance of the current to any distance you must build
either enclosed or open aqueduct; and in the hot square of the city
where you set it free, you find it good for health and pleasantness to
let it leap into a fountain. On these several needs you have a school
of sculpture founded; in the decoration of the walls of wells in level
countries, and of the sources of springs in mountainous ones, and
chiefly of all, where the women of household or market meet at the
city fountain.

There is, however, a farther reason for the use of art here than in
any other material service, so far as we may, by art, express our
reverence or thankfulness. Whenever a nation is in its right mind, it
always has a deep sense of divinity in the gift of rain from heaven,
filling its heart with food and gladness;[195] and all the more when
that gift becomes gentle and perennial in the flowing of springs. It
literally is not possible that any fruitful power of the Muses should
be put forth upon a people which disdains their Helicon; still less is
it possible that any Christian nation should grow up "tanquam lignum
quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum,"[196] which cannot recognize
the lesson meant in their being told of the places where Rebekah was
met;--where Rachel,--where Zipporah,--and she who was asked for water
under Mount Gerizim by a Stranger, weary, who had nothing to draw
with.[197]

And truly, when our mountain springs are set apart in vale or craggy
glen, or glade of wood green through the drought of summer, far from
cities, then, it is best let them stay in their own happy peace; but
if near towns, and liable therefore to be defiled by common usage, we
could not use the loveliest art more worthily than by sheltering the
spring and its first pools with precious marbles: nor ought anything
to be esteemed more important, as a means of healthy education, than
the care to keep the streams of it afterwards, to as great a distance
as possible, pure, full of fish, and easily accessible to children.
There used to be, thirty years ago, a little rivulet of the Wandel,
about an inch deep, which ran over the carriage-road and under a
footbridge just under the last chalk hill near Croydon. Alas! men came
and went; and it--did _not_ go on for ever. It has long since been
bricked over by the parish authorities; but there was more education
in that stream with its minnows than you could get out of a thousand
pounds spent yearly in the parish schools, even though you were to
spend every farthing of it in teaching the nature of oxygen and
hydrogen, and the names, and rate per minute, of all the rivers in
Asia and America.

Well, the gist of this matter lies here then. Suppose we want a school
of pottery again in England, all we poor artists are ready to do the
best we can, to show you how pretty a line may be that is twisted first
to one side, and then to the other; and how a plain household-blue will
make a pattern on white; and how ideal art may be got out of the
spaniel's colours of black and tan. But I tell you beforehand, all that
we can do will be utterly useless, unless you teach your peasant to say
grace, not only before meat, but before drink; and having provided him
with Greek cups and platters, provide him also with something that is
not poisoned to put into them.

There cannot be any need that I should trace for you the conditions of
art that are directly founded on serviceableness of dress, and of
armour; but it is my duty to affirm to you, in the most positive
manner, that after recovering, for the poor, wholesomeness of food,
your next step toward founding schools of art in England must be in
recovering, for the poor, decency and wholesomeness of dress;
thoroughly good in substance, fitted for their daily work, becoming to
their rank in life, and worn with order and dignity. And this order
and dignity must be taught them by the women of the upper and middle
classes, whose minds can be in nothing right, as long as they are so
wrong in this matter us to endure the squalor of the poor, while they
themselves dress gaily. And on the proper pride and comfort of both
poor and rich in dress, must be founded the true arts of dress;
carried on by masters of manufacture no less careful of the
perfectness and beauty of their tissues, and of all that in substance
and in design can be bestowed upon them, than ever the armourers of
Milan and Damascus were careful of their steel.

Then, in the third place, having recovered some wholesome habits of
life as to food and dress, we must recover them as to lodging. I said
just now that the best architecture was but a glorified roof. Think of
it. The dome of the Vatican, the porches of Rheims or Chartres, the
vaults and arches of their aisles, the canopy of the tomb, and the
spire of the belfry, are all forms resulting from the mere requirement
that a certain space shall be strongly covered from heat and rain.
More than that--as I have tried all through _The Stones of Venice_ to
show--the lovely forms of these were every one of them developed in
civil and domestic building, and only after their invention employed
ecclesiastically on the grandest scale. I think you cannot but have
noticed here in Oxford, as elsewhere, that our modern architects never
seem to know what to do with their roofs. Be assured, until the roofs
are right, nothing else will be; and there are just two ways of
keeping them right. Never build them of iron, but only of wood or
stone; and secondly, take care that in every town the little roofs are
built before the large ones, and that everybody who wants one has got
one. And we must try also to make everybody want one. That is to say,
at some not very advanced period of life, men should desire to have a
home, which they do not wish to quit any more, suited to their habits
of life, and likely to be more and more suitable to them until their
death. And men must desire to have these their dwelling-places built
as strongly as possible, and furnished and decorated daintily, and set
in pleasant places, in bright light, and good air, being able to
choose for themselves that at least as well as swallows. And when the
houses are grouped together in cities, men must have so much civic
fellowship as to subject their architecture to a common law, and so
much civic pride as to desire that the whole gathered group of human
dwellings should be a lovely thing, not a frightful one, on the face
of the earth. Not many weeks ago an English clergyman,[198] a master of
this University, a man not given to sentiment, but of middle age, and
great practical sense, told me, by accident, and wholly without
reference to the subject now before us, that he never could enter
London from his country parsonage but with closed eyes, lest the sight
of the blocks of houses which the railroad intersected in the suburbs
should unfit him, by the horror of it, for his day's work.

Now, it is not possible--and I repeat to you, only in more deliberate
assertion, what I wrote just twenty-two years ago in the last chapter
of the _Seven Lamps of Architecture_--it is not possible to have any
right morality, happiness, or art, in any country where the cities are
thus built, or thus, let me rather say, clotted and coagulated; spots
of a dreadful mildew, spreading by patches and blotches over the
country they consume. You must have lovely cities, crystallized, not
coagulated, into form; limited in size, and not casting out the scum
and scurf of them into an encircling eruption of shame, but girded
each with its sacred pomoerium, and with garlands of gardens full of
blossoming trees and softly guided streams.


  [187] In _Modern Painters_, vol. 1.

  [188] The quotation is from Vasari's account of Angelico's Last
  Judgment (now in the Accademia at Florence). [Cook and Wedderbum.]

  [189] _Song of Solomon_ i, 6.

  [190] Cf. _Classical Landscape_, pp. 92-93.

  [191] _Isaiah_, ii, 4; _Micah_ iv, 3; _Joel_ iii, 10.

  [192] The name of St. George, the "Earthworker," or "Husbandman."
  [Ruskin.]

  [193] _Luke_ xxiv, 35.

  [194] Virgil, _Æneid_, 3, 209. _seqq_. [Ruskin.]

  [195] _Acts_ xiv, 17.

  [196] _Psalms_ i, 3.

  [197] _Genesis_ xxiv, 15, 16 and xxix, 10; _Exodus_ ii, 16; _John_
  iv, 11.

  [198] Osborne Gordon. [Ruskin.]




ART AND HISTORY

ATHENA ERGANE


    This short selection is taken from the volume entitled _The Queen
    of the Air_, in which Ruskin, fascinated by the deep significance
    of the Greek myths and realizing the religious sincerity
    underlying them, attempts to interpret those that cluster about
    Athena. The book was published June 22, 1869. It is divided into
    three "Lectures," parts of which actually were delivered as
    lectures on different occasions, entitled respectively "Athena
    Chalinitis" (Athena in the Heavens), "Athena Keramitis" (Athena
    in the Earth), "Athena Ergane" (Athena in the Heart). The first
    lecture is the only one which keeps to the title of the book; in
    the others the legend is used merely as a starting-point for the
    expression of various pregnant ideas on social and historical
    problems. The book as a whole abounds in flashes of inspiration
    and insight, and is a favourite with many readers of Ruskin.
    Carlyle, in a letter to Froude, wrote: "Passages of that last
    book, _Queen of the Air_, went into my heart like arrows."

In different places of my writings, and through many years of
endeavour to define the laws of art, I have insisted on this Tightness
in work, and on its connection with virtue of character, in so many
partial ways, that the impression left on the reader's mind--if,
indeed, it was ever impressed at all--has been confused and uncertain.
In beginning the series of my corrected works, I wish this principle
(in my own mind the foundation of every other) to be made plain, if
nothing else is: and will try, therefore, to make it so, so far as, by
any effort, I can put it into unmistakable words. And, first, here is
a very simple statement of it, given lately in a lecture on the
Architecture of the Valley of the Somme,[199] which will be better read
in this place than in its incidental connection with my account of the
porches of Abbeville.

I had used, in a preceding part of the lecture, the expression, "by
what faults" this Gothic architecture fell. We continually speak thus
of works of art. We talk of their faults and merits, as of virtues and
vices. What do we mean by talking of the faults of a picture, or the
merits of a piece of stone?

The faults of a work of art are the faults of its workman, and its
virtues his virtues.

Great art is the expression of the mind of a great man, and mean art,
that of the want of mind of a weak man. A foolish person builds
foolishly, and a wise one, sensibly; a virtuous one, beautifully; and
a vicious one, basely. If stone work is well put together, it means
that a thoughtful man planned it, and a careful man cut it, and an
honest man cemented it. If it has too much ornament, it means that its
carver was too greedy of pleasure; if too little, that he was rude, or
insensitive, or stupid, and the like. So that when once you have
learned how to spell these most precious of all legends,--pictures
and buildings,--you may read the characters of men, and of nations, in
their art, as in a mirror;--nay, as in a microscope, and magnified a
hundredfold; for the character becomes passionate in the art, and
intensifies itself in all its noblest or meanest delights. Nay, not
only as in a microscope, but as under a scalpel, and in dissection;
for a man may hide himself from you, or misrepresent himself to you,
every other way; but he cannot in his work: there, be sure, you have
him to the inmost. All that he likes, all that he sees,--all that he
can do,--his imagination, his affections, his perseverance, his
impatience, his clumsiness, cleverness, everything is there. If the
work is a cobweb, you know it was made by a spider; if a honeycomb, by
a bee; a worm-cast is thrown up by a worm, and a nest wreathed by a
bird; and a house built by a man, worthily, if he is worthy, and
ignobly, if he is ignoble.

And always, from the least to the greatest, as the made thing is good
or bad, so is the maker of it.

You all use this faculty of judgment more or less, whether you
theoretically admit the principle or not. Take that floral gable;[200]
you don't suppose the man who built Stonehenge could have built that,
or that the man who built that, _would_ have built Stonehenge? Do you
think an old Roman would have liked such a piece of filigree work? or
that Michael Angelo would have spent his time in twisting these stems
of roses in and out? Or, of modern handicraftsmen, do you think a
burglar, or a brute, or a pickpocket could have carved it? Could Bill
Sykes have done it? or the Dodger, dexterous with finger and tool? You
will find in the end, that _no man could have done it but exactly the
man who did it_; and by looking close at it, you may, if you know your
letters, read precisely the manner of man he was.

Now I must insist on this matter, for a grave reason. Of all facts
concerning art, this is the one most necessary to be known, that,
while manufacture is the work of hands only, art is the work of the
whole spirit of man; and as that spirit is, so is the deed of it: and
by whatever power of vice or virtue any art is produced, the same vice
or virtue it reproduces and teaches. That which is born of evil begets
evil; and that which is born of valour and honour, teaches valour and
honour. Al art is either infection or education. It _must_ be one or
other of these.

This, I repeat, of all truths respecting art, is the one of which
understanding is the most precious, and denial the most deadly. And I
assert it the more, because it has of late been repeatedly, expressly,
and with contumely denied; and that by high authority: and I hold it
one of the most sorrowful facts connected with the decline of the arts
among us, that English gentlemen, of high standing as scholars and
artists, should have been blinded into the acceptance, and betrayed
into the assertion of a fallacy which only authority such as theirs
could have rendered for an instant credible. For the contrary of it is
written in the history of all great nations; it is the one sentence
always inscribed on the steps of their thrones; the one concordant
voice in which they speak to us out of their dust.

All such nations first manifest themselves as a pure and beautiful
animal race, with intense energy and imagination. They live lives of
hardship by choice, and by grand instinct of manly discipline: they
become fierce and irresistible soldiers; the nation is always its own
army, and their king, or chief head of government, is always their
first soldier. Pharaoh, or David, or Leonidas, or Valerius, or
Barbarossa, or Coeur de Lion, or St. Louis, or Dandolo, or Frederick
the Great:--Egyptian, Jew, Greek, Roman, German, English, French,
Venetian,--that is inviolable law for them all; their king must be
their first soldier, or they cannot be in progressive power. Then,
after their great military period, comes the domestic period; in
which, without betraying the discipline of war, they add to their
great soldiership the delights and possessions of a delicate and
tender home-life: and then, for all nations, is the time of their
perfect art, which is the fruit, the evidence, the reward of their
national ideal of character, developed by the finished care of the
occupations of peace. That is the history of all true art that ever
was, or can be: palpably the history of it,--unmistakably,--written on
the forehead of it in letters of light,--in tongues of fire, by which
the seal of virtue is branded as deep as ever iron burnt into a
convict's flesh the seal of crime. But always, hitherto, after the
great period, has followed the day of luxury, and pursuit of the arts
for pleasure only. And all has so ended.

Thus far of Abbeville building. Now I have here asserted two
things,--first, the foundation of art in moral character; next, the
foundation of moral character in war. I must make both these
assertions clearer, and prove them.

First, of the foundation of art in moral character. Of course art-gift
and amiability of disposition are two different things. A good man is
not necessarily a painter, nor does an eye for colour necessarily
imply an honest mind. But great art implies the union of both powers:
it is the expression, by an art-gift, of a pure soul. If the gift is
not there, we can have no art at all; and if the soul--and a right
soul too--is not there, the art is bad, however dexterous.

But also, remember, that the art-gift itself is only the result of the
moral character of generations. A bad woman may have a sweet voice;
but that sweetness of voice comes of the past morality of her race.
That she can sing with it at all, she owes to the determination of
laws of music by the morality of the past. Every act, every impulse,
of virtue and vice, affects in any creature, face, voice, nervous
power, and vigour and harmony of invention, at once. Perseverance in
rightness of human conduct, renders, after a certain number of
generations, human art possible; every sin clouds it, be it ever so
little a one; and persistent vicious living and following of pleasure
render, after a certain number of generations, all art impossible. Men
are deceived by the long-suffering of the laws of nature; and mistake,
in a nation, the reward of the virtue of its sires for the issue of
its own sins. The time of their visitation will come, and that
inevitably; for, it is always true, that if the fathers have eaten sour
grapes, the children's teeth are set on edge.[201] And for the
individual, as soon as you have learned to read, you may, as I have
said, know him to the heart's core, through his art. Let his art-gift
be never so great, and cultivated to the height by the schools of a
great race of men; and it is still but a tapestry thrown over his own
being and inner soul; and the bearing of it will show, infallibly,
whether it hangs on a man, or on a skeleton. If you are dim-eyed, you
may not see the difference in the fall of the folds at first, but
learn how to look, and the folds themselves will become transparent,
and you shall see through them the death's shape, or the divine one,
making the tissue above it as a cloud of light, or as a winding-sheet.

Then farther, observe, I have said (and you will find it true, and
that to the uttermost) that, as all lovely art is rooted in virtue, so
it bears fruit of virtue, and is didactic in its own nature. It is
often didactic also in actually expressed thought, as Giotto's,
Michael Angelo's, Dürer's, and hundreds more; but that is not its
special function,--it is didactic chiefly by being beautiful; but
beautiful with haunting thought, no less than with form, and full of
myths that can be read only with the heart.

For instance, at this moment there is open beside me as I write, a
page of Persian manuscript, wrought with wreathed azure and geld, and
soft green, and violet, and ruby and scarlet, into one field of pure
resplendence. It is wrought to delight the eyes only; and does delight
them; and the man who did it assuredly had eyes in his head; but not
much more. It is not didactic art, but its author was happy: and it
will do the good, and the harm, that mere pleasure can do. But,
opposite me, is an early Turner drawing of the lake of Geneva, taken
about two miles from Geneva, on the Lausanne road, with Mont Blanc in
the distance. The old city is seen lying beyond the waveless waters,
veiled with a sweet misty veil of Athena's weaving: a faint light of
morning, peaceful exceedingly, and almost colourless, shed from behind
the Voirons, increases into soft amber along the slope of the Salève,
and is just seen, and no more, on the fair warm fields of its summit,
between the folds of a white cloud that rests upon the grass, but
rises, high and towerlike, into the zenith of dawn above.

There is not as much colour in that low amber light upon the hill-side
as there is in the palest dead leaf. The lake is not blue, but grey in
mist, passing into deep shadow beneath the Voirons' pines; a few dark
clusters of leaves, a single white flower--scarcely seen--are all the
gladness given to the rocks of the shore. One of the ruby spots of the
eastern manuscript would give colour enough for all the red that is in
Turner's entire drawing. For the mere pleasure of the eye, there is
not so much in all those lines of his, throughout the entire
landscape, as in half an inch square of the Persian's page. What made
him take pleasure in the low colour that is only like the brown of a
dead leaf? in the cold grey of dawn--in the one white flower among the
rocks--in these--and no more than these?

He took pleasure in them because he had been bred among English fields
and hills; because the gentleness of a great race was in his heart,
and its power of thought in his brain; because he knew the stories of
the Alps, and of the cities at their feet; because he had read the
Homeric legends of the clouds, and beheld the gods of dawn, and the
givers of dew to the fields; because he knew the faces of the crags,
and the imagery of the passionate mountains, as a man knows the face
of his friend; because he had in him the wonder and sorrow concerning
life and death, which are the inheritance of the Gothic soul from the
days of its first sea kings; and also the compassion and the joy that
are woven into the innermost fabric of every great imaginative spirit,
born now in countries that have lived by the Christian faith with any
courage or truth. And the picture contains also, for us, just this
which its maker had in him to give; and can convey it to us, just so
far as we are of the temper in which it must be received. It is
didactic if we are worthy to be taught, no otherwise. The pure heart,
it will make more pure; the thoughtful, more thoughtful. It has in it
no words for the reckless or the base.


  [199] _The Flamboyant Architecture of the Valley of the Somme_, a
  lecture delivered at the Royal Institution, January 29, 1869.

  [200] The elaborate pediment above the central porch at the west
  end of Rouen Cathedral, pierced into a transparent web of tracery,
  and enriched with a border of "twisted eglantine." [Ruskin.]

  [201] _Jeremiah_ xxxi, 29.




TRAFFIC


    "Traffic" is the second of the three lectures published May, 1866,
    in the volume entitled _The Crown of Wild Olive_. All these
    lectures were delivered in the years 1864 and 1865, but the one
    here printed was earliest. The occasion on which Ruskin addressed
    the people of Bradford is made sufficiently clear from the opening
    sentences. The lecture is important as emphasizing in a popular
    way some of his most characteristic economic theories.



TRAFFIC[202]


My good Yorkshire friends, you asked me down here among your hills
that I might talk to you about this Exchange you are going to build:
but, earnestly and seriously asking you to pardon me, I am going to do
nothing of the kind. I cannot talk, or at least can say very little,
about this same Exchange. I must talk of quite other things, though
not willingly;--I could not deserve your pardon, if, when you invited
me to speak on one subject, I _wilfully_ spoke on another. But I
cannot speak, to purpose, of anything about which I do not care; and
most simply and sorrowfully I have to tell you, in the outset, that I
do _not_ care about this Exchange of yours.

If, however, when you sent me your invitation, I had answered, "I
won't come, I don't care about the Exchange of Bradford," you would
have been justly offended with me, not knowing the reasons of so blunt
a carelessness. So I have come down, hoping that you will patiently
let me tell you why, on this, and many other such occasions, I now
remain silent, when formerly I should have caught at the opportunity
of speaking to a gracious audience.

In a word, then, I do not care about this Exchange--because _you_
don't; and because you know perfectly well I cannot make you. Look at
the essential conditions of the case, which you, as business men, know
perfectly well, though perhaps you think I forget them. You are going
to spend £30,000, which to you, collectively, is nothing; the buying a
new coat is, as to the cost of it, a much more important matter of
consideration to me, than building a new Exchange is to you. But you
think you may as well have the right thing for your money. You know
there are a great many odd styles of architecture about; you don't
want to do anything ridiculous; you hear of me, among others, as a
respectable architectural man-milliner; and you send for me, that I
may tell you the leading fashion; and what is, in our shops, for the
moment, the newest and sweetest thing in pinnacles.

Now, pardon me for telling you frankly, you cannot have good
architecture merely by asking people's advice on occasion. All good
architecture is the expression of national life and character, and it
is produced by a prevalent and eager national taste, or desire for
beauty. And I want you to think a little of the deep significance of
this word "taste"; for no statement of mine has been more earnestly or
oftener controverted than that good taste is essentially a moral
quality. "No," say many of my antagonists, "taste is one thing,
morality is another. Tell us what is pretty: we shall be glad to know
that; but we need no sermons--even were you able to preach them, which
may be doubted."

Permit me, therefore, to fortify this old dogma of mine somewhat.
Taste is not only a part and an index of morality;--it is the ONLY
morality. The first, and last, and closest trial question to any
living creature is, "What do you like?" Tell me what you like, and
I'll tell you what you are. Go out into the street, and ask the first
man or woman you meet, what their "taste" is; and if they answer
candidly, you know them, body and soul. "You, my friend in the rags,
with the unsteady gait, what do _you_ like?" "A pipe and a quartern of
gin." I know you. "You, good woman, with the quick step and tidy
bonnet, what do you like?" "A swept hearth, and a clean tea-table; and
my husband opposite me, and a baby at my breast." Good, I know you
also. "You, little girl with the golden hair and the soft eyes, what
do you like?" "My canary, and a run among the wood hyacinths." "You,
little boy with the dirty hands, and the low forehead, what do you
like?" "A shy at the sparrows, and a game at pitch farthing." Good; we
know them all now. What more need we ask?

"Nay," perhaps you answer; "we need rather to ask what these people
and children do, than what they like. If they do right, it is no
matter that they like what is wrong; and if they _do_ wrong, it is no
matter that they like what is right. Doing is the great thing; and it
does not matter that the man likes drinking, so that he does not
drink; nor that the little girl likes to be kind to her canary, if she
will not learn her lessons; nor that the little boy likes throwing
stones at the sparrows, if he goes to the Sunday school." Indeed, for
a short time, and in a provisional sense, this is true. For if,
resolutely, people do what is right, in time they come to like doing
it. But they only are in a right moral state when they _have_ come to
like doing it; and as long as they don't like it, they are still in a
vicious state. The man is not in health of body who is always thinking
of the bottle in the cupboard, though he bravely bears his thirst; but
the man who heartily enjoys water in the morning, and wine in the
evening, each in its proper quantity and time. And the entire object
of true education is to make people not merely _do_ the right things,
but _enjoy_ the right things:--not merely industrious, but to love
industry--not merely learned, but to love knowledge--not merely pure,
but to love purity--not merely just, but to hunger and thirst after
justice.[203]

But you may answer or think, "Is the liking for outside
ornaments,--for pictures, or statues, or furniture, or
architecture,--a moral quality?" Yes, most surely, if a rightly set
liking. Taste for _any_ pictures or statues is not a moral quality,
but taste for good ones is. Only here again we have to define the word
"good." I don't mean by "good," clever--or learned--or difficult in
the doing. Take a picture by Teniers, of sots quarrelling over their
dice; it is an entirely clever picture; so clever that nothing in its
kind has ever been done equal to it; but it is also an entirely base
and evil picture. It is an expression of delight in the prolonged
contemplation of a vile thing, and delight in that is an "unmannered,"
or "immoral" quality. It is "bad taste" in the profoundest sense--it
is the taste of the devils. On the other hand, a picture of Titian's,
or a Greek statue, or a Greek coin, or a Turner landscape, expresses
delight in the perpetual contemplation of a good and perfect thing.
That is an entirely moral quality--it is the taste of the angels And
all delight in art, and all love of it, resolve themselves into simple
love of that which deserves love. That deserving is the quality which
we call "loveliness"--(we ought to have an opposite word, hateliness,
to be said of the things which deserve to be hated); and it is not an
indifferent nor optional thing whether we love this or that; but it is
just the vital function of all our being. What we _like_ determines
what we _are_, and is the sign of what we are; and to teach taste is
inevitably to form character.

As I was thinking over this, in walking up Fleet Street the other day,
my eye caught the title of a book standing open in a bookseller's
window. It was--"On the necessity of the diffusion of taste among all
classes." "Ah," I thought to myself, "my classifying friend, when you
have diffused your taste, where will your classes be? The man who
likes what you like, belongs to the same class with you, I think.
Inevitably so. You may put him to other work if you choose; but, by
the condition you have brought him into, he will dislike the other
work as much as you would yourself. You get hold of a scavenger or a
costermonger, who enjoyed the Newgate Calendar for literature, and
'Pop goes the Weasel' for music. You think you can make him like Dante
and Beethoven? I wish you joy of your lessons; but if you do, you have
made a gentleman of him:--he won't like to go back to his
coster-mongering."

And so completely and unexceptionally is this so, that, if I had time
to-night, I could show you that a nation cannot be affected by any
vice, or weakness, without expressing it, legibly, and for ever,
either in bad art, or by want of art; and that there is no national
virtue, small or great, which is not manifestly expressed in all the
art which circumstances enable the people possessing that virtue to
produce. Take, for instance, your great English virtue of enduring and
patient courage. You have at present in England only one art of any
consequence--that is, iron-working. You know thoroughly well how to
cast and hammer iron. Now, do you think, in those masses of lava which
you build volcanic cones to melt, and which you forge at the mouths of
the Infernos you have created; do you think, on those iron plates,
your courage and endurance are not written for ever,--not merely with
an iron pen, but on iron parchment? And take also your great English
vice--European vice--vice of all the world--vice of all other worlds
that roll or shine in heaven, bearing with them yet the atmosphere of
hell--the vice of jealousy, which brings competition into your
commerce, treachery into your councils, and dishonour into your
wars--that vice which has rendered for you, and for your next
neighbouring nation, the daily occupations of existence no longer
possible, but with the mail upon your breasts and the sword loose in
its sheath; so that at last, you have realized for all the multitudes
of the two great peoples who lead the so-called civilization of the
earth,--you have realized for them all, I say, in person and in
policy, what was once true only of the rough Border riders of your
Cheviot hills--

    They carved at the meal
    With gloves of steel,

And they drank the red wine through the helmet barr'd;[204] do you
think that this national shame and dastardliness of heart are not
written as legibly on every rivet of your iron armour as the strength
of the right hands that forged it?

Friends, I know not whether this thing be the more ludicrous or the
more melancholy. It is quite unspeakably both. Suppose, instead of
being now sent for by you, I had been sent for by some private
gentleman, living in a suburban house, with his garden separated only
by a fruit wall from his next door neighbour's; and he had called me
to consult with him on the furnishing of his drawing-room. I begin
looking about me, and find the walls rather bare; I think such and
such a paper might be desirable--perhaps a little fresco here and
there on the ceiling--a damask curtain or so at the windows. "Ah,"
says my employer, "damask curtains, indeed! That's all very fine, but
you know I can't afford that kind of thing just now!" "Yet the world
credits you with a splendid income!" "Ah, yes," says my friend, "but
do you know, at present I am obliged to spend it nearly all in
steel-traps?" "Steel-traps! for whom?" "Why, for that fellow on the
other side the wall, you know: we're very good friends, capital
friends; but we are obliged to keep our traps set on both sides of the
wall; we could not possibly keep on friendly terms without them, and
our spring guns. The worst of it is, we are both clever fellows
enough; and there's never a day passes that we don't find out a new
trap, or a new gun-barrel, or something; we spend about fifteen
millions a year each in our traps, take it altogether; and I don't see
how we're to do with less." A highly comic state of life for two
private gentlemen! but for two nations, it seems to me, not wholly
comic. Bedlam would be comic, perhaps, if there were only one madman
in it; and your Christmas pantomime is comic, when there is only one
clown in it; but when the whole world turns clown, and paints itself
red with its own heart's blood instead of vermilion, it is something
else than comic, I think.

Mind, I know a great deal of this is play, and willingly allow for
that. You don't know what to do with yourselves for a sensation:
fox-hunting and cricketing will not carry you through the whole of
this unendurably long mortal life: you liked pop-guns when you were
schoolboys, and rifles and Armstrongs are only the same things better
made: but then the worst of it is, that what was play to you when
boys, was not play to the sparrows; and what is play to you now, is
not play to the small birds of State neither; and for the black
eagles, you are somewhat shy of taking shots at them, if I mistake
not.[205]

I must get back to the matter in hand, however. Believe me, without
further instance, I could show you, in all time, that every nation's
vice, or virtue, was written in its art: the soldiership of early
Greece; the sensuality of late Italy; the visionary religion of
Tuscany; the splendid human energy and beauty of Venice. I have no
time to do this to-night (I have done it elsewhere before now);[206]
but I proceed to apply the principle to ourselves in a more searching
manner.

I notice that among all the new buildings that cover your once wild
hills, churches and schools are mixed in due, that is to say, in large
proportion, with your mills and mansions; and I notice also that the
churches and schools are almost always Gothic, and the mansions and
mills are never Gothic. Will you allow me to ask precisely the meaning
of this? For, remember, it is peculiarly a modern phenomenon. When
Gothic was invented, houses were Gothic as well as churches; and when
the Italian style superseded the Gothic, churches were Italian as well
as houses. If there is a Gothic spire to the cathedral of Antwerp,
there is a Gothic belfry to the Hotel de Ville at Brussels; if Inigo
Jones builds an Italian Whitehall, Sir Christopher Wren builds an
Italian St. Paul's.[207] But now you live under one school of
architecture, and worship under another. What do you mean by doing
this? Am I to understand that you are thinking of changing your
architecture back to Gothic; and that you treat your churches
experimentally, because it does not matter what mistakes you make in a
church? Or am I to understand that you consider Gothic a pre-eminently
sacred and beautiful mode of building, which you think, like the fine
frankincense, should be mixed for the tabernacle only, and reserved
for your religious services? For if this be the feeling, though it may
seem at first as if it were graceful and reverent, you will find that,
at the root of the matter, it signifies neither more nor less than
that you have separated your religion from your life.

For consider what a wide significance this fact has: and remember that
it is not you only, but all the people of England, who are behaving
thus, just now.

You have all got into the habit of calling the church "the house of
God." I have seen, over the doors of many churches, the legend
actually carved, "_This_ is the house of God and this is the gate of
heaven."[208] Now, note where that legend comes from, and of what
place it was first spoken. A boy leaves his father's house to go on a
long journey on foot, to visit his uncle: he has to cross a wild
hill-desert; just as if one of your own boys had to cross the wolds to
visit an uncle at Carlisle. The second or third day your boy finds
himself somewhere between Hawes and Brough, in the midst of the moors,
at sunset. It is stony ground, and boggy; he cannot go one foot
further that night. Down he lies, to sleep, on Wharnside, where best
he may, gathering a few of the stones together to put under his
head;--so wild the place is, he cannot get anything but stones. And
there, lying under the broad night, he has a dream; and he sees a
ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reaches to heaven, and
the angels of God are ascending and descending upon it. And when he
wakes out of his sleep, he says, "How dreadful is this place; surely
this is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven." This PLACE, observe; not this church; not this city; not this
stone, even, which he puts up for a memorial--the piece of flint on
which his head has lain. But this _place_; this windy slope of
Wharnside; this moorland hollow, torrent-bitten, snow-blighted! this
_any_ place where God lets down the ladder. And how are you to know
where that will be? or how are you to determine where it may be, but
by being ready for it always? Do you know where the lightning is to
fall next? You _do_ know that, partly; you can guide the lightning;
but you cannot guide the going forth of the Spirit, which is that
lightning when it shines from the east to the west.[209]

But the perpetual and insolent warping of that strong verse to serve a
merely ecclesiastical purpose is only one of the thousand instances in
which we sink back into gross Judaism. We call our churches "temples."
Now, you know perfectly well they are _not_ temples. They have never
had, never can have, anything whatever to do with temples. They are
"synagogues"--"gathering places"--where you gather yourselves together
as an assembly; and by not calling them so, you again miss the force
of another mighty text--"Thou, when thou prayest, shalt not be as the
hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the churches" [we
should translate it], "that they may be seen of men. But thou, when
thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door,
pray to thy Father"--which is, not in chancel nor in aisle, but "in
secret."[210]

Now, you feel, as I say this to you--I know you feel--as if I were
trying to take away the honour of your churches. Not so; I am trying
to prove to you the honour of your houses and your hills; not that the
Church is not sacred--but that the whole Earth is. I would have you
feel, what careless, what constant, what infectious sin there is in
all modes of thought, whereby, in calling your churches only "holy,"
you call your hearths and homes "profane"; and have separated
yourselves from the heathen by casting all your household gods to the
ground, instead of recognizing, in the place of their many and feeble
Lares, the presence of your One and Mighty Lord and Lar.

"But what has all this to do with our Exchange?" you ask me,
impatiently. My dear friends, it has just everything to do with it; on
these inner and great questions depend all the outer and little ones;
and if you have asked me down here to speak to you, because you had
before been interested in anything I have written, you must know that
all I have yet said about architecture was to show this. The book I
called _The Seven Lamps_ was to show that certain right states of
temper and moral feeling were the magic powers by which all good
architecture, without exception, had been produced. _The Stones of
Venice_ had, from beginning to end, no other aim than to show that the
Gothic architecture of Venice had arisen out of, and indicated in all
its features, a state of pure national faith, and of domestic virtue;
and that its Renaissance architecture had arisen out of, and in all
its features indicated, a state of concealed national infidelity, and
of domestic corruption. And now, you ask me what style is best to
build in, and how can I answer, knowing the meaning of the two styles,
but by another question--do you mean to build as Christians or as
Infidels? And still more--do you mean to build as honest Christians or
as honest Infidels? as thoroughly and confessedly either one or the
other? You don't like to be asked such rude questions. I cannot help
it; they are of much more importance than this Exchange business; and
if they can be at once answered, the Exchange business settles itself
in a moment. But before I press them farther, I must ask leave to
explain one point clearly.

In all my past work, my endeavour has been to show that good
architecture is essentially religious--the production of a faithful
and virtuous, not of an infidel and corrupted people. But in the
course of doing this, I have had also to show that good architecture
is not _ecclesiastical_. People are so apt to look upon religion as
the business of the clergy, not their own, that the moment they hear
of anything depending on "religion," they think it must also have
depended on the priesthood; and I have had to take what place was to
be occupied between these two errors, and fight both, often with
seeming contradiction. Good architecture is the work of good and
believing men; therefore, you say, at least some people say, "Good
architecture must essentially have been the work of the clergy, not of
the laity." No--a thousand times no; good architecture[211] has always
been the work of the commonalty, _not_ of the clergy. "What," you say,
"those glorious cathedrals--the pride of Europe--did their builders
not form Gothic architecture?" No; they corrupted Gothic architecture.
Gothic was formed in the baron's castle, and the burgher's street. It
was formed by the thoughts, and hands, and powers of labouring
citizens and warrior kings. By the monk it was used as an instrument
for the aid of his superstition; when that superstition became a
beautiful madness, and the best hearts of Europe vainly dreamed and
pined in the cloister, and vainly raged and perished in the
crusade,--through that fury of perverted faith and wasted war, the
Gothic rose also to its loveliest, most fantastic, and, finally, most
foolish dreams; and in those dreams, was lost.

I hope, now, that there is no risk of your misunderstanding me when I
come to the gist of what I want to say to-night;--when I repeat, that
every great national architecture has been the result and exponent of
a great national religion. You can't have bits of it here, bits
there--you must have it everywhere or nowhere. It is not the monopoly
of a clerical company--it is not the exponent of a theological
dogma--it is not the hieroglyphic writing of an initiated priesthood;
it is the manly language of a people inspired by resolute and common
purpose, and rendering resolute and common fidelity to the legible
laws of an undoubted God.

Now, there have as yet been three distinct schools of European
architecture. I say, European, because Asiatic and African
architectures belong so entirely to other races and climates, that
there is no question of them here; only, in passing, I will simply
assure you that whatever is good or great in Egypt, and Syria, and
India, is just good or great for the same reasons as the buildings on
our side of the Bosphorus. We Europeans, then, have had three great
religions: the Greek, which was the worship of the God of Wisdom and
Power; the Mediæval, which was the worship of the God of Judgment and
Consolation; the Renaissance, which was the worship of the God of
Pride and Beauty: these three we have had--they are past,--and now, at
last, we English have got a fourth religion, and a God of our own,
about which I want to ask you. But I must explain these three old ones
first.

I repeat, first, the Greeks essentially worshipped the God of Wisdom;
so that whatever contended against their religion,--to the Jews a
stumbling-block,--was, to the Greeks--_Foolishness_.[212]

The first Greek idea of deity was that expressed in the word, of which
we keep the remnant in our words "_Di_-urnal" and "_Di_-vine"--the god
of _Day_, Jupiter the revealer. Athena is his daughter, but especially
daughter of the Intellect, springing armed from the head. We are only
with the help of recent investigation beginning to penetrate the depth
of meaning couched under the Athenaic symbols: but I may note rapidly,
that her ægis, the mantle with the serpent fringes, in which she
often, in the best statues, is represented as folding up her left
hand, for better guard; and the Gorgon, on her shield, are both
representative mainly of the chilling horror and sadness (turning men
to stone, as it were), of the outmost and superficial spheres of
knowledge--that knowledge which separates, in bitterness, hardness,
and sorrow, the heart of the full-grown man from the heart of the
child. For out of imperfect knowledge spring terror, dissension,
danger, and disdain; but from perfect knowledge, given by the
full-revealed Athena, strength and peace, in sign of which she is
crowned with the olive spray, and bears the resistless spear.[213]

This, then, was the Greek conception of purest Deity; and every habit
of life, and every form of his art developed themselves from the
seeking this bright, serene, resistless wisdom; and setting himself,
as a man, to do things evermore rightly and strongly;[214] not with
any ardent affection or ultimate hope; but with a resolute and
continent energy of will, as knowing that for failure there was no
consolation, and for sin there was no remission. And the Greek
architecture rose unerring, bright, clearly defined, and
self-contained.

Next followed in Europe the great Christian faith, which was
essentially the religion of Comfort. Its great doctrine is the
remission of sins; for which cause, it happens, too often, in certain
phases of Christianity, that sin and sickness themselves are partly
glorified, as if, the more you had to be healed of, the more divine
was the healing. The practical result of this doctrine, in art, is a
continual contemplation of sin and disease, and of imaginary states of
purification from them; thus we have an architecture conceived in a
mingled sentiment of melancholy and aspiration, partly severe, partly
luxuriant, which will bend itself to every one of our needs, and every
one of our fancies, and be strong or weak with us, as we are strong or
weak ourselves. It is, of all architecture, the basest, when base
people build it--of all, the noblest, when built by the noble.

And now note that both these religions--Greek and Mediæval--perished
by falsehood in their own main purpose. The Greek religion of Wisdom
perished in a false philosophy--"Oppositions of science, falsely so
called." The Mediæval religion of Consolation perished in false
comfort; in remission of sins given lyingly. It was the selling of
absolution that ended the Mediæval faith; and I can tell you more, it
is the selling of absolution which, to the end of time, will mark
false Christianity. Pure Christianity gives her remission of sins only
by _ending_ them; but false Christianity gets her remission of sins by
_compounding for_ them. And there are many ways of compounding for
them. We English have beautiful little quiet ways of buying
absolution, whether in low Church or high, far more cunning than any
of Tetzel's trading.[215]

Then, thirdly, there followed the religion of Pleasure, in which all
Europe gave itself to luxury, ending in death. First, _bals masqués_
in every saloon, and then guillotines in every square. And all these
three worships issue in vast temple building. Your Greek worshipped
Wisdom, and built you the Parthenon--the Virgin's temple. The Mediæval
worshipped Consolation, and built you Virgin temples also--but to our
Lady of Salvation. Then the Revivalist worshipped beauty, of a sort,
and built you Versailles and the Vatican. Now, lastly, will you tell
me what _we_ worship, and what _we_ build?

You know we are speaking always of the real, active, continual,
national worship; that by which men act, while they live; not that
which they talk of, when they die. Now, we have, indeed, a nominal
religion, to which we pay tithes of property and sevenths of time; but
we have also a practical and earnest religion, to which we devote
nine-tenths of our property and sixth-sevenths of our time. And we
dispute a great deal about the nominal religion: but we are all
unanimous about this practical one; of which I think you will admit
that the ruling goddess may be best generally described as the
"Goddess of Getting-on," or "Britannia of the Market." The Athenians
had an "Athena Agoraia," or Athena of the Market; but she was a
subordinate type of their goddess, while our Britannia Agoraia is the
principal type of ours. And all your great architectural works are, of
course, built to her. It is long since you built a great cathedral;
and how you would laugh at me if I proposed building a cathedral on
the top of one of these hills of yours, taking it for an Acropolis!
But your railroad mounds, vaster than the walls of Babylon; your
railroad stations, vaster than the temple of Ephesus, and innumerable;
your chimneys, how much more mighty and costly than cathedral spires!
your harbour-piers; your warehouses; your exchanges!--all these are
built to your great Goddess of "Getting-on"; and she has formed, and
will continue to form your architecture, as long as you worship her;
and it is quite vain to ask me to tell you how to build to _her_; you
know far better than I.

There might, indeed, on some theories, be a conceivably good
architecture for Exchanges--that is to say, if there were any heroism
in the fact or deed of exchange which might be typically carved on the
outside of your building. For, you know, all beautiful architecture
must be adorned with sculpture or painting; and for sculpture or
painting, you must have a subject. And hitherto it has been a received
opinion among the nations of the world that the only right subjects
for either, were _heroisms_ of some sort. Even on his pots and his
flagons, the Greek put a Hercules slaying lions, or an Apollo slaying
serpents, or Bacchus slaying melancholy giants, and earthborn
despondencies. On his temples, the Greek put contests of great
warriors in founding states, or of gods with evil spirits. On his
houses and temples alike, the Christian put carvings of angels
conquering devils; or of hero-martyrs exchanging this world for
another: subject inappropriate, I think, to our manner of exchange
here. And the Master of Christians not only left His followers without
any orders as to the sculpture of affairs of exchange on the outside
of buildings, but gave some strong evidence of His dislike of affairs
of exchange within them.[216] And yet there might surely be a heroism
in such affairs; and all commerce become a kind of selling of doves,
not impious. The wonder has always been great to me, that heroism has
never been supposed to be in any wise consistent with the practice of
supplying people with food, or clothes; but rather with that of
quartering one's self upon them for food, and stripping them of their
clothes. Spoiling of armour is an heroic deed in all ages; but the
selling of clothes, old, or new, has never taken any colour of
magnanimity. Yet one does not see why feeding the hungry and clothing
the naked should ever become base businesses, even when engaged in on
a large scale. If one could contrive to attach the notion of conquest
to them anyhow! so that, supposing there were anywhere an obstinate
race, who refused to be comforted, one might take some pride in giving
them compulsory comfort! and, as it were, "_occupying_ a country" with
one's gifts, instead of one's armies? If one could only consider it as
much a victory to get a barren field sown, as to get an eared field
stripped; and contend who should build villages, instead of who should
"carry" them! Are not all forms of heroism conceivable in doing these
serviceable deeds? You doubt who is strongest? It might be ascertained
by push of spade, as well as push of sword. Who is wisest? There are
witty things to be thought of in planning other business than
campaigns. Who is bravest? There are always the elements to fight
with, stronger than men; and nearly as merciless.

The only absolutely and unapproachably heroic element in the soldier's
work seems to be--that he is paid little for it--and regularly: while
you traffickers, and exchangers, and others occupied in presumably
benevolent business, like to be paid much for it--and by chance. I
never can make out how it is that a _knight_-errant does not expect to
be paid for his trouble, but a _pedlar_-errant always does;--that
people are willing to take hard knocks for nothing, but never to sell
ribands cheap; that they are ready to go on fervent crusades, to
recover the tomb of a buried God, but never on any travels to fulfil
the orders of a living one;--that they will go anywhere barefoot to
preach their faith, but must be well bribed to practise it, and are
perfectly ready to give the Gospel gratis, but never the loaves and
fishes.

If you chose to take the matter up on any such soldierly principle; to
do your commerce, and your feeding of nations, for fixed salaries; and
to be as particular about giving people the best food, and the best
cloth, as soldiers are about giving them the best gunpowder, I could
carve something for you on your exchange worth looking at. But I can
only at present suggest decorating its frieze with pendant purses; and
making its pillars broad at the base, for the sticking of bills. And
in the innermost chambers of it there might be a statue of Britannia
of the Market, who may have, perhaps advisably, a partridge for her
crest, typical at once of her courage in fighting for noble ideas, and
of her interest in game; and round its neck, the inscription in golden
letters, "Perdix fovit quæ non peperit."[217] Then, for her spear, she
might have a weaver's beam; and on her shield, instead of St. George's
Cross, the Milanese boar, semi-fleeced, with the town of Gennesaret
proper, in the field; and the legend, "In the best market,"[218] and
her corslet, of leather, folded over her heart in the shape of a
purse, with thirty slits in it, for a piece of money to go in at, on
each day of the month. And I doubt not but that people would come to
see your exchange, and its goddess, with applause.

Nevertheless, I want to point out to you certain strange characters in
this goddess of yours. She differs from the great Greek and Mediæval
deities essentially in two things--first, as to the continuance of her
presumed power; secondly, as to the extent of it.

1st, as to the Continuance.

The Greek Goddess of Wisdom gave continual increase of wisdom, as the
Christian Spirit of Comfort (or Comforter) continual increase of
comfort. There was no question, with these, of any limit or cessation
of function. But with your Agora Goddess, that is just the most
important question. Getting on--but where to? Gathering together--but
how much? Do you mean to gather always--never to spend? If so, I wish
you joy of your goddess, for I am just as well off as you, without the
trouble of worshipping her at all. But if you do not spend, somebody
else will--somebody else must. And it is because of this (among many
other such errors) that I have fearlessly declared your so-called
science of Political Economy to be no science; because, namely, it has
omitted the study of exactly the most important branch of the
business--the study of _spending_. For spend you must, and as much as
you make, ultimately. You gather corn:--will you bury England under a
heap of grain; or will you, when you have gathered, finally eat? You
gather gold:--will you make your house-roofs of it, or pave your
streets with it? That is still one way of spending it. But if you keep
it, that you may get more, I'll give you more; I'll give you all the
gold you want--all you can imagine--if you can tell me what you'll do
with it. You shall have thousands of gold-pieces;--thousands of
thousands--millions--mountains, of gold: where will you keep them?
Will you put an Olympus of silver upon a golden Pelion--make Ossa like
a wart?[219] Do you think the rain and dew would then come down to
you, in the streams from such mountains, more blessedly than they will
down the mountains which God has made for you, of moss and whinstone?
But it is not gold that you want to gather! What is it? greenbacks?
No; not those neither. What is it then--is it ciphers after a capital
I? Cannot you practise writing ciphers, and write as many as you want?
Write ciphers for an hour every morning, in a big book, and say every
evening, I am worth all those noughts more than I was yesterday. Won't
that do? Well, what in the name of Plutus is it you want? Not gold,
not greenbacks, not ciphers after a capital I? You will have to
answer, after all, "No; we want, somehow or other, money's _worth_."
Well, what is that? Let your Goddess of Getting-on discover it, and
let her learn to stay therein.

2d. But there is yet another question to be asked respecting this
Goddess of Getting-on. The first was of the continuance of her power;
the second is of its extent.

Pallas and the Madonna were supposed to be all the world's Pallas, and
all the world's Madonna. They could teach all men, and they could
comfort all men. But, look strictly into the nature of the power of
your Goddess of Getting-on; and you will find she is the Goddess--not
of everybody's getting on--but only of somebody's getting on. This is
a vital, or rather deathful, distinction. Examine it in your own ideal
of the state of national life which this Goddess is to evoke and
maintain. I asked you what it was, when I was last here;--you have
never told me.[220] Now, shall I try to tell you?

Your ideal of human life then is, I think, that it should be passed in
a pleasant undulating world, with iron and coal everywhere underneath
it. On each pleasant bank of this world is to be a beautiful mansion,
with two wings; and stables, and coach-houses; a moderately-sized
park; a large garden and hot-houses; and pleasant carriage drives
through the shrubberies In this mansion are to live the favoured
votaries of the Goddess; the English gentleman, with his gracious
wife, and his beautiful family; always able to have the boudoir and
the jewels for the wife, and the beautiful ball dresses for the
daughters, and hunters for the sons, and a shooting in the Highlands
for himself. At the bottom of the bank, is to be the mill; not less
than a quarter of a mile long, with a steam engine at each end, and
two in the middle, and a chimney three hundred feet high. In this mill
are to be in constant employment from eight hundred to a thousand
workers, who never drink, never strike, always go to church on Sunday,
and always express themselves in respectful language.

Is not that, broadly, and in the main features, the kind of thing you
propose to yourselves? It is very pretty indeed seen from above; not
at all so pretty, seen from below. For, observe, while to one family
this deity is indeed the Goddess of Getting-on, to a thousand families
she is the Goddess of _not_ Getting-on. "Nay," you say, "they have all
their chance." Yes, so has every one in a lottery, but there must
always be the same number of blanks. "Ah! but in a lottery it is not
skill and intelligence which take the lead, but blind chance." What
then! do you think the old practice, that "they should take who have
the power, and they should keep who can,"[221] is less iniquitous,
when the power has become power of brains instead of fist? and that,
though we may not take advantage of a child's or a woman's weakness,
we may of a man's foolishness? "Nay, but finally, work must be done,
and some one must be at the top, some one at the bottom." Granted, my
friends. Work must always be, and captains of work must always be; and
if you in the least remember the tone of any of my writings, you must
know that they are thought unfit for this age, because they are always
insisting on need of government, and speaking with scorn of liberty.
But I beg you to observe that there is a wide difference between being
captains or governors of work, and taking the profits of it. It does
not follow, because you are general of an army, that you are to take
all the treasure, or land, it wins; (if it fight for treasure or
land;) neither, because you are king of a nation, that you are to
consume all the profits of the nation's work. Real kings, on the
contrary, are known invariably by their doing quite the reverse of
this,--by their taking the least possible quantity of the nation's
work for themselves. There is no test of real kinghood so infallible
as that. Does the crowned creature live simply, bravely,
unostentatiously? probably he _is_ a King. Does he cover his body with
jewels, and his table with delicates? in all probability he is _not_ a
King. It is possible he may be, as Solomon was; but that is when the
nation shares his splendour with him. Solomon made gold, not only to
be in his own palace as stones, but to be in Jerusalem as stones.[222]
But, even so, for the most part, these splendid kinghoods expire in
ruin, and only the true king-hoods live, which are of royal labourers
governing loyal labourers; who, both leading rough lives, establish
the true dynasties. Conclusively you will find that because you are
king of a nation, it does not follow that you are to gather for
yourself all the wealth of that nation; neither, because you are king
of a small part of the nation, and lord over the means of its
maintenance--over field, or mill, or mine,--are you to take all the
produce of that piece of the foundation of national existence for
yourself.

You will tell me I need not preach against these things, for I cannot
mend them. No, good friends, I cannot; but you can, and you will; or
something else can and will. Even good things have no abiding
power--and shall these evil things persist in victorious evil? All
history shows, on the contrary, that to be the exact thing they never
can do. Change _must_ come; but it is ours to determine whether change
of growth, or change of death. Shall the Parthenon be in ruins on its
rock, and Bolton priory[223] in its meadow, but these mills of yours
be the consummation of the buildings of the earth, and their wheels be
as the wheels of eternity? Think you that "men may come, and men may
go," but--mills--go on for ever?[224] Not so; out of these, better or
worse shall come; and it is for you to choose which.

I know that none of this wrong is done with deliberate purpose. I
know, on the contrary, that you wish your workmen well; that you do
much for them, and that you desire to do more for them, if you saw
your way to such benevolence safely. I know that even all this wrong
and misery are brought about by a warped sense of duty, each of you
striving to do his best; but, unhappily, not knowing for whom this
best should be done. And all our hearts have been betrayed by the
plausible impiety of the modern economist, telling us that, "To do the
best for ourselves, is finally to do the best for others." Friends,
our great Master said not so; and most absolutely we shall find this
world is not made so. Indeed, to do the best for others, is finally to
do the best for ourselves; but it will not do to have our eyes fixed
on that issue. The Pagans had got beyond that. Hear what a Pagan says
of this matter; hear what were, perhaps, the last written words of
Plato,--if not the last actually written (for this we cannot know),
yet assuredly in fact and power his parting words--in which,
endeavouring to give full crowning and harmonious close to all his
thoughts, and to speak the sum of them by the imagined sentence of the
Great Spirit, his strength and his heart fail him, and the words
cease, broken off for ever. They are at the close of the dialogue
called _Critias_, in which he describes, partly from real tradition,
partly in ideal dream, the early state of Athens; and the genesis, and
order, and religion, of the fabled isle of Atlantis; in which genesis
he conceives the same first perfection and final degeneracy of man,
which in our own Scriptural tradition is expressed by saying that the
Sons of God inter-married with the daughters of men,[225] for he
supposes the earliest race to have been indeed the children of God;
and to have corrupted themselves, until "their spot was not the spot
of his children."[226] And this, he says, was the end; that indeed
"through many generations, so long as the God's nature in them yet was
full, they were submissive to the sacred laws, and carried themselves
lovingly to all that had kindred with them in divineness; for their
uttermost spirit was faithful and true, and in every wise great; so
that, in _all meekness of wisdom, they dealt with each other_, and
took all the chances of life; and despising all things except virtue,
they cared little what happened day by day, and _bore lightly the
burden_ of gold and of possessions; for they saw that, if _only their
common love and virtue increased, all these things would be increased
together with them_; but to set their esteem and ardent pursuit upon
material possession would be to lose that first, and their virtue and
affection together with it. And by such reasoning, and what of the
divine nature remained in them, they gained all this greatness of
which we have already told; but when the God's part of them faded and
became extinct, being mixed again and again, and effaced by the
prevalent mortality; and the human nature at last exceeded, they then
became unable to endure the courses of fortune; and fell into
shapelessness of life, and baseness in the sight of him who could see,
having lost everything that was fairest of their honour; while to the
blind hearts which could not discern the true life, tending to
happiness, it seemed that they were then chiefly noble and happy,
being filled with an iniquity of inordinate possession and power.
Whereupon, the God of Gods, whose Kinghood is in laws, beholding a
once just nation thus cast into misery, and desiring to lay such
punishment upon them as might make them repent into restraining,
gathered together all the gods into his dwelling-place, which from
heaven's centre overlooks whatever has part in creation; and having
assembled them, he said "--

The rest is silence. Last words of the chief wisdom of the heathen,
spoken of this idol of riches; this idol of yours; this golden image,
high by measureless cubits, set up where your green fields of England
are furnace-burnt into the likeness of the plain of Dura:[227] this
idol, forbidden to us, first of all idols, by our own Master and
faith; forbidden to us also by every human lip that has ever, in any
age or people, been accounted of as able to speak according to the
purposes of God. Continue to make that forbidden deity your principal
one, and soon no more art, no more science, no more pleasure will be
possible. Catastrophe will come; or, worse than catastrophe, slow
mouldering and withering into Hades. But if you can fix some
conception of a true human state of life to be striven for--life, good
for all men, as for yourselves; if you can determine some honest and
simple order of existence; following those trodden ways of wisdom,
which are pleasantness,[228] and seeking her quiet and withdrawn
paths, which are peace;--then, and so sanctifying wealth into
"commonwealth," all your art, your literature, your daily labours,
your domestic affection, and citizen's duty, will join and increase
into one magnificent harmony. You will know then how to build, well
enough; you will build with stone well, but with flesh better; temples
not made with hands,[229] but riveted of hearts; and that kind of
marble, crimson-veined, is indeed eternal.


  [202] Delivered in the Town Hall, Bradford, April 21, 1864.

  [203] _Matthew_ v, 6.

  [204] Scott's _Lay of the Last Minstrel_, canto 1, stanza 4.

  [205] The reference was to the reluctance of this country to take
  arms in defence of Denmark against Prussia and Austria. [Cook and
  Wedderburn.]

  [206] See, e.g., pp. 167 ff. and 270 ff.

  [207] Inigo Jones [1573-1652] and Sir Christopher Wren [1632-1723]
  were the best known architects of their respective generations.

  [208] _Genesis_ xxviii, 17.

  [209] _Matthew_ xxiv, 27.

  [210] _Matthew_ vi, 6.

  [211] And all other arts, for the most part; even of incredulous
  and secularly-minded commonalties. [Ruskin.]

  [212] 1 _Corinthians_ i, 23.

  [213] For further interpretation of Greek mythology see Ruskin's
  _Queen of the Air_.

  [214] It is an error to suppose that the Greek worship, or seeking,
  was chiefly of Beauty. It was essentially of Rightness and
  Strength, founded on Forethought: the principal character of Greek
  art is not beauty, but design: and the Dorian Apollo-worship and
  Athenian Virgin-worship are both expressions of adoration of divine
  wisdom and purity. Next to these great deities, rank, in power over
  the national mind, Dionysus and Ceres, the givers of human strength
  and life; then, for heroic example, Hercules. There is no
  Venus-worship among the Greeks in the great times: and the Muses
  are essentially teachers of Truth, and of its harmonies. [Ruskin.]

  [215] Tetzel's trading in Papal indulgences aroused Luther to the
  protest which ended in the Reformation.

  [216] _Matthew_ xxi, 12.

  [217] _Jeremiah_ xvii, 11 (best in Septuagint and Vulgate). "As the
  partridge, fostering what she brought not forth, so he that getteth
  riches not by right shall leave them in the midst of his days, and
  at his end shall be a fool." [Ruskin.]

  [218] Meaning, fully, "We have brought our pigs to it." [Ruskin.]

  [219] Cf. _Hamlet_, 5. 1. 306.

  [220] Referring to a lecture on _Modern Manufacture and Design_,
  delivered at Bradford, March 1, 1859 published later as Lecture III
  in _The Two Paths_.

  [221] See Wordsworth's _Rob Roy's Grave_, 39-40.

  [222] 1 Kings x, 27.

  [223] A beautiful ruin in Yorkshire.

  [224] Cf. Tennyson's _The Brook_.

  [225] _Genesis_ vi, 2.

  [226] _Deuteronomy_ xxxii, 5.

  [227] _Daniel_ iii, 1.

  [228] _Proverbs_ iii, 17.

  [229] _Acts_ vii, 48.




LIFE AND ITS ARTS


    This lecture, the full title of which is "The Mystery of Life and
    its Arts," was delivered in Dublin on May 13, 1868. It composed
    one of a series of afternoon lectures on various subjects,
    religion excepted, arranged by some of the foremost residents in
    Dublin. The latter half of the lecture is included in the present
    volume of selections. The first publication of the lecture was as
    an additional part to a revised edition of _Sesame and Lilies_ in
    1871. Ruskin took exceptional care in writing "The Mystery of
    Life": he once said in conversation, "I put into it all that I
    know," and in the preface to it when published he tells us that
    certain passages of it "contain the best expression I have yet
    been able to put in words of what, so far as is within my power, I
    mean henceforward both to do myself, and to plead with all over
    whom I have any influence to do according to their means." Sir
    Leslie Stephen says this "is, to my mind, the most perfect of his
    essays." In later editions of _Sesame and Lilies_ this lecture was
    withdrawn. At the time the lecture was delivered its tone was
    characteristic of Ruskin's own thought and of the attitude he then
    took toward the public.

We have sat at the feet of the poets who sang of heaven, and they have
told us their dreams. We have listened to the poets who sang of earth,
and they have chanted to us dirges and words of despair. But there is
one class of men more:--men, not capable of vision, nor sensitive to
sorrow, but firm of purpose--practised in business; learned in all
that can be, (by handling,) known. Men, whose hearts and hopes are
wholly in this present world, from whom, therefore, we may surely
learn, at least, how, at present, conveniently to live in it. What
will _they_ say to us, or show us by example? These kings--these
councillors--these statesmen and builders of kingdoms--these
capitalists and men of business, who weigh the earth, and the dust of
it, in a balance.[230] They know the world, surely; and what is the
mystery of life to us, is none to them. They can surely show us how to
live, while we live, and to gather out of the present world what is
best.

I think I can best tell you their answer, by telling you a dream I had
once. For though I am no poet, I have dreams sometimes:--I dreamed I
was at a child's May-day party, in which every means of entertainment
had been provided for them, by a wise and kind host. It was in a
stately house, with beautiful gardens attached to it; and the children
had been set free in the rooms and gardens, with no care whatever but
how to pass their afternoon rejoicingly. They did not, indeed, know
much about what was to happen next day; and some of them, I thought,
were a little frightened, because there was a chance of their being
sent to a new school where there were examinations; but they kept the
thoughts of that out of their heads as well as they could, and
resolved to enjoy themselves. The house, I said, was in a beautiful
garden, and in the garden were all kinds of flowers; sweet, grassy
banks for rest; and smooth lawns for play; and pleasant streams and
woods; and rocky places for climbing. And the children were happy for
a little while, but presently they separated themselves into parties;
and then each party declared it would have a piece of the garden for
its own, and that none of the others should have anything to do with
that piece. Next, they quarrelled violently which pieces they would
have; and at last the boys took up the thing, as boys should do,
"practically," and fought in the flower-beds till there was hardly a
flower left standing; then they trampled down each other's bits of the
garden out of spite; and the girls cried till they could cry no more;
and so they all lay down at last breathless in the ruin, and waited
for the time when they were to be taken home in the evening.[231]

Meanwhile, the children in the house had been making themselves happy
also in their manner. For them, there had been provided every kind of
in-door pleasure: there was music for them to dance to; and the
library was open, with all manner of amusing books; and there was a
museum full of the most curious shells, and animals, and birds; and
there was a workshop, with lathes and carpenters' tools, for the
ingenious boys; and there were pretty fantastic dresses, for the girls
to dress in; and there were microscopes, and kaleidoscopes; and
whatever toys a child could fancy; and a table, in the dining-room,
loaded with everything nice to eat.

But, in the midst of all this, it struck two or three of the more
"practical" children, that they would like some of the brass-headed
nails that studded the chairs; and so they set to work to pull them
out. Presently, the others, who were reading, or looking at shells,
took a fancy to do the like; and, in a little while, all the children,
nearly, were spraining their fingers, in pulling out brass-headed
nails. With all that they could pull out, they were not satisfied; and
then, everybody wanted some of somebody else's. And at last, the
really practical and sensible ones declared, that nothing was of any
real consequence, that afternoon, except to get plenty of brass-headed
nails; and that the books, and the cakes, and the microscopes were of
no use at all in themselves, but only, if they could be exchanged for
nail-heads. And at last they began to fight for nail-heads, as the
others fought for the bits of garden. Only here and there, a despised
one shrank away into a corner, and tried to get a little quiet with a
book, in the midst of the noise; but all the practical ones thought of
nothing else but counting nail-heads all the afternoon--even though
they knew they would not be allowed to carry so much as one brass knob
away with them. But no--it was--"who has most nails? I have a hundred,
and you have fifty; or, I have a thousand, and you have two. I must
have as many as you before I leave the house, or I cannot possibly go
home in peace." At last, they made so much noise that I awoke, and
thought to myself, "What a false dream that is, of _children!_" The
child is the father of the man;[232] and wiser. Children never do such
foolish things. Only men do.

But there is yet one last class of persons to be interrogated. The
wise religious men we have asked in vain; the wise contemplative men,
in vain; the wise worldly men, in vain. But there is another group
yet. In the midst of this vanity of empty religion--of tragic
contemplation--of wrathful and wretched ambition, and dispute for
dust, there is yet one great group of persons, by whom all these
disputers live--the persons who have determined, or have had it by a
beneficent Providence determined for them, that they will do something
useful; that whatever may be prepared for them hereafter, or happen to
them here, they will, at least, deserve the food that God gives them
by winning it honourably: and that, however fallen from the purity, or
far from the peace, of Eden, they will carry out the duty of human
dominion, though they have lost its felicity; and dress and keep the
wilderness,[233] though they no more can dress or keep the garden.

These,--hewers of wood, and drawers of water,[234]--these, bent under
burdens, or torn of scourges--these, that dig and weave--that plant
and build; workers in wood, and in marble, and in iron--by whom all
food, clothing, habitation, furniture, and means of delight are
produced, for themselves, and for all men beside; men, whose deeds are
good, though their words may be few; men, whose lives are serviceable,
be they never so short, and worthy of honour, be they never so
humble;--from these, surely, at least, we may receive some clear
message of teaching; and pierce, for an instant, into the mystery of
life, and of its arts.

Yes; from these, at last, we do receive a lesson. But I grieve to say,
or rather--for that is the deeper truth of the matter--I rejoice to
say--this message of theirs can only be received by joining them--not
by thinking about them.

You sent for me to talk to you of art; and I have obeyed you in
coming. But the main thing I have to tell you is,--that art must not
be talked about. The fact that there is talk about it at all,
signifies that it is ill done, or cannot be done. No true painter ever
speaks, or ever has spoken, much of his art. The greatest speak
nothing. Even Reynolds is no exception, for he wrote of all that he
could not himself do,[235] and was utterly silent respecting all that he
himself did.

The moment a man can really do his work he becomes speechless about
it. All words become idle to him--all theories.

Does a bird need to theorize about building its nest, or boast of it
when built? All good work is essentially done that way--without
hesitation, without difficulty, without boasting; and in the doers of
the best, there is an inner and involuntary power which approximates
literally to the instinct of an animal--nay, I am certain that in the
most perfect human artists, reason does _not_ supersede instinct, but
is added to an instinct as much more divine than that of the lower
animals as the human body is more beautiful than theirs; that a great
singer sings not with less instinct than the nightingale, but with
more--only more various, applicable, and governable; that a great
architect does not build with less instinct than the beaver or the
bee, but with more--with an innate cunning of proportion that embraces
all beauty, and a divine ingenuity of skill that improvises all
construction. But be that as it may--be the instinct less or more than
that of inferior animals--like or unlike theirs, still the human art
is dependent on that first, and then upon an amount of practice, of
science,--and of imagination disciplined by thought, which the true
possessor of it knows to be incommunicable, and the true critic of it,
inexplicable, except through long process of laborious years. That
journey of life's conquest, in which hills over hills, and Alps on
Alps arose, and sank,--do you think you can make another trace it
painlessly, by talking? Why, you cannot even carry us up an Alp, by
talking. You can guide us up it, step by step, no otherwise--even so,
best silently. You girls, who have been among the hills, know how the
bad guide chatters and gesticulates, and it is "put your foot here";
and "mind how you balance yourself there"; but the good guide walks on
quietly, without a word, only with his eyes on you when need is, and
his arm like an iron bar, if need be.

In that slow way, also, art can be taught--if you have faith in your
guide, and will let his arm be to you as an iron bar when need is. But
in what teacher of art have you such faith? Certainly not in me; for,
as I told you at first, I know well enough it is only because you
think I can talk, not because you think I know my business, that you
let me speak to you at all. If I were to tell you anything that seemed
to you strange, you would not believe it, and yet it would only be in
telling you strange things that I could be of use to you. I could be
of great use to you--infinite use--with brief saying, if you would
believe it; but you would not, just because the thing that would be of
real use would displease you. You are all wild, for instance, with
admiration of Gustave Doré. Well, suppose I were to tell you, in the
strongest terms I could use, that Gustave Doré's art was bad--bad, not
in weakness,--not in failure,--but bad with dreadful power--the power
of the Furies and the Harpies mingled, enraging, and polluting; that
so long as you looked at it, no perception of pure or beautiful art
was possible for you. Suppose I were to tell you that! What would be
the use? Would you look at Gustave Doré less? Rather, more, I fancy.
On the other hand, I could soon put you into good humour with me, if I
chose. I know well enough what you like, and how to praise it to your
better liking. I could talk to you about moonlight, and twilight, and
spring flowers, and autumn leaves, and the Madonnas of Raphael--how
motherly! and the Sibyls of Michael Angelo--how majestic! and the
Saints of Angelico--how pious! and the Cherubs of Correggio--how
delicious! Old as I am, I could play you a tune on the harp yet, that
you would dance to. But neither you nor I should be a bit the better
or wiser; or, if we were, our increased wisdom could be of no
practical effect. For, indeed, the arts, as regards teachableness,
differ from the sciences also in this, that their power is founded not
merely on facts which can be communicated, but on dispositions which
require to be created. Art is neither to be achieved by effort of
thinking, nor explained by accuracy of speaking. It is the instinctive
and necessary result of power, which can only be developed through the
mind of successive generations, and which finally burst into life
under social conditions as slow of growth as the faculties they
regulate. Whole æras of mighty history are summed, and the passions of
dead myriads are concentrated, in the existence of a noble art; and if
that noble art were among us, we should feel it and rejoice; not
caring in the least to hear lectures on it; and since it is not among
us, be assured we have to go back to the root of it, or, at least, to
the place where the stock of it is yet alive, and the branches began
to die.

And now, may I have your pardon for pointing out, partly with
reference to matters which are at this time of greater moment than the
arts--that if we undertook such recession to the vital germ of
national arts that have decayed, we should find a more singular arrest
of their power in Ireland than in any other European country. For in
the eighth century Ireland possessed a school of art in her
manuscripts and sculpture, which, in many of its qualities--apparently
in all essential qualities of decorative invention--was quite without
rival; seeming as if it might have advanced to the highest triumphs in
architecture and in painting. But there was one fatal flaw in its
nature, by which it was stayed, and stayed with a conspicuousness of
pause to which there is no parallel: so that, long ago, in tracing the
progress of European schools from infancy to strength, I chose for the
students of Kensington, in a lecture since published, two
characteristic examples of early art, of equal skill; but in the one
case, skill which was progressive--in the other, skill which was at
pause. In the one case, it was work receptive of correction--hungry
for correction; and in the other, work which inherently rejected
correction. I chose for them a corrigible Eve, and an incorrigible
Angel, and I grieve to say[236] that the incorrigible Angel was also an
Irish angel!

And the fatal difference lay wholly in this. In both pieces of art
there was an equal falling short of the needs of fact; but the
Lombardic Eve knew she was in the wrong, and the Irish Angel thought
himself all right. The eager Lombardic sculptor, though firmly
insisting on his childish idea, yet showed in the irregular broken
touches of the features, and the imperfect struggle for softer lines
in the form, a perception of beauty and law that he could not render;
there was the strain of effort, under conscious imperfection, in every
line. But the Irish missal-painter had drawn his angel with no sense
of failure, in happy complacency, and put red dots into the palms of
each hand, and rounded the eyes into perfect circles, and, I regret to
say, left the mouth out altogether, with perfect satisfaction to
himself.

May I without offence ask you to consider whether this mode of arrest
in ancient Irish art may not be indicative of points of character
which even yet, in some measure, arrest your national power? I have
seen much of Irish character, and have watched it closely, for I have
also much loved it. And I think the form of failure to which it is
most liable is this,--that being generous-hearted, and wholly
intending always to do right, it does not attend to the external laws
of right, but thinks it must necessarily do right because it means to
do so, and therefore does wrong without finding it out; and then, when
the consequences of its wrong come upon it, or upon others connected
with it, it cannot conceive that the wrong is in any wise of its
causing or of its doing, but flies into wrath, and a strange agony of
desire for justice, as feeling itself wholly innocent, which leads it
farther astray, until there is nothing that it is not capable of doing
with a good conscience.

But mind, I do not mean to say that, in past or present relations
between Ireland and England, you have been wrong, and we right. Far
from that, I believe that in all great questions of principle, and in
all details of administration of law, you have been usually right, and
we wrong; sometimes in misunderstanding you, sometimes in resolute
iniquity to you. Nevertheless, in all disputes between states, though
the strongest is nearly always mainly in the wrong, the weaker is
often so in a minor degree; and I think we sometimes admit the
possibility of our being in error, and you never do.[237]

And now, returning to the broader question, what these arts and
labours of life have to teach us of its mystery, this is the first of
their lessons--that the more beautiful the art, the more it is
essentially the work of people who _feel themselves wrong_;--who are
striving for the fulfilment of a law, and the grasp of a loveliness,
which they have not yet attained, which they feel even farther and
farther from attaining the more they strive for it. And yet, in still
deeper sense, it is the work of people who know also that they are
right. The very sense of inevitable error from their purpose marks the
perfectness of that purpose, and the continued sense of failure arises
from the continued opening of the eyes more clearly to all the
sacredest laws of truth.

This is one lesson. The second is a very plain, and greatly precious
one: namely,--that whenever the arts and labours of life are fulfilled
in this spirit of striving against misrule, and doing whatever we have
to do, honourably and perfectly, they invariably bring happiness, as
much as seems possible to the nature of man. In all other paths by
which that happiness is pursued there is disappointment, or
destruction: for ambition and for passion there is no rest--no
fruition; the fairest pleasures of youth perish in a darkness greater
than their past light; and the loftiest and purest love too often does
but inflame the cloud of life with endless fire of pain. But,
ascending from lowest to highest, through every scale of human
industry, that industry worthily followed, gives peace. Ask the
labourer in the field, at the forge, or in the mine; ask the patient,
delicate-fingered artisan, or the strong-armed, fiery-hearted worker
in bronze, and in marble, and in the colours of light; and none of
these, who are true workmen, will ever tell you, that they have found
the law of heaven an unkind one--that in the sweat of their face they
should eat bread, till they return to the ground;[238] nor that they
ever found it an unrewarded obedience, if, indeed, it was rendered
faithfully to the command--"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do--do it
with thy might."[239]

These are the two great and constant lessons which our labourers teach
us of the mystery of life. But there is another, and a sadder one,
which they cannot teach us, which we must read on their tombstones.

"Do it with thy might." There have been myriads upon myriads of human
creatures who have obeyed this law--who have put every breath and
nerve of their being into its toil--who have devoted every hour, and
exhausted every faculty--who have bequeathed their unaccomplished
thoughts at death--who, being dead, have yet spoken,[240] by majesty of
memory, and strength of example. And, at last, what has all this
"Might" of humanity accomplished, in six thousand years of labour and
sorrow? What has it _done_? Take the three chief occupations and arts
of men, one by one, and count their achievements. Begin with the
first--the lord of them all--Agriculture. Six thousand years have
passed since we were sent to till the ground, from which we were
taken. How much of it is tilled? How much of that which is, wisely or
well? In the very centre and chief garden of Europe--where the two
forms of parent Christianity have had their fortresses--where the
noble Catholics of the Forest Cantons, and the noble Protestants of
the Vaudois valleys, have maintained, for dateless ages, their faiths
and liberties--there the unchecked Alpine rivers yet run wild in
devastation; and the marshes, which a few hundred men could redeem
with a year's labour, still blast their helpless inhabitants into
fevered idiotism. That is so, in the centre of Europe! While, on the
near coast of Africa, once the Garden of the Hesperides, an Arab
woman, but a few sunsets since, ate her child, for famine. And, with
all the treasures of the East at our feet, we, in our own dominion,
could not find a few grains of rice, for a people that asked of us no
more; but stood by, and saw five hundred thousand of them perish of
hunger.[241]

Then, after agriculture, the art of kings, take the next head of
human arts--weaving; the art of queens, honoured of all noble
Heathen women, in the person of their virgin goddess[242]--honoured
of all Hebrew women, by the word of their wisest king--"She layeth
her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff; she
stretcheth out her hand to the poor. She is not afraid of the snow
for her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
She maketh herself covering of tapestry; her clothing is silk and
purple. She maketh fine linen, and selleth it, and delivereth
girdles unto the merchant."[243] What have we done in all these
thousands of years with this bright art of Greek maid and Christian
matron? Six thousand years of weaving, and have we learned to weave?
Might not every naked wall have been purple with tapestry, and every
feeble breast fenced with sweet colours from the cold? What have we
done? Our fingers are too few, it seems, to twist together some poor
covering for our bodies. We set our streams to work for us, and
choke the air with fire, to turn our pinning-wheels--and,--_are we
yet clothed_? Are not the streets of the capitals of Europe foul
with the sale of cast clouts and rotten rags?[244] Is not the beauty
of your sweet children left in wretchedness of disgrace, while, with
better honour, nature clothes the brood of the bird in its nest, and
the suckling of the wolf in her den? And does not every winter's
snow robe what you have not robed, and shroud what you have not
shrouded; and every winter's wind bear up to heaven its wasted
souls, to witness against you hereafter, by the voice of their
Christ,--"I was naked, and ye clothed me not"?[245]

Lastly--take the Art of Building--the strongest--proudest--most
orderly--most enduring of the arts of man; that of which the produce
is in the surest manner accumulative, and need not perish, or be
replaced; but if once well done, will stand more strongly than the
unbalanced rocks--more prevalently than the crumbling hills. The art
which is associated with all civic pride and sacred principle; with
which men record their power--satisfy their enthusiasm--make sure
their defence--define and make dear their habitation. And in six
thousand years of building, what have we done? Of the greater part of
all that skill and strength, _no_ vestige is left, but fallen stones,
that encumber the fields and impede the streams. But, from this waste
of disorder, and of time, and of rage, what _is_ left to us?
Constructive and progressive creatures that we are, with ruling
brains, and forming hands, capable of fellowship, and thirsting for
fame, can we not contend, in comfort, with the insects of the forest,
or, in achievement, with the worm of the sea? The white surf rages in
vain against the ramparts built by poor atoms of scarcely nascent
life; but only ridges of formless ruin mark the places where once
dwelt our noblest multitudes. The ant and the moth have cells for each
of their young, but our little ones lie in festering heaps, in homes
that consume them like graves; and night by night, from the corners of
our streets, rises up the cry of the homeless--"I was a stranger, and
ye took me not in."[246]

Must it be always thus? Is our life for ever to be without
profit--without possession? Shall the strength of its generations be
as barren as death; or cast away their labour, as the wild fig-tree
casts her untimely figs?[247] Is it all a dream then--the desire of the
eyes and the pride of life--or, if it be, might we not live in nobler
dream than this? The poets and prophets, the wise men, and the
scribes, though they have told us nothing about a life to come, have
told us much about the life that is now. They have had--they
also,--their dreams, and we have laughed at them. They have dreamed of
mercy, and of justice; they have dreamed of peace and good-will; they
have dreamed of labour undisappointed, and of rest undisturbed; they
have dreamed of fulness in harvest, and overflowing in store; they
have dreamed of wisdom in council, and of providence in law; of
gladness of parents, and strength of children, and glory of grey
hairs. And at these visions of theirs we have mocked, and held them
for idle and vain, unreal and unaccomplishable. What have we
accomplished with our realities? Is this what has come of our worldly
wisdom, tried against their folly? this, our mightiest possible,
against their impotent ideal? or, have we only wandered among the
spectra of a baser felicity, and chased phantoms of the tombs, instead
of visions of the Almighty; and walked after the imaginations of our
evil hearts,[248] instead of after the counsels of Eternity, until our
lives--not in the likeness of the cloud of heaven, but of the smoke of
hell--have become "as a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and
then vanisheth away"?[249]

_Does_ it vanish then? Are you sure of that?--sure, that the
nothingness of the grave will be a rest from this troubled
nothingness; and that the coiling shadow, which disquiets itself in
vain, cannot change into the smoke of the torment that ascends for
ever?[250] Will any answer that they _are_ sure of it, and that there
is no fear, nor hope, nor desire, nor labour, whither they go?[251] Be
it so: will you not, then, make as sure of the Life that now is, as
you are of the Death that is to come? Your hearts are wholly in this
world--will you not give them to it wisely, as well as perfectly? And
see, first of all, that you _have_ hearts, and sound hearts, too, to
give. Because you have no heaven to look for, is that any reason that
you should remain ignorant of this wonderful and infinite earth, which
is firmly and instantly given you in possession? Although your days
are numbered, and the following darkness sure, is it necessary that
you should share the degradation of the brute, because you are
condemned to its mortality; or live the life of the moth, and of the
worm, because you are to companion them in the dust? Not so; we may
have but a few thousands of days to spend, perhaps hundreds
only--perhaps tens; nay, the longest of our time and best, looked back
on, will be but as a moment, as the twinkling of an eye; still we are
men, not insects; we are living spirits, not passing clouds. "He
maketh the winds His messengers; the momentary fire, His minister";[252]
and shall we do less than _these_? Let us do the work of men while
we bear the form of them; and, as we snatch our narrow portion of
time out of Eternity, snatch also our narrow inheritance of passion
out of Immortality--even though our lives _be_ as a vapour, that
appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.

But there are some of you who believe not this--who think this
cloud of life has no such close--that it is to float, revealed and
illumined, upon the floor of heaven, in the day when He cometh with
clouds, and every eye shall see Him.[253] Some day, you believe,
within these five, or ten, or twenty years, for every one of us the
judgment will be set, and the books opened.[254] If that be true,
far more than that must be true. Is there but one day of judgment?
Why, for us every day is a day of judgment--every day is a Dies
Iræ,[255] and writes its irrevocable verdict in the flame of its
West. Think you that judgment waits till the doors of the grave are
opened? It waits at the doors of your houses--it waits at the
corners of your streets; we are in the midst of judgment--the
insects that we crush are our judges--the moments that we fret away
are our judges--the elements that feed us, judge, as they
minister--and the pleasures that deceive us, judge as they indulge.
Let us, for our lives, do the work of Men while we bear the form of
them, if indeed those lives are _Not_ as a vapour, and do _Not_
vanish away.

"The work of men"--and what is that? Well, we may any of us know very
quickly, on the condition of being wholly ready to do it. But many of
us are for the most part thinking, not of what we are to do, but of
what we are to get; and the best of us are sunk into the sin of
Ananias,[256] and it is a mortal one--we want to keep back part of the
price; and we continually talk of taking up our cross, as if the only
harm in a cross was the _weight_ of it--as if it was only a thing to
be carried, instead of to be--crucified upon. "They that are His have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts."[257] Does that
mean, think you, that in time of national distress, of religious
trial, of crisis for every interest and hope of humanity--none of us
will cease jesting, none cease idling, none put themselves to any
wholesome work, none take so much as a tag of lace off their footmen's
coats, to save the world? Or does it rather mean, that they are ready
to leave houses, lands, and kindreds--yes, and life, if need be?
Life!--some of us are ready enough to throw that away, joyless as we
have made it. But "_station_ in Life"--how many of us are ready to
quit _that_? Is it not always the great objection, where there is
question of finding something useful to do--"We cannot leave our
stations in Life"?

Those of us who really cannot--that is to say, who can only maintain
themselves by continuing in some business or salaried office, have
already something to do; and all that they have to see to is, that
they do it honestly and with all their might. But with most people who
use that apology, "remaining in the station of life to which
Providence has called them" means keeping all the carriages, and all
the footmen and large houses they can possibly pay for; and, once for
all, I say that if ever Providence _did_ put them into stations of
that sort--which is not at all a matter of certainty--Providence is
just now very distinctly calling them out again. Levi's station in
life was the receipt of custom; and Peter's, the shore of Galilee; and
Paul's, the antechambers of the High Priest,--which "station in life"
each had to leave, with brief notice.

And, whatever our station in life may be, at this crisis, those of us
who mean to fulfil our duty ought first to live on as little as we
can; and, secondly, to do all the wholesome work for it we can, and to
spend all we can spare in doing all the sure good we can.

And sure good is, first in feeding people, then in dressing people,
then in lodging people, and lastly in rightly pleasing people, with
arts, or sciences, or any other subject of thought.

I say first in feeding; and, once for all, do not let yourselves be
deceived by any of the common talk of "indiscriminate charity." The
order to us is not to feed the deserving hungry, nor the industrious
hungry, nor the amiable and well-intentioned hungry, but simply to
feed the hungry.[258] It is quite true, infallibly true, that if any
man will not work, neither should he eat[259]--think of that, and every
time you sit down to your dinner, ladies and gentlemen, say solemnly,
before you ask a blessing, "How much work have I done to-day for my
dinner?" But the proper way to enforce that order on those below you,
as well as on yourselves, is not to leave vagabonds and honest people
to starve together, but very distinctly to discern and seize your
vagabond; and shut your vagabond up out of honest people's way, and
very sternly then see that, until he has worked, he does _not_ eat.
But the first thing is to be sure you have the food to give; and,
therefore, to enforce the organization of vast activities in
agriculture and in commerce, for the production of the wholesomest
food, and proper storing and distribution of it, so that no famine
shall any more be possible among civilized beings There is plenty of
work in this business alone, and at once, for any number of people who
like to engage in it.

Secondly, dressing people--that is to say, urging every one within
reach of your influence to be always neat and clean, and giving them
means of being so. In so far as they absolutely refuse, you must give
up the effort with respect to them, only taking care that no children
within your sphere of influence shall any more be brought up with such
habits; and that every person who is willing to dress with propriety
shall have encouragement to do so. And the first absolutely necessary
step towards this is the gradual adoption of a consistent dress for
different ranks of persons, so that their rank shall be known by their
dress; and the restriction of the changes of fashion within certain
limits. All which appears for the present quite impossible; but it is
only so far even difficult as it is difficult to conquer our vanity,
frivolity, and desire to appear what we are not. And it is not, nor
ever shall be, creed of mine, that these mean and shallow vices are
unconquerable by Christian women.

And then, thirdly, lodging people, which you may think should have
been put first, but I put it third, because we must feed and clothe
people where we find them, and lodge them afterwards. And providing
lodgment for them means a great deal of vigorous legislation, and
cutting down of vested interests that stand in the way, and after
that, or before that, so far as we can get it, thorough sanitary and
remedial action in the houses that we have; and then the building of
more, strongly, beautifully, and in groups of limited extent, kept in
proportion to their streams, and walled round, so that there may be no
festering and wretched suburb anywhere, but clean and busy street
within, and the open country without, with a belt of beautiful garden
and orchard round the walls, so that from any part of the city
perfectly fresh air and grass, and the sight of far horizon, might be
reachable in a few minutes' walk. This is the final aim; but in
immediate action every minor and possible good to be instantly done,
when, and as, we can; roofs mended that have holes in them--fences
patched that have gaps in them--walls buttressed that totter--and
floors propped that shake; cleanliness and order enforced with our own
hands and eyes, till we are breathless, every day. And all the fine
arts will healthily follow. I myself have washed a flight of stone
stairs all down, with bucket and broom, in a Savoy inn, where they
hadn't washed their stairs since they first went up them; and I never
made a better sketch than that afternoon.

These, then, are the three first needs of civilized life; and the law
for every Christian man and woman is, that they shall be in direct
service towards one of these three needs, as far as is consistent with
their own special occupation, and if they have no special business,
then wholly in one of these services. And out of such exertion in
plain duty all other good will come; for in this direct contention
with material evil, you will find out the real nature of all evil; you
will discern by the various kinds of resistance, what is really the
fault and main antagonism to good; also you will find the most
unexpected helps and profound lessons given, and truths will come thus
down to us which the speculation of all our lives would never have
raised us up to. You will find nearly every educational problem
solved, as soon as you truly want to do something; everybody will
become of use in their own fittest way, and will learn what is best
for them to know in that use. Competitive examination will then, and
not till then, be wholesome, because it will be daily, and calm, and
in practice; and on these familiar arts, and minute, but certain and
serviceable knowledges, will be surely edified and sustained the
greater arts and splendid theoretical sciences.

But much more than this. On such holy and simple practice will be
founded, indeed, at last, an infallible religion. The greatest of all
the mysteries of life, and the most terrible, is the corruption of
even the sincerest religion, which is not daily founded on rational,
effective, humble, and helpful action. Helpful action, observe! for
there is just one law, which obeyed, keeps all religions
pure--forgotten, makes them all false. Whenever in any religious
faith, dark or bright, we allow our minds to dwell upon the points in
which we differ from other people, we are wrong, and in the devil's
power. That is the essence of the Pharisee's thanksgiving--"Lord, I
thank Thee that I am not as other men are."[260] At every moment of our
lives we should be trying to find out, not in what we differ with
other people, but in what we agree with them; and the moment we find
we can agree as to anything that should be done, kind or good, (and
who but fools couldn't?) then do it; push at it together: you can't
quarrel in a side-by-side push; but the moment that even the best men
stop pushing, and begin talking, they mistake their pugnacity for
piety, and if's all over. I will not speak of the crimes which in past
times have been committed in the name of Christ, nor of the follies
which are at this hour held to be consistent with obedience to Him;
but I _will_ speak of the morbid corruption and waste of vital power
in religious sentiment, by which the pure strength of that which
should be the guiding soul of every nation, the splendour of its
youthful manhood, and spotless light of its maidenhood, is averted or
cast away. You may see continually girls who have never been taught to
do a single useful thing thoroughly; who cannot sew, who cannot cook,
who cannot cast an account, nor prepare a medicine, whose whole life
has been passed either in play or in pride; you will find girls like
these, when they are earnest-hearted, cast all their innate passion of
religious spirit, which was meant by God to support them through the
irksomeness of daily toil, into grievous and vain meditation over the
meaning of the great Book, of which no syllable was ever yet to be
understood but through a deed; all the instinctive wisdom and mercy of
their womanhood made vain, and the glory of their pure consciences
warped into fruitless agony concerning questions which the laws of
common serviceable life would have either solved for them in an
instant, or kept out of their way. Give such a girl any true work that
will make her active in the dawn, and weary at night, with the
consciousness that her fellow-creatures have indeed been the better
for her day, and the powerless sorrow of her enthusiasm will transform
itself into a majesty of radiant and beneficent peace.

So with our youths. We once taught them to make Latin verses, and
called them educated; now we teach them to leap and to row, to hit a
ball with a bat, and call them educated. Can they plough, can they
sow, can they plant at the right time, or build with a steady hand? Is
it the effort of their lives to be chaste, knightly, faithful, holy in
thought, lovely in word and deed? Indeed it is, with some, nay with
many, and the strength of England is in them, and the hope; but we
have to turn their courage from the toil of war to the toil of mercy;
and their intellect from dispute of words to discernment of things;
and their knighthood from the errantry of adventure to the state and
fidelity of a kingly power. And then, indeed, shall abide, for them,
and for us, an incorruptible felicity, and an infallible religion;
shall abide for us Faith, no more to be assailed by temptation, no
more to be defended by wrath and by fear;--shall abide with us Hope,
no more to be quenched by the years that overwhelm, or made ashamed by
the shadows that betray:--shall abide for us, and with us, the
greatest of these; the abiding will, the abiding name of our Father.
For the greatest of these is Charity.[261]


  [230] _Isaiah_ xl, 12.

  [231] I have sometimes been asked what this means. I intended it to
  set forth the wisdom of men in war contending for kingdoms, and
  what follows to set forth their wisdom in peace, contending for
  wealth. [Ruskin.]

  [232] See Wordsworth's poem, _My heart leaps up when I behold_.

  [233] See _Genesis_ ii, 15, and the opening lines of the first
  selection in this volume.

  [234] _Joshua_ ix, 21.

  [235] In his _Discourses on Art_. Cf. pp. 24 ff. above.

  [236] See _The Two Paths_, §§ 28 _et seq_. [Ruskin.]

  [237] References mainly to the Irish Land Question, on which Ruskin
  agreed with Mill and Gladstone in advocating the establishment of a
  peasant-proprietorship in Ireland.

  [238] _Genesis_ iii, 19.

  [239] _Ecclesiastes_ ix, 10.

  [240] _Hebrews_ xi, 4.

  [241] During the famine in the Indian province of Orissa.

  [242] Athena, goddess of weaving.

  [243] _Proverbs_ xxxi, 19-22, 24.

  [244] _Jeremiah_ xxxviii, 11.

  [245] _Matthew_ xxv, 43.

  [246] _Matthew_ xxv, 43.

  [247] _Revelation_ vi, 13.

  [248] _Jeremiah_ xi, 8.

  [249] _James_ iv, 14.

  [250] _Psalms_ xxxix, 6 and _Revelation_ xiv, 11.

  [251] _Ecclesiastes_ ix, 10.

  [252] _Psalms_ civ, 4.

  [253] _Revelation_ i, 7.

  [254] _Daniel_ vii, 10.

  [255] _Dies Iræ_, the name generally given (from the opening words)
  to the most famous of the mediæval hymns, usually ascribed to the
  Franciscan Thomas of Celano (died c. 1255). It is composed in
  triplets of rhyming trochaic tetrameters, and describes the Last
  Judgment in language of magnificent grandeur, passing into a
  plaintive plea for the souls of the dead.

  [256] _Acts_ v, 1, 2.

  [257] _Galatians_ v. 24.

  [258] _Isaiah_ lviii, 7.

  [259] 2 _Thessalonians_ iii, 10.

  [260] _Luke_ xviii, 11.

  [261] 1 _Corinthians_ xiii, 13.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


_Editions_. The standard edition of Ruskin is that of Cook and
      Wedderburn in 34 volumes. Most of his better-known works may
      be had in cheap and convenient forms.

The best lives are:

COLLINGWOOD, W.G. The Life and Work of John Ruskin Houghton Mifflin
      Company, 1893. (2 vols.) The standard biography.

HARRISON, P. John Ruskin (English Men of Letters). The Macmillan
      Company, 1902. A short and readable biography.






Sesame and Lilies




Contents:

Lecture I--Sesame
Lecture II--Lilies
Preface to the Later Editions
Lecture III--The Mystery of Life and its Arts



LECTURE I--SESAME.  OF KING'S TREASURIES



"You shall each have a cake of sesame,--and ten pound."
Lucian:  The Fisherman.


My first duty this evening is to ask your pardon for the ambiguity
of title under which the subject of lecture has been announced:  for
indeed I am not going to talk of kings, known as regnant, nor of
treasuries, understood to contain wealth; but of quite another order
of royalty, and another material of riches, than those usually
acknowledged.  I had even intended to ask your attention for a
little while on trust, and (as sometimes one contrives, in taking a
friend to see a favourite piece of scenery) to hide what I wanted
most to show, with such imperfect cunning as I might, until we
unexpectedly reached the best point of view by winding paths.  But--
and as also I have heard it said, by men practised in public
address, that hearers are never so much fatigued as by the endeavour
to follow a speaker who gives them no clue to his purpose,--I will
take the slight mask off at once, and tell you plainly that I want
to speak to you about the treasures hidden in books; and about the
way we find them, and the way we lose them.  A grave subject, you
will say; and a wide one!  Yes; so wide that I shall make no effort
to touch the compass of it.  I will try only to bring before you a
few simple thoughts about reading, which press themselves upon me
every day more deeply, as I watch the course of the public mind with
respect to our daily enlarging means of education; and the
answeringly wider spreading on the levels, of the irrigation of
literature.

It happens that I have practically some connexion with schools for
different classes of youth; and I receive many letters from parents
respecting the education of their children.  In the mass of these
letters I am always struck by the precedence which the idea of a
"position in life" takes above all other thoughts in the parents'--
more especially in the mothers'--minds.  "The education befitting
such and such a STATION IN LIFE"--this is the phrase, this the
object, always.  They never seek, as far as I can make out, an
education good in itself; even the conception of abstract rightness
in training rarely seems reached by the writers.  But, an education
"which shall keep a good coat on my son's back;--which shall enable
him to ring with confidence the visitors' bell at double-belled
doors; which shall result ultimately in establishment of a double-
belled door to his own house;--in a word, which shall lead to
advancement in life;--THIS we pray for on bent knees--and this is
ALL we pray for."  It never seems to occur to the parents that there
may be an education which, in itself, IS advancement in Life;--that
any other than that may perhaps be advancement in Death; and that
this essential education might be more easily got, or given, than
they fancy, if they set about it in the right way; while it is for
no price, and by no favour, to be got, if they set about it in the
wrong.

Indeed, among the ideas most prevalent and effective in the mind of
this busiest of countries, I suppose the first--at least that which
is confessed with the greatest frankness, and put forward as the
fittest stimulus to youthful exertion--is this of "Advancement in
life."  May I ask you to consider with me, what this idea
practically includes, and what it should include?

Practically, then, at present, "advancement in life" means, becoming
conspicuous in life; obtaining a position which shall be
acknowledged by others to be respectable or honourable.  We do not
understand by this advancement, in general, the mere making of
money, but the being known to have made it; not the accomplishment
of any great aim, but the being seen to have accomplished it.  In a
word, we mean the gratification of our thirst for applause.  That
thirst, if the last infirmity of noble minds, is also the first
infirmity of weak ones; and, on the whole, the strongest impulsive
influence of average humanity:  the greatest efforts of the race
have always been traceable to the love of praise, as its greatest
catastrophes to the love of pleasure.

I am not about to attack or defend this impulse.  I want you only to
feel how it lies at the root of effort; especially of all modern
effort.  It is the gratification of vanity which is, with us, the
stimulus of toil and balm of repose; so closely does it touch the
very springs of life that the wounding of our vanity is always
spoken of (and truly) as in its measure MORTAL; we call it
"mortification," using the same expression which we should apply to
a gangrenous and incurable bodily hurt.  And although a few of us
may be physicians enough to recognise the various effect of this
passion upon health and energy, I believe most honest men know, and
would at once acknowledge, its leading power with them as a motive.
The seaman does not commonly desire to be made captain only because
he knows he can manage the ship better than any other sailor on
board.  He wants to be made captain that he may be CALLED captain.
The clergyman does not usually want to be made a bishop only because
he believes that no other hand can, as firmly as his, direct the
diocese through its difficulties.  He wants to be made bishop
primarily that he may be called "My Lord."  And a prince does not
usually desire to enlarge, or a subject to gain, a kingdom, because
he believes no one else can as well serve the State, upon its
throne; but, briefly, because he wishes to be addressed as "Your
Majesty," by as many lips as may be brought to such utterance.

This, then, being the main idea of "advancement in life," the force
of it applies, for all of us, according to our station, particularly
to that secondary result of such advancement which we call "getting
into good society."  We want to get into good society, not that we
may have it, but that we may be seen in it; and our notion of its
goodness depends primarily on its conspicuousness.

Will you pardon me if I pause for a moment to put what I fear you
may think an impertinent question?  I never can go on with an
address unless I feel, or know, that my audience are either with me
or against me:  I do not much care which, in beginning; but I must
know where they are; and I would fain find out, at this instant,
whether you think I am putting the motives of popular action too
low.  I am resolved, to-night, to state them low enough to be
admitted as probable; for whenever, in my writings on Political
Economy, I assume that a little honesty, or generosity,--or what
used to be called "virtue,"--may be calculated upon as a human
motive of action, people always answer me, saying, "You must not
calculate on that:  that is not in human nature:  you must not
assume anything to be common to men but acquisitiveness and
jealousy; no other feeling ever has influence on them, except
accidentally, and in matters out of the way of business."  I begin,
accordingly, tonight low in the scale of motives; but I must know if
you think me right in doing so.  Therefore, let me ask those who
admit the love of praise to be usually the strongest motive in men's
minds in seeking advancement, and the honest desire of doing any
kind of duty to be an entirely secondary one, to hold up their
hands.  (About a dozen hands held up--the audience, partly, not
being sure the lecturer is serious, and, partly, shy of expressing
opinion.)  I am quite serious--I really do want to know what you
think; however, I can judge by putting the reverse question.  Will
those who think that duty is generally the first, and love of praise
the second, motive, hold up their hands?  (One hand reported to have
been held up behind the lecturer.)  Very good:  I see you are with
me, and that you think I have not begun too near the ground.  Now,
without teasing you by putting farther question, I venture to assume
that you will admit duty as at least a secondary or tertiary motive.
You think that the desire of doing something useful, or obtaining
some real good, is indeed an existent collateral idea, though a
secondary one, in most men's desire of advancement.  You will grant
that moderately honest men desire place and office, at least in some
measure for the sake of beneficent power; and would wish to
associate rather with sensible and well-informed persons than with
fools and ignorant persons, whether they are seen in the company of
the sensible ones or not.  And finally, without being troubled by
repetition of any common truisms about the preciousness of friends,
and the influence of companions, you will admit, doubtless, that
according to the sincerity of our desire that our friends may be
true, and our companions wise,--and in proportion to the earnestness
and discretion with which we choose both,--will be the general
chances of our happiness and usefulness.

But, granting that we had both the will and the sense to choose our
friends well, how few of us have the power! or, at least, how
limited, for most, is the sphere of choice!  Nearly all our
associations are determined by chance or necessity; and restricted
within a narrow circle.  We cannot know whom we would; and those
whom we know, we cannot have at our side when we most need them.
All the higher circles of human intelligence are, to those beneath,
only momentarily and partially open.  We may, by good fortune,
obtain a glimpse of a great poet, and hear the sound of his voice;
or put a question to a man of science, and be answered good-
humouredly.  We may intrude ten minutes' talk on a cabinet minister,
answered probably with words worse than silence, being deceptive; or
snatch, once or twice in our lives, the privilege of throwing a
bouquet in the path of a princess, or arresting the kind glance of a
queen.  And yet these momentary chances we covet; and spend our
years, and passions, and powers, in pursuit of little more than
these; while, meantime, there is a society continually open to us,
of people who will talk to us as long as we like, whatever our rank
or occupation;--talk to us in the best words they can choose, and of
the things nearest their hearts.  And this society, because it is so
numerous and so gentle, and can be kept waiting round us all day
long,--kings and statesmen lingering patiently, not to grant
audience, but to gain it!--in those plainly furnished and narrow
ante-rooms, our bookcase shelves,--we make no account of that
company,--perhaps never listen to a word they would say, all day
long!

You may tell me, perhaps, or think within yourselves, that the
apathy with which we regard this company of the noble, who are
praying us to listen to them; and the passion with which we pursue
the company, probably of the ignoble, who despise us, or who have
nothing to teach us, are grounded in this,--that we can see the
faces of the living men, and it is themselves, and not their
sayings, with which we desire to become familiar.  But it is not so.
Suppose you never were to see their faces;--suppose you could be put
behind a screen in the statesman's cabinet, or the prince's chamber,
would you not be glad to listen to their words, though you were
forbidden to advance beyond the screen?  And when the screen is only
a little less, folded in two instead of four, and you can be hidden
behind the cover of the two boards that bind a book, and listen all
day long, not to the casual talk, but to the studied, determined,
chosen addresses of the wisest of men;--this station of audience,
and honourable privy council, you despise!

But perhaps you will say that it is because the living people talk
of things that are passing, and are of immediate interest to you,
that you desire to hear them.  Nay; that cannot be so, for the
living people will themselves tell you about passing matters much
better in their writings than in their careless talk.  Yet I admit
that this motive does influence you, so far as you prefer those
rapid and ephemeral writings to slow and enduring writings--books,
properly so called.  For all books are divisible into two classes,
the books of the hour, and the books of all time.  Mark this
distinction--it is not one of quality only.  It is not merely the
bad book that does not last, and the good one that does.  It is a
distinction of species.  There are good books for the hour, and good
ones for all time; bad books for the hour, and bad ones for all
time.  I must define the two kinds before I go farther.

The good book of the hour, then,--I do not speak of the bad ones,--
is simply the useful or pleasant talk of some person whom you cannot
otherwise converse with, printed for you.  Very useful often,
telling you what you need to know; very pleasant often, as a
sensible friend's present talk would be.  These bright accounts of
travels; good-humoured and witty discussions of question; lively or
pathetic story-telling in the form of novel; firm fact-telling, by
the real agents concerned in the events of passing history;--all
these books of the hour, multiplying among us as education becomes
more general, are a peculiar possession of the present age:  we
ought to be entirely thankful for them, and entirely ashamed of
ourselves if we make no good use of them.  But we make the worst
possible use if we allow them to usurp the place of true books:
for, strictly speaking, they are not books at all, but merely
letters or newspapers in good print.  Our friend's letter may be
delightful, or necessary, to-day:  whether worth keeping or not, is
to be considered.  The newspaper may be entirely proper at breakfast
time, but assuredly it is not reading for all day.  So, though bound
up in a volume, the long letter which gives you so pleasant an
account of the inns, and roads, and weather, last year at such a
place, or which tells you that amusing story, or gives you the real
circumstances of such and such events, however valuable for
occasional reference, may not be, in the real sense of the word, a
"book" at all, nor, in the real sense, to be "read."  A book is
essentially not a talking thing, but a written thing; and written,
not with a view of mere communication, but of permanence.  The book
of talk is printed only because its author cannot speak to thousands
of people at once; if he could, he would--the volume is mere
MULTIPLICATION of his voice.  You cannot talk to your friend in
India; if you could, you would; you write instead:  that is mere
CONVEYANCE of voice.  But a book is written, not to multiply the
voice merely, not to carry it merely, but to perpetuate it.  The
author has something to say which he perceives to be true and
useful, or helpfully beautiful.  So far as he knows, no one has yet
said it; so far as he knows, no one else can say it.  He is bound to
say it, clearly and melodiously if he may; clearly at all events.
In the sum of his life he finds this to be the thing, or group of
things, manifest to him;--this, the piece of true knowledge, or
sight, which his share of sunshine and earth has permitted him to
seize.  He would fain set it down for ever; engrave it on rock, if
he could; saying, "This is the best of me; for the rest, I ate, and
drank, and slept, loved, and hated, like another; my life was as the
vapour, and is not; but this I saw and knew:  this, if anything of
mine, is worth your memory."  That is his "writing;" it is, in his
small human way, and with whatever degree of true inspiration is in
him, his inscription, or scripture.  That is a "Book."

Perhaps you think no books were ever so written?

But, again, I ask you, do you at all believe in honesty, or at all
in kindness, or do you think there is never any honesty or
benevolence in wise people?  None of us, I hope, are so unhappy as
to think that.  Well, whatever bit of a wise man's work is honestly
and benevolently done, that bit is his book or his piece of art. {5}
It is mixed always with evil fragments--ill-done, redundant,
affected work.  But if you read rightly, you will easily discover
the true bits, and those ARE the book.

Now books of this kind have been written in all ages by their
greatest men:- by great readers, great statesmen, and great
thinkers.  These are all at your choice; and Life is short.  You
have heard as much before;--yet have you measured and mapped out
this short life and its possibilities?  Do you know, if you read
this, that you cannot read that--that what you lose to-day you
cannot gain to-morrow?  Will you go and gossip with your housemaid,
or your stable-boy, when you may talk with queens and kings; or
flatter yourself that it is with any worthy consciousness of your
own claims to respect, that you jostle with the hungry and common
crowd for ENTREE here, and audience there, when all the while this
eternal court is open to you, with its society, wide as the world,
multitudinous as its days, the chosen, and the mighty, of every
place and time?  Into that you may enter always; in that you may
take fellowship and rank according to your wish; from that, once
entered into it, you can never be outcast but by your own fault; by
your aristocracy of companionship there, your own inherent
aristocracy will be assuredly tested, and the motives with which you
strive to take high place in the society of the living, measured, as
to all the truth and sincerity that are in them, by the place you
desire to take in this company of the Dead.

"The place you desire," and the place you FIT YOURSELF FOR, I must
also say; because, observe, this court of the past differs from all
living aristocracy in this:- it is open to labour and to merit, but
to nothing else.  No wealth will bribe, no name overawe, no artifice
deceive, the guardian of those Elysian gates.  In the deep sense, no
vile or vulgar person ever enters there.  At the portieres of that
silent Faubourg St. Germain, there is but brief question:- "Do you
deserve to enter?  Pass.  Do you ask to be the companion of nobles?
Make yourself noble, and you shall be.  Do you long for the
conversation of the wise?  Learn to understand it, and you shall
hear it.  But on other terms?--no.  If you will not rise to us, we
cannot stoop to you.  The living lord may assume courtesy, the
living philosopher explain his thought to you with considerate pain;
but here we neither feign nor interpret; you must rise to the level
of our thoughts if you would be gladdened by them, and share our
feelings, if you would recognise our presence."

This, then, is what you have to do, and I admit that it is much.
You must, in a word, love these people, if you are to be among them.
No ambition is of any use.  They scorn your ambition.  You must love
them, and show your love in these two following ways.

(1)  First, by a true desire to be taught by them, and to enter into
their thoughts.  To enter into theirs, observe; not to find your own
expressed by them.  If the person who wrote the book is not wiser
than you, you need not read it; if he be, he will think differently
from you in many respects.

(2)  Very ready we are to say of a book, "How good this is--that's
exactly what I think!"  But the right feeling is, "How strange that
is!  I never thought of that before, and yet I see it is true; or if
I do not now, I hope I shall, some day."  But whether thus
submissively or not, at least be sure that you go to the author to
get at HIS meaning, not to find yours.  Judge it afterwards if you
think yourself qualified to do so; but ascertain it first.  And be
sure, also, if the author is worth anything, that you will not get
at his meaning all at once;--nay, that at his whole meaning you will
not for a long time arrive in any wise.  Not that he does not say
what he means, and in strong words too; but he cannot say it all;
and what is more strange, will not, but in a hidden way and in
parables, in order that he may be sure you want it.  I cannot quite
see the reason of this, nor analyse that cruel reticence in the
breasts of wise men which makes them always hide their deeper
thought.  They do not give it you by way of help, but of reward; and
will make themselves sure that you deserve it before they allow you
to reach it.  But it is the same with the physical type of wisdom,
gold.  There seems, to you and me, no reason why the electric forces
of the earth should not carry whatever there is of gold within it at
once to the mountain tops, so that kings and people might know that
all the gold they could get was there; and without any trouble of
digging, or anxiety, or chance, or waste of time, cut it away, and
coin as much as they needed.  But Nature does not manage it so.  She
puts it in little fissures in the earth, nobody knows where:  you
may dig long and find none; you must dig painfully to find any.

And it is just the same with men's best wisdom.  When you come to a
good book, you must ask yourself, "Am I inclined to work as an
Australian miner would?  Are my pickaxes and shovels in good order,
and am I in good trim myself, my sleeves well up to the elbow, and
my breath good, and my temper?"  And, keeping the figure a little
longer, even at cost of tiresomeness, for it is a thoroughly useful
one, the metal you are in search of being the author's mind or
meaning, his words are as the rock which you have to crush and smelt
in order to get at it.  And your pickaxes are your own care, wit,
and learning; your smelting furnace is your own thoughtful soul.  Do
not hope to get at any good author's meaning without those tools and
that fire; often you will need sharpest, finest chiselling, and
patientest fusing, before you can gather one grain of the metal.

And, therefore, first of all, I tell you earnestly and
authoritatively (I KNOW I am right in this), you must get into the
habit of looking intensely at words, and assuring yourself of their
meaning, syllable by syllable--nay, letter by letter.  For though it
is only by reason of the opposition of letters in the function of
signs, to sounds in the function of signs, that the study of books
is called "literature," and that a man versed in it is called, by
the consent of nations, a man of letters instead of a man of books,
or of words, you may yet connect with that accidental nomenclature
this real fact:- that you might read all the books in the British
Museum (if you could live long enough), and remain an utterly
"illiterate," uneducated person; but that if you read ten pages of a
good book, letter by letter,--that is to say, with real accuracy,--
you are for evermore in some measure an educated person.  The entire
difference between education and non-education (as regards the
merely intellectual part of it), consists in this accuracy.  A well-
educated gentleman may not know many languages,--may not be able to
speak any but his own,--may have read very few books.  But whatever
language he knows, he knows precisely; whatever word he pronounces,
he pronounces rightly; above all, he is learned in the PEERAGE of
words; knows the words of true descent and ancient blood, at a
glance, from words of modern canaille; remembers all their ancestry,
their intermarriages, distant relationships, and the extent to which
they were admitted, and offices they held, among the national
noblesse of words at any time, and in any country.  But an
uneducated person may know, by memory, many languages, and talk them
all, and yet truly know not a word of any,--not a word even of his
own.  An ordinarily clever and sensible seaman will be able to make
his way ashore at most ports; yet he has only to speak a sentence of
any language to be known for an illiterate person:  so also the
accent, or turn of expression of a single sentence, will at once
mark a scholar.  And this is so strongly felt, so conclusively
admitted, by educated persons, that a false accent or a mistaken
syllable is enough, in the parliament of any civilized nation, to
assign to a man a certain degree of inferior standing for ever.

And this is right; but it is a pity that the accuracy insisted on is
not greater, and required to a serious purpose.  It is right that a
false Latin quantity should excite a smile in the House of Commons;
but it is wrong that a false English MEANING should NOT excite a
frown there.  Let the accent of words be watched; and closely:  let
their meaning be watched more closely still, and fewer will do the
work.  A few words well chosen, and distinguished, will do work that
a thousand cannot, when every one is acting, equivocally, in the
function of another.  Yes; and words, if they are not watched, will
do deadly work sometimes.  There are masked words droning and
skulking about us in Europe just now,--(there never were so many,
owing to the spread of a shallow, blotching, blundering, infectious
"information," or rather deformation, everywhere, and to the
teaching of catechisms and phrases at school instead of human
meanings)--there are masked words abroad, I say, which nobody
understands, but which everybody uses, and most people will also
fight for, live for, or even die for, fancying they mean this or
that, or the other, of things dear to them:  for such words wear
chameleon cloaks--"ground-lion" cloaks, of the colour of the ground
of any man's fancy:  on that ground they lie in wait, and rend them
with a spring from it.  There never were creatures of prey so
mischievous, never diplomatists so cunning, never poisoners so
deadly, as these masked words; they are the unjust stewards of all
men's ideas:  whatever fancy or favourite instinct a man most
cherishes, he gives to his favourite masked word to take care of for
him; the word at last comes to have an infinite power over him,--you
cannot get at him but by its ministry.

And in languages so mongrel in breed as the English, there is a
fatal power of equivocation put into men's hands, almost whether
they will or no, in being able to use Greek or Latin words for an
idea when they want it to be awful; and Saxon or otherwise common
words when they want it to be vulgar.  What a singular and salutary
effect, for instance, would be produced on the minds of people who
are in the habit of taking the Form of the "Word" they live by, for
the Power of which that Word tells them, if we always either
retained, or refused, the Greek form "biblos," or "biblion," as the
right expression for "book"--instead of employing it only in the one
instance in which we wish to give dignity to the idea, and
translating it into English everywhere else.  How wholesome it would
be for many simple persons if, in such places (for instance) as Acts
xix. 19, we retained the Greek expression, instead of translating
it, and they had to read--"Many of them also which used curious
arts, brought their bibles together, and burnt them before all men;
and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand
pieces of silver"!  Or if, on the other hand, we translated where we
retain it, and always spoke of "The Holy Book," instead of "Holy
Bible," it might come into more heads than it does at present, that
the Word of God, by which the heavens were, of old, and by which
they are now kept in store, {6} cannot be made a present of to
anybody in morocco binding; nor sown on any wayside by help either
of steam plough or steam press; but is nevertheless being offered to
us daily, and by us with contumely refused; and sown in us daily,
and by us, as instantly as may be, choked.

So, again, consider what effect has been produced on the English
vulgar mind by the use of the sonorous Latin form "damno," in
translating the Greek [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], when
people charitably wish to make it forcible; and the substitution of
the temperate "condemn" for it, when they choose to keep it gentle;
and what notable sermons have been preached by illiterate clergymen
on--"He that believeth not shall be damned;" though they would
shrink with horror from translating Heb. xi. 7, "The saving of his
house, by which he damned the world," or John viii. 10-11, "Woman,
hath no man damned thee?  She saith, No man, Lord.  Jesus answered
her, Neither do I damn thee:  go and sin no more."  And divisions in
the mind of Europe, which have cost seas of blood, and in the
defence of which the noblest souls of men have been cast away in
frantic desolation, countless as forest-leaves--though, in the heart
of them, founded on deeper causes--have nevertheless been rendered
practically possible, mainly, by the European adoption of the Greek
word for a public meeting, "ecclesia," to give peculiar
respectability to such meetings, when held for religious purposes;
and other collateral equivocations, such as the vulgar English one
of using the word "Priest" as a contraction for "presbyter."

Now, in order to deal with words rightly, this is the habit you must
form.  Nearly every word in your language has been first a word of
some other language--of Saxon, German, French, Latin, or Greek; (not
to speak of eastern and primitive dialects).  And many words have
been all these--that is to say, have been Greek first, Latin next,
French or German next, and English last:  undergoing a certain
change of sense and use on the lips of each nation; but retaining a
deep vital meaning, which all good scholars feel in employing them,
even at this day.  If you do not know the Greek alphabet, learn it;
young or old--girl or boy--whoever you may be, if you think of
reading seriously (which, of course, implies that you have some
leisure at command), learn your Greek alphabet; then get good
dictionaries of all these languages, and whenever you are in doubt
about a word, hunt it down patiently.  Read Max Muller's lectures
thoroughly, to begin with; and, after that, never let a word escape
you that looks suspicious.  It is severe work; but you will find it,
even at first, interesting, and at last endlessly amusing.  And the
general gain to your character, in power and precision, will be
quite incalculable.

Mind, this does not imply knowing, or trying to know, Greek or
Latin, or French.  It takes a whole life to learn any language
perfectly.  But you can easily ascertain the meanings through which
the English word has passed; and those which in a good writer's work
it must still bear.

And now, merely for example's sake, I will, with your permission,
read a few lines of a true book with you, carefully; and see what
will come out of them.  I will take a book perfectly known to you
all.  No English words are more familiar to us, yet few perhaps have
been read with less sincerity.  I will take these few following
lines of Lycidas:-


"Last came, and last did go,
The pilot of the Galilean lake.
Two massy keys he bore of metals twain,
(The golden opes, the iron shuts amain,)
He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake,
'How well could I have spared for thee, young swain,
Enow of such as for their bellies' sake
Creep, and intrude, and climb into the fold!
Of other care they little reckoning make,
Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast,
And shove away the worthy bidden guest;
Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
A sheep-hook, or have learn'd aught else, the least
That to the faithful herdman's art belongs!
What recks it them?  What need they?  They are sped;
And when they list, their lean and flashy songs
Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw;
The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
But, swoln with wind, and the rank mist they draw,
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread;
Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
Daily devours apace, and nothing said.'"


Let us think over this passage, and examine its words.

First, is it not singular to find Milton assigning to St. Peter, not
only his full episcopal function, but the very types of it which
Protestants usually refuse most passionately?  His "mitred" locks!
Milton was no Bishop-lover; how comes St. Peter to be "mitred"?
"Two massy keys he bore."  Is this, then, the power of the keys
claimed by the Bishops of Rome? and is it acknowledged here by
Milton only in a poetical licence, for the sake of its
picturesqueness, that he may get the gleam of the golden keys to
help his effect?

Do not think it.  Great men do not play stage tricks with the
doctrines of life and death:  only little men do that.  Milton means
what he says; and means it with his might too--is going to put the
whole strength of his spirit presently into the saying of it.  For
though not a lover of false bishops, he WAS a lover of true ones;
and the Lake-pilot is here, in his thoughts, the type and head of
true episcopal power.  For Milton reads that text, "I will give unto
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven," quite honestly.  Puritan
though he be, he would not blot it out of the book because there
have been bad bishops; nay, in order to understand HIM, we must
understand that verse first; it will not do to eye it askance, or
whisper it under our breath, as if it were a weapon of an adverse
sect.  It is a solemn, universal assertion, deeply to be kept in
mind by all sects.  But perhaps we shall be better able to reason on
it if we go on a little farther, and come back to it.  For clearly
this marked insistence on the power of the true episcopate is to
make us feel more weightily what is to be charged against the false
claimants of episcopate; or generally, against false claimants of
power and rank in the body of the clergy; they who, "for their
bellies' sake, creep, and intrude, and climb into the fold."

Never think Milton uses those three words to fill up his verse, as a
loose writer would.  He needs all the three;--especially those
three, and no more than those--"creep," and "intrude," and "climb;"
no other words would or could serve the turn, and no more could be
added.  For they exhaustively comprehend the three classes,
correspondent to the three characters, of men who dishonestly seek
ecclesiastical power.  First, those who "CREEP" into the fold; who
do not care for office, nor name, but for secret influence, and do
all things occultly and cunningly, consenting to any servility of
office or conduct, so only that they may intimately discern, and
unawares direct, the minds of men.  Then those who "intrude"
(thrust, that is) themselves into the fold, who by natural insolence
of heart, and stout eloquence of tongue, and fearlessly perseverant
self-assertion, obtain hearing and authority with the common crowd.
Lastly, those who "climb," who, by labour and learning, both stout
and sound, but selfishly exerted in the cause of their own ambition,
gain high dignities and authorities, and become "lords over the
heritage," though not "ensamples to the flock."

Now go on:-


"Of other care they little reckoning make,
Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast.
BLIND MOUTHS--"


I pause again, for this is a strange expression; a broken metaphor,
one might think, careless and unscholarly.

Not so:  its very audacity and pithiness are intended to make us
look close at the phrase and remember it.  Those two monosyllables
express the precisely accurate contraries of right character, in the
two great offices of the Church--those of bishop and pastor.

A "Bishop" means "a person who sees."

A "Pastor" means "a person who feeds."

The most unbishoply character a man can have is therefore to be
Blind.

The most unpastoral is, instead of feeding, to want to be fed,--to
be a Mouth.

Take the two reverses together, and you have "blind mouths."  We may
advisably follow out this idea a little.  Nearly all the evils in
the Church have arisen from bishops desiring POWER more than LIGHT.
They want authority, not outlook.  Whereas their real office is not
to rule; though it may be vigorously to exhort and rebuke:  it is
the king's office to rule; the bishop's office is to OVERSEE the
flock; to number it, sheep by sheep; to be ready always to give full
account of it.  Now it is clear he cannot give account of the souls,
if he has not so much as numbered the bodies, of his flock.  The
first thing, therefore, that a bishop has to do is at least to put
himself in a position in which, at any moment, he can obtain the
history, from childhood, of every living soul in his diocese, and of
its present state.  Down in that back street, Bill, and Nancy,
knocking each other's teeth out!--Does the bishop know all about it?
Has he his eye upon them?  Has he HAD his eye upon them?  Can he
circumstantially explain to us how Bill got into the habit of
beating Nancy about the head?  If he cannot, he is no bishop, though
he had a mitre as high as Salisbury steeple; he is no bishop,--he
has sought to be at the helm instead of the masthead; he has no
sight of things.  "Nay," you say, "it is not his duty to look after
Bill in the back street."  What! the fat sheep that have full
fleeces--you think it is only those he should look after while (go
back to your Milton) "the hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
besides what the grim wolf, with privy paw" (bishops knowing nothing
about it), "daily devours apace, and nothing said"?

"But that's not our idea of a bishop." {7} Perhaps not; but it was
St. Paul's; and it was Milton's.  They may be right, or we may be;
but we must not think we are reading either one or the other by
putting our meaning into their words.

I go on.


 "But swoln with wind, and the rank mist they draw."


This is to meet the vulgar answer that "if the poor are not looked
after in their bodies, they are in their souls; they have spiritual
food."

And Milton says, "They have no such thing as spiritual food; they
are only swollen with wind."  At first you may think that is a
coarse type, and an obscure one.  But again, it is a quite literally
accurate one.  Take up your Latin and Greek dictionaries, and find
out the meaning of "Spirit."  It is only a contraction of the Latin
word "breath," and an indistinct translation of the Greek word for
"wind."  The same word is used in writing, "The wind bloweth where
it listeth;" and in writing, "So is every one that is born of the
Spirit;" born of the BREATH, that is; for it means the breath of
God, in soul and body.  We have the true sense of it in our words
"inspiration" and "expire."  Now, there are two kinds of breath with
which the flock may be filled,--God's breath, and man's.  The breath
of God is health, and life, and peace to them, as the air of heaven
is to the flocks on the hills; but man's breath--the word which HE
calls spiritual,--is disease and contagion to them, as the fog of
the fen.  They rot inwardly with it; they are puffed up by it, as a
dead body by the vapours of its own decomposition.  This is
literally true of all false religious teaching; the first and last,
and fatalest sign of it, is that "puffing up."  Your converted
children, who teach their parents; your converted convicts, who
teach honest men; your converted dunces, who, having lived in
cretinous stupefaction half their lives, suddenly awaking to the
fact of there being a God, fancy themselves therefore His peculiar
people and messengers; your sectarians of every species, small and
great, Catholic or Protestant, of high church or low, in so far as
they think themselves exclusively in the right and others wrong;
and, pre-eminently, in every sect, those who hold that men can be
saved by thinking rightly instead of doing rightly, by word instead
of act, and wish instead of work;--these are the true fog children--
clouds, these, without water; bodies, these, of putrescent vapour
and skin, without blood or flesh:  blown bag-pipes for the fiends to
pipe with--corrupt, and corrupting,--" Swollen with wind, and the
rank mist they draw."

Lastly, let us return to the lines respecting the power of the keys,
for now we can understand them.  Note the difference between Milton
and Dante in their interpretation of this power:  for once, the
latter is weaker in thought; he supposes BOTH the keys to be of the
gate of heaven; one is of gold, the other of silver:  they are given
by St. Peter to the sentinel angel; and it is not easy to determine
the meaning either of the substances of the three steps of the gate,
or of the two keys.  But Milton makes one, of gold, the key of
heaven; the other, of iron, the key of the prison in which the
wicked teachers are to be bound who "have taken away the key of
knowledge, yet entered not in themselves."

We have seen that the duties of bishop and pastor are to see, and
feed; and of all who do so it is said, "He that watereth, shall be
watered also himself."  But the reverse is truth also.  He that
watereth not, shall be WITHERED himself; and he that seeth not,
shall himself be shut out of sight--shut into the perpetual prison-
house.  And that prison opens here, as well as hereafter:  he who is
to be bound in heaven must first be bound on earth.  That command to
the strong angels, of which the rock-apostle is the image, "Take
him, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him out," issues, in its
measure, against the teacher, for every help withheld, and for every
truth refused, and for every falsehood enforced; so that he is more
strictly fettered the more he fetters, and farther outcast as he
more and more misleads, till at last the bars of the iron cage close
upon him, and as "the golden opes, the iron shuts amain."

We have got something out of the lines, I think, and much more is
yet to be found in them; but we have done enough by way of example
of the kind of word-by-word examination of your author which is
rightly called "reading;" watching every accent and expression, and
putting ourselves always in the author's place, annihilating our own
personality, and seeking to enter into his, so as to be able
assuredly to say, "Thus Milton thought," not "Thus I thought, in
misreading Milton."  And by this process you will gradually come to
attach less weight to your own "Thus I thought" at other times.  You
will begin to perceive that what YOU thought was a matter of no
serious importance;--that your thoughts on any subject are not
perhaps the clearest and wisest that could be arrived at thereupon:-
in fact, that unless you are a very singular person, you cannot be
said to have any "thoughts" at all; that you have no materials for
them, in any serious matters; {8}--no right to "think," but only to
try to learn more of the facts.  Nay, most probably all your life
(unless, as I said, you are a singular person) you will have no
legitimate right to an "opinion" on any business, except that
instantly under your hand.  What must of necessity be done, you can
always find out, beyond question, how to do.  Have you a house to
keep in order, a commodity to sell, a field to plough, a ditch to
cleanse?  There need be no two opinions about these proceedings; it
is at your peril if you have not much more than an "opinion" on the
way to manage such matters.  And also, outside of your own business,
there are one or two subjects on which you are bound to have but one
opinion.  That roguery and lying are objectionable, and are
instantly to be flogged out of the way whenever discovered;--that
covetousness and love of quarrelling are dangerous dispositions even
in children, and deadly dispositions in men and nations;--that, in
the end, the God of heaven and earth loves active, modest, and kind
people, and hates idle, proud, greedy, and cruel ones;--on these
general facts you are bound to have but one, and that a very strong,
opinion.  For the rest, respecting religions, governments, sciences,
arts, you will find that, on the whole, you can know NOTHING,--judge
nothing; that the best you can do, even though you may be a well-
educated person, is to be silent, and strive to be wiser every day,
and to understand a little more of the thoughts of others, which so
soon as you try to do honestly, you will discover that the thoughts
even of the wisest are very little more than pertinent questions.
To put the difficulty into a clear shape, and exhibit to you the
grounds for INdecision, that is all they can generally do for you!--
and well for them and for us, if indeed they are able "to mix the
music with our thoughts and sadden us with heavenly doubts."  This
writer, from whom I have been reading to you, is not among the first
or wisest:  he sees shrewdly as far as he sees, and therefore it is
easy to find out its full meaning; but with the greater men, you
cannot fathom their meaning; they do not even wholly measure it
themselves,--it is so wide.  Suppose I had asked you, for instance,
to seek for Shakespeare's opinion, instead of Milton's on this
matter of Church authority?--or for Dante's?  Have any of you, at
this instant, the least idea what either thought about it?  Have you
ever balanced the scene with the bishops in 'Richard III.' against
the character of Cranmer? the description of St. Francis and St.
Dominic against that of him who made Virgil wonder to gaze upon
him,--"disteso, tanto vilmente, nell' eterno esilio;" or of him whom
Dante stood beside, "come 'l frate che confessa lo perfido
assassin?" {9}  Shakespeare and Alighieri knew men better than most
of us, I presume!  They were both in the midst of the main struggle
between the temporal and spiritual powers.  They had an opinion, we
may guess.  But where is it?  Bring it into court!  Put
Shakespeare's or Dante's creed into articles, and send IT up for
trial by the Ecclesiastical Courts!

You will not be able, I tell you again, for many and many a day, to
come at the real purposes and teaching of these great men; but a
very little honest study of them will enable you to perceive that
what you took for your own "judgment" was mere chance prejudice, and
drifted, helpless, entangled weed of castaway thought; nay, you will
see that most men's minds are indeed little better than rough heath
wilderness, neglected and stubborn, partly barren, partly overgrown
with pestilent brakes, and venomous, wind-sown herbage of evil
surmise; that the first thing you have to do for them, and yourself,
is eagerly and scornfully to set fire to THIS; burn all the jungle
into wholesome ash-heaps, and then plough and sow.  All the true
literary work before you, for life, must begin with obedience to
that order, "Break up your fallow ground, and SOW NOT AMONG THORNS."

II.  {10} Having then faithfully listened to the great teachers,
that you may enter into their Thoughts, you have yet this higher
advance to make;--you have to enter into their Hearts.  As you go to
them first for clear sight, so you must stay with them, that you may
share at last their just and mighty Passion.  Passion, or
"sensation."  I am not afraid of the word; still less of the thing.
You have heard many outcries against sensation lately; but, I can
tell you, it is not less sensation we want, but more.  The ennobling
difference between one man and another,--between one animal and
another,--is precisely in this, that one feels more than another.
If we were sponges, perhaps sensation might not be easily got for
us; if we were earth-worms, liable at every instant to be cut in two
by the spade, perhaps too much sensation might not be good for us.
But being human creatures, IT IS good for us; nay, we are only human
in so far as we are sensitive, and our honour is precisely in
proportion to our passion.

You know I said of that great and pure society of the Dead, that it
would allow "no vain or vulgar person to enter there."  What do you
think I meant by a "vulgar" person?  What do you yourselves mean by
"vulgarity"?  You will find it a fruitful subject of thought; but,
briefly, the essence of all vulgarity lies in want of sensation.
Simple and innocent vulgarity is merely an untrained and undeveloped
bluntness of body and mind; but in true inbred vulgarity, there is a
dreadful callousness, which, in extremity, becomes capable of every
sort of bestial habit and crime, without fear, without pleasure,
without horror, and without pity.  It is in the blunt hand and the
dead heart, in the diseased habit, in the hardened conscience, that
men become vulgar; they are for ever vulgar, precisely in proportion
as they are incapable of sympathy,--of quick understanding,--of all
that, in deep insistence on the common, but most accurate term, may
be called the "tact" or "touch-faculty," of body and soul:  that
tact which the Mimosa has in trees, which the pure woman has above
all creatures;--fineness and fulness of sensation, beyond reason;--
the guide and sanctifier of reason itself.  Reason can but determine
what is true:- it is the God-given passion of humanity which alone
can recognise what God has made good.

We come then to that great concourse of the Dead, not merely to know
from them what is True, but chiefly to feel with them what is just.
Now, to feel with them, we must be like them; and none of us can
become that without pains.  As the true knowledge is disciplined and
tested knowledge,--not the first thought that comes, so the true
passion is disciplined and tested passion,--not the first passion
that comes.  The first that come are the vain, the false, the
treacherous; if you yield to them they will lead you wildly and far,
in vain pursuit, in hollow enthusiasm, till you have no true purpose
and no true passion left.  Not that any feeling possible to humanity
is in itself wrong, but only wrong when undisciplined.  Its nobility
is in its force and justice; it is wrong when it is weak, and felt
for paltry cause.  There is a mean wonder, as of a child who sees a
juggler tossing golden balls; and this is base, if you will.  But do
you think that the wonder is ignoble, or the sensation less, with
which every human soul is called to watch the golden balls of heaven
tossed through the night by the Hand that made them?  There is a
mean curiosity, as of a child opening a forbidden door, or a servant
prying into her master's business;--and a noble curiosity,
questioning, in the front of danger, the source of the great river
beyond the sand,--the place of the great continents beyond the sea;-
-a nobler curiosity still, which questions of the source of the
River of Life, and of the space of the Continent of Heaven,--things
which "the angels desire to look into."  So the anxiety is ignoble,
with which you linger over the course and catastrophe of an idle
tale; but do you think the anxiety is less, or greater, with which
you watch, or OUGHT to watch, the dealings of fate and destiny with
the life of an agonized nation?  Alas! it is the narrowness,
selfishness, minuteness, of your sensation that you have to deplore
in England at this day;--sensation which spends itself in bouquets
and speeches:  in revellings and junketings; in sham fights and gay
puppet shows, while you can look on and see noble nations murdered,
man by man, without an effort or a tear.

I said "minuteness" and "selfishness" of sensation, but it would
have been enough to have said "injustice" or "unrighteousness" of
sensation.  For as in nothing is a gentleman better to be discerned
from a vulgar person, so in nothing is a gentle nation (such nations
have been) better to be discerned from a mob, than in this,--that
their feelings are constant and just, results of due contemplation,
and of equal thought.  You can talk a mob into anything; its
feelings may be--usually are--on the whole, generous and right; but
it has no foundation for them, no hold of them; you may tease or
tickle it into any, at your pleasure; it thinks by infection, for
the most part, catching an opinion like a cold, and there is nothing
so little that it will not roar itself wild about, when the fit is
on;--nothing so great but it will forget in an hour, when the fit is
past.  But a gentleman's, or a gentle nation's, passions are just,
measured, and continuous.  A great nation, for instance, does not
spend its entire national wits for a couple of months in weighing
evidence of a single ruffian's having done a single murder; and for
a couple of years see its own children murder each other by their
thousands or tens of thousands a day, considering only what the
effect is likely to be on the price of cotton, and caring no wise to
determine which side of battle is in the wrong.  Neither does a
great nation send its poor little boys to jail for stealing six
walnuts; and allow its bankrupts to steal their hundreds of
thousands with a bow, and its bankers, rich with poor men's savings,
to close their doors "under circumstances over which they have no
control," with a "by your leave;" and large landed estates to be
bought by men who have made their money by going with armed steamers
up and down the China Seas, selling opium at the cannon's mouth, and
altering, for the benefit of the foreign nation, the common
highwayman's demand of "your money OR your life," into that of "your
money AND your life."  Neither does a great nation allow the lives
of its innocent poor to be parched out of them by fog fever, and
rotted out of them by dunghill plague, for the sake of sixpence a
life extra per week to its landlords; {11} and then debate, with
drivelling tears, and diabolical sympathies, whether it ought not
piously to save, and nursingly cherish, the lives of its murderers.
Also, a great nation having made up its mind that hanging is quite
the wholesomest process for its homicides in general, can yet with
mercy distinguish between the degrees of guilt in homicides; and
does not yelp like a pack of frost-pinched wolf-cubs on the blood-
track of an unhappy crazed boy, or grey-haired clodpate Othello,
"perplexed i' the extreme," at the very moment that it is sending a
Minister of the Crown to make polite speeches to a man who is
bayoneting young girls in their fathers' sight, and killing noble
youths in cool blood, faster than a country butcher kills lambs in
spring.  And, lastly, a great nation does not mock Heaven and its
Powers, by pretending belief in a revelation which asserts the love
of money to be the root of ALL evil, and declaring, at the same
time, that it is actuated, and intends to be actuated, in all chief
national deeds and measures, by no other love. {12}

My friends, I do not know why any of us should talk about reading.
We want some sharper discipline than that of reading; but, at all
events, be assured, we cannot read.  No reading is possible for a
people with its mind in this state.  No sentence of any great writer
is intelligible to them.  It is simply and sternly impossible for
the English public, at this moment, to understand any thoughtful
writing,--so incapable of thought has it become in its insanity of
avarice.  Happily, our disease is, as yet, little worse than this
incapacity of thought; it is not corruption of the inner nature; we
ring true still, when anything strikes home to us; and though the
idea that everything should "pay" has infected our every purpose so
deeply, that even when we would play the good Samaritan, we never
take out our two pence and give them to the host, without saying,
"When I come again, thou shalt give me fourpence," there is a
capacity of noble passion left in our hearts' core.  We show it in
our work--in our war,--even in those unjust domestic affections
which make us furious at a small private wrong, while we are polite
to a boundless public one:  we are still industrious to the last
hour of the day, though we add the gambler's fury to the labourer's
patience; we are still brave to the death, though incapable of
discerning true cause for battle; and are still true in affection to
our own flesh, to the death, as the sea-monsters are, and the rock-
eagles.  And there is hope for a nation while this can be still said
of it.  As long as it holds its life in its hand, ready to give it
for its honour (though a foolish honour), for its love (though a
selfish love), and for its business (though a base business), there
is hope for it.  But hope only; for this instinctive, reckless
virtue cannot last.  No nation can last, which has made a mob of
itself, however generous at heart.  It must discipline its passions,
and direct them, or they will discipline it, one day, with scorpion
whips.  Above all, a nation cannot last as a money-making mob:  it
cannot with impunity,--it cannot with existence,--go on despising
literature, despising science, despising art, despising nature,
despising compassion, and concentrating its soul on Pence.  Do you
think these are harsh or wild words?  Have patience with me but a
little longer.  I will prove their truth to you, clause by clause.

(I.)  I say first we have despised literature.  What do we, as a
nation, care about books?  How much do you think we spend altogether
on our libraries, public or private, as compared with what we spend
on our horses?  If a man spends lavishly on his library, you call
him mad--a bibliomaniac.  But you never call any one a horsemaniac,
though men ruin themselves every day by their horses, and you do not
hear of people ruining themselves by their books.  Or, to go lower
still, how much do you think the contents of the book-shelves of the
United Kingdom, public and private, would fetch, as compared with
the contents of its wine-cellars?  What position would its
expenditure on literature take, as compared with its expenditure on
luxurious eating?  We talk of food for the mind, as of food for the
body:  now a good book contains such food inexhaustibly; it is a
provision for life, and for the best part of us; yet how long most
people would look at the best book before they would give the price
of a large turbot for it?  Though there have been men who have
pinched their stomachs and bared their backs to buy a book, whose
libraries were cheaper to them, I think, in the end, than most men's
dinners are.  We are few of us put to such trial, and more the pity;
for, indeed, a precious thing is all the more precious to us if it
has been won by work or economy; and if public libraries were half
so costly as public dinners, or books cost the tenth part of what
bracelets do, even foolish men and women might sometimes suspect
there was good in reading, as well as in munching and sparkling:
whereas the very cheapness of literature is making even wise people
forget that if a book is worth reading, it is worth buying.  No book
is worth anything which is not worth MUCH; nor is it serviceable,
until it has been read, and re-read, and loved, and loved again; and
marked, so that you can refer to the passages you want in it, as a
soldier can seize the weapon he needs in an armoury, or a housewife
bring the spice she needs from her store.  Bread of flour is good;
but there is bread, sweet as honey, if we would eat it, in a good
book; and the family must be poor indeed, which, once in their
lives, cannot, for, such multipliable barley-loaves, pay their
baker's bill.  We call ourselves a rich nation, and we are filthy
and foolish enough to thumb each other's books out of circulating
libraries!

(II.)  I say we have despised science.  "What!" you exclaim, "are we
not foremost in all discovery, {13} and is not the whole world giddy
by reason, or unreason, of our inventions?"  Yes; but do you suppose
that is national work?  That work is all done IN SPITE OF the
nation; by private people's zeal and money.  We are glad enough,
indeed, to make our profit of science; we snap up anything in the
way of a scientific bone that has meat on it, eagerly enough; but if
the scientific man comes for a bone or a crust to US, that is
another story.  What have we publicly done for science?  We are
obliged to know what o'clock it is, for the safety of our ships, and
therefore we pay for an observatory; and we allow ourselves, in the
person of our Parliament, to be annually tormented into doing
something, in a slovenly way, for the British Museum; sullenly
apprehending that to be a place for keeping stuffed birds in, to
amuse our children.  If anybody will pay for their own telescope,
and resolve another nebula, we cackle over the discernment as if it
were our own; if one in ten thousand of our hunting squires suddenly
perceives that the earth was indeed made to be something else than a
portion for foxes, and burrows in it himself, and tells us where the
gold is, and where the coals, we understand that there is some use
in that; and very properly knight him:  but is the accident of his
having found out how to employ himself usefully any credit to US?
(The negation of such discovery among his brother squires may
perhaps be some discredit to us, if we would consider of it.)  But
if you doubt these generalities, here is one fact for us all to
meditate upon, illustrative of our love of science.  Two years ago
there was a collection of the fossils of Solenhofen to be sold in
Bavaria; the best in existence, containing many specimens unique for
perfectness, and one unique as an example of a species (a whole
kingdom of unknown living creatures being announced by that fossil).
This collection, of which the mere market worth, among private
buyers, would probably have been some thousand or twelve hundred
pounds, was offered to the English nation for seven hundred:  but we
would not give seven hundred, and the whole series would have been
in the Munich Museum at this moment, if Professor Owen {14} had not,
with loss of his own time, and patient tormenting of the British
public in person of its representatives, got leave to give four
hundred pounds at once, and himself become answerable for the other
three! which the said public will doubtless pay him eventually, but
sulkily, and caring nothing about the matter all the while; only
always ready to cackle if any credit comes of it.  Consider, I beg
of you, arithmetically, what this fact means.  Your annual
expenditure for public purposes, (a third of it for military
apparatus,) is at least 50 millions.  Now 700L. is to 50,000,000L.
roughly, as seven pence to two thousand pounds.  Suppose, then, a
gentleman of unknown income, but whose wealth was to be conjectured
from the fact that he spent two thousand a year on his park-walls
and footmen only, professes himself fond of science; and that one of
his servants comes eagerly to tell him that an unique collection of
fossils, giving clue to a new era of creation, is to be had for the
sum of seven pence sterling; and that the gentleman who is fond of
science, and spends two thousand a year on his park, answers, after
keeping his servant waiting several months, "Well!  I'll give you
fourpence for them, if you will be answerable for the extra
threepence yourself, till next year!"

(III.)  I say you have despised Art!  "What!" you again answer,
"have we not Art exhibitions, miles long? and do we not pay
thousands of pounds for single pictures? and have we not Art schools
and institutions,--more than ever nation had before?"  Yes, truly,
but all that is for the sake of the shop.  You would fain sell
canvas as well as coals, and crockery as well as iron; you would
take every other nation's bread out of its mouth if you could; {15}
not being able to do that, your ideal of life is to stand in the
thoroughfares of the world, like Ludgate apprentices, screaming to
every passer-by, "What d'ye lack?"  You know nothing of your own
faculties or circumstances; you fancy that, among your damp, flat,
fat fields of clay, you can have as quick art-fancy as the Frenchman
among his bronzed vines, or the Italian under his volcanic cliffs;--
that Art may be learned, as book-keeping is, and when learned, will
give you more books to keep.  You care for pictures, absolutely, no
more than you do for the bills pasted on your dead walls.  There is
always room on the walls for the bills to be read,--never for the
pictures to be seen.  You do not know what pictures you have (by
repute) in the country, nor whether they are false or true, nor
whether they are taken care of or not; in foreign countries, you
calmly see the noblest existing pictures in the world rotting in
abandoned wreck--(in Venice you saw the Austrian guns deliberately
pointed at the palaces containing them), and if you heard that all
the fine pictures in Europe were made into sand-bags to-morrow on
the Austrian forts, it would not trouble you so much as the chance
of a brace or two of game less in your own bags, in a day's
shooting.  That is your national love of Art.

(IV.)  You have despised Nature; that is to say, all the deep and
sacred sensations of natural scenery.  The French revolutionists
made stables of the cathedrals of France; you have made race-courses
of the cathedrals of the earth.  Your ONE conception of pleasure is
to drive in railroad carriages round their aisles, and eat off their
altars. {16} You have put a railroad-bridge over the falls of
Schaffhausen.  You have tunnelled the cliffs of Lucerne by Tell's
chapel; you have destroyed the Clarens shore of the Lake of Geneva;
there is not a quiet valley in England that you have not filled with
bellowing fire; there is no particle left of English land which you
have not trampled coal ashes into {17}--nor any foreign city in
which the spread of your presence is not marked among its fair old
streets and happy gardens by a consuming white leprosy of new hotels
and perfumers' shops:  the Alps themselves, which your own poets
used to love so reverently, you look upon as soaped poles in a bear-
garden, which you set yourselves to climb and slide down again, with
"shrieks of delight."  When you are past shrieking, having no human
articulate voice to say you are glad with, you fill the quietude of
their valleys with gunpowder blasts, and rush home, red with
cutaneous eruption of conceit, and voluble with convulsive hiccough
of self-satisfaction.  I think nearly the two sorrowfullest
spectacles I have ever seen in humanity, taking the deep inner
significance of them, are the English mobs in the valley of
Chamouni, amusing themselves with firing rusty howitzers; and the
Swiss vintagers of Zurich expressing their Christian thanks for the
gift of the vine, by assembling in knots in the "towers of the
vineyards," and slowly loading and firing horse-pistols from morning
till evening.  It is pitiful, to have dim conceptions of duty; more
pitiful, it seems to me, to have conceptions like these, of mirth.

Lastly.  You despise compassion.  There is no need of words of mine
for proof of this.  I will merely print one of the newspaper
paragraphs which I am in the habit of cutting out and throwing into
my store-drawer; here is one from a 'Daily Telegraph' of an early
date this year (1867); (date which, though by me carelessly left
unmarked, is easily discoverable; for on the back of the slip there
is the announcement that "yesterday the seventh of the special
services of this year was performed by the Bishop of Ripon in St.
Paul's";) it relates only one of such facts as happen now daily;
this by chance having taken a form in which it came before the
coroner.  I will print the paragraph in red.  Be sure, the facts
themselves are written in that colour, in a book which we shall all
OF us, literate or illiterate, have to read our page of, some day.


An inquiry was held on Friday by Mr. Richards, deputy coroner, at
the White Horse Tavern, Christ Church, Spitalfields, respecting the
death of Michael Collins, aged 58 years.  Mary Collins, a miserable-
looking woman, said that she lived with the deceased and his son in
a room at 2, Cobb's Court, Christ Church.  Deceased was a
"translator" of boots.  Witness went out and bought old boots;
deceased and his son made them into good ones, and then witness sold
them for what she could get at the shops, which was very little
indeed.  Deceased and his son used to work night and day to try and
get a little bread and tea, and pay for the room (2S. a week), so as
to keep the home together.  On Friday-night-week deceased got up
from his bench and began to shiver.  He threw down the boots,
saying, "Somebody else must finish them when I am gone, for I can do
no more."  There was no fire, and he said, "I would be better if I
was warm."  Witness therefore took two pairs of translated boots
{18} to sell at the shop, but she could only get 14D. for the two
pairs, for the people at the shop said, "We must have our profit."
Witness got 14lb. of coal, and a little tea and bread.  Her son sat
up the whole night to make the "translations," to get money, but
deceased died on Saturday morning.  The family never had enough to
eat.--Coroner:  "It seems to me deplorable that you did not go into
the workhouse."  Witness:  "We wanted the comforts of our little
home."  A juror asked what the comforts were, for he only saw a
little straw in the corner of the room, the windows of which were
broken.  The witness began to cry, and said that they had a quilt
and other little things.  The deceased said he never would go into
the workhouse.  In summer, when the season was good, they sometimes
made as much as 10S. profit in the week.  They then always saved
towards the next week, which was generally a bad one.  In winter
they made not half so much.  For three years they had been getting
from bad to worse.--Cornelius Collins said that he had assisted his
father since 1847.  They used to work so far into the night that
both nearly lost their eyesight.  Witness now had a film over his
eyes.  Five years ago deceased applied to the parish for aid.  The
relieving officer gave him a 4lb. loaf, and told him if he came
again he should "get the stones." {19}  That disgusted deceased, and
he would have nothing to do with them since.  They got worse and
worse until last Friday week, when they had not even a half-penny to
buy a candle.  Deceased then lay down on the straw, and said he
could not live till morning.--A juror:  "You are dying of starvation
yourself, and you ought to go into the house until the summer."--
Witness:  "If we went in we should die.  When we come out in the
summer we should be like people dropped from the sky.  No one would
know us, and we would not have even a room.  I could work now if I
had food, for my sight would get better."  Dr. G. P. Walker said
deceased died from syncope, from exhaustion from want of food.  The
deceased had had no bedclothes.  For four months he had had nothing
but bread to eat.  There was not a particle of fat in the body.
There was no disease, but, if there had been medical attendance, he
might have survived the syncope or fainting.  The Coroner having
remarked upon the painful nature of the case, the jury returned the
following verdict:  "That deceased died from exhaustion from want of
food and the common necessaries of life; also through want of
medical aid."


"Why would witness not go into the workhouse?" you ask.  Well, the
poor seem to have a prejudice against the workhouse which the rich
have not; for of course everyone who takes a pension from Government
goes into the workhouse on a grand scale:  {20} only the workhouses
for the rich do not involve the idea of work, and should be called
play-houses.  But the poor like to die independently, it appears;
perhaps if we made the play-houses for them pretty and pleasant
enough, or gave them their pensions at home, and allowed them a
little introductory peculation with the public money, their minds
might be reconciled to the conditions.  Meantime, here are the
facts:  we make our relief either so insulting to them, or so
painful, that they rather die than take it at our hands; or, for
third alternative, we leave them so untaught and foolish that they
starve like brute creatures, wild and dumb, not knowing what to do,
or what to ask.  I say, you despise compassion; if you did not, such
a newspaper paragraph would be as impossible in a Christian country
as a deliberate assassination permitted in its public streets. {21}
"Christian," did I say?  Alas! if we were but wholesomely UN-
Christian, it would be impossible:  it is our imaginary Christianity
that helps us to commit these crimes, for we revel and luxuriate in
our faith, for the lewd sensation of it; dressing IT up, like
everything else, in fiction.  The dramatic Christianity of the organ
and aisle, of dawn-service and twilight-revival--the Christianity,
which we do not fear to mix the mockery of, pictorially, with our
play about the devil, in our Satanellas,--Roberts,--Fausts; chanting
hymns through traceried windows for background effect, and
artistically modulating the "Dio" through variation on variation of
mimicked prayer:  (while we distribute tracts, next day, for the
benefit of uncultivated swearers, upon what we suppose to be the
signification of the Third Commandment;-) this gas-lighted, and gas-
inspired Christianity, we are triumphant in, and draw back the hem
of our robes from the touch of the heretics who dispute it.  But to
do a piece of common Christian righteousness in a plain English word
or deed; to make Christian law any rule of life, and found one
National act or hope thereon,--we know too well what our faith comes
to for that!  You might sooner get lightning out of incense smoke
than true action or passion out of your modern English religion.
You had better get rid of the smoke, and the organ pipes, both:
leave them, and the Gothic windows, and the painted glass, to the
property man; give up your carburetted hydrogen ghost in one healthy
expiration, and look after Lazarus at the doorstep.  For there is a
true Church wherever one hand meets another helpfully, and that is
the only holy or Mother Church which ever was, or ever shall be.

All these pleasures then, and all these virtues, I repeat, you
nationally despise.  You have, indeed, men among you who do not; by
whose work, by whose strength, by whose life, by whose death, you
live, and never thank them.  Your wealth, your amusement, your
pride, would all be alike impossible, but for those whom you scorn
or forget.  The policeman, who is walking up and down the black lane
all night to watch the guilt you have created there; and may have
his brains beaten out, and be maimed for life, at any moment, and
never be thanked; the sailor wrestling with the sea's rage; the
quiet student poring over his book or his vial; the common worker,
without praise, and nearly without bread, fulfilling his task as
your horses drag your carts, hopeless, and spurned of all:  these
are the men by whom England lives; but they are not the nation; they
are only the body and nervous force of it, acting still from old
habit in a convulsive perseverance, while the mind is gone.  Our
National wish and purpose are only to be amused; our National
religion is the performance of church ceremonies, and preaching of
soporific truth (or untruths) to keep the mob quietly at work, while
we amuse ourselves; and the necessity for this amusement is
fastening on us, as a feverous disease of parched throat and
wandering eyes--senseless, dissolute, merciless.  How literally that
word DIS-Ease, the Negation and impossibility of Ease, expresses the
entire moral state of our English Industry and its Amusements!

When men are rightly occupied, their amusement grows out of their
work, as the colour-petals out of a fruitful flower;--when they are
faithfully helpful and compassionate, all their emotions become
steady, deep, perpetual, and vivifying to the soul as the natural
pulse to the body.  But now, having no true business, we pour our
whole masculine energy into the false business of money-making; and
having no true emotion, we must have false emotions dressed up for
us to play with, not innocently, as children with dolls, but
guiltily and darkly, as the idolatrous Jews with their pictures on
cavern walls, which men had to dig to detect.  The justice we do not
execute, we mimic in the novel and on the stage; for the beauty we
destroy in nature, we substitute the metamorphosis of the pantomime,
and (the human nature of us imperatively requiring awe and sorrow of
SOME kind) for the noble grief we should have borne with our
fellows, and the pure tears we should have wept with them, we gloat
over the pathos of the police court, and gather the night-dew of the
grave.

It is difficult to estimate the true significance of these things;
the facts are frightful enough;--the measure of national fault
involved in them is perhaps not as great as it would at first seem.
We permit, or cause, thousands of deaths daily, but we mean no harm;
we set fire to houses, and ravage peasants' fields, yet we should be
sorry to find we had injured anybody.  We are still kind at heart;
still capable of virtue, but only as children are.  Chalmers, at the
end of his long life, having had much power with the public, being
plagued in some serious matter by a reference to "public opinion,"
uttered the impatient exclamation, "The public is just a great
baby!"  And the reason that I have allowed all these graver subjects
of thought to mix themselves up with an inquiry into methods of
reading, is that, the more I see of our national faults or miseries,
the more they resolve themselves into conditions of childish
illiterateness and want of education in the most ordinary habits of
thought.  It is, I repeat, not vice, not selfishness, not dulness of
brain, which we have to lament; but an unreachable schoolboy's
recklessness, only differing from the true schoolboy's in its
incapacity of being helped, because it acknowledges no master.

There is a curious type of us given in one of the lovely, neglected
works of the last of our great painters.  It is a drawing of Kirkby
Lonsdale churchyard, and of its brook, and valley, and hills, and
folded morning sky beyond.  And unmindful alike of these, and of the
dead who have left these for other valleys and for other skies, a
group of schoolboys have piled their little books upon a grave, to
strike them off with stones.  So, also, we play with the words of
the dead that would teach us, and strike them far from us with our
bitter, reckless will; little thinking that those leaves which the
wind scatters had been piled, not only upon a gravestone, but upon
the seal of an enchanted vault--nay, the gate of a great city of
sleeping kings, who would awake for us and walk with us, if we knew
but how to call them by their names.  How often, even if we lift the
marble entrance gate, do we but wander among those old kings in
their repose, and finger the robes they lie in, and stir the crowns
on their foreheads; and still they are silent to us, and seem but a
dusty imagery; because we know not the incantation of the heart that
would wake them;--which, if they once heard, they would start up to
meet us in their power of long ago, narrowly to look upon us, and
consider us; and, as the fallen kings of Hades meet the newly
fallen, saying, "Art thou also become weak as we--art thou also
become one of us?" so would these kings, with their undimmed,
unshaken diadems, meet us, saying, "Art thou also become pure and
mighty of heart as we--art thou also become one of us?"

Mighty of heart, mighty of mind--"magnanimous"--to be this, is
indeed to be great in life; to become this increasingly, is, indeed,
to "advance in life,"--in life itself--not in the trappings of it.
My friends, do you remember that old Scythian custom, when the head
of a house died?  How he was dressed in his finest dress, and set in
his chariot, and carried about to his friends' houses; and each of
them placed him at his table's head, and all feasted in his
presence?  Suppose it were offered to you in plain words, as it IS
offered to you in dire facts, that you should gain this Scythian
honour, gradually, while you yet thought yourself alive.  Suppose
the offer were this:  You shall die slowly; your blood shall daily
grow cold, your flesh petrify, your heart beat at last only as a
rusted group of iron valves.  Your life shall fade from you, and
sink through the earth into the ice of Caina; but, day by day, your
body shall be dressed more gaily, and set in higher chariots, and
have more orders on its breast--crowns on its head, if you will.
Men shall bow before it, stare and shout round it, crowd after it up
and down the streets; build palaces for it, feast with it at their
tables' heads all the night long; your soul shall stay enough within
it to know what they do, and feel the weight of the golden dress on
its shoulders, and the furrow of the crown-edge on the skull;--no
more.  Would you take the offer, verbally made by the death-angel?
Would the meanest among us take it, think you?  Yet practically and
verily we grasp at it, every one of us, in a measure; many of us
grasp at it in its fulness of horror.  Every man accepts it, who
desires to advance in life without knowing what life is; who means
only that he is to get more horses, and more footmen, and more
fortune, and more public honour, and--NOT more personal soul.  He
only is advancing in life, whose heart is getting softer, whose
blood warmer, whose brain quicker, whose spirit is entering into
Living {22} peace.  And the men who have this life in them are the
true lords or kings of the earth--they, and they only.  All other
kingships, so far as they are true, are only the practical issue and
expression of theirs; if less than this, they are either dramatic
royalties,--costly shows, set off, indeed, with real jewels, instead
of tinsel--but still only the toys of nations; or else they are no
royalties at all, but tyrannies, or the mere active and practical
issue of national folly; for which reason I have said of them
elsewhere, "Visible governments are the toys of some nations, the
diseases of others, the harness of some, the burdens of more."

But I have no words for the wonder with which I hear Kinghood still
spoken of, even among thoughtful men, as if governed nations were a
personal property, and might be bought and sold, or otherwise
acquired, as sheep, of whose flesh their king was to feed, and whose
fleece he was to gather; as if Achilles' indignant epithet of base
kings, "people-eating," were the constant and proper title of all
monarchs; and the enlargement of a king's dominion meant the same
thing as the increase of a private man's estate!  Kings who think
so, however powerful, can no more be the true kings of the nation
than gadflies are the kings of a horse; they suck it, and may drive
it wild, but do not guide it.  They, and their courts, and their
armies are, if one could see clearly, only a large species of marsh
mosquito, with bayonet proboscis and melodious, band-mastered
trumpeting, in the summer air; the twilight being, perhaps,
sometimes fairer, but hardly more wholesome, for its glittering
mists of midge companies.  The true kings, meanwhile, rule quietly,
if at all, and hate ruling; too many of them make "il gran rifiuto;"
and if they do not, the mob, as soon as they are likely to become
useful to it, is pretty sure to make ITS "gran rifiuto" of THEM.

Yet the visible king may also be a true one, some day, if ever day
comes when he will estimate his dominion by the FORCE of it,--not
the geographical boundaries.  It matters very little whether Trent
cuts you a cantel out here, or Rhine rounds you a castle less there.
But it does matter to you, king of men, whether you can verily say
to this man, "Go," and he goeth; and to another, "Come," and he
cometh.  Whether you can turn your people, as you can Trent--and
where it is that you bid them come, and where go.  It matters to
you, king of men, whether your people hate you, and die by you, or
love you, and live by you.  You may measure your dominion by
multitudes, better than by miles; and count degrees of love-
latitude, not from, but to, a wonderfully warm and infinite equator.

Measure!--nay, you cannot measure.  Who shall measure the difference
between the power of those who "do and teach," and who are greatest
in the kingdoms of earth, as of heaven--and the power of those who
undo, and consume--whose power, at the fullest, is only the power of
the moth and the rust?  Strange! to think how the Moth-kings lay up
treasures for the moth; and the Rust-kings, who are to their
peoples' strength as rust to armour, lay up treasures for the rust;
and the Robber-kings, treasures for the robber; but how few kings
have ever laid up treasures that needed no guarding--treasures of
which, the more thieves there were, the better!  Broidered robe,
only to be rent; helm and sword, only to be dimmed; jewel and gold,
only to be scattered;--there have been three kinds of kings who have
gathered these.  Suppose there ever should arise a Fourth order of
kings, who had read, in some obscure writing of long ago, that there
was a Fourth kind of treasure, which the jewel and gold could not
equal, neither should it be valued with pure gold.  A web made fair
in the weaving, by Athena's shuttle; an armour, forged in divine
fire by Vulcanian force; a gold to be mined in the very sun's red
heart, where he sets over the Delphian cliffs;--deep-pictured
tissue;--impenetrable armour;--potable gold!--the three great Angels
of Conduct, Toil, and Thought, still calling to us, and waiting at
the posts of our doors, to lead us, with their winged power, and
guide us, with their unerring eyes, by the path which no fowl
knoweth, and which the vulture's eye has not seen!  Suppose kings
should ever arise, who heard and believed this word, and at last
gathered and brought forth treasures of--Wisdom--for their people?

Think what an amazing business THAT would be!  How inconceivable, in
the state of our present national wisdom!  That we should bring up
our peasants to a book exercise instead of a bayonet exercise!--
organise, drill, maintain with pay, and good generalship, armies of
thinkers, instead of armies of stabbers!--find national amusement in
reading-rooms as well as rifle-grounds; give prizes for a fair shot
at a fact, as well as for a leaden splash on a target.  What an
absurd idea it seems, put fairly in words, that the wealth of the
capitalists of civilised nations should ever come to support
literature instead of war!

Have yet patience with me, while I read you a single sentence out of
the only book, properly to be called a book, that I have yet written
myself, the one that will stand (if anything stand), surest and
longest of all work of mine.


"It is one very awful form of the operation of wealth in Europe that
it is entirely capitalists' wealth which supports unjust wars.  Just
wars do not need so much money to support them; for most of the men
who wage such, wage them gratis; but for an unjust war, men's bodies
and souls have both to be bought; and the best tools of war for them
besides, which make such war costly to the maximum; not to speak of
the cost of base fear, and angry suspicion, between nations which
have not grace nor honesty enough in all their multitudes to buy an
hour's peace of mind with; as, at present, France and England,
purchasing of each other ten millions sterling worth of
consternation, annually (a remarkably light crop, half thorns and
half aspen leaves, sown, reaped, and granaried by the 'science' of
the modern political economist, teaching covetousness instead of
truth).  And, all unjust war being supportable, if not by pillage of
the enemy, only by loans from capitalists, these loans are repaid by
subsequent taxation of the people, who appear to have no will in the
matter, the capitalists' will being the primary root of the war; but
its real root is the covetousness of the whole nation, rendering it
incapable of faith, frankness, or justice, and bringing about,
therefore, in due time, his own separate loss and punishment to each
person."


France and England literally, observe, buy PANIC of each other; they
pay, each of them, for ten thousand-thousand-pounds'-worth of
terror, a year.  Now suppose, instead of buying these ten millions'
worth of panic annually, they made up their minds to be at peace
with each other, and buy ten millions' worth of knowledge annually;
and that each nation spent its ten thousand thousand pounds a year
in founding royal libraries, royal art galleries, royal museums,
royal gardens, and places of rest.  Might it not be better somewhat
for both French and English?

It will be long, yet, before that comes to pass.  Nevertheless, I
hope it will not be long before royal or national libraries will be
founded in every considerable city, with a royal series of books in
them; the same series in every one of them, chosen books, the best
in every kind, prepared for that national series in the most perfect
way possible; their text printed all on leaves of equal size, broad
of margin, and divided into pleasant volumes, light in the hand,
beautiful, and strong, and thorough as examples of binders' work;
and that these great libraries will be accessible to all clean and
orderly persons at all times of the day and evening; strict law
being enforced for this cleanliness and quietness.

I could shape for you other plans, for art-galleries, and for
natural history galleries, and for many precious--many, it seems to
me, needful--things; but this book plan is the easiest and
needfullest, and would prove a considerable tonic to what we call
our British constitution, which has fallen dropsical of late, and
has an evil thirst, and evil hunger, and wants healthier feeding.
You have got its corn laws repealed for it; try if you cannot get
corn laws established for it, dealing in a better bread;--bread made
of that old enchanted Arabian grain, the Sesame, which opens doors;-
-doors not of robbers', but of Kings' Treasuries.



LECTURE II.--LILIES OF QUEENS' GARDENS



"Be thou glad, oh thirsting Desert; let the desert be made cheerful,
and bloom as the lily; and the barren places of Jordan shall run
wild with wood."--ISAIAH XXXV.  I. (Septuagint.)


It will, perhaps, be well, as this Lecture is the sequel of one
previously given, that I should shortly state to you my general
intention in both.  The questions specially proposed to you in the
first, namely, How and What to Read, rose out of a far deeper one,
which it was my endeavour to make you propose earnestly to
yourselves, namely, WHY to Read.  I want you to feel, with me, that
whatever advantages we possess in the present day in the diffusion
of education and of literature, can only be rightly used by any of
us when we have apprehended clearly what education is to lead to,
and literature to teach.  I wish you to see that both well-directed
moral training and well-chosen reading lead to the possession of a
power over the ill-guided and illiterate, which is, according to the
measure of it, in the truest sense, KINGLY; conferring indeed the
purest kingship that can exist among men:  too many other kingships
(however distinguished by visible insignia or material power) being
either spectral, or tyrannous;--spectral--that is to say, aspects
and shadows only of royalty, hollow as death, and which only the
"likeness of a kingly crown have on:" or else--tyrannous--that is to
say, substituting their own will for the law of justice and love by
which all true kings rule.

There is, then, I repeat--and as I want to leave this idea with you,
I begin with it, and shall end with it--only one pure kind of
kingship; an inevitable and eternal kind, crowned or not; the
kingship, namely, which consists in a stronger moral state, and a
truer thoughtful state, than that of others; enabling you,
therefore, to guide, or to raise them.  Observe that word "State;"
we have got into a loose way of using it.  It means literally the
standing and stability of a thing; and you have the full force of it
in the derived word "statue"--"the immovable thing."  A king's
majesty or "state," then, and the right of his kingdom to be called
a state, depends on the movelessness of both:- without tremor,
without quiver of balance; established and enthroned upon a
foundation of eternal law which nothing can alter, nor overthrow.

Believing that all literature and all education are only useful so
far as they tend to confirm this calm, beneficent, and THEREFORE
kingly, power--first, over ourselves, and, through ourselves, over
all around us,--I am now going to ask you to consider with me
farther, what special portion or kind of this royal authority,
arising out of noble education, may rightly be possessed by women;
and how far they also are called to a true queenly power,--not in
their households merely, but over all within their sphere.  And in
what sense, if they rightly understood and exercised this royal or
gracious influence, the order and beauty induced by such benignant
power would justify us in speaking of the territories over which
each of them reigned, as "Queens' Gardens."

And here, in the very outset, we are met by a far deeper question,
which--strange though this may seem--remains among many of us yet
quite undecided in spite of its infinite importance.

We cannot determine what the queenly power of women should be, until
we are agreed what their ordinary power should be.  We cannot
consider how education may fit them for any widely extending duty,
until we are agreed what is their true constant duty.  And there
never was a time when wilder words were spoken, or more vain
imagination permitted, respecting this question--quite vital to all
social happiness.  The relations of the womanly to the manly nature,
their different capacities of intellect or of virtue, seem never to
have been yet estimated with entire consent.  We hear of the
"mission" and of the "rights" of Woman, as if these could ever be
separate from the mission and the rights of Man--as if she and her
lord were creatures of independent kind, and of irreconcilable
claim.  This, at least, is wrong.  And not less wrong--perhaps even
more foolishly wrong (for I will anticipate thus far what I hope to
prove)--is the idea that woman is only the shadow and attendant
image of her lord, owing him a thoughtless and servile obedience,
and supported altogether in her weakness by the pre-eminence of his
fortitude.

This, I say, is the most foolish of all errors respecting her who
was made to be the helpmate of man.  As if he could be helped
effectively by a shadow, or worthily by a slave!

Let us try, then, whether we cannot get at some clear and harmonious
idea (it must be harmonious if it is true) of what womanly mind and
virtue are in power and office, with respect to man's; and how their
relations, rightly accepted, aid and increase the vigour and honour
and authority of both.

And now I must repeat one thing I said in the last lecture:  namely,
that the first use of education was to enable us to consult with the
wisest and the greatest men on all points of earnest difficulty.
That to use books rightly, was to go to them for help:  to appeal to
them, when our own knowledge and power of thought failed:  to be led
by them into wider sight,--purer conception,--than our own, and
receive from them the united sentence of the judges and councils of
all time, against our solitary and unstable opinion.

Let us do this now.  Let us see whether the greatest, the wisest,
the purest-hearted of all ages are agreed in any wise on this point:
let us hear the testimony they have left respecting what they held
to be the true dignity of woman, and her mode of help to man.

And first let us take Shakespeare.

Note broadly in the outset, Shakespeare has no heroes;--he has only
heroines.  There is not one entirely heroic figure in all his plays,
except the slight sketch of Henry the Fifth, exaggerated for the
purposes of the stage; and the still slighter Valentine in The Two
Gentlemen of Verona.  In his laboured and perfect plays you have no
hero.  Othello would have been one, if his simplicity had not been
so great as to leave him the prey of every base practice round him;
but he is the only example even approximating to the heroic type.
Coriolanus--Caesar--Antony stand in flawed strength, and fall by
their vanities;--Hamlet is indolent, and drowsily speculative; Romeo
an impatient boy; the Merchant of Venice languidly submissive to
adverse fortune; Kent, in King Lear, is entirely noble at heart, but
too rough and unpolished to be of true use at the critical time, and
he sinks into the office of a servant only.  Orlando, no less noble,
is yet the despairing toy of chance, followed, comforted, saved by
Rosalind.  Whereas there is hardly a play that has not a perfect
woman in it, steadfast in grave hope, and errorless purpose:
Cordelia, Desdemona, Isabella, Hermione, Imogen, Queen Catherine,
Perdita, Sylvia, Viola, Rosalind, Helena, and last, and perhaps
loveliest, Virgilia, are all faultless; conceived in the highest
heroic type of humanity.

Then observe, secondly,

The catastrophe of every play is caused always by the folly or fault
of a man; the redemption, if there be any, is by the wisdom and
virtue of a woman, and, failing that, there is none.  The
catastrophe of King Lear is owing to his own want of judgment, his
impatient vanity, his misunderstanding of his children; the virtue
of his one true daughter would have saved him from all the injuries
of the others, unless he had cast her away from him; as it is, she
all but saves him.

Of Othello I need not trace the tale;--nor the one weakness of his
so mighty love; nor the inferiority of his perceptive intellect to
that even of the second woman character in the play, the Emilia who
dies in wild testimony against his error:-


"Oh, murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool
Do with so good a wife?"


In Romeo and Juliet, the wise and brave stratagem of the wife is
brought to ruinous issue by the reckless impatience of her husband.
In Winter's Tale, and in Cymbeline, the happiness and existence of
two princely households, lost through long years, and imperilled to
the death by the folly and obstinacy of the husbands, are redeemed
at last by the queenly patience and wisdom of the wives.  In Measure
for Measure, the foul injustice of the judge, and the foul cowardice
of the brother, are opposed to the victorious truth and adamantine
purity of a woman.  In Coriolanus, the mother's counsel, acted upon
in time, would have saved her son from all evil; his momentary
forgetfulness of it is his ruin; her prayer, at last granted, saves
him--not, indeed, from death, but from the curse of living as the
destroyer of his country.

And what shall I say of Julia, constant against the fickleness of a
lover who is a mere wicked child?--of Helena, against the petulance
and insult of a careless youth?--of the patience of Hero, the
passion of Beatrice, and the calmly devoted wisdom of the
"unlessoned girl," who appears among the helplessness, the
blindness, and the vindictive passions of men, as a gentle angel,
bringing courage and safety by her presence, and defeating the worst
malignities of crime by what women are fancied most to fail in,--
precision and accuracy of thought.

Observe, further, among all the principal figures in Shakespeare's
plays, there is only one weak woman--Ophelia; and it is because she
fails Hamlet at the critical moment, and is not, and cannot in her
nature be, a guide to him when he needs her most, that all the
bitter catastrophe follows.  Finally, though there are three wicked
women among the principal figures--Lady Macbeth, Regan, and Goneril-
-they are felt at once to be frightful exceptions to the ordinary
laws of life; fatal in their influence also, in proportion to the
power for good which they have abandoned.

Such, in broad light, is Shakespeare's testimony to the position and
character of women in human life.  He represents them as infallibly
faithful and wise counsellors,--incorruptibly just and pure
examples--strong always to sanctify, even when they cannot save.

Not as in any wise comparable in knowledge of the nature of man,--
still less in his understanding of the causes and courses of fate,--
but only as the writer who has given us the broadest view of the
conditions and modes of ordinary thought in modern society, I ask
you next to receive the witness of Walter Scott.

I put aside his merely romantic prose writings as of no value, and
though the early romantic poetry is very beautiful, its testimony is
of no weight, other than that of a boy's ideal.  But his true works,
studied from Scottish life, bear a true witness; and in the whole
range of these, there are but three men who reach the heroic type
{23}--Dandie Dinmont, Rob Roy, and Claverhouse; of these, one is a
border farmer; another a freebooter; the third a soldier in a bad
cause.  And these touch the ideal of heroism only in their courage
and faith, together with a strong, but uncultivated, or mistakenly
applied, intellectual power; while his younger men are the
gentlemanly play-things of fantastic fortune, and only by aid (or
accident) of that fortune, survive, not vanquish, the trials they
involuntarily sustain.  Of any disciplined, or consistent character,
earnest in a purpose wisely conceived, or dealing with forms of
hostile evil, definitely challenged and resolutely subdued, there is
no trace in his conceptions of young men.  Whereas in his
imaginations of women,--in the characters of Ellen Douglas, of Flora
MacIvor, Rose Bradwardine, Catherine Seyton, Diana Vernon, Lilias
Redgauntlet, Alice Bridgenorth, Alice Lee, and Jeanie Deans,--with
endless varieties of grace, tenderness, and intellectual power, we
find in all a quite infallible sense of dignity and justice; a
fearless, instant, and untiring self-sacrifice, to even the
appearance of duty, much more to its real claims; and, finally, a
patient wisdom of deeply-restrained affection, which does infinitely
more than protect its objects from a momentary error; it gradually
forms, animates, and exalts the characters of the unworthy lovers,
until, at the close of the tale, we are just able, and no more, to
take patience in hearing of their unmerited success.

So that, in all cases, with Scott as with Shakespeare, it is the
woman who watches over, teaches, and guides the youth; it is never,
by any chance, the youth who watches over, or educates, his
mistress.

Next take, though more briefly, graver testimony--that of the great
Italians and Greeks.  You know well the plan of Dante's great poem--
that it is a love-poem to his dead lady; a song of praise for her
watch over his soul.  Stooping only to pity, never to love, she yet
saves him from destruction--saves him from hell.  He is going
eternally astray in despair; she comes down from heaven to his help,
and throughout the ascents of Paradise is his teacher, interpreting
for him the most difficult truths, divine and human; and leading
him, with rebuke upon rebuke, from star to star.

I do not insist upon Dante's conception; if I began I could not
cease:  besides, you might think this a wild imagination of one
poet's heart.  So I will rather read to you a few verses of the
deliberate writing of a knight of Pisa to his living lady, wholly
characteristic of the feeling of all the noblest men of the
thirteenth, or early fourteenth, century, preserved among many other
such records of knightly honour and love, which Dante Rossetti has
gathered for us from among the early Italian poets.


"For lo! thy law is passed
That this my love should manifestly be
To serve and honour thee:
And so I do; and my delight is full,
Accepted for the servant of thy rule.

"Without almost, I am all rapturous,
Since thus my will was set
To serve, thou flower of joy, thine excellence:
Nor ever seems it anything could rouse
A pain or a regret.

But on thee dwells my every thought and sense;
Considering that from thee all virtues spread
As from a fountain head,--
THAT IN THY GIFT IS WISDOM'S BEST AVAIL,
AND HONOUR WITHOUT FAIL,
With whom each sovereign good dwells separate,
Fulfilling the perfection of thy state.

"Lady, since I conceived
Thy pleasurable aspect in my heart,
MY LIFE HAS BEEN APART
IN SHINING BRIGHTNESS AND THE PLACE OF TRUTH;
Which till that time, good sooth,
Groped among shadows in a darken'd place,
Where many hours and days
It hardly ever had remember'd good.
But now my servitude
Is thine, and I am full of joy and rest.
A man from a wild beast
Thou madest me, since for thy love I lived."


You may think perhaps a Greek knight would have had a lower estimate
of women than this Christian lover.  His spiritual subjection to
them was indeed not so absolute; but as regards their own personal
character, it was only because you could not have followed me so
easily, that I did not take the Greek women instead of
Shakespeare's; and instance, for chief ideal types of human beauty
and faith, the simple mother's and wife's heart of Andromache; the
divine, yet rejected wisdom of Cassandra; the playful kindness and
simple princess-life of happy Nausicaa; the housewifely calm of that
of Penelope, with its watch upon the sea; the ever patient,
fearless, hopelessly devoted piety of the sister, and daughter, in
Antigone; the bowing down of Iphigenia, lamb-like and silent; and
finally, the expectation of the resurrection, made clear to the soul
of the Greeks in the return from her grave of that Alcestis, who, to
save her husband, had passed calmly through the bitterness of death.

Now I could multiply witness upon witness of this kind upon you if I
had time.  I would take Chaucer, and show you why he wrote a Legend
of Good Women; but no Legend of Good Men.  I would take Spenser, and
show you how all his fairy knights are sometimes deceived and
sometimes vanquished; but the soul of Una is never darkened, and the
spear of Britomart is never broken.  Nay, I could go back into the
mythical teaching of the most ancient times, and show you how the
great people,--by one of whose princesses it was appointed that the
Lawgiver of all the earth should be educated, rather than by his own
kindred;--how that great Egyptian people, wisest then of nations,
gave to their Spirit of Wisdom the form of a Woman; and into her
hand, for a symbol, the weaver's shuttle; and how the name and the
form of that spirit, adopted, believed, and obeyed by the Greeks,
became that Athena of the olive-helm, and cloudy shield, to faith in
whom you owe, down to this date, whatever you hold most precious in
art, in literature, or in types of national virtue.

But I will not wander into this distant and mythical element; I will
only ask you to give its legitimate value to the testimony of these
great poets and men of the world,--consistent, as you see it is, on
this head.  I will ask you whether it can be supposed that these
men, in the main work of their lives, are amusing themselves with a
fictitious and idle view of the relations between man and woman;--
nay, worse than fictitious or idle; for a thing may be imaginary,
yet desirable, if it were possible:  but this, their ideal of woman,
is, according to our common idea of the marriage relation, wholly
undesirable.  The woman, we say, is not to guide, nor even to think
for herself.  The man is always to be the wiser; he is to be the
thinker, the ruler, the superior in knowledge and discretion, as in
power.

Is it not somewhat important to make up our minds on this matter?
Are all these great men mistaken, or are we?  Are Shakespeare and
AEschylus, Dante and Homer, merely dressing dolls for us; or, worse
than dolls, unnatural visions, the realization of which, were it
possible, would bring anarchy into all households and ruin into all
affections?  Nay, if you can suppose this, take lastly the evidence
of facts, given by the human heart itself.  In all Christian ages
which have been remarkable for their purity or progress, there has
been absolute yielding of obedient devotion, by the lover, to his
mistress.  I say OBEDIENT;--not merely enthusiastic and worshipping
in imagination, but entirely subject, receiving from the beloved
woman, however young, not only the encouragement, the praise, and
the reward of all toil, but, so far as any choice is open, or any
question difficult of decision, the DIRECTION of all toil.  That
chivalry, to the abuse and dishonour of which are attributable
primarily whatever is cruel in war, unjust in peace, or corrupt and
ignoble in domestic relations; and to the original purity and power
of which we owe the defence alike of faith, of law, and of love;
that chivalry, I say, in its very first conception of honourable
life, assumes the subjection of the young knight to the command--
should it even be the command in caprice--of his lady.  It assumes
this, because its masters knew that the first and necessary impulse
of every truly taught and knightly heart is this of blind service to
its lady:  that where that true faith and captivity are not, all
wayward and wicked passion must be; and that in this rapturous
obedience to the single love of his youth, is the sanctification of
all man's strength, and the continuance of all his purposes.  And
this, not because such obedience would be safe, or honourable, were
it ever rendered to the unworthy; but because it ought to be
impossible for every noble youth--it IS impossible for every one
rightly trained--to love any one whose gentle counsel he cannot
trust, or whose prayerful command he can hesitate to obey.

I do not insist by any farther argument on this, for I think it
should commend itself at once to your knowledge of what has been and
to your feeling of what should be.  You cannot think that the
buckling on of the knight's armour by his lady's hand was a mere
caprice of romantic fashion.  It is the type of an eternal truth--
that the soul's armour is never well set to the heart unless a
woman's hand has braced it; and it is only when she braces it
loosely that the honour of manhood fails.  Know you not those lovely
lines--I would they were learned by all youthful ladies of England:-


"Ah, wasteful woman!--she who may
On her sweet self set her own price,
Knowing he cannot choose but pay -
How has she cheapen'd Paradise!
How given for nought her priceless gift,
How spoiled the bread and spill'd the wine,
Which, spent with due respective thrift,
Had made brutes men, and men divine!" {24}


Thus much, then, respecting the relations of lovers I believe you
will accept.  But what we too often doubt is the fitness of the
continuance of such a relation throughout the whole of human life.
We think it right in the lover and mistress, not in the husband and
wife.  That is to say, we think that a reverent and tender duty is
due to one whose affection we still doubt, and whose character we as
yet do but partially and distantly discern; and that this reverence
and duty are to be withdrawn when the affection has become wholly
and limitlessly our own, and the character has been so sifted and
tried that we fear not to entrust it with the happiness of our
lives.  Do you not see how ignoble this is, as well as how
unreasonable?  Do you not feel that marriage,--when it is marriage
at all,--is only the seal which marks the vowed transition of
temporary into untiring service, and of fitful into eternal love?

But how, you will ask, is the idea of this guiding function of the
woman reconcilable with a true wifely subjection?  Simply in that it
is a GUIDING, not a determining, function.  Let me try to show you
briefly how these powers seem to be rightly distinguishable.

We are foolish, and without excuse foolish, in speaking of the
"superiority" of one sex to the other, as if they could be compared
in similar things.  Each has what the other has not:  each completes
the other, and is completed by the other:  they are in nothing
alike, and the happiness and perfection of both depends on each
asking and receiving from the other what the other only can give.

Now their separate characters are briefly these.  The man's power is
active, progressive, defensive.  He is eminently the doer, the
creator, the discoverer, the defender.  His intellect is for
speculation and invention; his energy for adventure, for war, and
for conquest, wherever war is just, wherever conquest necessary.
But the woman's power is for rule, not for battle,--and her
intellect is not for invention or creation, but for sweet ordering,
arrangement, and decision.  She sees the qualities of things, their
claims, and their places.  Her great function is Praise; she enters
into no contest, but infallibly adjudges the crown of contest.  By
her office, and place, she is protected from all danger and
temptation.  The man, in his rough work in open world, must
encounter all peril and trial;--to him, therefore, must be the
failure, the offence, the inevitable error:  often he must be
wounded, or subdued; often misled; and ALWAYS hardened.  But he
guards the woman from all this; within his house, as ruled by her,
unless she herself has sought it, need enter no danger, no
temptation, no cause of error or offence.  This is the true nature
of home--it is the place of Peace; the shelter, not only from all
injury, but from all terror, doubt, and division.  In so far as it
is not this, it is not home; so far as the anxieties of the outer
life penetrate into it, and the inconsistently-minded, unknown,
unloved, or hostile society of the outer world is allowed by either
husband or wife to cross the threshold, it ceases to be home; it is
then only a part of that outer world which you have roofed over, and
lighted fire in.  But so far as it is a sacred place, a vestal
temple, a temple of the hearth watched over by Household Gods,
before whose faces none may come but those whom they can receive
with love,--so far as it is this, and roof and fire are types only
of a nobler shade and light,--shade as of the rock in a weary land,
and light as of the Pharos in the stormy sea;--so far it vindicates
the name, and fulfils the praise, of Home.

And wherever a true wife comes, this home is always round her.  The
stars only may be over her head; the glowworm in the night-cold
grass may be the only fire at her foot; but home is yet wherever she
is; and for a noble woman it stretches far round her, better than
ceiled with cedar, or painted with vermilion, shedding its quiet
light far, for those who else were homeless.

This, then, I believe to be,--will you not admit it to be,--the
woman's true place and power?  But do not you see that, to fulfil
this, she must--as far as one can use such terms of a human
creature--be incapable of error?  So far as she rules, all must be
right, or nothing is.  She must be enduringly, incorruptibly good;
instinctively, infallibly wise--wise, not for self-development, but
for self-renunciation:  wise, not that she may set herself above her
husband, but that she may never fail from his side:  wise, not with
the narrowness of insolent and loveless pride, but with the
passionate gentleness of an infinitely variable, because infinitely
applicable, modesty of service--the true changefulness of woman.  In
that great sense--"La donna e mobile," not "Qual pium' al vento";
no, nor yet "Variable as the shade, by the light quivering aspen
made"; but variable as the LIGHT, manifold in fair and serene
division, that it may take the colour of all that it falls upon, and
exalt it.

(II.)  I have been trying, thus far, to show you what should be the
place, and what the power of woman.  Now, secondly, we ask, What
kind of education is to fit her for these?

And if you indeed think this a true conception of her office and
dignity, it will not be difficult to trace the course of education
which would fit her for the one, and raise her to the other.

The first of our duties to her--no thoughtful persons now doubt
this,--is to secure for her such physical training and exercise as
may confirm her health, and perfect her beauty; the highest
refinement of that beauty being unattainable without splendour of
activity and of delicate strength.  To perfect her beauty, I say,
and increase its power; it cannot be too powerful, nor shed its
sacred light too far:  only remember that all physical freedom is
vain to produce beauty without a corresponding freedom of heart.
There are two passages of that poet who is distinguished, it seems
to me, from all others--not by power, but by exquisite RIGHTNESS--
which point you to the source, and describe to you, in a few
syllables, the completion of womanly beauty.  I will read the
introductory stanzas, but the last is the one I wish you specially
to notice:-


"Three years she grew in sun and shower,
Then Nature said, 'A lovelier flower
On earth was never sown;
This child I to myself will take;
She shall be mine, and I will make
A lady of my own.'

'Myself will to my darling be
Both law and impulse; and with me
The girl, in rock and plain,
In earth and heaven, in glade and bower,
Shall feel an overseeing power
To kindle, or restrain.'

'The floating clouds their state shall lend
To her, for her the willow bend;
Nor shall she fail to see,
Even in the motions of the storm,
Grace that shall mould the maiden's form
By silent sympathy.'

'And VITAL FEELINGS OF DELIGHT
Shall rear her form to stately height, -
Her virgin bosom swell.
Such thoughts to Lucy I will give,
While she and I together live,
Here in this happy dell.'" {25}


"VITAL feelings of delight," observe.  There are deadly feelings of
delight; but the natural ones are vital, necessary to very life.

And they must be feelings of delight, if they are to be vital.  Do
not think you can make a girl lovely, if you do not make her happy.
There is not one restraint you put on a good girl's nature--there is
not one check you give to her instincts of affection or of effort--
which will not be indelibly written on her features, with a hardness
which is all the more painful because it takes away the brightness
from the eyes of innocence, and the charm from the brow of virtue.

This for the means:  now note the end.

Take from the same poet, in two lines, a perfect description of
womanly beauty -


"A countenance in which did meet
Sweet records, promises as sweet."


The perfect loveliness of a woman's countenance can only consist in
that majestic peace, which is founded in the memory of happy and
useful years,--full of sweet records; and from the joining of this
with that yet more majestic childishness, which is still full of
change and promise;--opening always--modest at once, and bright,
with hope of better things to be won, and to be bestowed.  There is
no old age where there is still that promise.

Thus, then, you have first to mould her physical frame, and then, as
the strength she gains will permit you, to fill and temper her mind
with all knowledge and thoughts which tend to confirm its natural
instincts of justice, and refine its natural tact of love.

All such knowledge should be given her as may enable her to
understand, and even to aid, the work of men:  and yet it should be
given, not as knowledge,--not as if it were, or could be, for her an
object to know; but only to feel, and to judge.  It is of no moment,
as a matter of pride or perfectness in herself, whether she knows
many languages or one; but it is of the utmost, that she should be
able to show kindness to a stranger, and to understand the sweetness
of a stranger's tongue.  It is of no moment to her own worth or
dignity that she should be acquainted with this science or that; but
it is of the highest that she should be trained in habits of
accurate thought; that she should understand the meaning, the
inevitableness, and the loveliness of natural laws; and follow at
least some one path of scientific attainment, as far as to the
threshold of that bitter Valley of Humiliation, into which only the
wisest and bravest of men can descend, owning themselves for ever
children, gathering pebbles on a boundless shore.  It is of little
consequence how many positions of cities she knows, or how many
dates of events, or names of celebrated persons--it is not the
object of education to turn the woman into a dictionary; but it is
deeply necessary that she should be taught to enter with her whole
personality into the history she reads; to picture the passages of
it vitally in her own bright imagination; to apprehend, with her
fine instincts, the pathetic circumstances and dramatic relations,
which the historian too often only eclipses by his reasoning, and
disconnects by his arrangement:  it is for her to trace the hidden
equities of divine reward, and catch sight, through the darkness, of
the fateful threads of woven fire that connect error with
retribution.  But, chiefly of all, she is to be taught to extend the
limits of her sympathy with respect to that history which is being
for ever determined as the moments pass in which she draws her
peaceful breath; and to the contemporary calamity, which, were it
but rightly mourned by her, would recur no more hereafter.  She is
to exercise herself in imagining what would be the effects upon her
mind and conduct, if she were daily brought into the presence of the
suffering which is not the less real because shut from her sight.
She is to be taught somewhat to understand the nothingness of the
proportion which that little world in which she lives and loves,
bears to the world in which God lives and loves;--and solemnly she
is to be taught to strive that her thoughts of piety may not be
feeble in proportion to the number they embrace, nor her prayer more
languid than it is for the momentary relief from pain of her husband
or her child, when it is uttered for the multitudes of those who
have none to love them,--and is "for all who are desolate and
oppressed."

Thus far, I think, I have had your concurrence; perhaps you will not
be with me in what I believe is most needful for me to say.  There
IS one dangerous science for women--one which they must indeed
beware how they profanely touch--that of theology.  Strange, and
miserably strange, that while they are modest enough to doubt their
powers, and pause at the threshold of sciences where every step is
demonstrable and sure, they will plunge headlong, and without one
thought of incompetency, into that science in which the greatest men
have trembled, and the wisest erred.  Strange, that they will
complacently and pridefully bind up whatever vice or folly there is
in them, whatever arrogance, petulance, or blind
incomprehensiveness, into one bitter bundle of consecrated myrrh.
Strange, in creatures born to be Love visible, that where they can
know least, they will condemn, first, and think to recommend
themselves to their Master, by crawling up the steps of His
judgment-throne to divide it with Him.  Strangest of all that they
should think they were led by the Spirit of the Comforter into
habits of mind which have become in them the unmixed elements of
home discomfort; and that they dare to turn the Household Gods of
Christianity into ugly idols of their own;--spiritual dolls, for
them to dress according to their caprice; and from which their
husbands must turn away in grieved contempt, lest they should be
shrieked at for breaking them.

I believe, then, with this exception, that a girl's education should
be nearly, in its course and material of study, the same as a boy's;
but quite differently directed.  A woman, in any rank of life, ought
to know whatever her husband is likely to know, but to know it in a
different way.  His command of it should be foundational and
progressive; hers, general and accomplished for daily and helpful
use.  Not but that it would often be wiser in men to learn things in
a womanly sort of way, for present use, and to seek for the
discipline and training of their mental powers in such branches of
study as will be afterwards fittest for social service; but,
speaking broadly, a man ought to know any language or science he
learns, thoroughly--while a woman ought to know the same language,
or science, only so far as may enable her to sympathise in her
husband's pleasures, and in those of his best friends.

Yet, observe, with exquisite accuracy as far as she reaches.  There
is a wide difference between elementary knowledge and superficial
knowledge--between a firm beginning, and an infirm attempt at
compassing.  A woman may always help her husband by what she knows,
however little; by what she half-knows, or mis-knows, she will only
tease him.

And indeed, if there were to be any difference between a girl's
education and a boy's, I should say that of the two the girl should
be earlier led, as her intellect ripens faster, into deep and
serious subjects:  and that her range of literature should be, not
more, but less frivolous; calculated to add the qualities of
patience and seriousness to her natural poignancy of thought and
quickness of wit; and also to keep her in a lofty and pure element
of thought.  I enter not now into any question of choice of books;
only let us be sure that her books are not heaped up in her lap as
they fall out of the package of the circulating library, wet with
the last and lightest spray of the fountain of folly.

Or even of the fountain of wit; for with respect to the sore
temptation of novel reading, it is not the badness of a novel that
we should dread, so much as its over-wrought interest.  The weakest
romance is not so stupefying as the lower forms of religious
exciting literature, and the worst romance is not so corrupting as
false history, false philosophy, or false political essays.  But the
best romance becomes dangerous, if, by its excitement, it renders
the ordinary course of life uninteresting, and increases the morbid
thirst for useless acquaintance with scenes in which we shall never
be called upon to act.

I speak therefore of good novels only; and our modern literature is
particularly rich in types of such.  Well read, indeed, these books
have serious use, being nothing less than treatises on moral anatomy
and chemistry; studies of human nature in the elements of it.  But I
attach little weight to this function:  they are hardly ever read
with earnestness enough to permit them to fulfil it.  The utmost
they usually do is to enlarge somewhat the charity of a kind reader,
or the bitterness of a malicious one; for each will gather, from the
novel, food for her own disposition.  Those who are naturally proud
and envious will learn from Thackeray to despise humanity; those who
are naturally gentle, to pity it; those who are naturally shallow,
to laugh at it.  So, also, there might be a serviceable power in
novels to bring before us, in vividness, a human truth which we had
before dimly conceived; but the temptation to picturesqueness of
statement is so great, that often the best writers of fiction cannot
resist it; and our views are rendered so violent and one-sided, that
their vitality is rather a harm than good.

Without, however, venturing here on any attempt at decision how much
novel reading should be allowed, let me at least clearly assert
this,--that whether novels, or poetry, or history be read, they
should be chosen, not for their freedom from evil, but for their
possession of good.  The chance and scattered evil that may here and
there haunt, or hide itself in, a powerful book, never does any harm
to a noble girl; but the emptiness of an author oppresses her, and
his amiable folly degrades her.  And if she can have access to a
good library of old and classical books, there need be no choosing
at all.  Keep the modern magazine and novel out of your girl's way:
turn her loose into the old library every wet day, and let her
alone.  She will find what is good for her; you cannot:  for there
is just this difference between the making of a girl's character and
a boy's--you may chisel a boy into shape, as you would a rock, or
hammer him into it, if he be of a better kind, as you would a piece
of bronze.  But you cannot hammer a girl into anything.  She grows
as a flower does,--she will wither without sun; she will decay in
her sheath, as a narcissus will, if you do not give her air enough;
she may fall, and defile her head in dust, if you leave her without
help at some moments of her life; but you cannot fetter her; she
must take her own fair form and way, if she take any, and in mind as
in body, must have always


"Her household motions light and free
And steps of virgin liberty."


Let her loose in the library, I say, as you do a fawn in a field.
It knows the bad weeds twenty times better than you; and the good
ones too, and will eat some bitter and prickly ones, good for it,
which you had not the slightest thought would have been so.

Then, in art, keep the finest models before her, and let her
practice in all accomplishments be accurate and thorough, so as to
enable her to understand more than she accomplishes.  I say the
finest models--that is to say, the truest, simplest, usefullest.
Note those epithets:  they will range through all the arts.  Try
them in music, where you might think them the least applicable.  I
say the truest, that in which the notes most closely and faithfully
express the meaning of the words, or the character of intended
emotion; again, the simplest, that in which the meaning and melody
are attained with the fewest and most significant notes possible;
and, finally, the usefullest, that music which makes the best words
most beautiful, which enchants them in our memories each with its
own glory of sound, and which applies them closest to the heart at
the moment we need them.

And not only in the material and in the course, but yet more
earnestly in the spirit of it, let a girl's education be as serious
as a boy's.  You bring up your girls as if they were meant for
sideboard ornaments, and then complain of their frivolity.  Give
them the same advantages that you give their brothers--appeal to the
same grand instincts of virtue in them; teach THEM, also, that
courage and truth are the pillars of their being:- do you think that
they would not answer that appeal, brave and true as they are even
now, when you know that there is hardly a girls' school in this
Christian kingdom where the children's courage or sincerity would be
thought of half so much importance as their way of coming in at a
door; and when the whole system of society, as respects the mode of
establishing them in life, is one rotten plague of cowardice and
imposture--cowardice, in not daring to let them live, or love,
except as their neighbours choose; and imposture, in bringing, for
the purposes of our own pride, the full glow of the world's worst
vanity upon a girl's eyes, at the very period when the whole
happiness of her future existence depends upon her remaining
undazzled?

And give them, lastly, not only noble teachings, but noble teachers.
You consider somewhat before you send your boy to school, what kind
of a man the master is;--whatsoever kind of a man he is, you at
least give him full authority over your son, and show some respect
to him yourself;--if he comes to dine with you, you do not put him
at a side table:  you know also that, at college, your child's
immediate tutor will be under the direction of some still higher
tutor,--for whom you have absolute reverence.  You do not treat the
Dean of Christ Church or the Master of Trinity as your inferiors.

But what teachers do you give your girls, and what reverence do you
show to the teachers you have chosen?  Is a girl likely to think her
own conduct, or her own intellect, of much importance, when you
trust the entire formation of her character, moral and intellectual,
to a person whom you let your servants treat with less respect than
they do your housekeeper (as if the soul of your child were a less
charge than jams and groceries), and whom you yourself think you
confer an honour upon by letting her sometimes sit in the drawing-
room in the evening?

Thus, then, of literature as her help, and thus of art.  There is
one more help which she cannot do without--one which, alone, has
sometimes done more than all other influences besides,--the help of
wild and fair nature.  Hear this of the education of Joan of Arc:-


"The education of this poor girl was mean, according to the present
standard; was ineffably grand, according to a purer philosophic
standard; and only not good for our age, because for us it would be
unattainable.

" Next after her spiritual advantages, she owed most to the
advantages of her situation.  The fountain of Domremy was on the
brink of a boundless forest; and it was haunted to that degree by
fairies, that the parish priest (cure) was obliged to read mass
there once a year, in order to keep them in decent bounds.

"But the forests of Domremy--those were the glories of the land; for
in them abode mysterious powers and ancient secrets that towered
into tragic strength.  Abbeys there were, and abbey windows,--'like
Moorish temples of the Hindoos,' that exercised even princely power
both in Touraine and in the German Diets.  These had their sweet
bells that pierced the forests for many a league at matins or
vespers, and each its own dreamy legend.  Few enough, and scattered
enough, were these abbeys, so as in no degree to disturb the deep
solitude of the region; yet many enough to spread a network or
awning of Christian sanctity over what else might have seemed a
heathen wilderness." {26}

Now, you cannot, indeed, have here in England, woods eighteen miles
deep to the centre; but you can, perhaps, keep a fairy or two for
your children yet, if you wish to keep them.  But DO you wish it?
Suppose you had each, at the back of your houses, a garden, large
enough for your children to play in, with just as much lawn as would
give them room to run,--no more--and that you could not change your
abode; but that, if you chose, you could double your income, or
quadruple it, by digging a coal shaft in the middle of the lawn, and
turning the flower-beds into heaps of coke.  Would you do it?  I
hope not.  I can tell you, you would be wrong if you did, though it
gave you income sixty-fold instead of four-fold.

Yet this is what you are doing with all England.  The whole country
is but a little garden, not more than enough for your children to
run on the lawns of, if you would let them all run there.  And this
little garden you will turn into furnace ground, and fill with heaps
of cinders, if you can; and those children of yours, not you, will
suffer for it.  For the fairies will not be all banished; there are
fairies of the furnace as of the wood, and their first gifts seem to
be "sharp arrows of the mighty;" but their last gifts are "coals of
juniper."

And yet I cannot--though there is no part of my subject that I feel
more--press this upon you; for we made so little use of the power of
nature while we had it that we shall hardly feel what we have lost.
Just on the other side of the Mersey you have your Snowdon, and your
Menai Straits, and that mighty granite rock beyond the moors of
Anglesea, splendid in its heathery crest, and foot planted in the
deep sea, once thought of as sacred--a divine promontory, looking
westward; the Holy Head or Headland, still not without awe when its
red light glares first through storm.  These are the hills, and
these the bays and blue inlets, which, among the Greeks, would have
been always loved, always fateful in influence on the national mind.
That Snowdon is your Parnassus; but where are its Muses?  That
Holyhead mountain is your Island of AEgina; but where is its Temple
to Minerva?

Shall I read you what the Christian Minerva had achieved under the
shadow of our Parnassus up to the year 1848?--Here is a little
account of a Welsh school, from page 261 of the Report on Wales,
published by the Committee of Council on Education.  This is a
school close to a town containing 5,000 persons:-


"I then called up a larger class, most of whom had recently come to
the school.  Three girls repeatedly declared they had never heard of
Christ, and two that they had never heard of God.  Two out of six
thought Christ was on earth now" (they might have had a worse
thought perhaps), "three knew nothing about the Crucifixion.  Four
out of seven did not know the names of the months nor the number of
days in a year.  They had no notion of addition beyond two and two,
or three and three; their minds were perfect blanks."


Oh, ye women of England! from the Princess of that Wales to the
simplest of you, do not think your own children can be brought into
their true fold of rest, while these are scattered on the hills, as
sheep having no shepherd.  And do not think your daughters can be
trained to the truth of their own human beauty, while the pleasant
places, which God made at once for their schoolroom and their
playground, lie desolate and defiled.  You cannot baptize them
rightly in those inch-deep fonts of yours, unless you baptize them
also in the sweet waters which the great Lawgiver strikes forth for
ever from the rocks of your native land--waters which a Pagan would
have worshipped in their purity, and you worship only with
pollution.  You cannot lead your children faithfully to those narrow
axe-hewn church altars of yours, while the dark azure altars in
heaven--the mountains that sustain your island throne,--mountains on
which a Pagan would have seen the powers of heaven rest in every
wreathed cloud--remain for you without inscription; altars built,
not to, but by an Unknown God.

(III.)  Thus far, then, of the nature, thus far of the teaching, of
woman, and thus of her household office, and queenliness.  We now
come to our last, our widest question.--What is her queenly office
with respect to the state?

Generally, we are under an impression that a man's duties are
public, and a woman's private.  But this is not altogether so.  A
man has a personal work or duty, relating to his own home, and a
public work or duty, which is the expansion of the other, relating
to the state.  So a woman has a personal work or duty, relating to
her own home, and a public work or duty, which is also the expansion
of that.

Now the man's work for his own home is, as has been said, to secure
its maintenance, progress, and defence; the woman's to secure its
order, comfort, and loveliness.

Expand both these functions.  The man's duty as a member of a
commonwealth, is to assist in the maintenance, in the advance, in
the defence of the state.  The woman's duty, as a member of the
commonwealth, is to assist in the ordering, in the comforting, and
in the beautiful adornment of the state.

What the man is at his own gate, defending it, if need be, against
insult and spoil, that also, not in a less, but in a more devoted
measure, he is to be at the gate of his country, leaving his home,
if need be, even to the spoiler, to do his more incumbent work
there.

And, in like manner, what the woman is to be within her gates, as
the centre of order, the balm of distress, and the mirror of beauty:
that she is also to be without her gates, where order is more
difficult, distress more imminent, loveliness more rare.

And as within the human heart there is always set an instinct for
all its real duties,--an instinct which you cannot quench, but only
warp and corrupt if you withdraw it from its true purpose:- as there
is the intense instinct of love, which, rightly disciplined,
maintains all the sanctities of life, and, misdirected, undermines
them; and MUST do either the one or the other;--so there is in the
human heart an inextinguishable instinct, the love of power, which,
rightly directed, maintains all the majesty of law and life, and,
misdirected, wrecks them.

Deep rooted in the innermost life of the heart of man, and of the
heart of woman, God set it there, and God keeps it there.--Vainly,
as falsely, you blame or rebuke the desire of power!--For Heaven's
sake, and for Man's sake, desire it all you can.  But WHAT power?
That is all the question.  Power to destroy? the lion's limb, and
the dragon's breath?  Not so.  Power to heal, to redeem, to guide,
and to guard.  Power of the sceptre and shield; the power of the
royal hand that heals in touching,--that binds the fiend, and looses
the captive; the throne that is founded on the rock of Justice, and
descended from only by steps of Mercy.  Will you not covet such
power as this, and seek such throne as this, and be no more
housewives, but queens?

It is now long since the women of England arrogated, universally, a
title which once belonged to nobility only; and, having once been in
the habit of accepting the simple title of gentlewoman as
correspondent to that of gentleman, insisted on the privilege of
assuming the title of "Lady," {27} which properly corresponds only
to the title of "Lord."

I do not blame them for this; but only for their narrow motive in
this.  I would have them desire and claim the title of Lady,
provided they claim, not merely the title, but the office and duty
signified by it.  Lady means "bread-giver" or "loaf-giver," and Lord
means "maintainer of laws," and both titles have reference, not to
the law which is maintained in the house, nor to the bread which is
given to the household; but to law maintained for the multitude, and
to bread broken among the multitude.  So that a Lord has legal claim
only to his title in so far as he is the maintainer of the justice
of the Lord of lords; and a Lady has legal claim to her title only
so far as she communicates that help to the poor representatives of
her Master, which women once, ministering to Him of their substance,
were permitted to extend to that Master Himself; and when she is
known, as He Himself once was, in breaking of bread.

And this beneficent and legal dominion, this power of the Dominus,
or House-Lord, and of the Domina, or House-Lady, is great and
venerable, not in the number of those through whom it has lineally
descended, but in the number of those whom it grasps within its
sway; it is always regarded with reverent worship wherever its
dynasty is founded on its duty, and its ambition correlative with
its beneficence.  Your fancy is pleased with the thought of being
noble ladies, with a train of vassals.  Be it so; you cannot be too
noble, and your train cannot be too great; but see to it that your
train is of vassals whom you serve and feed, not merely of slaves
who serve and feed you; and that the multitude which obeys you is of
those whom you have comforted, not oppressed,--whom you have
redeemed, not led into captivity.

And this, which is true of the lower or household dominion, is
equally true of the queenly dominion; that highest dignity is open
to you, if you will also accept that highest duty.  Rex et Regina--
Roi et Reine--"RIGHT-doers;" they differ but from the Lady and Lord,
in that their power is supreme over the mind as over the person--
that they not only feed and clothe, but direct and teach.  And
whether consciously or not, you must be, in many a heart, enthroned:
there is no putting by that crown; queens you must always be:
queens to your lovers; queens to your husbands and your sons; queens
of higher mystery to the world beyond, which bows itself, and will
for ever bow, before the myrtle crown and the stainless sceptre of
womanhood.  But, alas! you are too often idle and careless queens,
grasping at majesty in the least things, while you abdicate it in
the greatest; and leaving misrule and violence to work their will
among men, in defiance of the power which, holding straight in gift
from the Prince of all Peace, the wicked among you betray, and the
good forget.

"Prince of Peace."  Note that name.  When kings rule in that name,
and nobles, and the judges of the earth, they also, in their narrow
place, and mortal measure, receive the power of it.  There are no
other rulers than they; other rule than theirs is but MISrule; they
who govern verily "Dei Gratia" are all princes, yes, or princesses
of Peace.  There is not a war in the world, no, nor an injustice,
but you women are answerable for it; not in that you have provoked,
but in that you have not hindered.  Men, by their nature, are prone
to fight; they will fight for any cause, or for none.  It is for you
to choose their cause for them, and to forbid them when there is no
cause.  There is no suffering, no injustice, no misery, in the
earth, but the guilt of it lies with you.  Men can bear the sight of
it, but you should not be able to bear it.  Men may tread it down
without sympathy in their own struggle; but men are feeble in
sympathy, and contracted in hope; it is you only who can feel the
depths of pain, and conceive the way of its healing.  Instead of
trying to do this, you turn away from it; you shut yourselves within
your park walls and garden gates; and you are content to know that
there is beyond them a whole world in wilderness--a world of secrets
which you dare not penetrate; and of suffering which you dare not
conceive.

I tell you that this is to me quite the most amazing among the
phenomena of humanity.  I am surprised at no depths to which, when
once warped from its honour, that humanity can be degraded.  I do
not wonder at the miser's death, with his hands, as they relax,
dropping gold.  I do not wonder at the sensualist's life, with the
shroud wrapped about his feet.  I do not wonder at the single-handed
murder of a single victim, done by the assassin in the darkness of
the railway, or reed shadow of the marsh.  I do not even wonder at
the myriad-handed murder of multitudes, done boastfully in the
daylight, by the frenzy of nations, and the immeasurable,
unimaginable guilt heaped up from hell to heaven, of their priests,
and kings.  But this is wonderful to me--oh, how wonderful!--to see
the tender and delicate woman among you, with her child at her
breast, and a power, if she would wield it, over it, and over its
father, purer than the air of heaven, and stronger than the seas of
earth--nay, a magnitude of blessing which her husband would not part
with for all that earth itself, though it were made of one entire
and perfect chrysolite:- to see her abdicate this majesty to play at
precedence with her next-door neighbour!  This is wonderful--oh,
wonderful!--to see her, with every innocent feeling fresh within
her, go out in the morning into her garden to play with the fringes
of its guarded flowers, and lift their heads when they are drooping,
with her happy smile upon her face, and no cloud upon her brow,
because there is a little wall around her place of peace:  and yet
she knows, in her heart, if she would only look for its knowledge,
that, outside of that little rose-covered wall, the wild grass, to
the horizon, is torn up by the agony of men, and beat level by the
drift of their life-blood.

Have you ever considered what a deep under meaning there lies, or at
least may be read, if we choose, in our custom of strewing flowers
before those whom we think most happy?  Do you suppose it is merely
to deceive them into the hope that happiness is always to fall thus
in showers at their feet?--that wherever they pass they will tread
on herbs of sweet scent, and that the rough ground will be made
smooth for them by depths of roses?  So surely as they believe that,
they will have, instead, to walk on bitter herbs and thorns; and the
only softness to their feet will be of snow.  But it is not thus
intended they should believe; there is a better meaning in that old
custom.  The path of a good woman is indeed strewn with flowers; but
they rise behind her steps, not before them.  "Her feet have touched
the meadows, and left the daisies rosy."

You think that only a lover's fancy;--false and vain!  How if it
could be true?  You think this also, perhaps, only a poet's fancy -


"Even the light harebell raised its head
Elastic from her airy tread."


But it is little to say of a woman, that she only does not destroy
where she passes.  She should revive; the harebells should bloom,
not stoop, as she passes.  You think I am rushing into wild
hyperbole!  Pardon me, not a whit--I mean what I say in calm
English, spoken in resolute truth.  You have heard it said--(and I
believe there is more than fancy even in that saying, but let it
pass for a fanciful one)--that flowers only flourish rightly in the
garden of some one who loves them.  I know you would like that to be
true; you would think it a pleasant magic if you could flush your
flowers into brighter bloom by a kind look upon them:  nay, more, if
your look had the power, not only to cheer, but to guard;--if you
could bid the black blight turn away, and the knotted caterpillar
spare--if you could bid the dew fall upon them in the drought, and
say to the south wind, in frost--"Come, thou south, and breathe upon
my garden, that the spices of it may flow out."  This you would
think a great thing?  And do you think it not a greater thing, that
all this, (and how much more than this!) you CAN do, for fairer
flowers than these--flowers that could bless you for having blessed
them, and will love you for having loved them; flowers that have
thoughts like yours, and lives like yours; and which, once saved,
you save for ever?  Is this only a little power?  Far among the
moorlands and the rocks,--far in the darkness of the terrible
streets,--these feeble florets are lying, with all their fresh
leaves torn, and their stems broken:  will you never go down to
them, nor set them in order in their little fragrant beds, nor fence
them in their trembling, from the fierce wind?  Shall morning follow
morning, for you, but not for them; and the dawn rise to watch, far
away, those frantic Dances of Death; {28} but no dawn rise to
breathe upon these living banks of wild violet, and woodbine, and
rose; nor call to you, through your casement--call (not giving you
the name of the English poet's lady, but the name of Dante's great
Matilda, who, on the edge of happy Lethe, stood, wreathing flowers
with flowers), saying:-


"Come into the garden, Maud,
For the black bat, night, has flown,
And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad,
And the musk of the roses blown"?


Will you not go down among them?--among those sweet living things,
whose new courage, sprung from the earth with the deep colour of
heaven upon it, is starting up in strength of goodly spire; and
whose purity, washed from the dust, is opening, bud by bud, into the
flower of promise;--and still they turn to you, and for you, "The
Larkspur listens--I hear, I hear!  And the Lily whispers--I wait."

Did you notice that I missed two lines when I read you that first
stanza; and think that I had forgotten them?  Hear them now:-


"Come into the garden, Maud,
For the black bat, night, has flown,
Come into the garden, Maud,
I am here at the gate, alone."


Who is it, think you, who stands at the gate of this sweeter garden
alone, waiting for you?  Did you ever hear, not of a Maud, but a
Madeleine, who went down to her garden in the dawn, and found One
waiting at the gate, whom she supposed to be the gardener?  Have you
not sought Him often;--sought Him in vain, all through the night;--
sought Him in vain at the gate of that old garden where the fiery
sword is set?  He is never there; but at the gate of THIS garden He
is waiting always--waiting to take your hand--ready to go down to
see the fruits of the valley, to see whether the vine has
flourished, and the pomegranate budded.  There you shall see with
Him the little tendrils of the vines that His hand is guiding--there
you shall see the pomegranate springing where His hand cast the
sanguine seed;--more:  you shall see the troops of the angel keepers
that, with their wings, wave away the hungry birds from the path-
sides where He has sown, and call to each other between the vineyard
rows, "Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines,
for our vines have tender grapes."  Oh--you queens--you queens!
among the hills and happy greenwood of this land of yours, shall the
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; and in your
cities, shall the stones cry out against you, that they are the only
pillows where the Son of Man can lay His head?



PREFACE TO THE LATER EDITIONS



Being now fifty-one years old, and little likely to change my mind
hereafter on any important subject of thought (unless through
weakness of age), I wish to publish a connected series of such parts
of my works as now seem to me right, and likely to be of permanent
use.  In doing so I shall omit much, but not attempt to mend what I
think worth reprinting.  A young man necessarily writes otherwise
than an old one, and it would be worse than wasted time to try to
recast the juvenile language:  nor is it to be thought that I am
ashamed even of what I cancel; for great part of my earlier work was
rapidly written for temporary purposes, and is now unnecessary,
though true, even to truism.  What I wrote about religion, was, on
the contrary, painstaking, and, I think, forcible, as compared with
most religious writing; especially in its frankness and
fearlessness:  but it was wholly mistaken:  for I had been educated
in the doctrines of a narrow sect, and had read history as obliquely
as sectarians necessarily must.

Mingled among these either unnecessary or erroneous statements, I
find, indeed, some that might be still of value; but these, in my
earlier books, disfigured by affected language, partly through the
desire to be thought a fine writer, and partly, as in the second
volume of 'Modern Painters,' in the notion of returning as far as I
could to what I thought the better style of old English literature,
especially to that of my then favourite, in prose, Richard Hooker.

For these reasons,--though, as respects either art, policy, or
morality, as distinct from religion, I not only still hold, but
would even wish strongly to re-affirm the substance of what I said
in my earliest books,--I shall reprint scarcely anything in this
series out of the first and second volumes of 'Modern Painters'; and
shall omit much of the 'Seven Lamps' and 'Stones of Venice'; but all
my books written within the last fifteen years will be republished
without change, as new editions of them are called for, with here
and there perhaps an additional note, and having their text divided,
for convenient reference, into paragraphs, consecutive through each
volume.  I shall also throw together the shorter fragments that bear
on each other, and fill in with such unprinted lectures or studies
as seem to me worth preserving, so as to keep the volumes, on an
average, composed of about a hundred leaves each.

The first book of which a new edition is required chances to be
'Sesame and Lilies,' from which I now detach the whole preface,
about the Alps, for use elsewhere; and to I which I add a lecture
given in Ireland on a subject closely connected with that of the
book itself.  I am glad that it should be the first of the complete
series, for many reasons; though in now looking over these two
lectures, I am painfully struck by the waste of good work in them.
They cost me much thought, and much strong emotion; but it was
foolish to suppose that I could rouse my audiences in a little while
to any sympathy with the temper into which I had brought myself by
years of thinking over subjects full of pain; while, if I missed my
purpose at the time, it was little to be hoped I could attain it
afterwards; since phrases written for oral delivery become
ineffective when quietly read.  Yet I should only take away what
good is in them if I tried to translate them into the language of
books; nor, indeed, could I at all have done so at the time of their
delivery, my thoughts then habitually and impatiently putting
themselves into forms fit only for emphatic speech; and thus I am
startled, in my review of them, to find that, though there is much,
(forgive me the impertinence) which seems to me accurately and
energetically said, there is scarcely anything put in a form to be
generally convincing, or even easily intelligible:  and I can well
imagine a reader laying down the book without being at all moved by
it, still less guided, to any definite course of action.

I think, however, if I now say briefly and clearly what I meant my
hearers to understand, and what I wanted, and still would fain have,
them to do, there may afterwards be found some better service in the
passionately written text.

The first lecture says, or tries to say, that, life being very
short, and the quiet hours of it few, we ought to waste none of them
in reading valueless books; and that valuable books should, in a
civilized country, be within the reach of every one, printed in
excellent form, for a just price; but not in any vile, vulgar, or,
by reason of smallness of type, physically injurious form, at a vile
price.  For we none of us need many books, and those which we need
ought to be clearly printed, on the best paper, and strongly bound.
And though we are, indeed, now, a wretched and poverty-struck
nation, and hardly able to keep soul and body together, still, as no
person in decent circumstances would put on his table confessedly
bad wine, or bad meat, without being ashamed, so he need not have on
his shelves ill-printed or loosely and wretchedly-stitched books;
for though few can be rich, yet every man who honestly exerts
himself may, I think, still provide, for himself and his family,
good shoes, good gloves, strong harness for his cart or carriage
horses, and stout leather binding for his books.  And I would urge
upon every young man, as the beginning of his due and wise provision
for his household, to obtain as soon as he can, by the severest
economy, a restricted, serviceable, and steadily--however slowly--
increasing, series of books for use through life; making his little
library, of all the furniture in his room, the most studied and
decorative piece; every volume having its assigned place, like a
little statue in its niche, and one of the earliest and strictest
lessons to the children of the house being how to turn the pages of
their own literary possessions lightly and deliberately, with no
chance of tearing or dog's ears.

That is my notion of the founding of Kings' Treasuries; and the
first lecture is intended to show somewhat the use and preciousness
of their treasures:  but the two following ones have wider scope,
being written in the hope of awakening the youth of England, so far
as my poor words might have any power with them, to take some
thought of the purposes of the life into which they are entering,
and the nature of the world they have to conquer.

These two lectures are fragmentary and ill-arranged, but not, I
think, diffuse or much compressible.  The entire gist and conclusion
of them, however, is in the last six paragraphs of the third
lecture, which I would beg the reader to look over not once nor
twice, (rather than any other part of the book,) for they contain
the best expression I have yet been able to put in words of what, so
far as is within my power, I mean henceforward both to do myself,
and to plead with all over whom I have any influence, to do also
according to their means:  the letters begun on the first day of
this year, to the workmen of England, having the object of
originating, if possible, this movement among them, in true alliance
with whatever trustworthy element of help they can find in the
higher classes.  After these paragraphs, let me ask you to read, by
the fiery light of recent events, the fable at p. 170 {1}, and then
paragraphs 129-131 {2}; and observe, my statement respecting the
famine at Orissa is not rhetorical, but certified by official
documents as within the truth.  Five hundred thousand persons, AT
LEAST, died by starvation in our British dominions, wholly in
consequence of carelessness and want of forethought.  Keep that well
in your memory; and note it as the best possible illustration of
modern political economy in true practice, and of the relations it
has accomplished between Supply and Demand.  Then begin the second
lecture, and all will read clear enough, I think, to the end; only,
since that second lecture was written, questions have arisen
respecting the education and claims of women which have greatly
troubled simple minds and excited restless ones.  I am sometimes
asked my thoughts on this matter, and I suppose that some girl
readers of the second lecture may at the end of it desire to be told
summarily what I would have them do and desire in the present state
of things.  This, then, is what I would say to any girl who had
confidence enough in me to believe what I told her, or to do what I
asked her.

First, be quite sure of one thing, that, however much you may know,
and whatever advantages you may possess, and however good you may
be, you have not been singled out, by the God who made you, from all
the other girls in the world, to be especially informed respecting
His own nature and character.  You have not been born in a luminous
point upon the surface of the globe, where a perfect theology might
be expounded to you from your youth up, and where everything you
were taught would be true, and everything that was enforced upon
you, right.  Of all the insolent, all the foolish persuasions that
by any chance could enter and hold your empty little heart, this is
the proudest and foolishest,--that you have been so much the darling
of the Heavens, and favourite of the Fates, as to be born in the
very nick of time, and in the punctual place, when and where pure
Divine truth had been sifted from the errors of the Nations; and
that your papa had been providentially disposed to buy a house in
the convenient neighbourhood of the steeple under which that
Immaculate and final verity would be beautifully proclaimed.  Do not
think it, child; it is not so.  This, on the contrary, is the fact,-
-unpleasant you may think it; pleasant, it seems to ME,--that you,
with all your pretty dresses, and dainty looks, and kindly thoughts,
and saintly aspirations, are not one whit more thought of or loved
by the great Maker and Master than any poor little red, black, or
blue savage, running wild in the pestilent woods, or naked on the
hot sands of the earth:  and that, of the two, you probably know
less about God than she does; the only difference being that she
thinks little of Him that is right, and you much that is wrong.

That, then, is the first thing to make sure of;--that you are not
yet perfectly well informed on the most abstruse of all possible
subjects, and that if you care to behave with modesty or propriety,
you had better be silent about it.

The second thing which you may make sure of is, that however good
you may be, you have faults; that however dull you may be, you can
find out what some of them are; and that however slight they may be,
you had better make some--not too painful, but patient--effort to
get quit of them.  And so far as you have confidence in me at all,
trust me for this, that how many soever you may find or fancy your
faults to be, there are only two that are of real consequence,--
Idleness and Cruelty.  Perhaps you may be proud.  Well, we can get
much good out of pride, if only it be not religious.  Perhaps you
may be vain; it is highly probable; and very pleasant for the people
who like to praise you.  Perhaps you are a little envious:  that is
really very shocking; but then--so is everybody else.  Perhaps,
also, you are a little malicious, which I am truly concerned to
hear, but should probably only the more, if I knew you, enjoy your
conversation.  But whatever else you may be, you must not be
useless, and you must not be cruel.  If there is any one point
which, in six thousand years of thinking about right and wrong, wise
and good men have agreed upon, or successively by experience
discovered, it is that God dislikes idle and cruel people more than
any others:- that His first order is, "Work while you have light;"
and His second, "Be merciful while you have mercy."

"Work while you have light," especially while you have the light of
morning.  There are few things more wonderful to me than that old
people never tell young ones how precious their youth is.  They
sometimes sentimentally regret their own earlier days; sometimes
prudently forget them; often foolishly rebuke the young, often more
foolishly indulge, often most foolishly thwart and restrain; but
scarcely ever warn or watch them.  Remember, then, that I, at least,
have warned YOU, that the happiness of your life, and its power, and
its part and rank in earth or in heaven, depend on the way you pass
your days now.  They are not to be sad days:  far from that, the
first duty of young people is to be delighted and delightful; but
they are to be in the deepest sense solemn days.  There is no
solemnity so deep, to a rightly-thinking creature, as that of dawn.
But not only in that beautiful sense, but in all their character and
method, they are to be solemn days.  Take your Latin dictionary, and
look out "solennis," and fix the sense of the word well in your
mind, and remember that every day of your early life is ordaining
irrevocably, for good or evil, the custom and practice of your soul;
ordaining either sacred customs of dear and lovely recurrence, or
trenching deeper and deeper the furrows for seed of sorrow.  Now,
therefore, see that no day passes in which you do not make yourself
a somewhat better creature:  and in order to do that, find out,
first, what you are now.  Do not think vaguely about it; take pen
and paper, and write down as accurate a description of yourself as
you can, with the date to it.  If you dare not do so, find out why
you dare not, and try to get strength of heart enough to look
yourself fairly in the face in mind as well as body.  I do not doubt
but that the mind is a less pleasant thing to look at than the face,
and for that very reason it needs more looking at; so always have
two mirrors on your toilet table, and see that with proper care you
dress body and mind before them daily.  After the dressing is once
over for the day, think no more about it:  as your hair will blow
about your ears, so your temper and thoughts will get ruffled with
the day's work, and may need, sometimes, twice dressing; but I don't
want you to carry about a mental pocket-comb; only to be smooth
braided always in the morning.

Write down then, frankly, what you are, or, at least, what you think
yourself, not dwelling upon those inevitable faults which I have
just told you are of little consequence, and which the action of a
right life will shake or smooth away; but that you may determine to
the best of your intelligence what you are good for and can be made
into.  You will find that the mere resolve not to be useless, and
the honest desire to help other people, will, in the quickest and
delicatest ways, improve yourself.  Thus, from the beginning,
consider all your accomplishments as means of assistance to others;
read attentively, in this volume, paragraphs 74, 75, 19, and 79, {3}
and you will understand what I mean, with respect to languages and
music.  In music especially you will soon find what personal benefit
there is in being serviceable:  it is probable that, however limited
your powers, you have voice and ear enough to sustain a note of
moderate compass in a concerted piece;--that, then, is the first
thing to make sure you can do.  Get your voice disciplined and
clear, and think only of accuracy; never of effect or expression:
if you have any soul worth expressing, it will show itself in your
singing; but most likely there are very few feelings in you, at
present, needing any particular expression; and the one thing you
have to do is to make a clear-voiced little instrument of yourself,
which other people can entirely depend upon for the note wanted.
So, in drawing, as soon as you can set down the right shape of
anything, and thereby explain its character to another person, or
make the look of it clear and interesting to a child, you will begin
to enjoy the art vividly for its own sake, and all your habits of
mind and powers of memory will gain precision:  but if you only try
to make showy drawings for praise, or pretty ones for amusement,
your drawing will have little of real interest for you, and no
educational power whatever.

Then, besides this more delicate work, resolve to do every day some
that is useful in the vulgar sense.  Learn first thoroughly the
economy of the kitchen; the good and bad qualities of every common
article of food, and the simplest and best modes of their
preparation:  when you have time, go and help in the cooking of
poorer families, and show them how to make as much of everything as
possible, and how to make little, nice; coaxing and tempting them
into tidy and pretty ways, and pleading for well-folded table-
cloths, however coarse, and for a flower or two out of the garden to
strew on them.  If you manage to get a clean table-cloth, bright
plates on it, and a good dish in the middle, of your own cooking,
you may ask leave to say a short grace; and let your religious
ministries be confined to that much for the present.

Again, let a certain part of your day (as little as you choose, but
not to be broken in upon) be set apart for making strong and pretty
dresses for the poor.  Learn the sound qualities of all useful
stuffs, and make everything of the best you can get, whatever its
price.  I have many reasons for desiring you to do this,--too many
to be told just now,--trust me, and be sure you get everything as
good as can be:  and if, in the villainous state of modern trade,
you cannot get it good at any price, buy its raw material, and set
some of the poor women about you to spin and weave, till you have
got stuff that can be trusted:  and then, every day, make some
little piece of useful clothing, sewn with your own fingers as
strongly as it can be stitched; and embroider it or otherwise
beautify it moderately with fine needlework, such as a girl may be
proud of having done.  And accumulate these things by you until you
hear of some honest persons in need of clothing, which may often too
sorrowfully be; and, even though you should be deceived, and give
them to the dishonest, and hear of their being at once taken to the
pawnbroker's, never mind that, for the pawnbroker must sell them to
some one who has need of them.  That is no business of yours; what
concerns you is only that when you see a half-naked child, you
should have good and fresh clothes to give it, if its parents will
let it be taught to wear them.  If they will not, consider how they
came to be of such a mind, which it will be wholesome for you beyond
most subjects of inquiry to ascertain.  And after you have gone on
doing this a little while, you will begin to understand the meaning
of at least one chapter of your Bible, Proverbs xxxi., without need
of any laboured comment, sermon, or meditation.

In these, then (and of course in all minor ways besides, that you
can discover in your own household), you must be to the best of your
strength usefully employed during the greater part of the day, so
that you may be able at the end of it to say, as proudly as any
peasant, that you have not eaten the bread of idleness.

Then, secondly, I said, you are not to be cruel.  Perhaps you think
there is no chance of your being so; and indeed I hope it is not
likely that you should be deliberately unkind to any creature; but
unless you are deliberately kind to every creature, you will often
be cruel to many.  Cruel, partly through want of imagination, (a far
rarer and weaker faculty in women than men,) and yet more, at the
present day, through the subtle encouragement of your selfishness by
the religious doctrine that all which we now suppose to be evil will
be brought to a good end; doctrine practically issuing, not in less
earnest efforts that the immediate unpleasantness may be averted
from ourselves, but in our remaining satisfied in the contemplation
of its ultimate objects, when it is inflicted on others.

It is not likely that the more accurate methods of recent mental
education will now long permit young people to grow up in the
persuasion that, in any danger or distress, they may expect to be
themselves saved by the Providence of God, while those around them
are lost by His improvidence:  but they may be yet long restrained
from rightly kind action, and long accustomed to endure both their
own pain occasionally, and the pain of others always, with an unwise
patience, by misconception of the eternal and incurable nature of
real evil.  Observe, therefore, carefully in this matter; there are
degrees of pain, as degrees of faultfulness, which are altogether
conquerable, and which seem to be merely forms of wholesome trial or
discipline.  Your fingers tingle when you go out on a frosty
morning, and are all the warmer afterwards; your limbs are weary
with wholesome work, and lie down in the pleasanter rest; you are
tried for a little while by having to wait for some promised good,
and it is all the sweeter when it comes.  But you cannot carry the
trial past a certain point.  Let the cold fasten on your hand in an
extreme degree, and your fingers will moulder from their sockets.
Fatigue yourself, but once, to utter exhaustion, and to the end of
life you shall not recover the former vigour of your frame.  Let
heart-sickness pass beyond a certain bitter point, and the heart
loses its life for ever.

Now, the very definition of evil is in this irremediableness.  It
means sorrow, or sin, which ends in death; and assuredly, as far as
we know, or can conceive, there are many conditions both of pain and
sin which cannot but so end.  Of course we are ignorant and blind
creatures, and we cannot know what seeds of good may be in present
suffering, or present crime; but with what we cannot know we are not
concerned.  It is conceivable that murderers and liars may in some
distant world be exalted into a higher humanity than they could have
reached without homicide or falsehood; but the contingency is not
one by which our actions should be guided.  There is, indeed, a
better hope that the beggar, who lies at our gates in misery, may,
within gates of pearl, be comforted; but the Master, whose words are
our only authority for thinking so, never Himself inflicted disease
as a blessing, nor sent away the hungry unfed, or the wounded
unhealed.

Believe me then, the only right principle of action here, is to
consider good and evil as defined by our natural sense of both; and
to strive to promote the one, and to conquer the other, with as
hearty endeavour as if there were, indeed, no other world than this.
Above all, get quit of the absurd idea that Heaven will interfere to
correct great errors, while allowing its laws to take their course
in punishing small ones.  If you prepare a dish of food carelessly,
you do not expect Providence to make it palatable; neither if,
through years of folly, you misguide your own life, need you expect
Divine interference to bring round everything at last for the best.
I tell you, positively, the world is not so constituted:  the
consequences of great mistakes are just as sure as those of small
ones, and the happiness of your whole life, and of all the lives
over which you have power, depend as literally on your own common
sense and discretion as the excellence and order of the feast of a
day.

Think carefully and bravely over these things, and you will find
them true:  having found them so, think also carefully over your own
position in life.  I assume that you belong to the middle or upper
classes, and that you would shrink from descending into a lower
sphere.  You may fancy you would not:  nay, if you are very good,
strong-hearted, and romantic, perhaps you really would not; but it
is not wrong that you should.  You have, then, I suppose, good food,
pretty rooms to live in, pretty dresses to wear, power of obtaining
every rational and wholesome pleasure; you are, moreover, probably
gentle and grateful, and in the habit of every day thanking God for
these things.  But why do you thank Him?  Is it because, in these
matters, as well as in your religious knowledge, you think He has
made a favourite of you?  Is the essential meaning of your
thanksgiving, "Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other girls are,
not in that I fast twice in the week while they feast, but in that I
feast seven times a week while they fast," and are you quite sure
this is a pleasing form of thanksgiving to your Heavenly Father?
Suppose you saw one of your own true earthly sisters, Lucy or Emily,
cast out of your mortal father's house, starving, helpless,
heartbroken; and that every morning when you went into your father's
room, you said to him, "How good you are, father, to give me what
you don't give Lucy," are you sure that, whatever anger your parent
might have just cause for, against your sister, he would be pleased
by that thanksgiving, or flattered by that praise?  Nay, are you
even sure that you ARE so much the favourite?--suppose that, all
this while, he loves poor Lucy just as well as you, and is only
trying you through her pain, and perhaps not angry with her in
anywise, but deeply angry with you, and all the more for your
thanksgivings?  Would it not be well that you should think, and
earnestly too, over this standing of yours; and all the more if you
wish to believe that text, which clergymen so much dislike preaching
on, "How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom
of God"?  You do not believe it now, or you would be less complacent
in your state; and you cannot believe it at all, until you know that
the Kingdom of God means,--"not meat and drink, but justice, peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost," nor until you know also that such joy is
not by any means, necessarily, in going to church, or in singing
hymns; but may be joy in a dance, or joy in a jest, or joy in
anything you have deserved to possess, or that you are willing to
give; but joy in nothing that separates you, as by any strange
favour, from your fellow-creatures, that exalts you through their
degradation--exempts you from their toil--or indulges you in time of
their distress.

Think, then, and some day, I believe, you will feel also,--no morbid
passion of pity such as would turn you into a black Sister of
Charity, but the steady fire of perpetual kindness which will make
you a bright one.  I speak in no disparagement of them; I know well
how good the Sisters of Charity are, and how much we owe to them;
but all these professional pieties (except so far as distinction or
association may be necessary for effectiveness of work) are in their
spirit wrong, and in practice merely plaster the sores of disease
that ought never to have been permitted to exist; encouraging at the
same time the herd of less excellent women in frivolity, by leading
them to think that they must either be good up to the black
standard, or cannot be good for anything.  Wear a costume, by all
means, if you like; but let it be a cheerful and becoming one; and
be in your heart a Sister of Charity always, without either veiled
or voluble declaration of it.

As I pause, before ending my preface--thinking of one or two more
points that are difficult to write of--I find a letter in 'The
Times,' from a French lady, which says all I want so beautifully,
that I will print it just as it stands:-


SIR,--It is often said that one example is worth many sermons.
Shall I be judged presumptuous if I point out one, which seems to me
so striking just now, that, however painful, I cannot help dwelling
upon it?

It is the share, the sad and large share, that French society and
its recent habits of luxury, of expenses, of dress, of indulgence in
every kind of extravagant dissipation, has to lay to its own door in
its actual crisis of ruin, misery, and humiliation.  If our
MENAGERES can be cited as an example to English housewives, so,
alas! can other classes of our society be set up as an example--NOT
to be followed.

Bitter must be the feelings of many a French woman whose days of
luxury and expensive habits are at an end, and whose bills of bygone
splendour lie with a heavy weight on her conscience, if not on her
purse!

With us the evil has spread high and low.  Everywhere have the
examples given by the highest ladies in the land been followed but
too successfully.

Every year did dress become more extravagant, entertainments more
costly, expenses of every kind more considerable.  Lower and lower
became the tone of society, its good breeding, its delicacy.  More
and more were MONDE and DEMI-MONDE associated in newspaper accounts
of fashionable doings, in scandalous gossip, on racecourses, in
PREMIERES REPRESENTATIONS, in imitation of each other's costumes,
MOBILIERS and slang.

Living beyond one's means became habitual--almost necessary--for
every one to keep up with, if not to go beyond, every one else.

What the result of all this has been we now see in the wreck of our
prosperity, in the downfall of all that seemed brightest and
highest.

Deeply and fearfully impressed by what my own country has incurred
and is suffering, I cannot help feeling sorrowful when I see in
England signs of our besetting sins appearing also.  Paint and
chignons, slang and vaudevilles, knowing "Anonymas" by name, and
reading doubtfully moral novels, are in themselves small offences,
although not many years ago they would have appeared very heinous
ones, yet they are quick and tempting conveyances on a very
dangerous high-road.

I would that all Englishwomen knew how they are looked up to from
abroad--what a high opinion, what honour and reverence we foreigners
have for their principles, their truthfulness, the fresh and pure
innocence of their daughters, the healthy youthfulness of their
lovely children.

May I illustrate this by a short example which happened very near
me?  During the days of the EMEUTES of 1848, all the houses in Paris
were being searched for firearms by the mob.  The one I was living
in contained none, as the master of the house repeatedly assured the
furious and incredulous Republicans.  They were going to lay violent
hands on him when his wife, an English lady, hearing the loud
discussion, came bravely forward and assured them that no arms were
concealed.  "Vous etes anglaise, nous vous croyons; les anglaises
disent toujours la verite," was the immediate answer, and the
rioters quietly left.

Now, Sir, shall I be accused of unjustified criticism if, loving and
admiring your country, as these lines will prove, certain new
features strike me as painful discrepancies in English life?

Far be it from me to preach the contempt of all that can make life
lovable and wholesomely pleasant.  I love nothing better than to see
a woman nice, neat, elegant, looking her best in the prettiest dress
that her taste and purse can afford, or your bright, fresh young
girls fearlessly and perfectly sitting their horses, or adorning
their houses as pretty [sic; it is not quite grammar, but it is
better than if it were;] as care, trouble, and refinement can make
them.

It is the degree BEYOND that which to us has proved so fatal, and
that I would our example could warn you from as a small repayment
for your hospitality and friendliness to us in our days of trouble.

May Englishwomen accept this in a kindly spirit as a New-year's wish
from

A FRENCH LADY.  Dec. 29.


That, then, is the substance of what I would fain say convincingly,
if it might be, to my girl friends; at all events with certainty in
my own mind that I was thus far a safe guide to them.

For other and older readers it is needful I should write a few words
more, respecting what opportunity I have had to judge, or right I
have to speak, of such things; for, indeed, too much of what I have
said about women has been said in faith only.  A wise and lovely
English lady told me, when 'Sesame and Lilies' first appeared, that
she was sure the 'Sesame' would be useful, but that in the 'Lilies'
I had been writing of what I knew nothing about.  Which was in a
measure too true, and also that it is more partial than my writings
are usually:  for as Ellesmere spoke his speech on the--
intervention, not, indeed, otherwise than he felt, but yet
altogether for the sake of Gretchen, so I wrote the 'Lilies' to
please one girl; and were it not for what I remember of her, and of
few besides, should now perhaps recast some of the sentences in the
'Lilies' in a very different tone:  for as years have gone by, it
has chanced to me, untowardly in some respects, fortunately in
others (because it enables me to read history more clearly), to see
the utmost evil that is in women, while I have had but to believe
the utmost good.  The best women are indeed necessarily the most
difficult to know; they are recognized chiefly in the happiness of
their husbands and the nobleness of their children; they are only to
be divined, not discerned, by the stranger; and, sometimes, seem
almost helpless except in their homes; yet without the help of one
of them, {4} to whom this book is dedicated, the day would probably
have come before now, when I should have written and thought no
more.

On the other hand, the fashion of the time renders whatever is
forward, coarse, or senseless, in feminine nature, too palpable to
all men:- the weak picturesqueness of my earlier writings brought me
acquainted with much of their emptiest enthusiasm; and the chances
of later life gave me opportunities of watching women in states of
degradation and vindictiveness which opened to me the gloomiest
secrets of Greek and Syrian tragedy.  I have seen them betray their
household charities to lust, their pledged love to devotion; I have
seen mothers dutiful to their children, as Medea; and children
dutiful to their parents, as the daughter of Herodias:  but my trust
is still unmoved in the preciousness of the natures that are so
fatal in their error, and I leave the words of the 'Lilies'
unchanged; believing, yet, that no man ever lived a right life who
had not been chastened by a woman's love, strengthened by her
courage, and guided by her discretion.

What I might myself have been, so helped, I rarely indulge in the
idleness of thinking; but what I am, since I take on me the function
of a teacher, it is well that the reader should know, as far as I
can tell him.

Not an unjust person; not an unkind one; not a false one; a lover of
order, labour, and peace.  That, it seems to me, is enough to give
me right to say all I care to say on ethical subjects; more, I could
only tell definitely through details of autobiography such as none
but prosperous and (in the simple sense of the word) faultless lives
could justify;--and mine has been neither.  Yet, if any one, skilled
in reading the torn manuscripts of the human soul, cares for more
intimate knowledge of me, he may have it by knowing with what
persons in past history I have most sympathy.

I will name three.

In all that is strongest and deepest in me,--that fits me for my
work, and gives light or shadow to my being, I have sympathy with
Guido Guinicelli.

In my constant natural temper, and thoughts of things and of people,
with Marmontel.

In my enforced and accidental temper, and thoughts of things and of
people, with Dean Swift.

Any one who can understand the natures of those three men, can
understand mine; and having said so much, I am content to leave both
life and work to be remembered or forgotten, as their uses may
deserve.

DENMARK HILL,

1st January, 1871.



LECTURE III--THE MYSTERY OF LIFE AND ITS ARTS



Lecture delivered in the theatre of the Royal College of Science,
Dublin, 1868.


When I accepted the privilege of addressing you to-day, I was not
aware of a restriction with respect to the topics of discussion
which may be brought before this Society {29}--a restriction which,
though entirely wise and right under the circumstances contemplated
in its introduction, would necessarily have disabled me, thinking as
I think, from preparing any lecture for you on the subject of art in
a form which might be permanently useful.  Pardon me, therefore, in
so far as I must transgress such limitation; for indeed my
infringement will be of the letter--not of the spirit--of your
commands.  In whatever I may say touching the religion which has
been the foundation of art, or the policy which has contributed to
its power, if I offend one, I shall offend all; for I shall take no
note of any separations in creeds, or antagonisms in parties:
neither do I fear that ultimately I shall offend any, by proving--or
at least stating as capable of positive proof--the connection of all
that is best in the crafts and arts of man, with the simplicity of
his faith, and the sincerity of his patriotism.

But I speak to you under another disadvantage, by which I am checked
in frankness of utterance, not here only, but everywhere:  namely,
that I am never fully aware how far my audiences are disposed to
give me credit for real knowledge of my subject, or how far they
grant me attention only because I have been sometimes thought an
ingenious or pleasant essayist upon it.  For I have had what, in
many respects, I boldly call the misfortune, to set my words
sometimes prettily together; not without a foolish vanity in the
poor knack that I had of doing so:  until I was heavily punished for
this pride, by finding that many people thought of the words only,
and cared nothing for their meaning.  Happily, therefore, the power
of using such pleasant language--if indeed it ever were mine--is
passing away from me; and whatever I am now able to say at all, I
find myself forced to say with great plainness.  For my thoughts
have changed also, as my words have; and whereas in earlier life,
what little influence I obtained was due perhaps chiefly to the
enthusiasm with which I was able to dwell on the beauty of the
physical clouds, and of their colours in the sky; so all the
influence I now desire to retain must be due to the earnestness with
which I am endeavouring to trace the form and beauty of another kind
of cloud than those; the bright cloud of which it is written--"What
is your life?  It is even as a vapour that appeareth for a little
time, and then vanisheth away."

I suppose few people reach the middle or latter period of their age,
without having, at some moment of change or disappointment, felt the
truth of those bitter words; and been startled by the fading of the
sunshine from the cloud of their life into the sudden agony of the
knowledge that the fabric of it was as fragile as a dream, and the
endurance of it as transient as the dew.  But it is not always that,
even at such times of melancholy surprise, we can enter into any
true perception that this human life shares in the nature of it, not
only the evanescence, but the mystery of the cloud; that its avenues
are wreathed in darkness, and its forms and courses no less
fantastic, than spectral and obscure; so that not only in the vanity
which we cannot grasp, but in the shadow which we cannot pierce, it
is true of this cloudy life of ours, that "man walketh in a vain
shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain."

And least of all, whatever may have been the eagerness of our
passions, or the height of our pride, are we able to understand in
its depth the third and most solemn character in which our life is
like those clouds of heaven; that to it belongs not only their
transcience, not only their mystery, but also their power; that in
the cloud of the human soul there is a fire stronger than the
lightning, and a grace more precious than the rain; and that though
of the good and evil it shall one day be said alike, that the place
that knew them knows them no more, there is an infinite separation
between those whose brief presence had there been a blessing, like
the mist of Eden that went up from the earth to water the garden,
and those whose place knew them only as a drifting and changeful
shade, of whom the heavenly sentence is, that they are "wells
without water; clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the
mist of darkness is reserved for ever."

To those among us, however, who have lived long enough to form some
just estimate of the rate of the changes which are, hour by hour in
accelerating catastrophe, manifesting themselves in the laws, the
arts, and the creeds of men, it seems to me, that now at least, if
never at any former time, the thoughts of the true nature of our
life, and of its powers and responsibilities, should present
themselves with absolute sadness and sternness.  And although I know
that this feeling is much deepened in my own mind by disappointment,
which, by chance, has attended the greater number of my cherished
purposes, I do not for that reason distrust the feeling itself,
though I am on my guard against an exaggerated degree of it:  nay, I
rather believe that in periods of new effort and violent change,
disappointment is a wholesome medicine; and that in the secret of
it, as in the twilight so beloved by Titian, we may see the colours
of things with deeper truth than in the most dazzling sunshine.  And
because these truths about the works of men, which I want to bring
to-day before you, are most of them sad ones, though at the same
time helpful; and because also I believe that your kind Irish hearts
will answer more gladly to the truthful expression of a personal
feeling, than to the exposition of an abstract principle, I will
permit myself so much unreserved speaking of my own causes of
regret, as may enable you to make just allowance for what, according
to your sympathies, you will call either the bitterness, or the
insight, of a mind which has surrendered its best hopes, and been
foiled in its favourite aims.

I spent the ten strongest years of my life, (from twenty to thirty,)
in endeavouring to show the excellence of the work of the man whom I
believed, and rightly believed, to be the greatest painter of the
schools of England since Reynolds.  I had then perfect faith in the
power of every great truth of beauty to prevail ultimately, and take
its right place in usefulness and honour; and I strove to bring the
painter's work into this due place, while the painter was yet alive.
But he knew, better than I, the uselessness of talking about what
people could not see for themselves.  He always discouraged me
scornfully, even when he thanked me--and he died before even the
superficial effect of my work was visible.  I went on, however,
thinking I could at least be of use to the public, if not to him, in
proving his power.  My books got talked about a little.  The prices
of modern pictures, generally, rose, and I was beginning to take
some pleasure in a sense of gradual victory, when, fortunately or
unfortunately, an opportunity of perfect trial undeceived me at
once, and for ever.  The Trustees of the National Gallery
commissioned me to arrange the Turner drawings there, and permitted
me to prepare three hundred examples of his studies from nature, for
exhibition at Kensington.  At Kensington they were, and are, placed
for exhibition; but they are not exhibited, for the room in which
they hang is always empty.

Well--this showed me at once, that those ten years of my life had
been, in their chief purpose, lost.  For that, I did not so much
care; I had, at least, learned my own business thoroughly, and
should be able, as I fondly supposed, after such a lesson, now to
use my knowledge with better effect.  But what I did care for was
the--to me frightful--discovery, that the most splendid genius in
the arts might be permitted by Providence to labour and perish
uselessly; that in the very fineness of it there might be something
rendering it invisible to ordinary eyes; but that, with this strange
excellence, faults might be mingled which would be as deadly as its
virtues were vain; that the glory of it was perishable, as well as
invisible, and the gift and grace of it might be to us as snow in
summer and as rain in harvest.

That was the first mystery of life to me.  But, while my best energy
was given to the study of painting, I had put collateral effort,
more prudent if less enthusiastic, into that of architecture; and in
this I could not complain of meeting with no sympathy.  Among
several personal reasons which caused me to desire that I might give
this, my closing lecture on the subject of art here, in Ireland, one
of the chief was, that in reading it, I should stand near the
beautiful building,--the engineer's school of your college,--which
was the first realization I had the joy to see, of the principles I
had, until then, been endeavouring to teach! but which, alas, is
now, to me, no more than the richly canopied monument of one of the
most earnest souls that ever gave itself to the arts, and one of my
truest and most loving friends, Benjamin Woodward.  Nor was it here
in Ireland only that I received the help of Irish sympathy and
genius.  When to another friend, Sir Thomas Deane, with Mr.
Woodward, was entrusted the building of the museum at Oxford, the
best details of the work were executed by sculptors who had been
born and trained here; and the first window of the facade of the
building, in which was inaugurated the study of natural science in
England, in true fellowship with literature, was carved from my
design by an Irish sculptor.

You may perhaps think that no man ought to speak of disappointment,
to whom, even in one branch of labour, so much success was granted.
Had Mr. Woodward now been beside me, I had not so spoken; but his
gentle and passionate spirit was cut off from the fulfilment of its
purposes, and the work we did together is now become vain.  It may
not be so in future; but the architecture we endeavoured to
introduce is inconsistent alike with the reckless luxury, the
deforming mechanism, and the squalid misery of modern cities; among
the formative fashions of the day, aided, especially in England, by
ecclesiastical sentiment, it indeed obtained notoriety; and
sometimes behind an engine furnace, or a railroad bank, you may
detect the pathetic discord of its momentary grace, and, with toil,
decipher its floral carvings choked with soot.  I felt answerable to
the schools I loved, only for their injury.  I perceived that this
new portion of my strength had also been spent in vain; and from
amidst streets of iron, and palaces of crystal, shrank back at last
to the carving of the mountain and colour of the flower.

And still I could tell of failure, and failure repeated, as years
went on; but I have trespassed enough on your patience to show you,
in part, the causes of my discouragement.  Now let me more
deliberately tell you its results.  You know there is a tendency in
the minds of many men, when they are heavily disappointed in the
main purposes of their life, to feel, and perhaps in warning,
perhaps in mockery, to declare, that life itself is a vanity.
Because it has disappointed them, they think its nature is of
disappointment always, or at best, of pleasure that can be grasped
by imagination only; that the cloud of it has no strength nor fire
within; but is a painted cloud only, to be delighted in, yet
despised.  You know how beautifully Pope has expressed this
particular phase of thought:-


"Meanwhile opinion gilds, with varying rays,
These painted clouds that beautify our days;
Each want of happiness by hope supplied,
And each vacuity of sense, by pride.
Hope builds as fast as Knowledge can destroy;
In Folly's cup, still laughs the bubble joy.
One pleasure past, another still we gain,
And not a vanity is given in vain."


But the effect of failure upon my own mind has been just the reverse
of this.  The more that my life disappointed me, the more solemn and
wonderful it became to me.  It seemed, contrarily to Pope's saying,
that the vanity of it WAS indeed given in vain; but that there was
something behind the veil of it, which was not vanity.  It became to
me not a painted cloud, but a terrible and impenetrable one:  not a
mirage, which vanished as I drew near, but a pillar of darkness, to
which I was forbidden to draw near.  For I saw that both my own
failure, and such success in petty things as in its poor triumph
seemed to me worse than failure, came from the want of sufficiently
earnest effort to understand the whole law and meaning of existence,
and to bring it to noble and due end; as, on the other hand, I saw
more and more clearly that all enduring success in the arts, or in
any other occupation, had come from the ruling of lower purposes,
not by a conviction of their nothingness, but by a solemn faith in
the advancing power of human nature, or in the promise, however
dimly apprehended, that the mortal part of it would one day be
swallowed up in immortality; and that, indeed, the arts themselves
never had reached any vital strength or honour, but in the effort to
proclaim this immortality, and in the service either of great and
just religion, or of some unselfish patriotism, and law of such
national life as must be the foundation of religion.

Nothing that I have ever said is more true or necessary--nothing has
been more misunderstood or misapplied--than my strong assertion that
the arts can never be right themselves, unless their motive is
right.  It is misunderstood this way:  weak painters, who have never
learned their business, and cannot lay a true line, continually come
to me, crying out--"Look at this picture of mine; it MUST be good, I
had such a lovely motive.  I have put my whole heart into it, and
taken years to think over its treatment."  Well, the only answer for
these people is--if one had the cruelty to make it--"Sir, you cannot
think over ANYthing in any number of years,--you haven't the head to
do it; and though you had fine motives, strong enough to make you
burn yourself in a slow fire, if only first you could paint a
picture, you can't paint one, nor half an inch of one; you haven't
the hand to do it."

But, far more decisively we have to say to the men who DO know their
business, or may know it if they choose--"Sir, you have this gift,
and a mighty one; see that you serve your nation faithfully with it.
It is a greater trust than ships and armies:  you might cast THEM
away, if you were their captain, with less treason to your people
than in casting your own glorious power away, and serving the devil
with it instead of men.  Ships and armies you may replace if they
are lost, but a great intellect, once abused, is a curse to the
earth for ever."

This, then, I meant by saying that the arts must have noble motive.
This also I said respecting them, that they never had prospered, nor
could prosper, but when they had such true purpose, and were devoted
to the proclamation of divine truth or law.  And yet I saw also that
they had always failed in this proclamation--that poetry, and
sculpture, and painting, though only great when they strove to teach
us something about the gods, never had taught us anything
trustworthy about the gods, but had always betrayed their trust in
the crisis of it, and, with their powers at the full reach, became
ministers to pride and to lust.  And I felt also, with increasing
amazement, the unconquerable apathy in ourselves and hearers, no
less than in these the teachers; and that while the wisdom and
rightness of every act and art of life could only be consistent with
a right understanding of the ends of life, we were all plunged as in
a languid dream--our hearts fat, and our eyes heavy, and our ears
closed, lest the inspiration of hand or voice should reach us--lest
we should see with our eyes, and understand with our hearts, and be
healed.

This intense apathy in all of us is the first great mystery of life;
it stands in the way of every perception, every virtue.  There is no
making ourselves feel enough astonishment at it.  That the
occupations or pastimes of life should have no motive, is
understandable; but--That life itself should have no motive--that we
neither care to find out what it may lead to, nor to guard against
its being for ever taken away from us--here is a mystery indeed.
For just suppose I were able to call at this moment to any one in
this audience by name, and to tell him positively that I knew a
large estate had been lately left to him on some curious conditions;
but that though I knew it was large, I did not know how large, nor
even where it was--whether in the East Indies or the West, or in
England, or at the Antipodes.  I only knew it was a vast estate, and
that there was a chance of his losing it altogether if he did not
soon find out on what terms it had been left to him.  Suppose I were
able to say this positively to any single man in this audience, and
he knew that I did not speak without warrant, do you think that he
would rest content with that vague knowledge, if it were anywise
possible to obtain more?  Would he not give every energy to find
some trace of the facts, and never rest till he had ascertained
where this place was, and what it was like?  And suppose he were a
young man, and all he could discover by his best endeavour was that
the estate was never to be his at all, unless he persevered, during
certain years of probation, in an orderly and industrious life; but
that, according to the rightness of his conduct, the portion of the
estate assigned to him would be greater or less, so that it
literally depended on his behaviour from day to day whether he got
ten thousand a year, or thirty thousand a year, or nothing whatever-
-would you not think it strange if the youth never troubled himself
to satisfy the conditions in any way, nor even to know what was
required of him, but lived exactly as he chose, and never inquired
whether his chances of the estate were increasing or passing away?
Well, you know that this is actually and literally so with the
greater number of the educated persons now living in Christian
countries.  Nearly every man and woman in any company such as this,
outwardly professes to believe--and a large number unquestionably
think they believe--much more than this; not only that a quite
unlimited estate is in prospect for them if they please the Holder
of it, but that the infinite contrary of such a possession--an
estate of perpetual misery--is in store for them if they displease
this great Land-Holder, this great Heaven-Holder.  And yet there is
not one in a thousand of these human souls that cares to think, for
ten minutes of the day, where this estate is or how beautiful it is,
or what kind of life they are to lead in it, or what kind of life
they must lead to obtain it.

You fancy that you care to know this:  so little do you care that,
probably, at this moment many of you are displeased with me for
talking of the matter!  You came to hear about the Art of this
world, not about the Life of the next, and you are provoked with me
for talking of what you can hear any Sunday in church.  But do not
be afraid.  I will tell you something before you go about pictures,
and carvings, and pottery, and what else you would like better to
hear of than the other world.  Nay, perhaps you say, "We want you to
talk of pictures and pottery, because we are sure that you know
something of them, and you know nothing of the other world."  Well--
I don't.  That is quite true.  But the very strangeness and mystery
of which I urge you to take notice, is in this--that I do not;--nor
you either.  Can you answer a single bold question unflinchingly
about that other world?--Are you sure there is a heaven?  Sure there
is a hell?  Sure that men are dropping before your faces through the
pavements of these streets into eternal fire, or sure that they are
not?  Sure that at your own death you are going to be delivered from
all sorrow, to be endowed with all virtue, to be gifted with all
felicity, and raised into perpetual companionship with a King,
compared to whom the kings of the earth are as grass-hoppers, and
the nations as the dust of His feet?  Are you sure of this? or, if
not sure, do any of us so much as care to make it sure? and, if not,
how can anything that we do be right--how can anything we think be
wise? what honour can there be in the arts that amuse us, or what
profit in the possessions that please?

Is not this a mystery of life?

But farther, you may, perhaps, think it a beneficent ordinance for
the generality of men that they do not, with earnestness or anxiety,
dwell on such questions of the future because the business of the
day could not be done if this kind of thought were taken by all of
us for the morrow.  Be it so:  but at least we might anticipate that
the greatest and wisest of us, who were evidently the appointed
teachers of the rest, would set themselves apart to seek out
whatever could be surely known of the future destinies of their
race; and to teach this in no rhetorical or ambiguous manner, but in
the plainest and most severely earnest words.

Now, the highest representatives of men who have thus endeavoured,
during the Christian era, to search out these deep things, and
relate them, are Dante and Milton.  There are none who for
earnestness of thought, for mastery of word, can be classed with
these.  I am not at present, mind you, speaking of persons set apart
in any priestly or pastoral office, to deliver creeds to us, or
doctrines; but of men who try to discover and set forth, as far as
by human intellect is possible, the facts of the other world.
Divines may perhaps teach us how to arrive there, but only these two
poets have in any powerful manner striven to discover, or in any
definite words professed to tell, what we shall see and become
there; or how those upper and nether worlds are, and have been,
inhabited.

And what have they told us?  Milton's account of the most important
event in his whole system of the universe, the fall of the angels,
is evidently unbelievable to himself; and the more so, that it is
wholly founded on, and in a great part spoiled and degraded from,
Hesiod's account of the decisive war of the younger gods with the
Titans.  The rest of his poem is a picturesque drama, in which every
artifice of invention is visibly and consciously employed; not a
single fact being, for an instant, conceived as tenable by any
living faith.  Dante's conception is far more intense, and, by
himself, for the time, not to be escaped from; it is indeed a
vision, but a vision only, and that one of the wildest that ever
entranced a soul--a dream in which every grotesque type or phantasy
of heathen tradition is renewed, and adorned; and the destinies of
the Christian Church, under their most sacred symbols, become
literally subordinate to the praise, and are only to be understood
by the aid, of one dear Florentine maiden.

I tell you truly that, as I strive more with this strange lethargy
and trance in myself, and awake to the meaning and power of life, it
seems daily more amazing to me that men such as these should dare to
play with the most precious truths, (or the most deadly untruths,)
by which the whole human race listening to them could be informed,
or deceived;--all the world their audiences for ever, with pleased
ear, and passionate heart;--and yet, to this submissive infinitude
of souls, and evermore succeeding and succeeding multitude, hungry
for bread of life, they do but play upon sweetly modulated pipes;
with pompous nomenclature adorn the councils of hell; touch a
troubadour's guitar to the courses of the suns; and fill the
openings of eternity, before which prophets have veiled their faces,
and which angels desire to look into, with idle puppets of their
scholastic imagination, and melancholy lights of frantic faith in
their lost mortal love.

Is not this a mystery of life?

But more.  We have to remember that these two great teachers were
both of them warped in their temper, and thwarted in their search
for truth.  They were men of intellectual war, unable, through
darkness of controversy, or stress of personal grief, to discern
where their own ambition modified their utterances of the moral law;
or their own agony mingled with their anger at its violation.  But
greater men than these have been--innocent-hearted--too great for
contest.  Men, like Homer and Shakespeare, of so unrecognised
personality, that it disappears in future ages, and becomes ghostly,
like the tradition of a lost heathen god.  Men, therefore, to whose
unoffended, uncondemning sight, the whole of human nature reveals
itself in a pathetic weakness, with which they will not strive; or
in mournful and transitory strength, which they dare not praise.
And all Pagan and Christian Civilization thus becomes subject to
them.  It does not matter how little, or how much, any of us have
read, either of Homer or Shakespeare; everything round us, in
substance, or in thought, has been moulded by them.  All Greek
gentlemen were educated under Homer.  All Roman gentlemen, by Greek
literature.  All Italian, and French, and English gentlemen, by
Roman literature, and by its principles.  Of the scope of
Shakespeare, I will say only, that the intellectual measure of every
man since born, in the domains of creative thought, may be assigned
to him, according to the degree in which he has been taught by
Shakespeare.  Well, what do these two men, centres of mortal
intelligence, deliver to us of conviction respecting what it most
behoves that intelligence to grasp?  What is their hope--their crown
of rejoicing? what manner of exhortation have they for us, or of
rebuke? what lies next their own hearts, and dictates their undying
words?  Have they any peace to promise to our unrest--any redemption
to our misery?

Take Homer first, and think if there is any sadder image of human
fate than the great Homeric story.  The main features in the
character of Achilles are its intense desire of justice, and its
tenderness of affection.  And in that bitter song of the Iliad, this
man, though aided continually by the wisest of the gods, and burning
with the desire of justice in his heart, becomes yet, through ill-
governed passion, the most unjust of men:  and, full of the deepest
tenderness in his heart, becomes yet, through ill-governed passion,
the most cruel of men.  Intense alike in love and in friendship, he
loses, first his mistress, and then his friend; for the sake of the
one, he surrenders to death the armies of his own land; for the sake
of the other, he surrenders all.  Will a man lay down his life for
his friend?  Yea--even for his DEAD friend, this Achilles, though
goddess-born, and goddess-taught, gives up his kingdom, his country,
and his life--casts alike the innocent and guilty, with himself,
into one gulf of slaughter, and dies at last by the hand of the
basest of his adversaries.

Is not this a mystery of life?

But what, then, is the message to us of our own poet, and searcher
of hearts, after fifteen hundred years of Christian faith have been
numbered over the graves of men?  Are his words more cheerful than
the Heathen's--is his hope more near--his trust more sure--his
reading of fate more happy?  Ah, no!  He differs from the Heathen
poet chiefly in this--that he recognizes, for deliverance, no gods
nigh at hand; and that, by petty chance--by momentary folly--by
broken message--by fool's tyranny--or traitor's snare, the strongest
and most righteous are brought to their ruin, and perish without
word of hope.  He indeed, as part of his rendering of character,
ascribes the power and modesty of habitual devotion to the gentle
and the just.  The death-bed of Katharine is bright with visions of
angels; and the great soldier-king, standing by his few dead,
acknowledges the presence of the Hand that can save alike by many or
by few.  But observe that from those who with deepest spirit,
meditate, and with deepest passion, mourn, there are no such words
as these; nor in their hearts are any such consolations.  Instead of
the perpetual sense of the helpful presence of the Deity, which,
through all heathen tradition, is the source of heroic strength, in
battle, in exile, and in the valley of the shadow of death, we find
only in the great Christian poet, the consciousness of a moral law,
through which "the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices make
instruments to scourge us;" and of the resolved arbitration of the
destinies, that conclude into precision of doom what we feebly and
blindly began; and force us, when our indiscretion serves us, and
our deepest plots do pall, to the confession, that "there's a
divinity that shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will."

Is not this a mystery of life?

Be it so, then.  About this human life that is to be, or that is,
the wise religious men tell us nothing that we can trust; and the
wise contemplative men, nothing that can give us peace.  But there
is yet a third class, to whom we may turn--the wise practical men.
We have sat at the feet of the poets who sang of heaven, and they
have told us their dreams.  We have listened to the poets who sang
of earth, and they have chanted to us dirges and words of despair.
But there is one class of men more:- men, not capable of vision, nor
sensitive to sorrow, but firm of purpose--practised in business;
learned in all that can be, (by handling,) known.  Men, whose hearts
and hopes are wholly in this present world, from whom, therefore, we
may surely learn, at least, how, at present, conveniently to live in
it.  What will THEY say to us, or show us by example?  These kings--
these councillors--these statesmen and builders of kingdoms--these
capitalists and men of business, who weigh the earth, and the dust
of it, in a balance.  They know the world, surely; and what is the
mystery of life to us, is none to them.  They can surely show us how
to live, while we live, and to gather out of the present world what
is best.

I think I can best tell you their answer, by telling you a dream I
had once.  For though I am no poet, I have dreams sometimes:- I
dreamed I was at a child's Mayday party, in which every means of
entertainment had been provided for them, by a wise and kind host.
It was in a stately house, with beautiful gardens attached to it;
and the children had been set free in the rooms and gardens, with no
care whatever but how to pass their afternoon rejoicingly.  They did
not, indeed, know much about what was to happen next day; and some
of them, I thought, were a little frightened, because there was a
chance of their being sent to a new school where there were
examinations; but they kept the thoughts of that out of their heads
as well as they could, and resolved to enjoy themselves.  The house,
I said, was in a beautiful garden, and in the garden were all kinds
of flowers; sweet, grassy banks for rest; and smooth lawns for play;
and pleasant streams and woods; and rocky places for climbing.  And
the children were happy for a little while, but presently they
separated themselves into parties; and then each party declared it
would have a piece of the garden for its own, and that none of the
others should have anything to do with that piece.  Next, they
quarrelled violently which pieces they would have; and at last the
boys took up the thing, as boys should do, "practically," and fought
in the flower-beds till there was hardly a flower left standing;
then they trampled down each other's bits of the garden out of
spite; and the girls cried till they could cry no more; and so they
all lay down at last breathless in the ruin, and waited for the time
when they were to be taken home in the evening. {30}

Meanwhile, the children in the house had been making themselves
happy also in their manner.  For them, there had been provided every
kind of indoor pleasure:  there was music for them to dance to; and
the library was open, with all manner of amusing books; and there
was a museum full of the most curious shells, and animals, and
birds; and there was a workshop, with lathes and carpenter's tools,
for the ingenious boys; and there were pretty fantastic dresses, for
the girls to dress in; and there were microscopes, and
kaleidoscopes; and whatever toys a child could fancy; and a table,
in the dining-room, loaded with everything nice to eat.

But, in the midst of all this, it struck two or three of the more
"practical" children, that they would like some of the brass-headed
nails that studded the chairs; and so they set to work to pull them
out.  Presently, the others, who were reading, or looking at shells,
took a fancy to do the like; and, in a little while, all the
children, nearly, were spraining their fingers, in pulling out
brass-headed nails.  With all that they could pull out, they were
not satisfied; and then, everybody wanted some of somebody else's.
And at last, the really practical and sensible ones declared, that
nothing was of any real consequence, that afternoon, except to get
plenty of brass-headed nails; and that the books, and the cakes, and
the microscopes were of no use at all in themselves, but only, if
they could be exchanged for nail-heads.  And at last they began to
fight for nail-heads, as the others fought for the bits of garden.
Only here and there, a despised one shrank away into a corner, and
tried to get a little quiet with a book, in the midst of the noise;
but all the practical ones thought of nothing else but counting
nail-heads all the afternoon--even though they knew they would not
be allowed to carry so much as one brass knob away with them.  But
no--it was--"Who has most nails?  I have a hundred, and you have
fifty; or, I have a thousand, and you have two.  I must have as many
as you before I leave the house, or I cannot possibly go home in
peace."  At last, they made so much noise that I awoke, and thought
to myself, "What a false dream that is, of CHILDREN!"  The child is
the father of the man; and wiser.  Children never do such foolish
things.  Only men do.

But there is yet one last class of persons to be interrogated.  The
wise religious men we have asked in vain; the wise contemplative
men, in vain; the wise worldly men, in vain.  But there is another
group yet.  In the midst of this vanity of empty religion--of tragic
contemplation--of wrathful and wretched ambition, and dispute for
dust, there is yet one great group of persons, by whom all these
disputers live--the persons who have determined, or have had it by a
beneficent Providence determined for them, that they will do
something useful; that whatever may be prepared for them hereafter,
or happen to them here, they will, at least, deserve the food that
God gives them by winning it honourably:  and that, however fallen
from the purity, or far from the peace, of Eden, they will carry out
the duty of human dominion, though they have lost its felicity; and
dress and keep the wilderness, though they no more can dress or keep
the garden.

These,--hewers of wood, and drawers of water,--these, bent under
burdens, or torn of scourges--these, that dig and weave--that plant
and build; workers in wood, and in marble, and in iron--by whom all
food, clothing, habitation, furniture, and means of delight are
produced, for themselves, and for all men beside; men, whose deeds
are good, though their words may be few; men, whose lives are
serviceable, be they never so short, and worthy of honour, be they
never so humble;--from these, surely, at least, we may receive some
clear message of teaching; and pierce, for an instant, into the
mystery of life, and of its arts.

Yes; from these, at last, we do receive a lesson.  But I grieve to
say, or rather--for that is the deeper truth of the matter--I
rejoice to say--this message of theirs can only be received by
joining them--not by thinking about them.

You sent for me to talk to you of art; and I have obeyed you in
coming.  But the main thing I have to tell you is,--that art must
not be talked about.  The fact that there is talk about it at all,
signifies that it is ill done, or cannot be done.  No true painter
ever speaks, or ever has spoken, much of his art.  The greatest
speak nothing.  Even Reynolds is no exception, for he wrote of all
that he could not himself do, and was utterly silent respecting all
that he himself did.

The moment a man can really do his work he becomes speechless about
it.  All words become idle to him--all theories.

Does a bird need to theorize about building its nest, or boast of it
when built?  All good work is essentially done that way--without
hesitation, without difficulty, without boasting; and in the doers
of the best, there is an inner and involuntary power which
approximates literally to the instinct of an animal--nay, I am
certain that in the most perfect human artists, reason does NOT
supersede instinct, but is added to an instinct as much more divine
than that of the lower animals as the human body is more beautiful
than theirs; that a great singer sings not with less instinct than
the nightingale, but with more--only more various, applicable, and
governable; that a great architect does not build with less instinct
than the beaver or the bee, but with more--with an innate cunning of
proportion that embraces all beauty, and a divine ingenuity of skill
that improvises all construction.  But be that as it may--be the
instinct less or more than that of inferior animals--like or unlike
theirs, still the human art is dependent on that first, and then
upon an amount of practice, of science,--and of imagination
disciplined by thought, which the true possessor of it knows to be
incommunicable, and the true critic of it, inexplicable, except
through long process of laborious' years.  That journey of life's
conquest, in which hills over hills, and Alps on Alps arose, and
sank,--do you think you can make another trace it painlessly, by
talking?  Why, you cannot even carry us up an Alp, by talking.  You
can guide us up it, step by step, no otherwise--even so, best
silently.  You girls, who have been among the hills, know how the
bad guide chatters and gesticulates, and it is "Put your foot here;"
and "Mind how you balance yourself there;" but the good guide walks
on quietly, without a word, only with his eyes on you when need is,
and his arm like an iron bar, if need be.

In that slow way, also, art can be taught--if you have faith in your
guide, and will let his arm be to you as an iron bar when need is.
But in what teacher of art have you such faith?  Certainly not in
me; for, as I told you at first, I know well enough it is only
because you think I can talk, not because you think I know my
business, that you let me speak to you at all.  If I were to tell
you anything that seemed to you strange you would not believe it,
and yet it would only be in telling you strange things that I could
be of use to you.  I could be of great use to you--infinite use--
with brief saying, if you would believe it; but you would not, just
because the thing that would be of real use would displease you.
You are all wild, for instance, with admiration of Gustave Dore.
Well, suppose I were to tell you, in the strongest terms I could
use, that Gustave Dore's art was bad--bad, not in weakness,--not in
failure,--but bad with dreadful power--the power of the Furies and
the Harpies mingled, enraging, and polluting; that so long as you
looked at it, no perception of pure or beautiful art was possible
for you.  Suppose I were to tell you that!  What would be the use?
Would you look at Gustave Dore less?  Rather, more, I fancy.  On the
other hand, I could soon put you into good humour with me, if I
chose.  I know well enough what you like, and how to praise it to
your better liking.  I could talk to you about moonlight, and
twilight, and spring flowers, and autumn leaves, and the Madonnas of
Raphael--how motherly! and the Sibyls of Michael Angelo--how
majestic! and the Saints of Angelico--how pious! and the Cherubs of
Correggio--how delicious!  Old as I am, I could play you a tune on
the harp yet, that you would dance to.  But neither you nor I should
be a bit the better or wiser; or, if we were, our increased wisdom
could be of no practical effect.  For, indeed, the arts, as regards
teachableness, differ from the sciences also in this, that their
power is founded not merely on facts which can be communicated, but
on dispositions which require to be created.  Art is neither to be
achieved by effort of thinking, nor explained by accuracy of
speaking.  It is the instinctive and necessary result of power,
which can only be developed through the mind of successive
generations, and which finally burst into life under social
conditions as slow of growth as the faculties they regulate.  Whole
aeras of mighty history are summed, and the passions of dead myriads
are concentrated, in the existence of a noble art, and if that noble
art were among us, we should feel it and rejoice; not caring in the
least to hear lectures on it; and since it is not among us, be
assured we have to go back to the root of it, or, at least, to the
place where the stock of it is yet alive, and the branches began to
die.

And now, may I have your pardon for pointing out, partly with
reference to matters which are at this time of greater moment than
the arts--that if we undertook such recession to the vital germ of
national arts that have decayed, we should find a more singular
arrest of their power in Ireland than in any other European country?
For in the eighth century Ireland possessed a school of art in her
manuscripts and sculpture, which, in many of its qualities--
apparently in all essential qualities of decorative invention--was
quite without rival; seeming as if it might have advanced to the
highest triumphs in architecture and in painting.  But there was one
fatal flaw in its nature, by which it was stayed, and stayed with a
conspicuousness of pause to which there is no parallel:  so that,
long ago, in tracing the progress of European schools from infancy
to strength, I chose for the students of Kensington, in a lecture
since published, two characteristic examples of early art, of equal
skill; but in the one case, skill which was progressive--in the
other, skill which was at pause.  In the one case, it was work
receptive of correction--hungry for correction; and in the other,
work which inherently rejected correction.  I chose for them a
corrigible Eve, and an incorrigible Angel, and I grieve to say that
the incorrigible Angel was also an Irish Angel! {31}

And the fatal difference lay wholly in this.  In both pieces of art
there was an equal falling short of the needs of fact; but the
Lombardic Eve knew she was in the wrong, and the Irish Angel thought
himself all right.  The eager Lombardic sculptor, though firmly
insisting on his childish idea, yet showed in the irregular broken
touches of the features, and the imperfect struggle for softer lines
in the form, a perception of beauty and law that he could not
render; there was the strain of effort, under conscious
imperfection, in every line.  But the Irish missal-painter had drawn
his angel with no sense of failure, in happy complacency, and put
red dots into the palm of each hand, and rounded the eyes into
perfect circles, and, I regret to say, left the mouth out
altogether, with perfect satisfaction to himself.

May I without offence ask you to consider whether this mode of
arrest in ancient Irish art may not be indicative of points of
character which even yet, in some measure, arrest your national
power?  I have seen much of Irish character, and have watched it
closely, for I have also much loved it.  And I think the form of
failure to which it is most liable is this,--that being generous-
hearted, and wholly intending always to do right, it does not attend
to the external laws of right, but thinks it must necessarily do
right because it means to do so, and therefore does wrong without
finding it out; and then, when the consequences of its wrong come
upon it, or upon others connected with it, it cannot conceive that
the wrong is in anywise of its causing or of its doing, but flies
into wrath, and a strange agony of desire for justice, as feeling
itself wholly innocent, which leads it farther astray, until there
is nothing that it is not capable of doing with a good conscience.

But mind, I do not mean to say that, in past or present relations
between Ireland and England, you have been wrong, and we right.  Far
from that, I believe that in all great questions of principle, and
in all details of administration of law, you have been usually
right, and we wrong; sometimes in misunderstanding you, sometimes in
resolute iniquity to you.  Nevertheless, in all disputes between
states, though the stronger is nearly always mainly in the wrong,
the weaker is often so in a minor degree; and I think we sometimes
admit the possibility of our being in error, and you never do.

And now, returning to the broader question, what these arts and
labours of life have to teach us of its mystery, this is the first
of their lessons--that the more beautiful the art, the more it is
essentially the work of people who FEEL THEMSELVES WRONG;--who are
striving for the fulfilment of a law, and the grasp of a loveliness,
which they have not yet attained, which they feel even farther and
farther from attaining the more they strive for it.  And yet, in
still deeper sense, it is the work of people who know also that they
are right.  The very sense of inevitable error from their purpose
marks the perfectness of that purpose, and the continued sense of
failure arises from the continued opening of the eyes more clearly
to all the sacredest laws of truth.

This is one lesson.  The second is a very plain, and greatly
precious one:  namely--that whenever the arts and labours of life
are fulfilled in this spirit of striving against misrule, and doing
whatever we have to do, honourably and perfectly, they invariably
bring happiness, as much as seems possible to the nature of man.  In
all other paths by which that happiness is pursued there is
disappointment, or destruction:  for ambition and for passion there
is no rest--no fruition; the fairest pleasures of youth perish in a
darkness greater than their past light:  and the loftiest and purest
love too often does but inflame the cloud of life with endless fire
of pain.  But, ascending from lowest to highest, through every scale
of human industry, that industry worthily followed, gives peace.
Ask the labourer in the field, at the forge, or in the mine; ask the
patient, delicate-fingered artisan, or the strong-armed, fiery-
hearted worker in bronze, and in marble, and with the colours of
light; and none of these, who are true workmen, will ever tell you,
that they have found the law of heaven an unkind one--that in the
sweat of their face they should eat bread, till they return to the
ground; nor that they ever found it an unrewarded obedience, if,
indeed, it was rendered faithfully to the command--"Whatsoever thy
hand findeth to do--do it with thy might."

These are the two great and constant lessons which our labourers
teach us of the mystery of life.  But there is another, and a sadder
one, which they cannot teach us, which we must read on their
tombstones.

"Do it with thy might."  There have been myriads upon myriads of
human creatures who have obeyed this law--who have put every breath
and nerve of their being into its toil--who have devoted every hour,
and exhausted every faculty--who have bequeathed their
unaccomplished thoughts at death--who, being dead, have yet spoken,
by majesty of memory, and strength of example.  And, at last, what
has all this "Might" of humanity accomplished, in six thousand years
of labour and sorrow?  What has it DONE?  Take the three chief
occupations and arts of men, one by one, and count their
achievements.  Begin with the first--the lord of them all--
Agriculture.  Six thousand years have passed since we were set to
till the ground, from which we were taken.  How much of it is
tilled?  How much of that which is, wisely or well?  In the very
centre and chief garden of Europe--where the two forms of parent
Christianity have had their fortresses--where the noble Catholics of
the Forest Cantons, and the noble Protestants of the Vaudois
valleys, have maintained, for dateless ages, their faiths and
liberties--there the unchecked Alpine rivers yet run wild in
devastation; and the marshes, which a few hundred men could redeem
with a year's labour, still blast their helpless inhabitants into
fevered idiotism.  That is so, in the centre of Europe!  While, on
the near coast of Africa, once the Garden of the Hesperides, an Arab
woman, but a few sunsets since, ate her child, for famine.  And,
with all the treasures of the East at our feet, we, in our own
dominion, could not find a few grains of rice, for a people that
asked of us no more; but stood by, and saw five hundred thousand of
them perish of hunger.

Then, after agriculture, the art of kings, take the next head of
human arts--Weaving; the art of queens, honoured of all noble
Heathen women, in the person of their virgin goddess--honoured of
all Hebrew women, by the word of their wisest king--"She layeth her
hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff; she stretcheth
out her hand to the poor.  She is not afraid of the snow for her
household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.  She
maketh herself covering of tapestry; her clothing is silk and
purple.  She maketh fine linen, and selleth it, and delivereth
girdles to the merchant."  What have we done in all these thousands
of years with this bright art of Greek maid and Christian matron?
Six thousand years of weaving, and have we learned to weave?  Might
not every naked wall have been purple with tapestry, and every
feeble breast fenced with sweet colours from the cold?  What have we
done?  Our fingers are too few, it seems, to twist together some
poor covering for our bodies.  We set our streams to work for us,
and choke the air with fire, to turn our spinning-wheels--and,--ARE
WE YET CLOTHED?  Are not the streets of the capitals of Europe foul
with sale of cast clouts and rotten rags?  Is not the beauty of your
sweet children left in wretchedness of disgrace, while, with better
honour, nature clothes the brood of the bird in its nest, and the
suckling of the wolf in her den?  And does not every winter's snow
robe what you have not robed, and shroud what you have not shrouded;
and every winter's wind bear up to heaven its wasted souls, to
witness against you hereafter, by the voice of their Christ,--"I was
naked, and ye clothed me not"?

Lastly--take the Art of Building--the strongest--proudest--most
orderly--most enduring of the arts of man; that of which the produce
is in the surest manner accumulative, and need not perish, or be
replaced; but if once well done, will stand more strongly than the
unbalanced rocks--more prevalently than the crumbling hills.  The
art which is associated with all civic pride and sacred principle;
with which men record their power--satisfy their enthusiasm--make
sure their defence--define and make dear their habitation.  And in
six thousand years of building, what have we done?  Of the greater
part of all that skill and strength, NO vestige is left, but fallen
stones, that encumber the fields and impede the streams.  But, from
this waste of disorder, and of time, and of rage, what IS left to
us?  Constructive and progressive creatures, that we are, with
ruling brains, and forming hands, capable of fellowship, and
thirsting for fame, can we not contend, in comfort, with the insects
of the forest, or, in achievement, with the worm of the sea?  The
white surf rages in vain against the ramparts built by poor atoms of
scarcely nascent life; but only ridges of formless ruin mark the
places where once dwelt our noblest multitudes.  The ant and the
moth have cells for each of their young, but our little ones lie in
festering heaps, in homes that consume them like graves; and night
by night, from the corners of our streets, rises up the cry of the
homeless--"I was a stranger, and ye took me not in."

Must it be always thus?  Is our life for ever to be without profit--
without possession?  Shall the strength of its generations be as
barren as death; or cast away their labour, as the wild fig-tree
casts her untimely figs?  Is it all a dream then--the desire of the
eyes and the pride of life--or, if it be, might we not live in
nobler dream than this?  The poets and prophets, the wise men, and
the scribes, though they have told us nothing about a life to come,
have told us much about the life that is now.  They have had--they
also,--their dreams, and we have laughed at them.  They have dreamed
of mercy, and of justice; they have dreamed of peace and good-will;
they have dreamed of labour undisappointed, and of rest undisturbed;
they have dreamed of fulness in harvest, and overflowing in store;
they have dreamed of wisdom in council, and of providence in law; of
gladness of parents, and strength of children, and glory of grey
hairs.  And at these visions of theirs we have mocked, and held them
for idle and vain, unreal and unaccomplishable.  What have we
accomplished with our realities?  Is this what has come of our
worldly wisdom, tried against their folly? this, our mightiest
possible, against their impotent ideal? or, have we only wandered
among the spectra of a baser felicity, and chased phantoms of the
tombs, instead of visions of the Almighty; and walked after the
imaginations of our evil hearts, instead of after the counsels of
Eternity, until our lives--not in the likeness of the cloud of
heaven, but of the smoke of hell--have become "as a vapour, that
appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away"?

DOES it vanish then?  Are you sure of that?--sure, that the
nothingness of the grave will be a rest from this troubled
nothingness; and that the coiling shadow, which disquiets itself in
vain, cannot change into the smoke of the torment that ascends for
ever?  Will any answer that they ARE sure of it, and that there is
no fear, nor hope, nor desire, nor labour, whither they go?  Be it
so:  will you not, then, make as sure of the Life that now is, as
you are of the Death that is to come?  Your hearts are wholly in
this world--will you not give them to it wisely, as well as
perfectly?  And see, first of all, that you HAVE hearts, and sound
hearts, too, to give.  Because you have no heaven to look for, is
that any reason that you should remain ignorant of this wonderful
and infinite earth, which is firmly and instantly given you in
possession?  Although your days are numbered, and the following
darkness sure, is it necessary that you should share the degradation
of the brute, because you are condemned to its mortality; or live
the life of the moth, and of the worm, because you are to companion
them in the dust?  Not so; we may have but a few thousands of days
to spend, perhaps hundreds only--perhaps tens; nay, the longest of
our time and best, looked back on, will be but as a moment, as the
twinkling of an eye; still we are men, not insects; we are living
spirits, not passing clouds.  "He maketh the winds His messengers;
the momentary fire, His minister;" and shall we do less than THESE?
Let us do the work of men while we bear the form of them; and, as we
snatch our narrow portion of time out of Eternity, snatch also our
narrow inheritance of passion out of Immortality--even though our
lives BE as a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then
vanisheth away.

But there are some of you who believe not this--who think this cloud
of life has no such close--that it is to float, revealed and
illumined, upon the floor of heaven, in the day when He cometh with
clouds, and every eye shall see Him.  Some day, you believe, within
these five, or ten, or twenty years, for every one of us the
judgment will be set, and the books opened.  If that be true, far
more than that must be true.  Is there but one day of judgment?
Why, for us every day is a day of judgment--every day is a Dies
Irae, and writes its irrevocable verdict in the flame of its West.
Think you that judgment waits till the doors of the grave are
opened?  It waits at the doors of your houses--it waits at the
corners of your streets; we are in the midst of judgment--the
insects that we crush are our judges--the moments we fret away are
our judges--the elements that feed us, judge, as they minister--and
the pleasures that deceive us, judge, as they indulge.  Let us, for
our lives, do the work of Men while we bear the form of them, if
indeed those lives are NOT as a vapour, and do NOT vanish away.

"The work of men"--and what is that?  Well, we may any of us know
very quickly, on the condition of being wholly ready to do it.  But
many of us are for the most part thinking, not of what we are to do,
but of what we are to get; and the best of us are sunk into the sin
of Ananias, and it is a mortal one--we want to keep back part of the
price; and we continually talk of taking up our cross, as if the
only harm in a cross was the WEIGHT of it--as if it was only a thing
to be carried, instead of to be--crucified upon.  "They that are His
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts."  Does that
mean, think you, that in time of national distress, of religious
trial, of crisis for every interest and hope of humanity--none of us
will cease jesting, none cease idling, none put themselves to any
wholesome work, none take so much as a tag of lace off their
footmen's coats, to save the world?  Or does it rather mean, that
they are ready to leave houses, lands, and kindreds--yes, and life,
if need be?  Life!--some of us are ready enough to throw that away,
joyless as we have made it.  But "STATION in Life"--how many of us
are ready to quit THAT?  Is it not always the great objection, where
there is question of finding something useful to do--"We cannot
leave our stations in Life"?

Those of us who really cannot--that is to say, who can only maintain
themselves by continuing in some business or salaried office, have
already something to do; and all that they have to see to is, that
they do it honestly and with all their might.  But with most people
who use that apology, "remaining in the station of life to which
Providence has called them" means keeping all the carriages, and all
the footmen and large houses they can possibly pay for; and, once
for all, I say that if ever Providence DID put them into stations of
that sort--which is not at all a matter of certainty--Providence is
just now very distinctly calling them out again.  Levi's station in
life was the receipt of custom; and Peter's, the shore of Galilee;
and Paul's, the antechambers of the High Priest,--which "station in
life" each had to leave, with brief notice.

And, whatever our station in life may be, at this crisis, those of
us who mean to fulfil our duty ought first to live on as little as
we can; and, secondly, to do all the wholesome work for it we can,
and to spend all we can spare in doing all the sure good we can.

And sure good is, first in feeding people, then in dressing people,
then in lodging people, and lastly in rightly pleasing people, with
arts, or sciences, or any other subject of thought.

I say first in feeding; and, once for all, do not let yourselves be
deceived by any of the common talk of "indiscriminate charity."  The
order to us is not to feed the deserving hungry, nor the industrious
hungry, nor the amiable and well-intentioned hungry, but simply to
feed the hungry.  It is quite true, infallibly true, that if any man
will not work, neither should he eat--think of that, and every time
you sit down to your dinner, ladies and gentlemen, say solemnly,
before you ask a blessing, "How much work have I done to-day for my
dinner?"  But the proper way to enforce that order on those below
you, as well as on yourselves, is not to leave vagabonds and honest
people to starve together, but very distinctly to discern and seize
your vagabond; and shut your vagabond up out of honest people's way,
and very sternly then see that, until he has worked, he does NOT
eat.  But the first thing is to be sure you have the food to give;
and, therefore, to enforce the organization of vast activities in
agriculture and in commerce, for the production of the wholesomest
food, and proper storing and distribution of it, so that no famine
shall any more be possible among civilized beings.  There is plenty
of work in this business alone, and at once, for any number of
people who like to engage in it.

Secondly, dressing people--that is to say, urging every one, within
reach of your influence to be always neat and clean, and giving them
means of being so.  In so far as they absolutely refuse, you must
give up the effort with respect to them, only taking care that no
children within your sphere of influence shall any more be brought
up with such habits; and that every person who is willing to dress
with propriety shall have encouragement to do so.  And the first
absolutely necessary step towards this is the gradual adoption of a
consistent dress for different ranks of persons, so that their rank
shall be known by their dress; and the restriction of the changes of
fashion within certain limits.  All which appears for the present
quite impossible; but it is only so far even difficult as it is
difficult to conquer our vanity, frivolity, and desire to appear
what we are not.  And it is not, nor ever shall be, creed of mine,
that these mean and shallow vices are unconquerable by Christian
women.

And then, thirdly, lodging people, which you may think should have
been put first, but I put it third, because we must feed and clothe
people where we find them, and lodge them afterwards.  And providing
lodgment for them means a great deal of vigorous legislature, and
cutting down of vested interests that stand in the way, and after
that, or before that, so far as we can get it, thorough sanitary and
remedial action in the houses that we have; and then the building of
more, strongly, beautifully, and in groups of limited extent, kept
in proportion to their streams, and walled round, so that there may
be no festering and wretched suburb anywhere, but clean and busy
street within, and the open country without, with a belt of
beautiful garden and orchard round the walls, so that from any part
of the city perfectly fresh air and grass, and sight of far horizon,
might be reachable in a few minutes' walk.  This the final aim; but
in immediate action every minor and possible good to be instantly
done, when, and as, we can; roofs mended that have holes in them--
fences patched that have gaps in them--walls' buttressed that
totter--and floors propped that shake; cleanliness and order
enforced with our own hands and eyes, till we are breathless, every
day.  And all the fine arts will healthily follow.  I myself have
washed a flight of stone stairs all down, with bucket and broom, in
a Savoy inn, where they hadn't washed their stairs since they first
went up them; and I never made a better sketch than that afternoon.

These, then, are the three first needs of civilized life; and the
law for every Christian man and woman is, that they shall be in
direct service towards one of these three needs, as far as is
consistent with their own special occupation, and if they have no
special business, then wholly in one of these services.  And out of
such exertion in plain duty all other good will come; for in this
direct contention with material evil, you will find out the real
nature of all evil; you will discern by the various kinds of
resistance, what is really the fault and main antagonism to good;
also you will find the most unexpected helps and profound lessons
given, and truths will come thus down to us which the speculation of
all our lives would never have raised us up to.  You will find
nearly every educational problem solved, as soon as you truly want
to do something; everybody will become of use in their own fittest
way, and will learn what is best for them to know in that use.
Competitive examination will then, and not till then, be wholesome,
because it will be daily, and calm, and in practice; and on these
familiar arts, and minute, but certain and serviceable knowledges,
will be surely edified and sustained the greater arts and splendid
theoretical sciences.

But much more than this.  On such holy and simple practice will be
founded, indeed, at last, an infallible religion.  The greatest of
all the mysteries of life, and the most terrible, is the corruption
of even the sincerest religion, which is not daily founded on
rational, effective, humble, and helpful action.  Helpful action,
observe! for there is just one law, which, obeyed, keeps all
religions pure--forgotten, makes them all false.  Whenever in any
religious faith, dark or bright, we allow our minds to dwell upon
the points in which we differ from other people, we are wrong, and
in the devil's power.  That is the essence of the Pharisee's
thanksgiving--"Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are."
At every moment of our lives we should be trying to find out, not in
what we differ from other people, but in what we agree with them;
and the moment we find we can agree as to anything that should be
done, kind or good, (and who but fools couldn't?) then do it; push
at it together:  you can't quarrel in a side-by-side push; but the
moment that even the best men stop pushing, and begin talking, they
mistake their pugnacity for piety, and it's all over.  I will not
speak of the crimes which in past times have been committed in the
name of Christ, nor of the follies which are at this hour held to be
consistent with obedience to Him; but I WILL speak of the morbid
corruption and waste of vital power in religious sentiment, by which
the pure strength of that which should be the guiding soul of every
nation, the splendour of its youthful manhood, and spotless light of
its maidenhood, is averted or cast away.  You may see continually
girls who have never been taught to do a single useful thing
thoroughly; who cannot sew, who cannot cook, who cannot cast an
account, nor prepare a medicine, whose whole life has been passed
either in play or in pride; you will find girls like these, when
they are earnest-hearted, cast all their innate passion of religious
spirit, which was meant by God to support them through the
irksomeness of daily toil, into grievous and vain meditation over
the meaning of the great Book, of which no syllable was ever yet to
be understood but through a deed; all the instinctive wisdom and
mercy of their womanhood made vain, and the glory of their pure
consciences warped into fruitless agony concerning questions which
the laws of common serviceable life would have either solved for
them in an instant, or kept out of their way.  Give such a girl any
true work that will make her active in the dawn, and weary at night,
with the consciousness that her fellow-creatures have indeed been
the better for her day, and the powerless sorrow of her enthusiasm
will transform itself into a majesty of radiant and beneficent
peace.

So with our youths.  We once taught them to make Latin verses, and
called them educated; now we teach them to leap and to row, to hit a
ball with a bat, and call them educated.  Can they plough, can they
sow, can they plant at the right time, or build with a steady hand?
Is it the effort of their lives to be chaste, knightly, faithful,
holy in thought, lovely in word and deed?  Indeed it is, with some,
nay, with many, and the strength of England is in them, and the
hope; but we have to turn their courage from the toil of war to the
toil of mercy; and their intellect from dispute of words to
discernment of things; and their knighthood from the errantry of
adventure to the state and fidelity of a kingly power.  And then,
indeed, shall abide, for them and for us, an incorruptible felicity,
and an infallible religion; shall abide for us Faith, no more to be
assailed by temptation, no more to be defended by wrath and by
fear;--shall abide with us Hope, no more to be quenched by the years
that overwhelm, or made ashamed by the shadows that betray:- shall
abide for us, and with us, the greatest of these; the abiding will,
the abiding name of our Father.  For the greatest of these is
Charity.



Footnotes:

{1}  The paragraph that begins "I think I can best tell you their
answer..."

{2}  The paragraph that begins "Does a bird..."

{3}  The paragraphs beginning:

79--"I believe, then, with this exception..."
75--"Yet, observe, with exquisite accuracy..."
19--"Now, in order to deal with words rightly,..."
79--"Then, in art, keep the finest models..."

{4} [Greek word which cannot be reproduced]

{5}  Note this sentence carefully, and compare the 'Queen of the
Air,' paragraph "Nothing that I ever said is more ..."

{6}  2 Peter iii. 5-7.

{7}  Compare the 13th Letter in 'Time and Tide.'

{8}  Modern "Education" for the most part signifies giving people
the faculty of thinking wrong on every conceivable subject of
importance to them.

{9}  Inf. xxiii. 125, 126; xix. 49. 50.

{10}  Compare with paragraph "This, then, is what you have to do..."

{11}  See note at end of lecture.  I have put it in large type,
because the course of matters since it was written has made it
perhaps better worth attention.

{12}  Respecting the increase of rent by the deaths of the poor, for
evidence of which see the preface to the Medical Officer's report to
the Privy Council, just published, there are suggestions in its
preface which will make some stir among us, I fancy, respecting
which let me note these points following:-

There are two theories on the subject of land now abroad, and in
contention; both false.

The first is that, by Heavenly law, there have always existed, and
must continue to exist, a certain number of hereditarily sacred
persons to whom the earth, air, and water of the world belong, as
personal property; of which earth, air, and water, these persons
may, at their pleasure, permit, or forbid, the rest of the human
race to eat, to breathe, or to drink.  This theory is not for many
years longer tenable.  The adverse theory is that a division of the
land of the world among the mob of the world would immediately
elevate the said mob into sacred personages; that houses would then
build themselves, and corn grow of itself; and that everybody would
be able to live, without doing any work for his living.  This theory
would also be found highly untenable in practice.

It will, however, require some rough experiments and rougher
catastrophes, before the generality of persons will be convinced
that no law concerning anything--least of all concerning land, for
either holding or dividing it, or renting it high, or renting it
low--would be of the smallest ultimate use to the people, so long as
the general contest for life, and for the means of life, remains one
of mere brutal competition.  That contest, in an unprincipled
nation, will take one deadly form or another, whatever laws you make
against it.  For instance, it would be an entirely wholesome law for
England, if it could be carried, that maximum limits should be
assigned to incomes according to classes; and that every nobleman's
income should be paid to him as a fixed salary or pension by the
nation; and not squeezed by him in variable sums, at discretion, out
of the tenants of his land.  But if you could get such a law passed
to-morrow, and if, which would be farther necessary, you could fix
the value of the assigned incomes by making a given weight of pure
bread for a given sum, a twelvemonth would not pass before another
currency would have been tacitly established, and the power of
accumulated wealth would have re-asserted itself in some other
article, or some other imaginary sign.  There is only one cure for
public distress--and that is public education, directed to make men
thoughtful, merciful, and just.  There are, indeed, many laws
conceivable which would gradually better and strengthen the national
temper; but, for the most part, they are such as the national temper
must be much bettered before it would bear.  A nation in its youth
may be helped by laws, as a weak child by backboards, but when it is
old it cannot that way strengthen its crooked spine.

And besides; the problem of land, at its worst, is a bye one;
distribute the earth as you will, the principal question remains
inexorable,--Who is to dig it?  Which of us, in brief word, is to do
the hard and dirty work for the rest, and for what pay?  Who is to
do the pleasant and clean work, and for what pay?  Who is do no
work, and for what pay?  And there are curious moral and religious
questions connected with these.  How far is it lawful to suck a
portion of the soul out of a great many persons, in order to put the
abstracted psychical quantities together and make one very beautiful
or ideal soul?  If we had to deal with mere blood instead of spirit,
(and the thing might literally be done--as it has been done with
infants before now)--so that it were possible, by taking a certain
quantity of blood from the arms of a given number of the mob, and
putting it all into one person, to make a more azure-blooded
gentleman of him, the thing would of course be managed; but
secretly, I should conceive.  But now, because it is brain and soul
that we abstract, not visible blood, it can be done quite openly,
and we live, we gentlemen, on delicatest prey, after the manner of
weasels; that is to say, we keep a certain number of clowns digging
and ditching, and generally stupefied, in order that we, being fed
gratis, may have all the thinking and feeling to ourselves.  Yet
there is a great deal to be said for this.  A highly-bred and
trained English, French, Austrian, or Italian gentleman (much more a
lady), is a great production,--a better production than most
statues; being beautifully coloured as well as shaped, and plus all
the brains; a glorious thing to look at, a wonderful thing to talk
to; and you cannot have it, any more than a pyramid or a church, but
by sacrifice of much contributed life.  And it is, perhaps, better
to build a beautiful human creature than a beautiful dome or
steeple--and more delightful to look up reverently to a creature far
above us, than to a wall; only the beautiful human creature will
have some duties to do in return--duties of living belfry and
rampart--of which presently.

{13}  Since this was written, the answer has become definitely--No;
we having surrendered the field of Arctic discovery to the
Continental nations, as being ourselves too poor to pay for ships.

{14}  I state this fact without Professor Owen's permission:  which
of course he could not with propriety have granted, had I asked it;
but I consider it so important that the public should be aware of
the fact, that I do what seems to me right, though rude.

{15}  That was our real idea of "Free Trade"--"All the trade to
myself."  You find now that by "competition" other people can manage
to sell something as well as you--and now we call for Protection
again.  Wretches!

{16}  I meant that the beautiful places of the world--Switzerland,
Italy, South Germany, and so on--are, indeed, the truest cathedrals-
-places to be reverent in, and to worship in; and that we only care
to drive through them:  and to eat and drink at their most sacred
places.

{17}  I was singularly struck, some years ago, by finding all the
river shore at Richmond, in Yorkshire, black in its earth, from the
mere drift of soot-laden air from places many miles away.

{18}  One of the things which we must very resolutely enforce, for
the good of all classes, in our future arrangements, must be that
they wear no "translated" articles of dress.  See the preface.

{19}  This abbreviation of the penalty of useless labour is
curiously coincident in verbal form with a certain passage which
some of us may remember.  It may perhaps be well to preserve beside
this paragraph another cutting out of my store-drawer, from the
'Morning Post,' of about a parallel date, Friday, March 10th, 1865:-
"The SALONS of Mme. C-, who did the honours with clever imitative
grace and elegance, were crowded with princes, dukes, marquises, and
counts--in fact, with the same MALE company as one meets at the
parties of the Princess Metternich and Madame Drouyn de Lhuys.  Some
English peers and members of Parliament were present, and appeared
to enjoy the animated and dazzlingly improper scene.  On the second
floor the supper tables were loaded with every delicacy of the
season.  That your readers may form some idea of the dainty fare of
the Parisian demi-monde, I copy the menu of the supper, which was
served to all the guests (about 200) seated at four o'clock.  Choice
Yquem, Johannisberg, Laffitte, Tokay, and champagne of the finest
vintages were served most lavishly throughout the morning.  After
supper dancing was resumed with increased animation, and the ball
terminated with a CHAINE DIABOLIQUE and a CANCAN D'ENFER at seven in
the morning.  (Morning service--'Ere the fresh lawns appeared, under
the opening eyelids of the Morn.-')  Here is the menu:- 'Consomme de
volaille e la Bagration:  16 hors-d'oeuvres varies.  Bouchees e la
Talleyrand.  Saumons froids, sauce Ravigote.  Filets de boeuf en
Bellevue, timbales milanaises, chaudfroid de gibier.  Dindes
truffees.  Pates de foies gras, buissons d'ecrevisses, salades
venetiennes, gelees blanches aux fruits, gateaux mancini, parisiens
et parisiennes.  Fromages glaces.  Ananas.  Dessert.'"

{20}  Please observe this statement, and think of it, and consider
how it happens that a poor old woman will be ashamed to take a
shilling a week from the country--but no one is ashamed to take a
pension of a thousand a year.

{21}  I am heartily glad to see such a paper as the 'Pall Mall
Gazette' established; for the power of the press in the hands of
highly educated men, in independent position, and of honest purpose,
may indeed become all that it has been hitherto vainly vaunted to
be.  Its editor will therefore, I doubt not, pardon me, in that, by
very reason of my respect for the journal, I do not let pass
unnoticed an article in its third number, page 5, which was wrong in
every word of it, with the intense wrongness which only an honest
man can achieve who has taken a false turn of thought in the outset,
and is following it, regardless of consequences.  It contained at
the end this notable passage:-

"The bread of affliction, and the water of affliction,--aye, and the
bedsteads and blankets of affliction, are the very utmost that the
law ought to give to OUTCASTS MERELY AS OUTCASTS."  I merely put
beside this expression of the gentlemanly mind of England in 1865, a
part of the message which Isaiah was ordered to "lift up his voice
like a trumpet" in declaring to the gentlemen of his day:  "Ye fast
for strife, and to smite with the fist of wickedness.  Is not this
the fast that I have chosen, to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor THAT ARE CAST OUT (margin, 'afflicted') to
THY house?"  The falsehood on which the writer had mentally founded
himself, as previously stated by him, was this:  "To confound the
functions of the dispensers of the poor-rates with those of the
dispensers of a charitable institution is a great and pernicious
error."  This sentence is so accurately and exquisitely wrong, that
its substance must be thus reversed in our minds before we can deal
with any existing problem of national distress.  "To understand that
the dispensers of the poor-rates are the almoners of the nation, and
should distribute its alms with a gentleness and freedom of hand as
much greater and franker than that possible to individual charity,
as the collective national wisdom and power may be supposed greater
than those of any single person, is the foundation of all law
respecting pauperism."  (Since this was written the 'Pall Mall
Gazette' has become a mere party paper--like the rest; but it writes
well, and does more good than mischief on the whole.)

{22}  [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

{23}  I ought, in order to make this assertion fully understood, to
have noted the various weaknesses which lower the ideal of other
great characters of men in the Waverley novels--the selfishness and
narrowness of thought in Redgauntlet, the weak religious enthusiasm
in Edward Glendinning, and the like; and I ought to have noticed
that there are several quite perfect characters sketched sometimes
in the backgrounds; three--let us accept joyously this courtesy to
England and her soldiers--are English officers:  Colonel Gardiner,
Colonel Talbot, and Colonel Mannering.

{24}  Coventry Patmore.  You cannot read him too often or too
carefully; as far as I know he is the only living poet who always
strengthens and purifies; the others sometimes darken, and nearly
always depress and discourage, the imagination they deeply seize.

{25}  Observe, it is "Nature" who is speaking throughout, and who
says, "while she and I together live."

{26}  "Joan of Arc:  in reference to M. Michelet's 'History of
France.'"  De Quincey's Works.  Vol. iii. p. 217.

{27}  I wish there were a true order of chivalry instituted for our
English youth of certain ranks, in which both boy and girl should
receive, at a given age, their knighthood and ladyhood by true
title; attainable only by certain probation and trial both of
character and accomplishment; and to be forfeited, on conviction, by
their peers, of any dishonourable act.  Such an institution would be
entirely, and with all noble results, possible, in a nation which
loved honour.  That it would not be possible among us, is not to the
discredit of the scheme.

{28}  See note {19}

{29}  That no reference should be made to religious questions.

{30}  I have sometimes been asked what this means.  I intended it to
set forth the wisdom of men in war contending for kingdoms, and what
follows to set forth their wisdom in peace, contending for wealth.

{31}  See "The Two Paths,"--paragraph beginning "You know I said of
that great and pure..."






[Illustration: John Ruskin.]

STONES OF VENICE

BY JOHN RUSKIN




THE STONES OF VENICE:

INTRODUCTORY CHAPTERS AND LOCAL INDICES
(PRINTED SEPARATELY)
FOR THE USE OF TRAVELLERS WHILE STAYING IN VENICE AND VERONA.


BY
JOHN RUSKIN, LL.D.




PREFACE.


This volume is the first of a series designed by the Author with the
purpose of placing in the hands of the public, in more serviceable form,
those portions of his earlier works which he thinks deserving of a
permanent place in the system of his general teaching. They were at
first intended to be accompanied by photographic reductions of the
principal plates in the larger volumes; but this design has been
modified by the Author's increasing desire to gather his past and
present writings into a consistent body, illustrated by one series of
plates, purchasable in separate parts, and numbered consecutively. Of
other prefatory matter, once intended,--apologetic mostly,--the reader
shall be spared the cumber: and a clear prospectus issued by the
publisher of the new series of plates, as soon as they are in a state of
forwardness.

The second volume of this edition will contain the most useful matter
out of the third volume of the old one, closed by its topical index,
abridged and corrected.

BRANTWOOD,

_3rd May_, 1879.




CONTENTS.


CHAP.

I. The Quarry

II. The Throne

III. Torcello

IV. St. Mark's

V. The Ducal Palace




THE STONES OF VENICE




CHAPTER I.

[FIRST OF THE OLD EDITION.]

THE QUARRY.


SECTION I. Since the first dominion of men was asserted over the ocean,
three thrones, of mark beyond all others, have been set upon its sands:
the thrones of Tyre, Venice, and England. Of the First of these great
powers only the memory remains; of the Second, the ruin; the Third,
which inherits their greatness, if it forget their example, may be led
through prouder eminence to less pitied destruction.

The exaltation, the sin, and the punishment of Tyre have been recorded
for us, in perhaps the most touching words ever uttered by the Prophets
of Israel against the cities of the stranger. But we read them as a
lovely song; and close our ears to the sternness of their warning: for
the very depth of the Fall of Tyre has blinded us to its reality, and we
forget, as we watch the bleaching of the rocks between the sunshine and
the sea, that they were once "as in Eden, the garden of God."

Her successor, like her in perfection of beauty, though less in
endurance of dominion, is still left for our beholding in the final
period of her decline: a ghost upon the sands of the sea, so weak--so
quiet,--so bereft of all but her loveliness, that we might well doubt,
as we watched her faint reflection in the mirage of the lagoon, which
was the City, and which the Shadow.

I would endeavor to trace the lines of this image before it be for ever
lost, and to record, as far as I may, the warning which seems to me to
be uttered by every one of the fast-gaining waves, that beat, like
passing bells, against the STONES OF VENICE.

SECTION II. It would be difficult to overrate the value of the lessons
which might be derived from a faithful study of the history of this
strange and mighty city: a history which, in spite of the labor of
countless chroniclers, remains in vague and disputable outline,--barred
with brightness and shade, like the far away edge of her own ocean,
where the surf and the sand-bank are mingled with the sky. The inquiries
in which we have to engage will hardly render this outline clearer, but
their results will, in some degree, alter its aspect; and, so far as
they bear upon it at all, they possess an interest of a far higher kind
than that usually belonging to architectural investigations. I may,
perhaps, in the outset, and in few words, enable the general reader to
form a clearer idea of the importance of every existing expression of
Venetian character through Venetian art, and of the breadth of interest
which the true history of Venice embraces, than he is likely to have
gleaned from the current fables of her mystery or magnificence.

SECTION III. Venice is usually conceived as an oligarchy: She was so
during a period less than the half of her existence, and that including
the days of her decline; and it is one of the first questions needing
severe examination, whether that decline was owing in any wise to the
change in the form of her government, or altogether as assuredly in
great part, to changes, in the character of the persons of whom it was
composed.

The state of Venice existed Thirteen Hundred and Seventy-six years, from
the first establishment of a consular government on the island of the
Rialto, [Footnote: Appendix I., "Foundations of Venice."] to the moment
when the General-in-chief of the French army of Italy pronounced the
Venetian republic a thing of the past. Of this period, Two Hundred and
Seventy-six years [Footnote: Appendix II., "Power of the Doges."] were
passed in a nominal subjection to the cities of old Venetia, especially
to Padua, and in an agitated form of democracy, of which the executive
appears to have been entrusted to tribunes, [Footnote: Sismondi, Hist.
des Rép. Ital., vol. i. ch. v.] chosen, one by the inhabitants of each
of the principal islands. For six hundred years, [Footnote: Appendix
III., "Serrar del Consiglio."] during which the power of Venice was
continually on the increase, her government was an elective monarchy,
her King or doge possessing, in early times at least, as much
independent authority as any other European sovereign, but an authority
gradually subjected to limitation, and shortened almost daily of its
prerogatives, while it increased in a spectral and incapable
magnificence. The final government of the nobles, under the image of a
king, lasted for five hundred years, during which Venice reaped the
fruits of her former energies, consumed them,--and expired.

SECTION IV. Let the reader therefore conceive the existence of the
Venetian state as broadly divided into two periods: the first of nine
hundred, the second of five hundred years, the separation being marked
by what was called the "Serrar del Consiglio;" that is to say, the final
and absolute distinction of the nobles from the commonalty, and the
establishment of the government in their hands to the exclusion alike of
the influence of the people on the one side, and the authority of the
doge on the other.

Then the first period, of nine hundred years, presents us with the most
interesting spectacle of a people struggling out of anarchy into order
and power; and then governed, for the most part, by the worthiest and
noblest man whom they could find among them, [Footnote: "Ha saputo
trovar modo che non uno, non pochi, non molti, signoreggiano, ma molti
buoni, pochi migliori, e insiememente, _un ottimo solo_." (_Sansovino_,)
Ah, well done, Venice! Wisdom this, indeed.] called their Doge or Leader,
with an aristocracy gradually and resolutely forming itself around him,
out of which, and at last by which, he was chosen; an aristocracy owing
its origin to the accidental numbers, influence, and wealth of some among
the families of the fugitives from the older Venetia, and gradually
organizing itself, by its unity and heroism, into a separate body.

This first period includes the rise of Venice, her noblest achievements,
and the circumstances which determined her character and position among
European powers; and within its range, as might have been anticipated,
we find the names of all her hero princes,--of Pietro Urseolo, Ordalafo
Falier, Domenico Michieli, Sebastiano Ziani, and Enrico Dandolo.

SECTION V. The second period opens with a hundred and twenty years, the
most eventful in the career of Venice--the central struggle of her
life--stained with her darkest crime, the murder of Carrara--disturbed
by her most dangerous internal sedition, the conspiracy of
Falier--oppressed by her most fatal war, the war of Chiozza--and
distinguished by the glory of her two noblest citizens (for in this
period the heroism of her citizens replaces that of her monarchs),
Vittor Pisani and Carlo Zeno.

I date the commencement of the Fall of Venice from the death of Carlo
Zeno, 8th May, 1418; [Footnote: Daru, liv. xii. ch. xii.] the _visible_
commencement from that of another of her noblest and wisest children, the
Doge Tomaso Mocenigo, who expired five years later. The reign of Foscari
followed, gloomy with pestilence and war; a war in which large
acquisitions of territory were made by subtle or fortunate policy in
Lombardy, and disgrace, significant as irreparable, sustained in the
battles on the Po at Cremona, and in the marshes of Caravaggio. In 1454,
Venice, the first of the states of Christendom, humiliated herself to the
Turk in the same year was established the Inquisition of State,
[Footnote: Daru, liv. xvi. cap. xx. We owe to this historian the
discovery of the statutes of the tribunal and date of its establishment.]
and from this period her government takes the perfidious and mysterious
form under which it is usually conceived. In 1477, the great Turkish
invasion spread terror to the shores of the lagoons; and in 1508 the
league of Cambrai marks the period usually assigned as the commencement
of the decline of the Venetian power; [Footnote: Ominously signified by
their humiliation to the Papal power (as before to the Turkish) in 1509,
and their abandonment of their right of appointing the clergy of their
territories.] the commercial prosperity of Venice in the close of the
fifteenth century blinding her historians to the previous evidence of the
diminution of her internal strength.

SECTION VI. Now there is apparently a significative coincidence between
the establishment of the aristocratic and oligarchical powers, and the
diminution of the prosperity of the state. But this is the very question
at issue; and it appears to me quite undetermined by any historian, or
determined by each in accordance with his own prejudices. It is a triple
question: first, whether the oligarchy established by the efforts of
individual ambition was the cause, in its subsequent operation, of the
Fall of Venice; or (secondly) whether the establishment of the oligarchy
itself be not the sign and evidence, rather than the cause, of national
enervation; or (lastly) whether, as I rather think, the history of
Venice might not be written almost without reference to the construction
of her senate or the prerogatives of her Doge. It is the history of a
people eminently at unity in itself, descendants of Roman race, long
disciplined by adversity, and compelled by its position either to live
nobly or to perish:--for a thousand years they fought for life; for
three hundred they invited death: their battle was rewarded, and their
call was heard.

SECTION VII. Throughout her career, the victories of Venice, and, at
many periods of it, her safety, were purchased by individual heroism;
and the man who exalted or saved her was sometimes (oftenest) her king,
sometimes a noble, sometimes a citizen. To him no matter, nor to her:
the real question is, not so much what names they bore, or with what
powers they were entrusted, as how they were trained; how they were made
masters of themselves, servants of their country, patient of distress,
impatient of dishonor; and what was the true reason of the change from
the time when she could find saviours among those whom she had cast into
prison, to that when the voices of her own children commanded her to
sign covenant with Death. [Footnote: The senate voted the abdication of
their authority by a majority of 512 to 14. (Alison, ch. xxiii.)]

SECTION VIII. On this collateral question I wish the reader's mind to be
fixed throughout all our subsequent inquiries. It will give double
interest to every detail: nor will the interest be profitless; for the
evidence which I shall be able to deduce from the arts of Venice will be
both frequent and irrefragable, that the decline of her political
prosperity was exactly coincident with that of domestic and individual
religion.

I say domestic and individual; for--and this is the second point which I
wish the reader to keep in mind--the most curious phenomenon in all
Venetian history is the vitality of religion in private life, and its
deadness in public policy. Amidst the enthusiasm, chivalry, or
fanaticism of the other states of Europe, Venice stands, from first to
last, like a masked statue; her coldness impenetrable, her exertion only
aroused by the touch of a secret spring. That spring was her commercial
interest,--this the one motive of all her important political acts, or
enduring national animosities. She could forgive insults to her honor,
but never rivalship in her commerce; she calculated the glory of her
conquests by their value, and estimated their justice by their facility.
The fame of success remains; when the motives of attempt are forgotten;
and the casual reader of her history may perhaps be surprised to be
reminded, that the expedition which was commanded by the noblest of her
princes, and whose results added most to her military glory, was one in
which while all Europe around her was wasted by the fire of its
devotion, she first calculated the highest price she could exact from
its piety for the armament she furnished, and then, for the advancement
of her own private interests, at once broke her faith [Footnote: By
directing the arms of the Crusaders against a Christian prince. (Daru,
liv. iv. ch. iv. viii.)] and betrayed her religion.

SECTION IX. And yet, in the midst of this national criminality, we shall
be struck again and again by the evidences of the most noble individual
feeling. The tears of Dandolo were not shed in hypocrisy, though they
could not blind him to the importance of the conquest of Zara. The habit
of assigning to religion a direct influence over all _his own_ actions,
and all the affairs of _his own_ daily life, is remarkable in every great
Venetian during the times of the prosperity of the state; nor are
instances wanting in which the private feeling of the citizens reaches
the sphere of their policy, and even becomes the guide of its course
where the scales of expediency are doubtfully balanced. I sincerely trust
that the inquirer would be disappointed who should endeavor to trace any
more immediate reasons for their adoption of the cause of Alexander III.
against Barbarossa, than the piety which was excited by the character of
their suppliant, and the noble pride which was provoked by the insolence
of the emperor. But the heart of Venice is shown only in her hastiest
councils; her worldly spirit recovers the ascendency whenever she has
time to calculate the probabilities of advantage, or when they are
sufficiently distinct to need no calculation; and the entire subjection
of private piety to national policy is not only remarkable throughout the
almost endless series of treacheries and tyrannies by which her empire
was enlarged and maintained, but symbolized by a very singular
circumstance in the building of the city itself. I am aware of no other
city of Europe in which its cathedral was not the principal feature. But
the principal church in Venice was the chapel attached to the palace of
her prince, and called the "Chiesa Ducale." The patriarchal church,
[Footnote: Appendix 4, "San Pietro di Castello."] inconsiderable in size
and mean in decoration, stands on the outermost islet of the Venetian
group, and its name, as well as its site, is probably unknown to the
greater number of travellers passing hastily through the city. Nor is it
less worthy of remark, that the two most important temples of Venice,
next to the ducal chapel, owe their size and magnificence, not to
national effort, but to the energy of the Franciscan and Dominican monks,
supported by the vast organization of those great societies on the
mainland of Italy, and countenanced by the most pious, and perhaps also,
in his generation, the most wise, of all the princes of Venice,
[Footnote: Tomaso Mocenigo, above named, Section V.] who now rests
beneath the roof of one of those very temples, and whose life is not
satirized by the images of the Virtues which a Tuscan sculptor has placed
around his tomb.

SECTION X. There are, therefore, two strange and solemn lights in which
we have to regard almost every scene in the fitful history of the Rivo
Alto. We find, on the one hand, a deep, and constant tone of individual
religion characterizing the lives of the citizens of Venice in her
greatness; we find this spirit influencing them in all the familiar and
immediate concerns of life, giving a peculiar dignity to the conduct
even of their commercial transactions, and confessed by them with a
simplicity of faith that may well put to shame the hesitation with which
a man of the world at present admits (even if it be so in reality) that
religious feeling has any influence over the minor branches of his
conduct. And we find as the natural consequence of all this, a healthy
serenity of mind and energy of will expressed in all their actions, and
a habit of heroism which never fails them, even when the immediate
motive of action ceases to be praiseworthy. With the fulness of this
spirit the prosperity of the state is exactly correspondent, and with
its failure her decline, and that with a closeness and precision which
it will be one of the collateral objects of the following essay to
demonstrate from such accidental evidence as the field of its inquiry
presents. And, thus far, all is natural and simple. But the stopping
short of this religious faith when it appears likely to influence
national action, correspondent as it is, and that most strikingly, with
several characteristics of the temper of our present English
legislature, is a subject, morally and politically, of the most curious
interest and complicated difficulty; one, however, which the range of my
present inquiry will not permit me to approach, and for the treatment of
which I must be content to furnish materials in the light I may be able
to throw upon the private tendencies of the Venetian character.

SECTION XI. There is, however, another most interesting feature in the
policy of Venice which will be often brought before us; and which a
Romanist would gladly assign as the reason of its irreligion; namely,
the magnificent and successful struggle which she maintained against the
temporal authority of the Church of Rome. It is true that, in a rapid
survey of her career, the eye is at first arrested by the strange drama
to which I have already alluded, closed by that ever memorable scene in
the portico of St. Mark's, [Footnote:
                    "In that temple porch,
  (The brass is gone, the porphyry remains,)
  Did BARBAROSSA fling his mantle off,
  And kneeling, on his neck receive the foot
  Of the proud Pontiff--thus at last consoled
  For flight, disguise, and many an aguish shake
  On his stony pillow."

I need hardly say whence the lines are taken: Rogers' "Italy" has, I
believe, now a place in the best beloved compartment of all libraries,
and will never be removed from it. There is more true expression of the
spirit of Venice in the passages devoted to her in that poem, than in all
else that has been written of her.] the central expression in most men's
thoughts of the unendurable elevation of the pontifical power; it is true
that the proudest thoughts of Venice, as well as the insignia of her
prince, and the form of her chief festival, recorded the service thus
rendered to the Roman Church. But the enduring sentiment of years more
than balanced the enthusiasm of a moment; and the bull of Clement V.,
which excommunicated the Venetians and their doge, likening them to
Dathan, Abiram, Absalom, and Lucifer, is a stronger evidence of the great
tendencies of the Venetian government than the umbrella of the doge or
the ring of the Adriatic. The humiliation of Francesco Dandolo blotted
out the shame of Barbarossa, and the total exclusion of ecclesiastics
from all share in the councils of Venice became an enduring mark of her
knowledge of the spirit of the Church of Rome, and of her defiance of it.

To this exclusion of Papal influence from her councils, the Romanist
will attribute their irreligion, and the Protestant their success.
[Footnote: At least, such success as they had. Vide Appendix 5, "The
Papal Power in Venice."]

The first may be silenced by a reference to the character of the policy
of the Vatican itself; and the second by his own shame, when he reflects
that the English legislature sacrificed their principles to expose
themselves to the very danger which the Venetian senate sacrificed
theirs to avoid.

SECTION XII. One more circumstance remains to be noted respecting the
Venetian government, the singular unity of the families composing
it,--unity far from sincere or perfect, but still admirable when
contrasted with the fiery feuds, the almost daily revolutions, the
restless successions of families and parties in power, which fill the
annals of the other states of Italy. That rivalship should sometimes be
ended by the dagger, or enmity conducted to its ends under the mask of
law, could not but be anticipated where the fierce Italian spirit was
subjected to so severe a restraint: it is much that jealousy appears
usually unmingled with illegitimate ambition, and that, for every
instance in which private passion sought its gratification through
public danger, there are a thousand in which it was sacrificed to the
public advantage. Venice may well call upon us to note with reverence,
that of all the towers which are still seen rising like a branchless
forest from her islands, there is but one whose office was other than
that of summoning to prayer, and that one was a watch-tower only
[Footnote: Thus literally was fulfilled the promise to St. Mark,--Pax
e.] from first to last, while the palaces of the other cities of Italy
were lifted into sullen fortitudes of rampart, and fringed with forked
battlements for the javelin and the bow, the sands of Venice never sank
under the weight of a war tower, and her roof terraces were wreathed
with Arabian imagery, of golden globes suspended on the leaves of
lilies. [Footnote: The inconsiderable fortifications of the arsenal are
no exception to this statement, as far as it regards the city itself.
They are little more than a semblance of precaution against the attack
of a foreign enemy.]

SECTION XIII. These, then, appear to me to be the points of chief
general interest in the character and fate of the Venetian people. I
would next endeavor to give the reader some idea of the manner in which
the testimony of Art bears upon these questions, and of the aspect which
the arts themselves assume when they are regarded in their true
connection with the history of the state.

1st. Receive the witness of Painting.

It will be remembered that I put the commencement of the Fall of Venice
as far back as 1418.

Now, John Bellini was born in 1423, and Titian in 1480. John Bellini,
and his brother Gentile, two years older than he, close the line of the
sacred painters of Venice. But the most solemn spirit of religious faith
animates their works to the last. There is no religion in any work of
Titian's: there is not even the smallest evidence of religious temper or
sympathies either in himself, or in those for whom he painted. His
larger sacred subjects are merely themes for the exhibition of pictorial
rhetoric,--composition and color. His minor works are generally made
subordinate to purposes of portraiture. The Madonna in the church of the
Frari is a mere lay figure, introduced to form a link of connection
between the portraits of various members of the Pesaro family who
surround her.

Now this is not merely because John Bellini was a religious man and
Titian was not. Titian and Bellini are each true representatives of the
school of painters contemporary with them; and the difference in their
artistic feeling is a consequence not so much of difference in their own
natural characters as in their early education: Bellini was brought up
in faith; Titian in formalism. Between the years of their births the
vital religion of Venice had expired.

SECTION XIV. The _vital_ religion, observe, not the formal. Outward
observance was as strict as ever; and doge and senator still were
painted, in almost every important instance, kneeling before the Madonna
or St. Mark; a confession of faith made universal by the pure gold of
the Venetian sequin. But observe the great picture of Titian's in the
ducal palace, of the Doge Antonio Grimani kneeling before Faith: there
is a curious lesson in it. The figure of Faith is a coarse portrait of
one of Titian's least graceful female models: Faith had become carnal.
The eye is first caught by the flash of the Doge's armor. The heart of
Venice was in her wars, not in her worship.

The mind of Tintoret, incomparably more deep and serious than that of
Titian, casts the solemnity of its own tone over the sacred subjects
which it approaches, and sometimes forgets itself into devotion; but the
principle of treatment is altogether the same as Titian's: absolute
subordination of the religious subject to purposes of decoration or
portraiture.

The evidence might be accumulated a thousandfold from the works of
Veronese, and of every succeeding painter,--that the fifteenth century
had taken away the religious heart of Venice.

SECTION XV. Such is the evidence of Painting. To collect that of
Architecture will be our task through many a page to come; but I must
here give a general idea of its heads.

Philippe de Commynes, writing of his entry into Venice in 1495, says,--

"Chascun me feit seoir au meillieu de ces deux ambassadeurs qui est
l'honneur d'Italie que d'estre au meillieu; et me menerent au long de la
grant rue, qu'ilz appellent le Canal Grant, et est bien large. Les
gallees y passent à travers et y ay veu navire de quatre cens tonneaux
ou plus pres des maisons: et est la plus belle rue que je croy qui soit
en tout le monde, et la mieulx maisonnee, et va le long de la ville. Les
maisons sont fort grandes et haultes, et de bonne pierre, et les
anciennes toutes painctes; les aul tres faictes depuis cent ans: toutes
ont le devant de marbre blanc, qui leur vient d'Istrie, à cent mils de
la, et encores maincte grant piece de porphire et de sarpentine sur le
devant.... C'est la plus triumphante cité que j'aye jamais veue et qui
plus faict d'honneur à ambassadeurs et estrangiers, et qui plus
saigement se gouverne, et où le service de Dieu est le plus
sollennellement faict: et encores qu'il y peust bien avoir d'aultres
faultes, si croy je que Dieu les a en ayde pour la reverence qu'ilz
portent au service de l'Eglise." [Footnote: Mémoires de Commynes, liv.
vii. ch. xviii.]

SECTION XVI. This passage is of peculiar interest, for two reasons.
Observe, first, the impression of Commynes respecting the religion of
Venice: of which, as I have above said, the forms still remained with
some glimmering of life in them, and were the evidence of what the real
life had been in former times. But observe, secondly, the impression
instantly made on Commynes' mind by the distinction between the elder
palaces and those built "within this last hundred years; which all have
their fronts of white marble brought from Istria, a hundred miles away,
and besides, many a large piece of porphyry and serpentine upon their
fronts."

On the opposite page I have given two of the ornaments of the palaces
which so struck the French ambassador. [Footnote: Appendix 6,
"Renaissance Ornaments."] He was right in his notice of the distinction.
There had indeed come a change over Venetian architecture in the
fifteenth century; and a change of some importance to us moderns: we
English owe to it our St. Paul's Cathedral, and Europe in general owes
to it the utter degradation or destruction of her schools of
architecture, never since revived. But that the reader may understand
this, it is necessary that he should have some general idea of the
connection of the architecture of Venice with that of the rest of
Europe, from its origin forwards.

SECTION XVII. All European architecture, bad and good, old and new, is
derived from Greece through Rome, and colored and perfected from the
East. The history of architecture is nothing but the tracing of the
various modes and directions of this derivation. Understand this, once
for all: if you hold fast this great connecting clue, you may string all
the types of successive architectural invention upon it like so many
beads. The Doric and the Corinthian orders are the roots, the one of all
Romanesque, massy-capitaled buildings--Norman, Lombard, Byzantine, and
what else you can name of the kind; and the Corinthian of all Gothic,
Early English, French, German, and Tuscan. Now observe: those old Greeks
gave the shaft; Rome gave the arch; the Arabs pointed and foliated the
arch. The shaft and arch, the frame-work and strength of architecture,
are from the race of Japheth: the spirituality and sanctity of it from
Ismael, Abraham, and Shem.

SECTION XVIII. There is high probability that the Greek received his
shaft system from Egypt; but I do not care to keep this earlier
derivation in the mind of the reader. It is only necessary that he
should be able to refer to a fixed point of origin, when the form of the
shaft was first perfected. But it may be incidently observed, that if
the Greeks did indeed receive their Doric from Egypt, then the three
families of the earth have each contributed their part to its noblest
architecture: and Ham, the servant of the others, furnishes the
sustaining or bearing member, the shaft; Japheth the arch; Shem the
spiritualization of both.

SECTION XIX. I have said that the two orders, Doric and Corinthian, are
the roots of all European architecture. You have, perhaps, heard of five
orders; but there are only two real orders, and there never can be any
more until doomsday. On one of these orders the ornament is convex:
those are Doric, Norman, and what else you recollect of the kind. On the
other the ornament is concave: those are Corinthian, Early English,
Decorated, and what else you recollect of that kind. The transitional
form, in which the ornamental line is straight, is the centre or root of
both. All other orders are varieties of those, or phantasms and
grotesques altogether indefinite in number and species. [Footnote:
Appendix 7, "Varieties of the Orders."]

SECTION XX. This Greek architecture, then, with its two orders, was
clumsily copied and varied by the Romans with no particular result,
until they begun to bring the arch into extensive practical service;
except only that the Doric capital was spoiled in endeavors to mend it,
and the Corinthian much varied and enriched with fanciful, and often
very beautiful imagery. And in this state of things came Christianity:
seized upon the arch as her own; decorated it, and delighted in it;
invented a new Doric capital to replace the spoiled Roman one: and all
over the Roman empire set to work, with such materials as were nearest
at hand, to express and adorn herself as best she could. This Roman
Christian architecture is the exact expression of the Christianity of
the time, very fervid and beautiful--but very imperfect; in many
respects ignorant, and yet radiant with a strong, childlike light of
imagination, which flames up under Constantine, illumines all the shores
of the Bosphorus and the Aegean and the Adriatic Sea, and then
gradually, as the people give themselves up to idolatry, becomes
Corpse-light. The architecture sinks into a settled form--a strange,
gilded, and embalmed repose: it, with the religion it expressed; and so
would have remained for ever,--so _does_ remain, where its languor has
been undisturbed. [Footnote: The reader will find the _weak_ points of
Byzantine architecture shrewdly seized, and exquisitely sketched, in the
opening chapter of the most delightful book of travels I ever opened,--
Curzon's "Monasteries of the Levant."] But rough wakening was ordained.

Section XXI. This Christian art of the declining empire is divided into
two great branches, western and eastern; one centred at Rome, the other
at Byzantium, of which the one is the early Christian Romanesque,
properly so called, and the other, carried to higher imaginative
perfection by Greek workmen, is distinguished from it as Byzantine. But
I wish the reader, for the present, to class these two branches of art
together in his mind, they being, in points of main importance, the
same; that is to say, both of them a true continuance and sequence of
the art of old Rome itself, flowing uninterruptedly down from the
fountain-head, and entrusted always to the best workmen who could be
found--Latins in Italy and Greeks in Greece; and thus both branches may
be ranged under the general term of Christian Romanesque, an
architecture which had lost the refinement of Pagan art in the
degradation of the empire, but which was elevated by Christianity to
higher aims, and by the fancy of the Greek workmen endowed with brighter
forms. And this art the reader may conceive as extending in its various
branches over all the central provinces of the empire, taking aspects
more or less refined, according to its proximity to the seats of
government; dependent for all its power on the vigor and freshness of
the religion which animated it; and as that vigor and purity departed,
losing its own vitality, and sinking into nerveless rest, not deprived
of its beauty, but benumbed and incapable of advance or change.

SECTION XXII. Meantime there had been preparation for its renewal. While
in Rome and Constantinople, and in the districts under their immediate
influence, this Roman art of pure descent was practised in all its
refinement, an impure form of it--a patois of Romanesque--was carried by
inferior workmen into distant provinces; and still ruder imitations of
this patois were executed by the barbarous nations on the skirts of the
empire. But these barbarous nations were in the strength of their youth;
and while, in the centre of Europe, a refined and purely descended art
was sinking into graceful formalism, on its confines a barbarous and
borrowed art was organizing itself into strength and consistency. The
reader must therefore consider the history of the work of the period as
broadly divided into two great heads: the one embracing the elaborately
languid succession of the Christian art of Rome; and the other, the
imitations of it executed by nations in every conceivable phase of early
organization, on the edges of the empire, or included in its now merely
nominal extent.

SECTION XXIII. Some of the barbaric nations were, of course, not
susceptible of this influence; and when they burst over the Alps,
appear, like the Huns, as scourges only, or mix, as the Ostrogoths, with
the enervated Italians, and give physical strength to the mass with
which they mingle, without materially affecting its intellectual
character. But others, both south and north of the empire, had felt its
influence, back to the beach of the Indian Ocean on the one hand, and to
the ice creeks of the North Sea on the other. On the north and west the
influence was of the Latins; on the south and east, of the Greeks. Two
nations, pre-eminent above all the rest, represent to us the force of
derived mind on either side. As the central power is eclipsed, the orbs
of reflected light gather into their fulness; and when sensuality and
idolatry had done their work, and the religion of the empire was laid
asleep in a glittering sepulchre, the living light rose upon both
horizons, and the fierce swords of the Lombard and Arab were shaken over
its golden paralysis.

SECTION XXIV. The work of the Lombard was to give hardihood and system
to the enervated body and enfeebled mind of Christendom; that of the
Arab was to punish idolatry, and to proclaim the spirituality of
worship. The Lombard covered every church which he built with the
sculptured representations of bodily exercises--hunting and war.
[Footnote: Appendix 8, "The Northern Energy."] The Arab banished all
imagination of creature form from his temples, and proclaimed from their
minarets, "There is no god but God." Opposite in their character and
mission, alike in their magnificence of energy, they came from the
North, and from the South, the glacier torrent and the lava stream: they
met and contended over the wreck of the Roman empire; and the very
centre of the struggle, the point of pause of both, the dead water of
the opposite eddies, charged with embayed fragments of the Roman wreck,
is VENICE.

The Ducal palace of Venice contains the three elements in exactly equal
proportions--the Roman, Lombard, and Arab. It is the central building of
the world.

SECTION XXV. The reader will now begin to understand something of the
importance of the study of the edifices of a city which includes, within
the circuit of some seven or eight miles, the field of contest between
the three pre-eminent architectures of the world:--each architecture
expressing a condition of religion; each an erroneous condition, yet
necessary to the correction of the others, and corrected by them.

SECTION XXVI. It will be part of my endeavor, in the following work, to
mark the various modes in which the northern and southern architectures
were developed from the Roman: here I must pause only to name the
distinguishing characteristics of the great families. The Christian
Roman and Byzantine work is round-arched, with single and
well-proportioned shafts; capitals imitated from classical Roman;
mouldings more or less so; and large surfaces of walls entirely covered
with imagery, mosaic, and paintings, whether of scripture history or of
sacred symbols.

The Arab school is at first the same in its principal features, the
Byzantine workmen being employed by the caliphs; but the Arab rapidly
introduces characters half Persepolitan, half Egyptian, into the shafts
and capitals: in his intense love of excitement he points the arch and
writhes it into extravagant foliations; he banishes the animal imagery,
and invents an ornamentation of his own (called Arabesque) to replace
it: this not being adapted for covering large surfaces, he concentrates
it on features of interest, and bars his surfaces with horizontal lines
of color, the expression of the level of the Desert. He retains the
dome, and adds the minaret. All is done with exquisite refinement.

SECTION XXVII. The changes effected by the Lombard are more curious
still, for they are in the anatomy of the building, more than its
decoration. The Lombard architecture represents, as I said, the whole of
that of the northern barbaric nations. And this I believe was, at first,
an imitation in wood of the Christian Roman churches or basilicas.
Without staying to examine the whole structure of a basilica, the reader
will easily understand thus much of it: that it had a nave and two
aisles, the nave much higher than the aisles; that the nave was
separated from the aisles by rows of shafts, which supported, above,
large spaces of flat or dead wall, rising above the aisles, and forming
the upper part of the nave, now called the clerestory, which had a
gabled wooden roof.

These high dead walls were, in Roman work, built of stone; but in the
wooden work of the North, they must necessarily have been made of
horizontal boards or timbers attached to uprights on the top of the nave
pillars, which were themselves also of wood. [Footnote: Appendix 9,
"Wooden Churches of the North."] Now, these uprights were necessarily
thicker than the rest of the timbers, and formed vertical square
pilasters above the nave piers. As Christianity extended and
civilization increased, these wooden structures were changed into stone;
but they were literally petrified, retaining the form which had been
made necessary by their being of wood. The upright pilaster above the
nave pier remains in the stone edifice, and is the first form of the
great distinctive feature of Northern architecture--the vaulting shaft.
In that form the Lombards brought it into Italy, in the seventh century,
and it remains to this day in St. Ambrogio of Milan, and St. Michele of
Pavia.

SECTION XXVIII. When the vaulting shaft was introduced in the clerestory
walls, additional members were added for its support to the nave piers.
Perhaps two or three pine trunks, used for a single pillar, gave the
first idea of the grouped shaft. Be that as it may, the arrangement of
the nave pier in the form of a cross accompanies the superimposition of
the vaulting shaft; together with corresponding grouping of minor shafts
in doorways and apertures of windows. Thus, the whole body of the
Northern architecture, represented by that of the Lombards, may be
described as rough but majestic work, round-arched, with grouped shafts,
added vaulting shafts, and endless imagery of active life and fantastic
superstitions.

SECTION XXIX. The glacier stream of the Lombards, and the following one
of the Normans, left their erratic blocks, wherever they had flowed; but
without influencing, I think, the Southern nations beyond the sphere of
their own presence. But the lava stream of the Arab, even after it
ceased to flow, warmed the whole of the Northern air; and the history of
Gothic architecture is the history of the refinement and
spiritualization of Northern work under its influence. The noblest
buildings of the world, the Pisan-Romanesque, Tuscan (Giottesque)
Gothic, and Veronese Gothic, are those of the Lombard schools
themselves, under its close and direct influence; the various Gothics of
the North are the original forms of the architecture which the Lombards
brought into Italy, changing under the less direct influence of the
Arab.

SECTION XXX. Understanding thus much of the formation of the great
European styles, we shall have no difficulty in tracing the succession
of architectures in Venice herself. From what I said of the central
character of Venetian art, the reader is not, of course, to conclude
that the Roman, Northern, and Arabian elements met together and
contended for the mastery at the same period. The earliest element was
the pure Christian Roman; but few, if any, remains of this art exist at
Venice; for the present city was in the earliest times only one of many
settlements formed on the chain of marshy islands which extend from the
mouths of the Isonzo to those of the Adige, and it was not until the
beginning of the ninth century that it became the seat of government;
while the cathedral of Torcello, though Christian Roman in general form,
was rebuilt in the eleventh century, and shows evidence of Byzantine
workmanship in many of its details. This cathedral, however, with the
church of Santa Fosca at Torcello, San Giacomo di Rialto at Venice, and
the crypt of St. Mark's, forms a distinct group of buildings, in which
the Byzantine influence is exceedingly slight; and which is probably
very sufficiently representative of the earliest architecture on the
islands.

SECTION XXXI. The Ducal residence was removed to Venice in 809, and the
body of St. Mark was brought from Alexandria twenty years later. The
first church of St. Mark's was, doubtless, built in imitation of that
destroyed at Alexandria, and from which the relics of the saint had been
obtained. During the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, the
architecture of Venice seems to have been formed on the same model, and
is almost identical with that of Cairo under the caliphs, [Footnote:
Appendix 10, "Church of Alexandria."] it being quite immaterial whether
the reader chooses to call both Byzantine or both Arabic; the workmen
being certainly Byzantine, but forced to the invention of new forms by
their Arabian masters, and bringing these forms into use in whatever
other parts of the world they were employed.

To this first manner of Venetian architecture, together with such
vestiges as remain of the Christian Roman, I shall devote the first
division of the following inquiry. The examples remaining of it consist
of three noble churches (those of Torcello, Murano, and the greater part
of St. Mark's), and about ten or twelve fragments of palaces.

SECTION XXXII. To this style succeeds a transitional one, of a character
much more distinctly Arabian: the shafts become more slender, and the
arches consistently pointed, instead of round; certain other changes,
not to be enumerated in a sentence, taking place in the capitals and
mouldings. This style is almost exclusively secular. It was natural for
the Venetians to imitate the beautiful details of the Arabian
dwelling-house, while they would with reluctance adopt those of the
mosque for Christian churches.

I have not succeeded in fixing limiting dates for this style. It appears
in part contemporary with the Byzantine manner, but outlives it. Its
position is, however, fixed by the central date, 1180, that of the
elevation of the granite shafts of the Piazetta, whose capitals are the
two most important pieces of detail in this transitional style in
Venice. Examples of its application to domestic buildings exist in
almost every street of the city, and will form the subject of the second
division of the following essay.

SECTION XXXIII. The Venetians were always ready to receive lessons in
art from their enemies (else had there been no Arab work in Venice). But
their especial dread and hatred of the Lombards appears to have long
prevented them from receiving the influence of the art which that people
had introduced on the mainland of Italy. Nevertheless, during the
practice of the two styles above distinguished, a peculiar and very
primitive condition of pointed Gothic had arisen in ecclesiastical
architecture. It appears to be a feeble reflection of the Lombard-Arab
forms, which were attaining perfection upon the continent, and would
probably, if left to itself, have been soon merged in the Venetian-Arab
school, with which it had from the first so close a fellowship, that it
will be found difficult to distinguish the Arabian ogives from those
which seem to have been built under this early Gothic influence. The
churches of San Giacopo dell' Orio, San Giovanni in Bragora, the
Carmine, and one or two more, furnish the only important examples of it.
But, in the thirteenth century, the Franciscans and Dominicans
introduced from the continent their morality and their architecture,
already a distinct Gothic, curiously developed from Lombardic and
Northern (German?) forms; and the influence of the principles exhibited
in the vast churches of St. Paul and the Frari began rapidly to affect
the Venetian-Arab school. Still the two systems never became united; the
Venetian policy repressed the power of the church, and the Venetian
artists resisted its example; and thenceforward the architecture of the
city becomes divided into ecclesiastical and civil: the one an
ungraceful yet powerful form of the Western Gothic, common to the whole
peninsula, and only showing Venetian sympathies in the adoption of
certain characteristic mouldings; the other a rich, luxuriant, and
entirely original Gothic, formed from the Venetian-Arab by the influence
of the Dominican and Franciscan architecture, and especially by the
engrafting upon the Arab forms of the most novel feature of the
Franciscan work, its traceries. These various forms of Gothic, the
_distinctive_ architecture of Venice, chiefly represented by the
churches of St. John and Paul, the Frari, and San Stefano, on the
ecclesiastical side, and by the Ducal palace, and the other principal
Gothic palaces, on the secular side, will be the subject of the third
division of the essay.

SECTION XXXIV. Now observe. The transitional (or especially Arabic)
style of the Venetian work is centralized by the date 1180, and is
transformed gradually into the Gothic, which extends in its purity from
the middle of the thirteenth to the beginning of the fifteenth century;
that is to say, over the precise period which I have described as the
central epoch of the life of Venice. I dated her decline from the year
1418; Foscari became doge five years later, and in his reign the first
marked signs appear in architecture of that mighty change which Philippe
de Commynes notices as above, the change to which London owes St.
Paul's, Rome St. Peter's, Venice and Vicenza the edifices commonly
supposed to be their noblest, and Europe in general the degradation of
every art she has since practised.

SECTION XXXV. This change appears first in a loss of truth and vitality
in existing architecture all over the world. (Compare "Seven Lamps,"
chap. ii.)

All the Gothics in existence, southern or northern, were corrupted at
once: the German and French lost themselves in every species of
extravagance; the English Gothic was confined, in its insanity, by a
strait-waistcoat of perpendicular lines; the Italian effloresced on the
main land into the meaningless ornamentation of the Certosa of Pavia and
the Cathedral of Como, (a style sometimes ignorantly called Italian
Gothic), and at Venice into the insipid confusion of the Porta della
Carta and wild crockets of St. Mark's. This corruption of all
architecture, especially ecclesiastical, corresponded with, and marked
the state of religion over all Europe,--the peculiar degradation of the
Romanist superstition, and of public morality in consequence, which
brought about the Reformation.

SECTION XXXVI. Against the corrupted papacy arose two great divisions of
adversaries, Protestants in Germany and England, Rationalists in France
and Italy; the one requiring the purification of religion, the other its
destruction. The Protestant kept the religion, but cast aside the
heresies of Rome, and with them her arts, by which last rejection he
injured his own character, cramped his intellect in refusing to it one
of its noblest exercises, and materially diminished his influence. It
may be a serious question how far the Pausing of the Reformation has
been a consequence of this error.

The Rationalist kept the arts and cast aside the religion. This
rationalistic art is the art commonly called Renaissance, marked by a
return to pagan systems, not to adopt them and hallow them for
Christianity, but to rank itself under them as an imitator and pupil. In
Painting it is headed by Giulio Romano and Nicolo Poussin; in
Architecture by Sansovino and Palladio.

SECTION XXXVII. Instant degradation followed in every direction,--a
flood of folly and hypocrisy. Mythologies ill understood at first, then
perverted into feeble sensualities, take the place of the
representations of Christian subjects, which had become blasphemous
under the treatment of men like the Caracci. Gods without power, satyrs
without rusticity, nymphs without innocence, men without humanity,
gather into idiot groups upon the polluted canvas, and scenic
affectations encumber the streets with preposterous marble. Lower and
lower declines the level of abused intellect; the base school of
landscape [Footnote: Appendix II, "Renaissance Landscape."] gradually
usurps the place of the historical painting, which had sunk into
prurient pedantry,--the Alsatian sublimities of Salvator, the
confectionery idealities of Claude, the dull manufacture of Gaspar and
Canaletto, south of the Alps, and on the north the patient devotion of
besotted lives to delineation of bricks and fogs, fat cattle and
ditchwater. And thus Christianity and morality, courage, and intellect,
and art all crumbling together into one wreck, we are hurried on to the
fall of Italy, the revolution in France, and the condition of art in
England (saved by her Protestantism from severer penalty) in the time of
George II.

SECTION XXXVIII. I have not written in vain if I have heretofore done
anything towards diminishing the reputation of the Renaissance landscape
painting. But the harm which has been done by Claude and the Poussins is
as nothing when compared to the mischief effected by Palladio, Scamozzi,
and Sansovino. Claude and the Poussins were weak men, and have had no
serious influence on the general mind. There is little harm in their
works being purchased at high prices: their real influence is very
slight, and they may be left without grave indignation to their poor
mission of furnishing drawing-rooms and assisting stranded conversation.
Not so the Renaissance architecture. Raised at once into all the
magnificence of which it was capable by Michael Angelo, then taken up by
men of real intellect and imagination, such as Scamozzi, Sansovino,
Inigo Jones, and Wren, it is impossible to estimate the extent of its
influence on the European mind; and that the more, because few persons
are concerned with painting, and, of those few, the larger number regard
it with slight attention; but all men are concerned with architecture,
and have at some time of their lives serious business with it. It does
not much matter that an individual loses two or three hundred pounds in
buying a bad picture, but it is to be regretted that a nation should
lose two or three hundred thousand in raising a ridiculous building. Nor
is it merely wasted wealth or distempered conception which we have to
regret in this Renaissance architecture: but we shall find in it partly
the root, partly the expression, of certain dominant evils of modern
times--over-sophistication and ignorant classicalism; the one destroying
the healthfulness of general society, the other rendering our schools
and universities useless to a large number of the men who pass through
them.

Now Venice, as she was once the most religious, was in her fall the most
corrupt, of European states; and as she was in her strength the centre
of the pure currents of Christian architecture, so she is in her decline
the source of the Renaissance. It was the originality and splendor of
the palaces of Vicenza and Venice which gave this school its eminence in
the eyes of Europe; and the dying city, magnificent in her dissipation,
and graceful in her follies, obtained wider worship in her decrepitude
than in her youth, and sank from the midst of her admirers into the
grave.

SECTION XXXIX. It is in Venice, therefore, and in Venice only that
effectual blows can be struck at this pestilent art of the Renaissance.
Destroy its claims to admiration there, and it can assert them nowhere
else. This, therefore, will be the final purpose of the following essay.
I shall not devote a fourth section to Palladio, nor weary the reader
with successive chapters of vituperation; but I shall, in my account of
the earlier architecture, compare the forms of all its leading features
with those into which they were corrupted by the Classicalists; and
pause, in the close, on the edge of the precipice of decline, so soon as
I have made its depths discernible. In doing this I shall depend upon
two distinct kinds of evidence:--the first, the testimony borne by
particular incidents and facts to a want of thought or of feeling in the
builders; from which we may conclude that their architecture must be
bad:--the second, the sense, which I doubt not I shall be able to excite
in the reader, of a systematic ugliness in the architecture itself. Of
the first kind of testimony I shall here give two instances, which may
be immediately useful in fixing in the reader's mind the epoch above
indicated for the commencement of decline.

SECTION XL. I must again refer to the importance which I have above
attached to the death of Carlo Zeno and the doge Tomaso Mocenigo. The
tomb of that doge is, as I said, wrought by a Florentine; but it is of
the same general type and feeling as all the Venetian tombs of the
period, and it is one of the last which retains it. The classical
element enters largely into its details, but the feeling of the whole is
as yet unaffected. Like all the lovely tombs of Venice and Verona, it is
a sarcophagus with a recumbent figure above, and this figure is a
faithful but tender portrait, wrought as far as it can be without
painfulness, of the doge as he lay in death. He wears his ducal robe and
bonnet--his head is laid slightly aside upon his pillow--his hands are
simply crossed as they fall. The face is emaciated, the features large,
but so pure and lordly in their natural chiselling, that they must have
looked like marble even in their animation. They are deeply worn away by
thought and death; the veins on the temples branched and starting; the
skin gathered in sharp folds; the brow high-arched and shaggy; the
eye-ball magnificently large; the curve of the lips just veiled by the
light mustache at the side; the beard short, double, and sharp-pointed:
all noble and quiet; the white sepulchral dust marking like light the
stern angles of the cheek and brow.

This tomb was sculptured in 1424, and is thus described by one of the
most intelligent of the recent writers who represent the popular feeling
respecting Venetian art.

    "Of the Italian school is also the rich but ugly (ricco ma non
    bel) sarcophagus in which repose the ashes of Tomaso Mocenigo.
    It may be called one of the last links which connect the
    declining art of the Middle Ages with that of the Renaissance,
    which was in its rise. We will not stay to particularize the
    defects of each of the seven figures of the front and sides,
    which represent the cardinal and theological virtues; nor will
    we make any remarks upon those which stand in the niches above
    the pavilion, because we consider them unworthy both of the age
    and reputation of the Florentine school, which was then with
    reason considered the most notable in Italy." [Footnote:
    Selvatico, "Architettura di Venezia," p. 147.]

It is well, indeed, not to pause over these defects; but it might have
been better to have paused a moment beside that noble image of a king's
mortality.

SECTION XLI. In the choir of the same church, St. Giov. and Paolo, is
another tomb, that of the Doge Andrea Vendramin. This doge died in 1478,
after a short reign of two years, the most disastrous in the annals of
Venice. He died of a pestilence which followed the ravage of the Turks,
carried to the shores of the lagoons. He died, leaving Venice disgraced
by sea and land, with the smoke of hostile devastation rising in the
blue distances of Friuli; and there was raised to him the most costly
tomb ever bestowed on her monarchs.

SECTION XLII. If the writer above quoted was cold beside the statue of
one of the fathers of his country, he atones for it by his eloquence
beside the tomb of the Vendramin. I must not spoil the force of Italian
superlative by translation.

    "Quando si guarda a quella corretta eleganza di profili e di
    proporzioni, a quella squisitezza d'ornamenti, a quel certo
    sapore antico che senza ombra d' imitazione traspareda tutta l'
    opera"--&c. "Sopra ornatissimo zoccolo fornito di squisiti
    intagli s' alza uno stylobate"--&c. "Sotto le colonne, il
    predetto stilobate si muta leggiadramente in piedistallo, poi
    con bella novita di pensiero e di effetto va coronato da un
    fregio il piu gentile che veder si possa"--&c. "Non puossi
    lasciar senza un cenno l' _arca dove_ sta chiuso il doge;
    capo lavoro di pensiero e di esecuzione," etc.

There are two pages and a half of closely printed praise, of which the
above specimens may suffice; but there is not a word of the statue of
the dead from beginning to end. I am myself in the habit of considering
this rather an important part of a tomb, and I was especially interested
in it here, because Selvatico only echoes the praise of thousands. It is
unanimously declared the chef d'oeuvre of Renaissance sepulchral work,
and pronounced by Cicognara (also quoted by Selvatico).

    "Il vertice a cui l'arti Veneziane si spinsero col ministero del
    scalpello,"--"The very culminating point to which the Venetian
    arts attained by ministry of the chisel."

To this culminating point, therefore, covered with dust and cobwebs, I
attained, as I did to every tomb of importance in Venice, by the
ministry of such ancient ladders as were to be found in the sacristan's
keeping. I was struck at first by the excessive awkwardness and want of
feeling in the fall of the hand towards the spectator, for it is thrown
off the middle of the body in order to show its fine cutting. Now the
Mocenigo hand, severe and even stiff in its articulations, has its veins
finely drawn, its sculptor having justly felt that the delicacy of the
veining expresses alike dignity and age and birth. The Vendramin hand is
far more laboriously cut, but its blunt and clumsy contour at once makes
us feel that all the care has been thrown away, and well it may be, for
it has been entirely bestowed in cutting gouty wrinkles about the
joints. Such as the hand is, I looked for its fellow. At first I thought
it had been broken off, but, on clearing away the dust, I saw the
wretched effigy had only _one_ hand, and was a mere block on the
inner side. The face, heavy and disagreeable in its features, is made
monstrous by its semi-sculpture. One side of the forehead is wrinkled
elaborately, the other left smooth; one side only of the doge's cap is
chased; one cheek only is finished, and the other blocked out and
distorted besides; finally, the ermine robe, which is elaborately
imitated to its utmost lock of hair and of ground hair on the one side,
is blocked out only on the other: it having been supposed throughout the
work that the effigy was only to be seen from below, and from one side.

SECTION XLIII. It was indeed to be seen by nearly every one; and I do
not blame--I should, on the contrary, have praised--the sculptor for
regulating his treatment of it by its position; if that treatment had
not involved, first, dishonesty, in giving only half a face, a monstrous
mask, when we demanded true portraiture of the dead; and, secondly, such
utter coldness of feeling, as could only consist with an extreme of
intellectual and moral degradation: Who, with a heart in his breast,
could have stayed his hand as he drew the dim lines of the old man's
countenance--unmajestic once, indeed, but at least sanctified by the
solemnities of death--could have stayed his hand, as he reached the bend
of the grey forehead, and measured out the last veins of it at so much
the zecchin.

I do not think the reader, if he has feeling, will expect that much
talent should be shown in the rest of his work, by the sculptor of this
base and senseless lie. The whole monument is one wearisome aggregation
of that species of ornamental flourish, which, when it is done with a
pen, is called penmanship, and when done with a chisel, should be called
chiselmanship; the subject of it being chiefly fat-limbed boys sprawling
on dolphins, dolphins incapable of swimming, and dragged along the sea
by expanded pocket-handkerchiefs.

But now, reader, comes the very gist and point of the whole matter. This
lying monument to a dishonored doge, this culminating pride of the
Renaissance art of Venice, is at least veracious, if in nothing else, in
its testimony to the character of its sculptor. _He was banished from
Venice for forgery_ in 1487. [Footnote: Selvatico, p. 221.]

SECTION XLIV. I have more to say about this convict's work hereafter;
but I pass at present, to the second, slighter, but yet more interesting
piece of evidence, which I promised.

The ducal palace has two principal façades; one towards the sea, the
other towards the Piazzetta. The seaward side, and, as far as the
seventh main arch inclusive, the Piazzetta side, is work of the early
part of the fourteenth century, some of it perhaps even earlier; while
the rest of the Piazzetta side is of the fifteenth. The difference in
age has been gravely disputed by the Venetian antiquaries, who have
examined many documents on the subject, and quoted some which they never
examined. I have myself collated most of the written documents, and one
document more, to which the Venetian antiquaries never thought of
referring,--the masonry of the palace itself.

SECTION XLV. That masonry changes at the centre of the eighth arch from
the sea angle on the Piazzetta side. It has been of comparatively small
stones up to that point; the fifteenth century work instantly begins
with larger stones, "brought from Istria, a hundred miles away."
[Footnote: The older work is of Istrian stone also, but of different
quality.] The ninth shaft from the sea in the lower arcade, and the
seventeenth, which is above it, in the upper arcade, commence the series
of fifteenth century shafts. These two are somewhat thicker than the
others, and carry the party-wall of the Sala del Scrutinio. Now observe,
reader. The face of the palace, from this point to the Porta della
Carta, was built at the instance of that noble Doge Mocenigo beside
whose tomb you have been standing; at his instance, and in the beginning
of the reign of his successor, Foscari; that is to say, circa 1424. This
is not disputed; it is only disputed that the sea façade is earlier; of
which, however, the proofs are as simple as they are incontrovertible:
for not only the masonry, but the sculpture, changes at the ninth lower
shaft, and that in the capitals of the shafts both of the upper and
lower arcade: the costumes of the figures introduced in the sea façade
being purely Giottesque, correspondent with Giotto's work in the Arena
Chapel at Padua, while the costume on the other capitals is
Renaissance-Classic: and the lions' heads between the arches change at
the same point. And there are a multitude of other evidences in the
statues of the angels, with which I shall not at present trouble the
reader.

SECTION XLVI. Now, the architect who built under Foscari, in 1424
(remember my date for the decline of Venice, 1418), was obliged to
follow the principal forms of the older palace. But he had not the wit
to invent new capitals in the same style; he therefore clumsily copied
the old ones. The palace has seventeen main arches on the sea façade,
eighteen on the Piazzetta side, which in all are of course carried by
thirty-six pillars; and these pillars I shall always number from right
to left, from the angle of the palace at the Ponte della Paglia to that
next the Porta della Carta. I number them in this succession, because I
thus have the earliest shafts first numbered. So counted, the 1st, the
18th, and the 36th, are the great supports of the angles of the palace;
and the first of the fifteenth century series, being, as above stated,
the 9th from the sea on the Piazzetta side, is the 26th of the entire
series, and will always in future be so numbered, so that all numbers
above twenty-six indicate fifteenth century work, and all below it,
fourteenth century, with some exceptional cases of restoration.

Then the copied capitals are: the 28th, copied from the 7th; the 29th,
from the 9th; the 30th, from the 10th; the 31st, from the 8th; the 33d,
from the 12th; and the 34th, from the 11th; the others being dull
inventions of the 15th century, except the 36th; which is very nobly
designed.

SECTION XLVII. The capitals thus selected from the earlier portion of
the palace for imitation, together with the rest, will be accurately
described hereafter; the point I have here to notice is in the copy of
the ninth capital, which was decorated (being, like the rest, octagonal)
with figures of the eight Virtues:--Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice,
Temperance, Prudence, Humility (the Venetian antiquaries call it
Humanity!), and Fortitude. The Virtues of the fourteenth century are
somewhat hard-featured; with vivid and living expression, and plain
every-day clothes of the time. Charity has her lap full of apples
(perhaps loaves), and is giving one to a little child, who stretches his
arm for it across a gap in the leafage of the capital. Fortitude tears
open a lion's jaws; Faith lays her hand on her breast, as she beholds
the Cross; and Hope is praying, while above her a hand is seen emerging
from sunbeams--the hand of God (according to that of Revelations, "The
Lord God giveth them light"); and the inscription above is, "Spes optima
in Deo."

SECTION XLVIII. This design, then, is, rudely and with imperfect
chiselling, imitated by the fifteenth century workmen: the Virtues have
lost their hard features and living expression; they have now all got
Roman noses, and have had their hair curled. Their actions and emblems
are, however, preserved until we come to Hope: she is still praying, but
she is praying to the sun only: _The hand of God is gone_.

Is not this a curious and striking type of the spirit which had then
become dominant in the world, forgetting to see God's hand in the light
He gave; so that in the issue, when the light opened into the
Reformation on the one side, and into full knowledge of ancient
literature on the other, the one was arrested and the other perverted?

SECTION XLIX. Such is the nature of the accidental evidence on which I
shall depend for the proof of the inferiority of character in the
Renaissance workmen. But the proof of the inferiority of the work itself
is not so easy, for in this I have to appeal to judgments which the
Renaissance work has itself distorted. I felt this difficulty very
forcibly as I read a slight review of my former work, "The Seven Lamps,"
in "The Architect:" the writer noticed my constant praise of St. Mark's:
"Mr. Ruskin thinks it a very beautiful building! We," said the
Architect, "think it a very ugly building." I was not surprised at the
difference of opinion, but at the thing being considered so completely a
subject of opinion. My opponents in matters of painting always assume
that there _is_ such a thing as a law of right, and that I do not
understand it: but my architectural adversaries appeal to no law, they
simply set their opinion against mine; and indeed there is no law at
present to which either they or I can appeal. No man can speak with
rational decision of the merits or demerits of buildings: he may with
obstinacy; he may with resolved adherence to previous prejudices; but
never as if the matter could be otherwise decided than by a majority of
votes, or pertinacity of partisanship. I had always, however, a clear
conviction that there _was_ a law in this matter: that good
architecture might be indisputably discerned and divided from the bad;
that the opposition in their very nature and essence was clearly
visible; and that we were all of us just as unwise in disputing about
the matter without reference to principle, as we should be for debating
about the genuineness of a coin, without ringing it. I felt also assured
that this law must be universal if it were conclusive; that it must
enable us to reject all foolish and base work, and to accept all noble
and wise work, without reference to style or national feeling; that it
must sanction the design of all truly great nations and times, Gothic or
Greek or Arab; that it must cast off and reprobate the design of all
foolish nations and times, Chinese or Mexican, or modern European: and
that it must be easily applicable to all possible architectural
inventions of human mind. I set myself, therefore, to establish such a
law, in full belief that men are intended, without excessive difficulty,
and by use of their general common sense, to know good things from bad;
and that it is only because they will not be at the pains required for
the discernment, that the world is so widely encumbered with forgeries
and basenesses. I found the work simpler than I had hoped; the
reasonable things ranged themselves in the order I required, and the
foolish things fell aside, and took themselves away so soon as they were
looked in the face. I had then, with respect to Venetian architecture,
the choice, either to establish each division of law in a separate form,
as I came to the features with which it was concerned, or else to ask
the reader's patience, while I followed out the general inquiry first,
and determined with him a code of right and wrong, to which we might
together make retrospective appeal. I thought this the best, though
perhaps the dullest way; and in these first following pages I have
therefore endeavored to arrange those foundations of criticism, on which
I shall rest in my account of Venetian architecture, in a form clear and
simple enough to be intelligible even to those who never thought of
architecture before. To those who have, much of what is stated in them
will be well known or self-evident; but they must not be indignant at a
simplicity on which the whole argument depends for its usefulness. From
that which appears a mere truism when first stated, they will find very
singular consequences sometimes following,--consequences altogether
unexpected, and of considerable importance; I will not pause here to
dwell on their importance, nor on that of the thing itself to be done;
for I believe most readers will at once admit the value of a criterion
of right and wrong in so practical and costly an art as architecture,
and will be apt rather to doubt the possibility of its attainment than
dispute its usefulness if attained. I invite them, therefore, to a fair
trial, being certain that even if I should fail in my main purpose, and
be unable to induce in my reader the confidence of judgment I desire, I
shall at least receive his thanks for the suggestion of consistent
reasons, which may determine hesitating choice, or justify involuntary
preference. And if I should succeed, as I hope, in making the Stones of
Venice touchstones, and detecting, by the mouldering of her marble,
poison more subtle than ever was betrayed by the rending of her crystal;
and if thus I am enabled to show the baseness of the schools of
architecture and nearly every other art, which have for three centuries
been predominant in Europe, I believe the result of the inquiry may be
serviceable for proof of a more vital truth than any at which I have
hitherto hinted. For observe: I said the Protestant had despised the
arts, and the Rationalist corrupted them. But what has the Romanist done
meanwhile? He boasts that it was the papacy which raised the arts; why
could it not support them when it was left to its own strength? How came
it to yield to Classicalism which was based on infidelity, and to oppose
no barrier to innovations, which have reduced the once faithfully
conceived imagery of its worship to stage decoration? [Footnote:
Appendix XII., "Romanist Modern Art."] Shall we not rather find that
Romanism, instead of being a promoter of the arts, has never shown itself
capable of a single great conception since the separation of
Protestantism from its side? [Footnote: Perfectly true: but the whole
vital value of the truth was lost by my sectarian ignorance.
Protestantism (so far as it was still Christianity, and did not consist
merely in maintaining one's own opinion for gospel) could not separate
itself from the Catholic Church. The so-called Catholics became
themselves sectarians and heretics in casting them out; and Europe was
turned into a mere cockpit, of the theft and fury of unchristian men of
both parties; while innocent and silent on the hills and fields, God's
people in neglected peace, everywhere and for ever Catholics, lived and
died.] So long as, corrupt though it might be, no clear witness had been
borne against it, so that it still included in its ranks a vast number of
faithful Christians, so long its arts were noble. But the witness was
borne--the error made apparent; and Rome, refusing to hear the testimony
or forsake the falsehood, has been struck from that instant with an
intellectual palsy, which has not only incapacitated her from any further
use of the arts which once were her ministers, but has made her worship
the shame of its own shrines, and her worshippers their destroyers. Come,
then, if truths such as these are worth our thoughts; come, and let us
know, before we enter the streets of the Sea city, whether we are indeed
to submit ourselves to their undistinguished enchantment, and to look
upon the last changes which were wrought on the lifted forms of her
palaces, as we should on the capricious towering of summer clouds in the
sunset, ere they sank into the deep of night; or, whether, rather, we
shall not behold in the brightness of their accumulated marble, pages on
which the sentence of her luxury was to be written until the waves should
efface it, as they fulfilled--"God has numbered thy kingdom, and finished
it."




CHAPTER II.

[FIRST OF SECOND VOLUME IN OLD EDITION.]

THE THRONE.


SECTION I. In the olden days of travelling, now to return no more, in
which distance could not be vanquished without toil, but in which that
toil was rewarded, partly by the power of deliberate survey of the
countries through which the journey lay, and partly by the happiness of
the evening hours, when, from the top of the last hill he had
surmounted, the traveller beheld the quiet village where he was to rest,
scattered among the meadows beside its valley stream; or, from the
long-hoped-for turn in the dusty perspective of the causeway, saw, for
the first time, the towers of some famed city, faint in the rays of
sunset--hours of peaceful and thoughtful pleasure, for which the rush of
the arrival in the railway station is perhaps not always, or to all men,
an equivalent,--in those days, I say, when there was something more to
be anticipated and remembered in the first aspect of each successive
halting-place, than a new arrangement of glass roofing and iron girder,
there were few moments of which the recollection was more fondly
cherished by the traveller than that which, as I endeavored to describe
in the close of the last chapter, brought him within sight of Venice, as
his gondola shot into the open lagoon from the canal of Mestre. Not but
that the aspect of the city itself was generally the source of some
slight disappointment, for, seen in this direction, its buildings are
far less characteristic than those of the other great towns of Italy;
but this inferiority was partly disguised by distance, and more than
atoned for by the strange rising of its walls and towers out of the
midst, as it seemed, of the deep sea, for it was impossible that the
mind or the eye could at once comprehend the shallowness of the vast
sheet of water which stretched away in leagues of rippling lustre to the
north and south, or trace the narrow line of islets bounding it to the
east. The salt breeze, the white moaning sea-birds, the masses of black
weed separating and disappearing gradually, in knots of heaving shoal,
under the advance of the steady tide, all proclaimed it to be indeed the
ocean on whose bosom the great city rested so calmly; not such blue,
soft, lake-like ocean as bathes the Neapolitan promontories, or sleeps
beneath the marble rocks of Genoa, but a sea with the bleak power of our
own northern waves, yet subdued into a strange spacious rest, and
changed from its angry pallor into a field of burnished gold, as the sun
declined behind the belfry tower of the lonely island church, fitly
named "St. George of the Seaweed." As the boat drew nearer to the city,
the coast which the traveller had just left sank behind him into one
long, low, sad-colored line, tufted irregularly with brushwood and
willows: but, at what seemed its northern extremity, the hills of Arqua
rose in a dark cluster of purple pyramids, balanced on the bright mirage
of the lagoon; two or three smooth surges of inferior hill extended
themselves about their roots, and beyond these, beginning with the
craggy peaks above Vicenza, the chain of the Alps girded the whole
horizon to the north--a wall of jagged blue, here and there showing
through its clefts a wilderness of misty precipices, fading far back
into the recesses of Cadore, and itself rising and breaking away
eastward, where the sun struck opposite upon its snow, into mighty
fragments of peaked light, standing up behind the barred clouds of
evening, one after another, countless, the crown of the Adrian Sea,
until the eye turned back from pursuing them, to rest upon the nearer
burning of the campaniles of Murano, and on the great city, where it
magnified itself along the waves, as the quick silent pacing of the
gondola drew nearer and nearer. And at last, when its walls were
reached, and the outmost of its untrodden streets was entered, not
through towered gate or guarded rampart, but as a deep inlet between two
rocks of coral in the Indian sea; when first upon the traveller's sight
opened the long ranges of columned palaces,--each with its black boat
moored at the portal,--each with its image cast down, beneath its feet,
upon that green pavement which every breeze broke into new fantasies of
rich tessellation; when first, at the extremity of the bright vista, the
shadowy Rialto threw its colossal curve slowly forth from behind the
palace of the Camerlenghi; that strange curve, so delicate, so
adamantine, strong as a mountain cavern, graceful as a bow just bent;
when first, before its moonlike circumference was all risen, the
gondolier's cry, "Ah! Stali," [Footnote: Appendix I, "The Gondolier's
Cry."] struck sharp upon the ear, and the prow turned aside under the
mighty cornices that half met over the narrow canal, where the plash of
the water followed close and loud, ringing along the marble by the
boat's side, and when at last that boat darted forth upon the breadth of
silver sea, across which the front of the Ducal palace, flushed with its
sanguine veins, looks to the snowy dome of Our Lady of Salvation,
[Footnote: Appendix II, "Our Lady of Salvation."] it was no marvel that
the mind should be so deeply entranced by the visionary charm of a scene
so beautiful and so strange, as to forget the darker truths of its
history and its being. Well might it seem that such a city had owed her
existence rather to the rod of the enchanter, than the fear of the
fugitive; that the waters which encircled her had been chosen for the
mirror of her state, rather than the shelter of her nakedness; and that
all which in nature was wild or merciless,--Time and Decay, as well as
the waves and tempests,--had been won to adorn her instead of to
destroy, and might still spare, for ages to come, that beauty which
seemed to have fixed for its throne the sands of the hour-glass as well
as of the sea.

SECTION II. And although the last few eventful years, fraught with
change to the face of the whole earth, have been more fatal in their
influence on Venice than the five hundred that preceded them; though the
noble landscape of approach to her can now be seen no more, or seen only
by a glance, as the engine slackens its rushing on the iron line; and
though many of her palaces are for ever defaced, and many in desecrated
ruins, there is still so much of magic in her aspect, that the hurried
traveller, who must leave her before the wonder of that first aspect has
been worn away, may still be led to forget the humility of her origin,
and to shut his eyes to the depth of her desolation. They, at least, are
little to be envied, in whose hearts the great charities of the
imagination lie dead, and for whom the fancy has no power to repress the
importunity of painful impressions, or to raise what is ignoble, and
disguise what is discordant, in a scene so rich in its remembrances, so
surpassing in its beauty. But for this work of the imagination there
must be no permission during the task which is before us. The impotent
feeling of romance, so singularly characteristic of this century, may
indeed gild, but never save the remains of those mightier ages to which
they are attached like climbing flowers; and they must be torn away from
the magnificent fragments, if we would see them as they stood in their
own strength. Those feelings, always as fruitless as they are fond, are
in Venice not only incapable of protecting, but even of discerning, the
objects of which they ought to have been attached. The Venice of modern
fiction and drama is a thing of yesterday, a mere efflorescence of
decay, a stage dream which the first ray of daylight must dissipate into
dust. No prisoner, whose name is worth remembering, or whose sorrow
deserved sympathy, ever crossed that "Bridge of Sighs," which is the
centre of the Byronic ideal of Venice; no great merchant of Venice ever
saw that Rialto under which the traveller now passes with breathless
interest: the statue which Byron makes Faliero address as of one of his
great ancestors was erected to a soldier of fortune a hundred and fifty
years after Faliero's death; and the most conspicuous parts of the city
have been so entirely altered in the course of the last three centuries,
that if Henry Dandolo or Francis Foscari could be summoned from their
tombs, and stood each on the deck of his galley at the entrance of the
Grand Canal, that renowned entrance, the painter's favorite subject, the
novelist's favorite scene, where the water first narrows by the steps of
the Church of La Salute,--the mighty Doges would not know in what spot
of the world they stood, would literally not recognize one stone of the
great city, for whose sake, and by whose ingratitude, their gray hairs
had been brought down with bitterness to the grave. The remains of
_their_ Venice lie hidden behind the cumbrous masses which were the
delight of the nation in its dotage; hidden in many a grass-grown court,
and silent pathway, and lightless canal, where the slow waves have
sapped their foundations for five hundred years, and must soon prevail
over them for ever. It must be our task to glean and gather them forth,
and restore out of them some faint image of the lost city, more gorgeous
a thousand-fold than that which now exists, yet not created in the
day-dream of the prince, nor by the ostentation of the noble, but built
by iron hands and patient hearts, contending against the adversity of
nature and the fury of man, so that its wonderfulness cannot be grasped
by the indolence of imagination, but only after frank inquiry into the
true nature of that wild and solitary scene, whose restless tides and
trembling sands did indeed shelter the birth of the city, but long
denied her dominion.

SECTION III. When the eye falls casually on a map of Europe, there is no
feature by which it is more likely to be arrested than the strange
sweeping loop formed by the junction of the Alps and the Apennines, and
enclosing the great basin of Lombardy. This return of the mountain chain
upon itself causes a vast difference in the character of the
distribution of its débris on its opposite sides. The rock fragments and
sediment which the torrents on the north side of the Alps bear into the
plains are distributed over a vast extent of country, and, though here
and there lodged in beds of enormous thickness, soon permit the firm
substrata to appear from underneath them; but all the torrents which
descend from the southern side of the High Alps, and from the northern
slope of the Apennines, meet concentrically in the recess or mountain
bay which the two ridges enclose; every fragment which thunder breaks
out of their battlements, and every grain of dust which the summer rain
washes from their pastures, is at last laid at rest in the blue sweep of
the Lombardic plain; and that plain must have risen within its rocky
barriers as a cup fills with wine, but for two contrary influences which
continually depress, or disperse from its surface, the accumulation of
the ruins of ages.

SECTION IV. I will not tax the reader's faith in modern science by
insisting on the singular depression of the surface of Lombardy, which
appears for many centuries to have taken place steadily and continually;
the main fact with which we have to do is the gradual transport, by the
Po and its great collateral rivers, of vast masses of the finer sediment
to the sea. The character of the Lombardic plains is most strikingly
expressed by the ancient walls of its cities, composed for the most part
of large rounded Alpine pebbles alternating with narrow courses of
brick; and was curiously illustrated in 1848, by the ramparts of these
same pebbles thrown up four or five feet high round every field, to
check the Austrian cavalry in the battle under the walls of Verona. The
finer dust among which these pebbles are dispersed is taken up by the
rivers, fed into continual strength by the Alpine snow, so that, however
pure their waters may be when they issue from the lakes at the foot of
the great chain, they become of the color and opacity of clay before
they reach the Adriatic; the sediment which they bear is at once thrown
down as they enter the sea, forming a vast belt of low land along the
eastern coast of Italy. The powerful stream of the Po of course builds
forward the fastest; on each side of it, north and south, there is a
tract of marsh, fed by more feeble streams, and less liable to rapid
change than the delta of the central river. In one of these tracts is
built RAVENNA, and in the other VENICE.

SECTION V. What circumstances directed the peculiar arrangement of this
great belt of sediment in the earliest times, it is not here the place
to inquire. It is enough for us to know that from the mouths of the
Adige to those of the Piave there stretches, at a variable distance of
from three to five miles from the actual shore, a bank of sand, divided
into long islands by narrow channels of sea. The space between this bank
and the true shore consists of the sedimentary deposits from these and
other rivers, a great plain of calcareous mud, covered, in the
neighborhood of Venice, by the sea at high water, to the depth in most
places of a foot or a foot and a half, and nearly everywhere exposed at
low tide, but divided by an intricate network of narrow and winding
channels, from which the sea never retires. In some places, according to
the run of the currents, the land has risen into marshy islets,
consolidated, some by art, and some by time, into ground firm enough to
be built upon, or fruitful enough to be cultivated: in others, on the
contrary, it has not reached the sea-level; so that, at the average low
water, shallow lakelets glitter among its irregularly exposed fields of
seaweed. In the midst of the largest of these, increased in importance
by the confluence of several large river channels towards one of the
openings in the sea bank, the city of Venice itself is built, on a
clouded cluster of islands; the various plots of higher ground which
appear to the north and south of this central cluster, have at different
periods been also thickly inhabited, and now bear, according to their
size, the remains of cities, villages, or isolated convents and
churches, scattered among spaces of open ground, partly waste and
encumbered by ruins, partly under cultivation for the supply of the
metropolis.

SECTION VI. The average rise and fall of the tide is about three feet
(varying considerably with the seasons; [Footnote: Appendix III, "Tides
of Venice."]) but this fall, on so flat a shore, is enough to cause
continual movement in the waters, and in the main canals to produce a
reflux which frequently runs like a mill stream. At high water no land
is visible for many miles to the north or south of Venice, except in the
form of small islands crowned with towers or gleaming with villages:
there is a channel, some three miles wide, between the city and the
mainland, and some mile and a half wide between it and the sandy
breakwater called the Lido, which divides the lagoon from the Adriatic,
but which is so low as hardly to disturb the impression of the city's
having been built in the midst of the ocean, although the secret of its
true position is partly, yet not painfully, betrayed by the clusters of
piles set to mark the deep-water channels, which undulate far away in
spotty chains like the studded backs of huge sea-snakes, and by the
quick glittering of the crisped and crowded waves that flicker and dance
before the strong winds upon the unlifted level of the shallow sea. But
the scene is widely different at low tide. A fall of eighteen or twenty
inches is enough to show ground over the greater part of the lagoon; and
at the complete ebb the city is seen standing in the midst of a dark
plain of seaweed, of gloomy green, except only where the larger branches
of the Brenta and its associated streams converge towards the port of
the Lido. Through this salt and sombre plain the gondola and the
fishing-boat advance by tortuous channels, seldom more than four or five
feet deep, and often so choked with slime that the heavier keels furrow
the bottom till their crossing tracks are seen through the clear sea
water like the ruts upon a. wintry road, and the oar leaves blue gashes
upon the ground at every stroke, or is entangled among the thick weed
that fringes the banks with the weight of its sullen waves, leaning to
and fro upon the uncertain sway of the exhausted tide. The scene is
often profoundly oppressive, even at this day, when every plot of higher
ground bears some fragment of fair building: but, in order to know what
it was once, let the traveller follow in his boat at evening the
windings of some unfrequented channel far into the midst of the
melancholy plain; let him remove, in his imagination, the brightness of
the great city that still extends itself in the distance, and the walls
and towers from the islands that are near; and so wait, until the bright
investiture and, sweet warmth of the sunset are withdrawn from the
waters, and the black desert of their shore lies in its nakedness
beneath the night, pathless, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor
and fearful silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the
tideless pools, or the seabirds flit from their margins with a
questioning cry; and he will be enabled to enter in some sort into the
horror of heart with which this solitude was anciently chosen by man for
his habitation. They little thought, who first drove the stakes into the
sand, and strewed the ocean reeds for their rest, that their children
were to be the princes of that ocean, and their palaces its pride; and
yet, in the great natural laws that rule that sorrowful wilderness, let
it be remembered what strange preparation had been made for the things
which no human imagination could have foretold, and how the whole
existence and fortune of the Venetian nation were anticipated or
compelled, by the setting of those bars and doors to the rivers and the
sea. Had deeper currents divided their islands, hostile navies would
again and again have reduced the rising city into servitude; had
stronger surges beaten their shores, all the richness and refinement of
the Venetian architecture must have been exchanged for the walls and
bulwarks of an ordinary sea-port. Had there been no tide, as in other
parts of the Mediterranean, the narrow canals of the city would have
become noisome, and the marsh in which it was built pestiferous. Had the
tide been only a foot or eighteen inches higher in its rise, the
water-access to the doors of the palaces would have been impossible:
even as it is, there is sometimes a little difficulty, at the ebb, in
landing without setting foot upon the lower and slippery steps: and the
highest tides sometimes enter the courtyards, and overflow the entrance
halls. Eighteen inches more of difference between the level of the flood
and ebb would have rendered the doorsteps of every palace, at low water,
a treacherous mass of weeds and limpets, and the entire system of
water-carriage for the higher classes, in their easy and daily
intercourse, must have been done away with. The streets of the city
would have been widened, its network of canals filled up, and all the
peculiar character of the place and the people destroyed.

SECTION VII. The reader may perhaps have felt some pain in the contrast
between this faithful view of the site of the Venetian Throne, and the
romantic conception of it which we ordinarily form; but this pain, if he
have felt it, ought to be more than counterbalanced by the value of the
instance thus afforded to us at once of the inscrutableness and the
wisdom of the ways of God. If, two thousand years ago, we had been
permitted to watch the slow settling of the slime of those turbid rivers
into the polluted sea, and the gaining upon its deep and fresh waters of
the lifeless, impassable, unvoyageable plain, how little could we have
understood the purpose with which those islands were shaped out of the
void, and the torpid waters enclosed with their desolate walls of sand!
How little could we have known, any more than of what now seems to us
most distressful, dark, and objectless, the glorious aim which was then
in the mind of Him in whose hand are all the corners of the earth! how
little imagined that in the laws which were stretching forth the gloomy
margins of those fruitless banks, and feeding the bitter grass among
their shallows, there was indeed a preparation, and _the only preparation
possible_, for the founding of a city which was to be set like a golden
clasp on the girdle of the earth, to write her history on the white
scrolls of the sea-surges, and to word it in their thunder, and to gather
and give forth, in world-wide pulsation, the glory of the West and of the
East, from the burning heart of her Fortitude and Splendor.




CHAPTER III.

[SECOND OF SECOND VOLUME IN OLD EDITION.]

TORCELLO.


SECTION I. Seven miles to the north of Venice, the banks of sand, which
near the city rise little above low-water mark, attain by degrees a
higher level, and knit themselves at last into fields of salt morass,
raised here and there into shapeless mounds, and intercepted by narrow
creeks of sea. One of the feeblest of these inlets, after winding for
some time among buried fragments of masonry, and knots of sunburnt weeds
whitened with webs of fucus, stays itself in an utterly stagnant pool
beside a plot of greener grass covered with ground ivy and violets. On
this mound is built a rude brick campanile, of the commonest Lombardic
type, which if we ascend towards evening (and there are none to hinder
us, the door of its ruinous staircase swinging idly on its hinges), we
may command from it one of the most notable scenes in this wide world of
ours. Far as the eye can reach, a waste of wild sea moor, of a lurid
ashen gray; not like our northern moors with their jet-black pools and
purple heath, but lifeless, the color of sackcloth, with the corrupted
sea-water soaking through the roots of its acrid weeds, and gleaming
hither and thither through its snaky channels. No gathering of fantastic
mists, nor coursing of clouds across it; but melancholy clearness of
space in the warm sunset, oppressive, reaching to the horizon of its
level gloom. To the very horizon, on the north-east; but, to the north
and west, there is a blue line of higher land along the border of it,
and above this, but farther back, a misty band of mountains, touched
with snow. To the east, the paleness and roar of the Adriatic, louder at
momentary intervals as the surf breaks on the bars of sand; to the
south, the widening branches of the calm lagoon, alternately purple and
pale green, as they reflect the evening clouds or twilight sky; and
almost beneath our feet, on the same field which sustains the tower we
gaze from, a group of four buildings, two of them little larger than
cottages (though built of stone, and one adorned by a quaint belfry),
the third an octagonal chapel, of which we can see but little more than
the flat red roof with its rayed tiling, the fourth, a considerable
church with nave and aisles, but of which, in like manner, we can see
little but the long central ridge and lateral slopes of roof, which the
sunlight separates in one glowing mass from the green field beneath and
gray moor beyond. There are no living creatures near the buildings, nor
any vestige of village or city round about them. They lie like a little
company of ships becalmed on a far-away sea.

SECTION II. Then look farther to the south. Beyond the widening branches
of the lagoon, and rising out of the bright lake into which they gather,
there are a multitude of towers, dark, and scattered among square-set
shapes of clustered palaces, a long and irregular line fretting the
southern sky.

Mother and daughter, you behold them both in their widowhood,--TORCELLO
and VENICE.

Thirteen hundred years ago, the gray moorland looked as it does this
day, and the purple mountains stood as radiantly in the deep distances
of evening; but on the line of the horizon, there were strange fires
mixed with the light of sunset, and the lament of many human voices
mixed with the fretting of the waves on their ridges of sand. The flames
rose from the ruins of Altinum; the lament from the multitude of its
people, seeking, like Israel of old, a refuge from the sword in the
paths of the sea.

The cattle are feeding and resting upon the site of the city that they
left; the mower's scythe swept this day at dawn over the chief street of
the city that they built, and the swathes of soft grass are now sending
up their scent into the night air, the only incense that fills the
temple of their ancient worship. Let us go down into that little space
of meadow land.

SECTION III. The inlet which runs nearest to the base of the campanile
is not that by which Torcello is commonly approached. Another, somewhat
broader, and overhung by alder copse, winds out of the main channel of
the lagoon up to the very edge of the little meadow which was once the
Piazza of the city, and there, stayed by a few grey stones which present
some semblance of a quay, forms its boundary at one extremity. Hardly
larger than an ordinary English farmyard, and roughly enclosed on each
side by broken palings and hedges of honeysuckle and briar, the narrow
field retires from the water's edge, traversed by a scarcely traceable
footpath, for some forty or fifty paces, and then expanding into the
form of a small square, with buildings on three sides of it, the fourth
being that which opens to the water. Two of these, that on our left and
that in front of us as we approach from the canal, are so small that
they might well be taken for the out-houses of the farm, though the
first is a conventual building, and the other aspires to the title of
the "Palazzo publico," both dating as far back as the beginning of the
fourteenth century; the third, the octagonal church of Santa Fosca, is
far more ancient than either, yet hardly on a larger scale. Though the
pillars of the portico which surrounds it are of pure Greek marble, and
their capitals are enriched with delicate sculpture, they, and the
arches they sustain, together only raise the roof to the height of a
cattle-shed; and the first strong impression which the spectator
receives from the whole scene is, that whatever sin it may have been
which has on this spot been visited with so utter a desolation, it could
not at least have been ambition. Nor will this impression be diminished
as we approach, or enter, the larger church to which the whole group of
building is subordinate. It has evidently been built by men in flight
and distress, [Footnote: Appendix IV, "Date of the Duomo of Torcello."]
who sought in the hurried erection of their Island church such a shelter
for their earnest and sorrowful worship as, on the one hand, could not
attract the eyes of their enemies by its splendor, and yet, on the
other, might not awaken too bitter feelings by its contrast with the
churches which they had seen destroyed.

There is visible everywhere a simple and tender effort to recover some
of the form of the temples which they had loved, and to do honor to God
by that which they were erecting, while distress and humiliation
prevented the desire, and prudence precluded the admission, either of
luxury of ornament or magnificence of plan. The exterior is absolutely
devoid of decoration, with the exception only of the western entrance
and the lateral door, of which the former has carved sideposts and
architrave, and the latter, crosses of rich sculpture; while the massy
stone shutters of the windows, turning on huge rings of stone, which
answer the double purpose of stanchions and brackets, cause the whole
building rather to resemble a refuge from Alpine storm than the
cathedral of a populous city; and, internally, the two solemn mosaics of
the eastern and western extremities,--one representing the Last
Judgment, the other the Madonna, her tears falling as her hands are
raised to bless,--and the noble range of pillars which enclose the space
between, terminated by the high throne for the pastor and the
semicircular raised seats for the superior clergy, are expressive at
once of the deep sorrow and the sacred courage of men who had no home
left them upon earth, but who looked for one to come, of men "persecuted
but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed."

SECTION IV. For observe this choice of subjects. It is indeed possible
that the walls of the nave and aisles, which are now whitewashed, may
have been covered with fresco or mosaic, and thus have supplied a series
of subjects, on the choice of which we cannot speculate. I do not,
however, find record of the destruction of any such works; and I am
rather inclined to believe that at any rate the central division of the
building was originally, decorated, as it is now, simply by mosaics
representing Christ, the Virgin, and the apostles, at one extremity, and
Christ coming to judgment at the other. And if so, I repeat, observe the
significance of this choice. Most other early churches are covered with
imagery sufficiently suggestive of the vivid interest of the builders in
the history and occupations of the world. Symbols or representations of
political events, portraits of living persons, and sculptures of
satirical, grotesque, or trivial subjects are of constant occurrence,
mingled with the more strictly appointed representations of scriptural
or ecclesiastical history; but at Torcello even these usual, and one
should have thought almost necessary, successions of Bible events do not
appear. The mind of the worshipper was fixed entirely upon two great
facts, to him the most precious of all facts,--the present mercy of
Christ to His Church, and His future coming to judge the world. That
Christ's mercy was, at this period, supposed chiefly to be attainable
through the pleading of the Virgin, and that therefore beneath the
figure of the Redeemer is seen that of the weeping Madonna in the act of
intercession, may indeed be matter of sorrow to the Protestant beholder,
but ought not to blind him to the earnestness and singleness of the
faith with which these men sought their sea-solitudes; not in hope of
founding new dynasties, or entering upon new epochs of prosperity, but
only to humble themselves before God, and to pray that in His infinite
mercy He would hasten the time when the sea should give up the dead
which were in it, and Death and Hell give up the dead which were in
them, and when they might enter into the better kingdom, "where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest."

SECTION V. Nor were the strength and elasticity of their minds, even in
the least matters, diminished by thus looking forward to the close of
all things. On the contrary, nothing is more remarkable than the finish
and beauty of all the portions of the building, which seem to have been
actually executed for the place they occupy in the present structure.
The rudest are those which they brought with them from the mainland; the
best and most beautiful, those which appear to have been carved for
their island church: of these, the new capitals already noticed, and the
exquisite panel ornaments of the chancel screen, are the most
conspicuous; the latter form a low wall across the church between the
six small shafts whose places are seen in the plan, and serve to enclose
a space raised two steps above the level of the nave, destined for the
singers, and indicated also in the plan by an open line _a b c d_. The
bas-reliefs on this low screen are groups of peacocks and lions, two
face to face on each panel, rich and fantastic beyond description,
though not expressive of very accurate knowledge either of leonine or
pavonine forms. And it is not until we pass to the back of the stair of
the pulpit, which is connected with the northern extremity of this
screen, that we find evidence of the haste with which the church was
constructed.

SECTION VI. The pulpit, however, is not among the least noticeable of
its features. It is sustained on the four small detached shafts marked
at _p_ in the plan, between the two pillars at the north side of
the screen; both pillars and pulpit studiously plain, while the
staircase which ascends to it is a compact mass of masonry (shaded in
the plan), faced by carved slabs of marble; the parapet of the staircase
being also formed of solid blocks like paving-stones, lightened by rich,
but not deep, exterior carving. Now these blocks, or at least those
which adorn the staircase towards the aisle, have been brought from the
mainland; and, being of size and shape not easily to be adjusted to the
proportions of the stair, the architect has cut out of them pieces of
the size he needed, utterly regardless of the subject or symmetry of the
original design. The pulpit is not the only place where this rough
procedure has been permitted: at the lateral door of the church are two
crosses, cut out of slabs of marble, formerly covered with rich
sculpture over their whole surfaces, of which portions are left on the
surface of the crosses; the lines of the original design being, of
course, just as arbitrarily cut by the incisions between the arms, as
the patterns upon a piece of silk which has been shaped anew. The fact
is, that in all early Romanesque work, large surfaces are covered with
sculpture for the sake of enrichment only; sculpture which indeed had
always meaning, because it was easier for the sculptor to work with some
chain of thought to guide his chisel, than without any; but it was not
always intended, or at least not always hoped, that this chain of
thought might be traced by the spectator. All that was proposed appears
to have been the enrichment of surface, so as to make it delightful to
the eye; and this being once understood, a decorated piece of marble
became to the architect just what a piece of lace or embroidery is to a
dressmaker, who takes of it such portions as she may require, with
little regard to the places where the patterns are divided. And though
it may appear, at first sight, that the procedure is indicative of
bluntness and rudeness of feeling,--we may perceive, upon reflection,
that it may also indicate the redundance of power which sets little
price upon its own exertion. When a barbarous nation builds its
fortress-walls out of fragments of the refined architecture it has
overthrown, we can read nothing but its savageness in the vestiges of
art which may thus chance to have been preserved; but when the new work
is equal, if not superior, in execution, to the pieces of the older art
which are associated with it, we may justly conclude that the rough
treatment to which the latter have been subjected is rather a sign of
the hope of doing better things, than of want of feeling for those
already accomplished. And, in general, this careless fitting of ornament
is, in very truth, an evidence of life in the school of builders, and of
their making a due distinction between work which is to be used for
architectural effect, and work which is to possess an abstract
perfection; and it commonly shows also that the exertion of design is so
easy to them, and their fertility so inexhaustible, that they feel no
remorse in using somewhat injuriously what they can replace with so
slight an effort.

SECTION VII. It appears however questionable in the present instance,
whether, if the marbles had not been carved to his hand, the architect
would have taken the trouble to enrich them. For the execution of the
rest of the pulpit is studiously simple, and it is in this respect that
its design possesses, it seems to me, an interest to the religious
spectator greater than he will take in any other portion of the
building. It is supported, as I said, on a group of four slender shafts;
itself of a slightly oval form, extending nearly from one pillar of the
nave to the next, so as to give the preacher free room for the action of
the entire person, which always gives an unaffected impressiveness to
the eloquence of the southern nations. In the centre of its curved
front, a small bracket and detached shaft sustain the projection of a
narrow marble desk (occupying the place of a cushion in a modern
pulpit), which is hollowed out into a shallow curve on the upper
surface, leaving a ledge at the bottom of the slab, so that a book laid
upon it, or rather into it, settles itself there, opening as if by
instinct, but without the least chance of slipping to the side, or in
any way moving beneath the preacher's hands. Six balls, or rather
almonds, of purple marble veined with white are set round the edge of
the pulpit, and form its only decoration. Perfectly graceful, but severe
and almost cold in its simplicity, built for permanence and service, so
that no single member, no stone of it, could be spared, and yet all are
firm and uninjured as when they were first set together, it stands in
venerable contrast both with the fantastic pulpits of mediaeval
cathedrals and with the rich furniture of those of our modern churches.
It is worth while pausing for a moment to consider how far the manner of
decorating a pulpit may have influence on the efficiency of its service,
and whether our modern treatment of this, to us all-important, feature
of a church be the best possible. [Footnote: Appendix V., "Modern
Pulpits."]

SECTION VIII. When the sermon is good we need not much concern ourselves
about the form of the pulpit. But sermons cannot always be good; and I
believe that the temper in which the congregation set themselves to
listen may be in some degree modified by their perception of fitness or
unfitness, impressiveness or vulgarity, in the disposition of the place
appointed for the speaker,--not to the same degree, but somewhat in the
same way, that they may be influenced by his own gestures or expression,
irrespective of the sense of what he says. I believe, therefore, in the
first place, that pulpits ought never to be highly decorated; the
speaker is apt to look mean or diminutive if the pulpit is either on a
very large scale or covered with splendid ornament, and if the interest
of the sermon should flag the mind is instantly tempted to wander. I
have observed that in almost all cathedrals, when the pulpits are
peculiarly magnificent, sermons are not often preached from them; but
rather, and especially if for any important purpose, from some temporary
erection in other parts of the building:--and though this may often be
done because the architect has consulted the effect upon the eye more
than the convenience of the ear in the placing of his larger pulpit, I
think it also proceeds in some measure from a natural dislike in the
preacher to match himself with the magnificence of the rostrum, lest the
sermon should not be thought worthy of the place. Yet this will rather
hold of the colossal sculptures, and pyramids of fantastic tracery which
encumber the pulpits of Flemish and German churches, than of the
delicate mosaics and ivory-like carving of the Romanesque basilicas, for
when the form is kept simple, much loveliness of color and costliness of
work may be introduced, and yet the speaker not be thrown into the shade
by them.

SECTION IX. But, in the second place, whatever ornaments we admit ought
clearly to be of a chaste, grave, and noble kind; and what furniture we
employ, evidently more for the honoring of God's word than for the ease
of the preacher. For there are two ways of regarding a sermon, either as
a human composition, or a Divine message. If we look upon it entirely as
the first, and require our clergymen to finish it with their utmost care
and learning, for our better delight whether of ear or intellect, we
shall necessarily be led to expect much formality and stateliness in its
delivery, and to think that all is not well if the pulpit have not a
golden fringe round it, and a goodly cushion in front of it, and if the
sermon be not fairly written in a black book, to be smoothed upon the
cushion in a majestic manner before beginning; all this we shall duly
come to expect: but we shall at the same time consider the treatise thus
prepared as something to which it is our duty to listen without
restlessness for half an hour or three quarters, but which, when that
duty has been decorously performed, we may dismiss from our minds in
happy confidence of being provided with another when next it shall be
necessary. But if once we begin to regard the preacher, whatever his
faults, as a man sent with a message to us, which it is a matter of life
or death whether we hear or refuse; if we look upon him as set in charge
over many spirits in danger of ruin, and having allowed to him but an
hour or two in the seven days to speak to them; if we make some endeavor
to conceive how precious these hours ought to be to him, a small vantage
on the side of God after his flock have been exposed for six days
together to the full weight of the world's temptation, and he has been
forced to watch the thorn and the thistle springing in their hearts, and
to see what wheat had been scattered there snatched from the wayside by
this wild bird and the other, and at last, when breathless and weary
with the week's labor they give him this interval of imperfect and
languid hearing, he has but thirty minutes to get at the separate hearts
of a thousand men, to convince them of all their weaknesses, to shame
them for all their sins, to warn them of all their dangers, to try by
this way and that to stir the hard fastenings of those doors where the
Master himself has stood and knocked yet none opened, and to call at the
openings of those dark streets where Wisdom herself hath stretched forth
her hands and no man regarded,--thirty minutes to raise the dead
in,--let us but once understand and feel this, and we shall look with
changed eyes upon that frippery of gay furniture about the place from
which the message of judgment must be delivered, which either breathes
upon the dry bones that they may live, or, if ineffectual, remains
recorded in condemnation, perhaps against the utterer and listener
alike, but assuredly against one of them. We shall not so easily bear
with the silk and gold upon the seat of judgment, nor with ornament of
oratory in the mouth of the messenger: we shall wish that his words may
be simple, even when they are sweetest, and the place from which he
speaks like a marble rock in the desert, about which the people have
gathered in their thirst.

SECTION X. But the severity which is so marked in the pulpit at Torcello
is still more striking in the raised seats and episcopal throne which
occupy the curve of the apse. The arrangement at first somewhat recalls
to the mind that of the Roman amphitheatres; the flight of steps which
lead up to the central throne divides the curve of the continuous steps
or seats (it appears in the first three ranges questionable which were
intended, for they seem too high for the one, and too low and close for
the other), exactly as in an amphitheatre the stairs for access
intersect the sweeping ranges of seats. But in the very rudeness of this
arrangement, and especially in the want of all appliances of comfort
(for the whole is of marble, and the arms of the central throne are not
for convenience, but for distinction, and to separate it more
conspicuously from the undivided seats), there is a dignity which no
furniture of stalls nor carving of canopies ever could attain, and well
worth the contemplation of the Protestant, both as sternly significative
of an episcopal authority which in the early days of the Church was
never disputed, and as dependent for all its impressiveness on the utter
absence of any expression either of pride or self-indulgence.

SECTION XI. But there is one more circumstance which we ought to
remember as giving peculiar significance to the position which the
episcopal throne occupies in this island church, namely, that in the
minds of all early Christians the Church itself was most frequently
symbolized under the image of a ship, of which the bishop was the pilot.
Consider the force which this symbol would assume in the imaginations of
men to whom the spiritual Church had become an ark of refuge in the
midst of a destruction hardly less terrible than that from which the
eight souls were saved of old, a destruction in which the wrath of man
had become as broad as the earth and as merciless as the sea, and who
saw the actual and literal edifice of the Church raked up, itself like
an ark in the midst of the waters. No marvel if with the surf of the
Adriatic rolling between them and the shores of their birth, from which
they were separated for ever, they should have looked upon each other as
the disciples did when the storm came down on the Tiberias Lake, and
have yielded ready and loving obedience to those who ruled them in His
name, who had there rebuked the winds and commanded stillness to the
sea. And if the stranger would yet learn in what spirit it was that the
dominion of Venice was begun, and in what strength she went forth
conquering and to conquer, let him not seek to estimate the wealth of
her arsenals or number of her armies, nor look upon the pageantry of her
palaces, nor enter into the secrets of her councils; but let him ascend
the highest tier of the stern ledges that sweep round the altar of
Torcello, and then, looking as the pilot did of old along the marble
ribs of the goodly temple-ship, let him repeople its veined deck with
the shadows of its dead mariners, and strive to feel in himself the
strength of heart that was kindled within them, when first, after the
pillars of it had settled in the sand, and the roof of it had been
closed against the angry sky that was still reddened by the fires of
their homesteads,--first, within the shelter of its knitted walls,
amidst the murmur of the waste of waves and the beating of the wings of
the sea-birds round the rock that was strange to them,--rose that
ancient hymn, in the power of their gathered voices:

  THE SEA IS HIS, AND HE MADE IT,
  AND HIS HANDS PREPARED THE DRY LAND.




CHAPTER IV.

ST. MARK'S.


SECTION I. "And so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus." If as
the shores of Asia lessened upon his sight, the spirit of prophecy had
entered into the heart of the weak disciple who had turned back when his
hand was on the plough, and who had been judged, by the chiefest of
Christ's captains, unworthy thenceforward to go forth with him to the
work, [Footnote: Acts, xiii. 13; xv. 38, 39.] how wonderful would he
have thought it, that by the lion symbol in future ages he was to be
represented among men! how woful, that the war-cry of his name should so
often reanimate the rage of the soldier, on those very plains where he
himself had failed in the courage of the Christian, and so often dye
with fruitless blood that very Cypriot Sea, over whose waves, in
repentance and shame, he was following the Son of Consolation!

SECTION II. That the Venetians possessed themselves of his body in the
ninth century, there appears no sufficient reason to doubt, nor that it
was principally in consequence of their having done so, that they chose
him for their patron saint. There exists, however, a tradition that
before he went into Egypt he had founded the Church at Aquileia, and was
thus, in some sort, the first bishop of the Venetian isles and people. I
believe that this tradition stands on nearly as good grounds as that of
St. Peter having been the first bishop of Rome; [Footnote: The reader
who desires to investigate it may consult Galliciolli, "Delle Memorie
Venete" (Venice, 1795), tom. ii. p. 332, and the authorities quoted by
him.] but, as usual, it is enriched by various later additions and
embellishments, much resembling the stories told respecting the church
of Murano. Thus we find it recorded by the Santo Padre who compiled the
"Vite de' Santi spettanti alle Chiese di Venezia," [Footnote: Venice,
1761, tom. i. p. 126.] that "St. Mark having seen the people of Aquileia
well grounded in religion, and being called to Rome by St. Peter, before
setting off took with him the holy bishop Hermagoras, and went in a
small boat to the marshes of Venice. There were at that period some
houses built upon a certain high bank called Rialto, and the boat being
driven by the wind was anchored in a marshy place, when St. Mark,
snatched into ecstasy, heard the voice of an angel saying to him: 'Peace
be to thee, Mark; here shall thy body rest.'" The angel goes on to
foretell the building of "una stupenda, ne più veduta Città;" but the
fable is hardly ingenious enough to deserve farther relation.

SECTION III. But whether St. Mark was first bishop of Aquileia or not,
St. Theodore was the first patron of the city; nor can he yet be
considered as having entirely abdicated his early right, as his statue,
standing on a crocodile, still companions the winged lion on the
opposing pillar of the piazzetta. A church erected to this Saint is said
to have occupied, before the ninth century, the site of St. Mark's; and
the traveller, dazzled by the brilliancy of the great square, ought not
to leave it without endeavoring to imagine its aspect in that early
time, when it was a green field cloister-like and quiet, [Footnote: St.
Mark's Place, "partly covered by turf, and planted with a few trees; and
on account of its pleasant aspect called Brollo or Broglio, that is to
say, Garden." The canal passed through it, over which is built the
bridge of the Malpassi. Galliciolli, lib. I, cap. viii.] divided by a
small canal, with a line of trees on each side; and extending between
the two churches of St. Theodore and St. Geminian, as the little piazza,
of Torcello lies between its "palazzo" and cathedral.

SECTION IV. But in the year 813, when the seat of government was finally
removed to the Rialto, a Ducal Palace, built on the spot where the
present one stands, with a Ducal Chapel beside it, [Footnote: My
authorities for this statement are given below, in the chapter on the
Ducal Palace.] gave a very different character to the Square of St.
Mark; and fifteen years later, the acquisition of the body of the Saint,
and its deposition in the Ducal Chapel, perhaps not yet completed,
occasioned the investiture of that chapel with all possible splendor.
St. Theodore was deposed from his patronship, and his church destroyed,
to make room for the aggrandizement of the one attached to the Ducal
Palace, and thenceforward known as "St. Mark's." [Footnote: In the
Chronicles, "Sancti Marci Ducalis Cappella."]

SECTION V. This first church was however destroyed by fire, when the
Ducal Palace was burned in the revolt against Candiano, in 976. It was
partly rebuilt by his successor, Pietro Orseolo, on a larger scale; and
with the assistance of Byzantine architects, the fabric was carried on
under successive Doges for nearly a hundred years; the main building
being completed in 1071, but its incrustation with marble not till
considerably later. It was consecrated on the 8th of October, 1085,
[Footnote: "To God the Lord, the glorious Virgin Annunciate, and the
Protector St. Mark."--_Corner_, p. 14. It is needless to trouble the
reader with the various authorities for the above statements: I have
consulted the best. The previous inscription once existing on the church
itself:

  "Anno milleno transacto bisque trigeno
  Desuper undecimo fuit facta primo,"

is no longer to be seen, and is conjectured by Corner, with much
probability, to have perished "in qualche ristauro."] according to
Sansovino and the author of the "Chiesa Ducale di S. Marco," in 1094
according to Lazari, but certainly between 1084 and 1096, those years
being the limits of the reign of Vital Falier; I incline to the
supposition that it was soon after his accession to the throne in 1085,
though Sansovino writes, by mistake, Ordelafo instead of Vital Falier.
But, at all events, before the close of the eleventh century the great
consecration of the church took place. It was again injured by fire in
1106, but repaired; and from that time to the fall of Venice there was
probably no Doge who did not in some slight degree embellish or alter
the fabric, so that few parts of it can be pronounced boldly to be of
any given date. Two periods of interference are, however, notable above
the rest: the first, that in which the Gothic school had superseded the
Byzantine towards the close of the fourteenth century, when the
pinnacles, upper archivolts, and window traceries were added to the
exterior, and the great screen, with various chapels and
tabernacle-work, to the interior; the second, when the Renaissance
school superseded the Gothic, and the pupils of Titian and Tintoret
substituted, over one half of the church, their own compositions for the
Greek mosaics with which it was originally decorated; [Footnote: Signed
Bartolomeus Bozza, 1634, 1647, 1656, etc.] happily, though with no good
will, having left enough to enable us to imagine and lament what they
destroyed. Of this irreparable loss we shall have more to say hereafter;
meantime, I wish only to fix in the reader's mind the succession of
periods of alteration as firmly and simply as possible.

SECTION VI. We have seen that the main body of the church may be broadly
stated to be of the eleventh century, the Gothic additions of the
fourteenth, and the restored mosaics of the seventeenth. There is no
difficulty in distinguishing at a glance the Gothic portions from the
Byzantine; but there is considerable difficulty in ascertaining how
long, during the course of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
additions were made to the Byzantine church, which cannot be easily
distinguished from the work of the eleventh century, being purposely
executed in the same manner. Two of the most important pieces of
evidence on this point are, a mosaic in the south transept, and another
over the northern door of the façade; the first representing the
interior, the second the exterior, of the ancient church.

SECTION VII. It has just been stated that the existing building was
consecrated by the Doge Vital Falier. A peculiar solemnity was given to
that of consecration, in the minds of the Venetian people, by what
appears to have been one of the best arranged and most successful
impostures ever attempted by the clergy of the Romish church. The body
of St. Mark had, without doubt, perished in the conflagration of 976;
but the revenues of the church depended too much upon the devotion
excited by these relics to permit the confession of their loss. The
following is the account given by Corner, and believed to this day by
the Venetians, of the pretended miracle by which it was concealed.

"After the repairs undertaken by the Doge Orseolo, the place in which
the body of the holy Evangelist rested had been altogether forgotten, so
that the Doge Vital Falier was entirely ignorant of the place of the
venerable deposit. This was no light affliction, not only to the pious
Doge, but to all the citizens and people; so that at last, moved by
confidence in the Divine mercy, they determined to implore, with prayer
and fasting, the manifestation of so great a treasure, which did not now
depend upon any human effort. A general fast being therefore proclaimed,
and a solemn procession appointed for the 25th day of June, while the
people assembled in the church interceded with God in fervent prayers
for the desired boon, they beheld, with as much amazement as joy, a
slight shaking in the marbles of a pillar (near the place where the
altar of the Cross is now), which, presently falling to the earth,
exposed to the view of the rejoicing people the chest of bronze in which
the body of the Evangelist was laid."

SECTION VIII. Of the main facts of this tale there is no doubt. They
were embellished afterwards, as usual, by many fanciful traditions; as,
for instance, that, when the sarcophagus was discovered, St. Mark
extended his hand out of it, with a gold ring on one of the fingers,
which he permitted a noble of the Dolfin family to remove; and a quaint
and delightful story was further invented of this ring, which I shall
not repeat here, as it is now as well known as any tale of the Arabian
Nights. But the fast and the discovery of the coffin, by whatever means
effected, are facts; and they are recorded in one of the best-preserved
mosaics of the north transept, executed very certainly not long after
the event had taken place, closely resembling in its treatment that of
the Bayeux tapestry, and showing, in a conventional manner, the interior
of the church, as it then was, filled by the people, first in prayer,
then in thanksgiving, the pillar standing open before them, and the
Doge, in the midst of them, distinguished by his crimson bonnet
embroidered with gold, but more unmistakably by the inscription "Dux"
over his head, as uniformly is the case in the Bayeux tapestry, and most
other pictorial works of the period. The church is, of course, rudely
represented, and the two upper stories of it reduced to a small scale in
order to form a background to the figures; one of those bold pieces of
picture history which we in our pride of perspective, and a thousand
things besides, never dare attempt. We should have put in a column or
two of the real or perspective size, and subdued it into a vague
background: the old workman crushed the church together that he might
get it all in, up to the cupolas; and has, therefore, left us some
useful notes of its ancient form, though any one who is familiar with
the method of drawing employed at the period will not push the evidence
too far. The two pulpits are there, however, as they are at this day,
and the fringe of mosaic flowerwork which then encompassed the whole
church, but which modern restorers have destroyed, all but one fragment
still left in the south aisle. There is no attempt to represent the
other mosaics on the roof, the scale being too small to admit of their
being represented with any success; but some at least of those mosaics
had been executed at that period, and their absence in the
representation of the entire church is especially to be observed, in
order to show that we must not trust to any negative evidence in such
works. M. Lazari has rashly concluded that the central archivolt of St.
Mark's _must_ be posterior to the year 1205, because it does not
appear in the representation of the exterior of the church over the
northern door; [Footnote: Guida di Venezia, p. 6. (He is right,
however.)] but he justly observes that this mosaic (which is the other
piece of evidence we possess respecting the ancient form of the
building) cannot itself be earlier than 1205, since it represents the
bronze horses which were brought from Constantinople in that year. And
this one fact renders it very difficult to speak with confidence
respecting the date of any part of the exterior of St. Mark's; for we
have above seen that it was consecrated in the eleventh century, and yet
here is one of the most important exterior decorations assuredly
retouched, if not entirely added, in the thirteenth, although its style
would have led us to suppose it had been an original part of the fabric.
However, for all our purposes, it will be enough for the reader to
remember that the earliest parts of the building belong to the eleventh,
twelfth, and first part of the thirteenth century; the Gothic portions
to the fourteenth; some of the altars and embellishments to the
fifteenth and sixteenth; and the modern portion of the mosaics to the
seventeenth.

SECTION IX. This, however, I only wish him to recollect in order that I
may speak generally of the Byzantine architecture of St. Mark's, without
leading him to suppose the whole church to have been built and decorated
by Greek artists. Its later portions, with the single exception of the
seventeenth century mosaics, have been so dexterously accommodated to
the original fabric that the general effect is still that of a Byzantine
building; and I shall not, except when it is absolutely necessary,
direct attention to the discordant points, or weary the reader with
anatomical criticism. Whatever in St. Mark's arrests the eye, or affects
the feelings, is either Byzantine, or has been modified by Byzantine
influence; and our inquiry into its architectural merits need not
therefore be disturbed by the anxieties of antiquarianism, or arrested
by the obscurities of chronology.

SECTION X. And now I wish that the reader, before I bring him into St.
Mark's Place, would imagine himself for a little time in a quiet English
cathedral town, and walk with me to the west front of its cathedral. Let
us go together up the more retired street, at the end of which we can
see the pinnacles of one of the towers, and then through the low gray
gateway, with its battlemented top and small latticed window in the
centre, into the inner private-looking road or close, where nothing goes
in but the carts of the tradesmen who supply the bishop and the chapter,
and where there are little shaven grass-plots, fenced in by neat rails,
before old-fashioned groups of somewhat diminutive and excessively trim
houses, with little oriel and bay windows jutting out here and there,
and deep wooden cornices and eaves painted cream color and white, and
small porches to their doors in the shape of cockle-shells, or little,
crooked, thick, indescribable wooden gables warped a little on one side;
and so forward till we come to larger houses, also old-fashioned, but of
red brick, and with gardens behind them, and fruit walls, which show
here and there, among the nectarines, the vestiges of an old cloister
arch or shaft, and looking in front on the cathedral square itself, laid
out in rigid divisions of smooth grass and gravel walk, yet not
uncheerful, especially on the sunny side where the canons' children are
walking with their nurserymaids. And so, taking care not to tread on the
grass, we will go along the straight walk to the west front, and there
stand for a time, looking up at its deep-pointed porches and the dark
places between their pillars where there were statues once, and where
the fragments, here and there, of a stately figure are still left, which
has in it the likeness of a king, perhaps indeed a king on earth,
perhaps a saintly king long ago in heaven; and so higher and higher up
to the great mouldering wall of rugged sculpture and confused arcades,
shattered, and gray, and grisly with heads of dragons and mocking
fiends, worn by the rain and swirling winds into yet unseemlier shape,
and colored on their stony scales by the deep russet-orange lichen,
melancholy gold; and so, higher still, to the bleak towers, so far above
that the eye loses itself among the bosses of their traceries, though
they are rude and strong, and only sees like a drift of eddying black
points, now closing, now scattering, and now settling suddenly into
invisible places among the bosses and flowers, the crowd of restless
birds that fill the whole square with that strange clangor of theirs, so
harsh and yet so soothing, like the cries of birds on a solitary coast
between the cliffs and sea.

SECTION XI. Think for a little while of that scene, and the meaning of
all its small formalisms, mixed with its serene sublimity. Estimate its
secluded, continuous, drowsy felicities, and its evidence of the sense
and steady performance of such kind of duties as can be regulated by the
cathedral clock; and weigh the influence of those dark towers on all who
have passed through the lonely square at their feet for centuries, and
on all who have seen them rising far away over the wooded plain, or
catching on their square masses the last rays of the sunset, when the
city at their feet was indicated only by the mist at the bend of the
river. And then let us quickly recollect that we are in Venice, and land
at the extremity of the Calle Lunga San Moisè, which may be considered
as there answering to the secluded street that led us to our English
cathedral gateway.

SECTION XII. We find ourselves in a paved alley, some seven feet wide
where it is widest, full of people, and resonant with cries of itinerant
salesmen,--a shriek in their beginning, and dying away into a kind of
brazen ringing, all the worse for its confinement between the high
houses of the passage along which we have to make our way. Over head an
inextricable confusion of rugged shutters, and iron balconies and
chimney flues pushed out on brackets to save room, and arched windows
with projecting sills of Istrian stone, and gleams of green leaves here
and there where a fig-tree branch escapes over a lower wall from some
inner cortile, leading the eye up to the narrow stream of blue sky high
over all. On each side, a row of shops, as densely set as may be,
occupying, in fact, intervals between the square stone shafts, about
eight feet high, which carry the first floors: intervals of which one is
narrow and serves as a door; the other is, in the more respectable
shops, wainscoted to the height of the counter and glazed above, but in
those of the poorer tradesmen left open to the ground, and the wares
laid on benches and tables in the open air, the light in all cases
entering at the front only,--and fading away in a few feet from the
threshold into a gloom which the eye from without cannot penetrate, but
which is generally broken by a ray or two from a feeble lamp at the back
of the shop, suspended before a print of the Virgin. The less pious
shop-keeper sometimes leaves his lamp unlighted, and is contented with a
penny print; the more religious one has his print colored and set in a
little shrine with a gilded or figured fringe, with perhaps a faded
flower or two on each side, and his lamp burning brilliantly. Here at
the fruiterer's, where the dark-green watermelons are heaped upon the
counter like cannon balls, the Madonna has a tabernacle of fresh laurel
leaves; but the pewterer next door has let his lamp out, and there is
nothing to be seen in his shop but the dull gleam of the studded
patterns on the copper pans, hanging from his roof in the darkness. Next
comes a "Vendita Frittole e Liquori," where the Virgin, enthroned in a
very humble manner beside a tallow candle on a back shelf, presides over
certain ambrosial morsels of a nature too ambiguous to be denned or
enumerated. But a few steps farther on, at the regular wineshop of the
calle, where we are offered "Vino Nostrani a Soldi 28'32," the Madonna
is in great glory, enthroned above ten or a dozen large red casks of
three-year-old vintage, and flanked by goodly ranks of bottles of
Maraschino, and two crimson lamps; and for the evening, when the
gondoliers will come to drink out, under her auspices, the money they
have gained during the day, she will have a whole chandelier.

SECTION XIII. A yard or two farther, we pass the hostelry of the Black
Eagle, and, glancing as we pass through the square door of marble,
deeply moulded, in the outer wall, we see the shadows of its pergola of
vines resting on an ancient well, with a pointed shield carved on its
side; and so presently emerge on the bridge and Campo San Moisè, whence
to the entrance into St. Mark's Place, called the Bocca di Piazza,
(mouth of the square), the Venetian character is nearly destroyed, first
by the frightful façade of San Moisè, which we will pause at another
time to examine, and then by the modernizing of the shops as they near
the piazza, and the mingling with the lower Venetian populace of
lounging groups of English and Austrians. We will push fast through them
into the shadow of the pillars at the end of the "Bocca di Piazza," and
then we forget them all; for between those pillars there opens a great
light, and, in the midst of it, as we advance slowly, the vast tower of
St. Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the level field of
chequered stones; and, on each side, the countless arches prolong
themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and irregular houses
that pressed together above us in the dark alley had been struck back
into sudden obedience and lovely order, and all their rude casements and
broken walls had been transformed into arches charged with goodly
sculpture, and fluted shafts of delicate stone.

SECTION XIV. And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops of
ordered arches there rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great
square seems to have opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it
far away;--a multitude of pillars and white domes, clustered into a long
low pyramid of colored light; a treasure-heap, it seems, partly of gold,
and partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into five great
vaulted porches, ceiled with fair mosaic, and beset with sculpture of
alabaster, clear as amber and delicate as ivory,--sculpture fantastic
and involved, of palm leaves and lilies, and grapes and pomegranates,
and birds clinging and fluttering among the branches, all twined
together into an endless network of buds and plumes; and, in the midst
of it, the solemn forms of angels, sceptred, and robed to the feet, and
leaning to each other across the gates, their figures indistinct among
the gleaming of the golden ground through the leaves beside them,
interrupted and dim, like the morning light as it faded back among the
branches of Eden, when first its gates were angel-guarded long ago. And
round the walls of the porches there are set pillars of variegated
stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green serpentine spotted with
flakes of snow, and marbles, that half refuse and half yield to the
sunshine, Cleopatra-like, "their bluest veins to kiss"--the shadow, as
it steals back from them, revealing line after line of azure undulation,
as a receding tide leaves the waved sand; their capitals rich with
interwoven tracery, rooted knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of
acanthus and vine, and mystical signs, all beginning and ending in the
Cross; and above them, in the broad archivolts, a continuous chain of
language and of life--angels, and the signs of heaven, and the labors of
men, each in its appointed season upon the earth; and above these,
another range of glittering pinnacles, mixed with white arches edged
with scarlet flowers,--a confusion of delight, amidst which the breasts
of the Greek horses are seen blazing in their breadth of golden
strength, and the St. Mark's Lion, lifted on a blue field covered with
stars, until at last, as if in ecstasy, the crests of the arches break
into a marble foam, and toss themselves far into the blue sky in flashes
and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the breakers on the Lido shore
had been frost-bound before they fell, and the sea-nymphs had inlaid
them with coral and amethyst.

Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an interval! There
is a type of it in the very birds that haunt them; for, instead of the
restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and sable-winged, drifting on the bleak
upper air, the St. Mark's porches are full of doves, that nestle among
the marble foliage, and mingle the soft iridescence of their living
plumes, changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less lovely,
that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years.

SECTION XV. And what effect has this splendor on those who pass beneath
it? You may walk from sunrise to sunset, to and fro, before the gateway
of St. Mark's, and you will not see an eye lifted to it, nor a
countenance brightened by it. Priest and layman, soldier and civilian,
rich and poor, pass by it alike regardlessly. Up to the very recesses of
the porches, the meanest tradesmen of the city push their counters; nay,
the foundations of its pillars are themselves the seats--not "of them
that sell doves" for sacrifice, but of the vendors of toys and
caricatures. Round the whole square in front of the church there is
almost a continuous line of cafes, where the idle Venetians of the
middle classes lounge, and read empty journals; in its centre the
Austrian bands play during the time of vespers, their martial music
jarring with the organ notes,--the march drowning the miserere, and the
sullen crowd thickening round them,--a crowd, which, if it had its will,
would stiletto every soldier that pipes to it. And in the recesses of
the porches, all day long, knots of men of the lowest classes,
unemployed and listless, lie basking in the sun like lizards; and
unregarded children,--every heavy glance of their young eyes full of
desperation and stony depravity, and their throats hoarse with
cursing,--gamble, and fight, and snarl, and sleep, hour after hour,
clashing their bruised centesimi upon the marble ledges of the church
porch. And the images of Christ and His angels look down upon it
continually.

That we may not enter the church out of the midst of the horror of this,
let us turn aside under the portico which looks towards the sea, and
passing round within the two massive pillars brought from St. Jean
d'Acre, we shall find the gate of the Baptistery; let us enter there.
The heavy door closes behind us instantly, and the light, and the
turbulence of the Piazzetta, are together shut out by it.

SECTION XVI. We are in a low vaulted room; vaulted, not with arches, but
with small cupolas starred with gold, and chequered with gloomy figures:
in the centre is a bronze font charged with rich bas-reliefs, a small
figure of the Baptist standing above it in a single ray of light that
glances across the narrow room, dying as it falls from a window high in
the wall, and the first thing that it strikes, and the only thing that
it strikes brightly, is a tomb. We hardly know if it be a tomb indeed;
for it is like a narrow couch set beside the window, low-roofed and
curtained, so that it might seem, but that it has some height above the
pavement, to have been drawn towards the window, that the sleeper might
be wakened early;--only there are two angels who have drawn the curtain
back, and are looking down upon him. Let us look also and thank that
gentle light that rests upon his forehead for ever, and dies away upon
his breast.

The face is of a man in middle life, but there are two deep furrows
right across the forehead, dividing it like the foundations of a tower:
the height of it above is bound by the fillet of the ducal cap. The rest
of the features are singularly small and delicate, the lips sharp,
perhaps the sharpness of death being added to that of the natural lines;
but there is a sweet smile upon them, and a deep serenity upon the whole
countenance. The roof of the canopy above has been blue, filled with
stars; beneath, in the centre of the tomb on which the figure rests, is
a seated figure of the Virgin, and the border of it all around is of
flowers and soft leaves, growing rich and deep, as if in a field in
summer.

It is the Doge Andrea Dandolo, a man early great among the great of
Venice; and early lost. She chose him for her king in his 36th year; he
died ten years later, leaving behind him that history to which we owe
half of what we know of her former fortunes.

SECTION XVII. Look round at the room in which he lies. The floor of it
is of rich mosaic, encompassed by a low seat of red marble, and its
walls are of alabaster, but worn and shattered, and darkly stained with
age, almost a ruin,--in places the slabs of marble have fallen away
altogether, and the rugged brickwork is seen through the rents, but all
beautiful; the ravaging fissures fretting their way among the islands
and channelled zones of the alabaster, and the time-stains on its
translucent masses darkened into fields of rich golden brown, like the
color of seaweed when the sun strikes on it through deep sea. The light
fades away into the recess of the chamber towards the altar, and the eye
can hardly trace the lines of the bas-relief behind it of the baptism of
Christ: but on the vaulting of the roof the figures are distinct, and
there are seen upon it two great circles, one surrounded by the
"Principalities and powers in heavenly places," of which Milton has
expressed the ancient division in the single massy line,

  "Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,"

and around the other, the Apostles; Christ the centre of both; and upon
the walls, again and again repeated, the gaunt figure of the Baptist, in
every circumstance of his life and death; and the streams of the Jordan
running down between their cloven rocks; the axe laid to the root of a
fruitless tree that springs upon their shore. "Every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire." Yes,
verily: to be baptized with fire, or to be cast therein; it is the
choice set before all men. The march-notes still murmur through the
grated window, and mingle with the sounding in our ears of the sentence
of judgment, which the old Greek has written on that Baptistery wall.
Venice has made her choice.

SECTION XVIII. He who lies under that stony canopy would have taught her
another choice, in his day, if she would have listened to him; but he
and his counsels have long been forgotten by her, the dust lies upon his
lips.

Through the heavy door whose bronze network closes the place of his
rest, let us enter the church itself. It is lost in still deeper
twilight, to which the eye must be accustomed for some moments before
the form of the building can be traced; and then there opens before us a
vast cave, hewn out into the form of a Cross, and divided into shadowy
aisles by many pillars. Round the domes of its roof the light enters
only through narrow apertures like large stars; and here and there a ray
or two from some far away casement wanders into the darkness, and casts
a narrow phosphoric stream upon the waves of marble that heave and fall
in a thousand colors along the floor. What else there is of light is
from torches, or silver lamps, burning ceaselessly in the recesses of
the chapels; the roof sheeted with gold, and the polished walls covered
with alabaster, give back at every curve and angle some feeble gleaming
to the flames; and the glories round the heads of the sculptured saints
flash out upon us as we pass them, and sink again into the gloom. Under
foot and over head, a continual succession of crowded imagery, one
picture passing into another, as in a dream; forms beautiful and
terrible mixed together; dragons and serpents, and ravening beasts of
prey, and graceful birds that in the midst of them drink from running
fountains and feed from vases of crystal; the passions and the pleasures
of human life symbolized together, and the mystery of its redemption;
for the mazes of interwoven lines and changeful pictures lead always at
last to the Cross, lifted and carved in every place and upon every
stonel sometimes with the serpent of eternity wrapt round it, sometimes
with doves beneath its arms, and sweet herbage growing forth from its
feet; but conspicuous most of all on the great rood that crosses the
church before the altar, raised in bright blazonry against the shadow of
the apse. And although in the recesses of the aisles and chapels, when
the mist of the incense hangs heavily, we may see continually a figure
traced in faint lines upon their marble, a woman standing with her eyes
raised to heaven, and the inscription above her, "Mother of God," she is
not here the presiding deity. It is the Cross that is first seen, and
always, burning in the centre of the temple; and every dome and hollow
of its roof has the figure of Christ in the utmost height of it, raised
in power, or returning in judgment.

SECTION XIX. Nor is this interior without effect on the minds of the
people. At every hour of the day there are groups collected before the
various shrines, and solitary worshippers scattered through the dark
places of the church, evidently in prayer both deep and reverent, and,
for the most part, profoundly sorrowful. The devotees at the greater
number of the renowned shrines of Romanism may be seen murmuring their
appointed prayers with wandering eyes and unengaged gestures; but the
step of the stranger does not disturb those who kneel on the pavement of
St. Mark's; and hardly a moment passes, from early morning to sunset, in
which we may not see some half-veiled figure enter beneath the Arabian
porch, cast itself into long abasement on the floor of the temple, and
then rising slowly with more confirmed step, and with a passionate kiss
and clasp of the arms given to the feet of the crucifix, by which the
lamps burn always in the northern aisle, leave the church, as if
comforted.

SECTION XX. But we must not hastily conclude from this that the nobler
characters of the building have at present any influence in fostering a
devotional spirit. There is distress enough in Venice to bring many to
their knees, without excitement from external imagery; and whatever
there may be in the temper of the worship offered in St. Mark's more
than can be accounted for by reference to the unhappy circumstances of
the city, is assuredly not owing either to the beauty of its
architecture or to the impressiveness of the Scripture histories
embodied in its mosaics. That it has a peculiar effect, however slight,
on the popular mind, may perhaps be safely conjectured from the number
of worshippers which it attracts, while the churches of St. Paul and the
Frari, larger in size and more central in position, are left
comparatively empty. [Footnote: The mere warmth of St. Mark's in winter,
which is much greater than that of the other two churches above named,
must, however, be taken into consideration, as one of the most efficient
causes of its being then more frequented.] But this effect is altogether
to be ascribed to its richer assemblage of those sources of influence
which address themselves to the commonest instincts of the human mind,
and which, in all ages and countries, have been more or less employed in
the support of superstition. Darkness and mystery; confused recesses of
building; artificial light employed in small quantity, but maintained
with a constancy which seems to give it a kind of sacredness;
preciousness of material easily comprehended by the vulgar eye; close
air loaded with a sweet and peculiar odor associated only with religious
services, solemn music, and tangible idols or images having popular
legends attached to them,--these, the stage properties of superstition,
which have been from the beginning of the world, and must be to the end
of it, employed by all nations, whether openly savage or nominally
civilized, to produce a false awe in minds incapable of apprehending the
true nature of the Deity, are assembled in St. Mark's to a degree, as
far as I know, unexampled in any other European church. The arts of the
Magus and the Brahmin are exhausted in the animation of a paralyzed
Christianity; and the popular sentiment which these arts excite is to be
regarded by us with no more respect than we should have considered
ourselves justified in rendering to the devotion of the worshippers at
Eleusis, Ellora, or Edfou. [Footnote: I said above that the larger
number of the devotees entered by the "Arabian" porch; the porch, that
is to say, on the north side of the church, remarkable for its rich
Arabian archivolt, and through which access is gained immediately to the
northern transept. The reason is, that in that transept is the chapel of
the Madonna, which has a greater attraction for the Venetians than all
the rest of the church besides. The old builders kept their images of
the Virgin subordinate to those of Christ; but modern Romanism has
retrograded from theirs, and the most glittering portions of the whole
church are the two recesses behind this lateral altar, covered with
silver hearts dedicated to the Virgin.]

SECTION XXI. Indeed, these inferior means of exciting religious emotion
were employed in the ancient Church as they are at this day, but not
employed alone. Torchlight there was, as there is now; but the
torchlight illumined Scripture histories on the walls, which every eye
traced and every heart comprehended, but which, during my whole
residence in Venice, I never saw one Venetian regard for an instant. I
never heard from any one the most languid expression of interest in any
feature of the church, or perceived the slightest evidence of their
understanding the meaning of its architecture; and while, therefore, the
English cathedral, though no longer dedicated to the kind of services
for which it was intended by its builders, and much at variance in many
of its characters with the temper of the people by whom it is now
surrounded, retains yet so much of its religious influence that no
prominent feature of its architecture can be said to exist altogether in
vain, we have in St. Mark's a building apparently still employed in the
ceremonies for which it was designed, and yet of which the impressive
attributes have altogether ceased to be comprehended by its votaries.
The beauty which it possesses is unfelt, the language it uses is
forgotten; and in the midst of the city to whose service it has so long
been consecrated, and still filled by crowds of the descendants of those
to whom it owes its magnificence; it stands, in reality, more desolate
than the ruins through which the sheep-walk passes unbroken in our
English valleys; and the writing on its marble walls is less regarded
and less powerful for the teaching of men, than the letters which the
shepherd follows with his finger, where the moss is lightest on the
tombs in the desecrated cloister.

SECTION XXII. It must therefore be altogether without reference to its
present usefulness, that we pursue our inquiry into the merits and
meaning of the architecture of this marvellous building; and it can only
be after we have terminated that inquiry, conducting it carefully on
abstract grounds, that we can pronounce with any certainty how far the
present neglect of St. Mark's is significative of the decline of the
Venetian character, or how far this church is to be considered as the
relic of a barbarous age, incapable of attracting the admiration, or
influencing the feelings of a civilized community.

The inquiry before us is twofold. Throughout the first volume, I
carefully kept the study of _expression_ distinct from that of abstract
architectural perfection; telling the reader that in every building we
should afterwards examine, he would have first to form a judgment of its
construction and decorative merit, considering it merely as a work of
art; and then to examine farther, in what degree it fulfilled its
expressional purposes. Accordingly, we have first to judge of St. Mark's
merely as a piece of architecture, not as a church; secondly, to estimate
its fitness for its special duty as a place of worship, and the relation
in which it stands, as such, to those northern cathedrals that still
retain so much of the power over the human heart, which the Byzantine
domes appear to have lost for ever.

SECTION XXIII. In the two succeeding sections of this work, devoted
respectively to the examination of the Gothic and Renaissance buildings
in Venice, I have endeavored to analyze and state, as briefly as
possible, the true nature of each school,--first in Spirit, then in
Form. I wished to have given a similar analysis, in this section, of the
nature of Byzantine architecture; but could not make my statements
general, because I have never seen this kind of building on its native
soil. Nevertheless, in the following sketch of the principles
exemplified in St. Mark's, I believe that most of the leading features
and motives of the style will be found clearly enough distinguished to
enable the reader to judge of it with tolerable fairness, as compared
with the better known systems of European architecture in the middle
ages.

SECTION XXIV. Now the first broad characteristic of the building, and
the root nearly of every other important peculiarity in it, is its
confessed _incrustation_. It is the purest example in Italy of the
great school of architecture in which the ruling principle is the
incrustation of brick with more precious materials; and it is necessary
before we proceed to criticise any one of its arrangements, that the
reader should carefully consider the principles which are likely to have
influenced, or might legitimately influence, the architects of such a
school, as distinguished from those whose designs are to be executed in
massive materials.

It is true, that among different nations, and at different times, we may
find examples of every sort and degree of incrustation, from the mere
setting of the larger and more compact stones by preference at the
outside of the wall, to the miserable construction of that modern brick
cornice, with its coating of cement, which, but the other day, in
London, killed its unhappy workmen in its fall. [Footnote: Vide
"Builder," for October, 1851.] But just as it is perfectly possible to
have a clear idea of the opposing characteristics of two different
species of plants or animals, though between the two there are varieties
which it is difficult to assign either to the one or the other, so the
reader may fix decisively in his mind the legitimate characteristics of
the incrusted and the massive styles, though between the two there are
varieties which confessedly unite the attributes of both. For instance,
in many Roman remains, built of blocks of tufa and incrusted with
marble, we have a style, which, though truly solid, possesses some of
the attributes of incrustation; and in the Cathedral of Florence, built
of brick and coated with marble, the marble facing is so firmly and
exquisitely set, that the building, though in reality incrusted, assumes
the attributes of solidity. But these intermediate examples need not in
the least confuse our generally distinct ideas of the two families of
buildings: the one in which the substance is alike throughout, and the
forms and conditions of the ornament assume or prove that it is so, as
in the best Greek buildings, and for the most part in our early Norman
and Gothic; and the other, in which the substance is of two kinds, one
internal, the other external, and the system of decoration is founded on
this duplicity, as pre-eminently in St. Mark's.

SECTION XXV. I have used the word duplicity in no depreciatory sense. In
chapter ii. of the "Seven Lamps," Section 18, I especially guarded this
incrusted school from the imputation of insincerity, and I must do so
now at greater length. It appears insincere at first to a Northern
builder, because, accustomed to build with solid blocks of freestone, he
is in the habit of supposing the external superficies of a piece of
masonry to be some criterion of its thickness. But, as soon as he gets
acquainted with the incrusted style, he will find that the Southern
builders had no intention to deceive him. He will see that every slab of
facial marble is fastened to the next by a confessed _rivet_, and that
the joints of the armor are so visibly and openly accommodated to the
contours of the substance within, that he has no more right to complain
of treachery than a savage would have, who, for the first time in his
life seeing a man in armor, had supposed him to be made of solid steel.
Acquaint him with the customs of chivalry, and with the uses of the coat
of mail, and he ceases to accuse of dishonesty either the panoply or the
knight.

These laws and customs of the St. Mark's architectural chivalry it must
be our business to develop.

SECTION XXVI. First, consider the natural circumstances which give rise
to such a style. Suppose a nation of builders, placed far from any
quarries of available stone, and having precarious access to the
mainland where they exist; compelled therefore either to build entirely
with brick, or to import whatever stone they use from great distances,
in ships of small tonnage, and for the most part dependent for speed on
the oar rather than the sail. The labor and cost of carriage are just as
great, whether they import common or precious stone, and therefore the
natural tendency would always be to make each shipload as valuable as
possible. But in proportion to the preciousness of the stone, is the
limitation of its possible supply; limitation not determined merely by
cost, but by the physical conditions of the material, for of many
marbles, pieces above a certain size are not to be had for money. There
would also be a tendency in such circumstances to import as much stone
as possible ready sculptured, in order to save weight; and therefore, if
the traffic of their merchants led them to places where there were ruins
of ancient edifices, to ship the available fragments of them home. Out
of this supply of marble, partly composed of pieces of so precious a
quality that only a few tons of them could be on any terms obtained, and
partly of shafts, capitals, and other portions of foreign buildings, the
island architect has to fashion, as best he may, the anatomy of his
edifice. It is at his choice either to lodge his few blocks of precious
marble here and there among his masses of brick, and to cut out of the
sculptured fragments such new forms as may be necessary for the
observance of fixed proportions in the new building; or else to cut the
colored stones into thin pieces, of extent sufficient to face the whole
surface of the walls, and to adopt a method of construction irregular
enough to admit the insertion of fragmentary sculptures; rather with a
view of displaying their intrinsic beauty, than of setting them to any
regular service in the support of the building.

An architect who cared only to display his own skill, and had no respect
for the works of others, would assuredly have chosen the former
alternative, and would have sawn the old marbles into fragments in order
to prevent all interference with his own designs. But an architect who
cared for the preservation of noble work, whether his own or others',
and more regarded the beauty of his building than his own fame, would
have done what those old builders of St. Mark's did for us, and saved
every relic with which he was entrusted.

SECTION XXVII. But these were not the only motives which influenced the
Venetians in the adoption of their method of architecture. It might,
under all the circumstances above stated, have been a question with
other builders, whether to import one shipload of costly jaspers, or
twenty of chalk flints; and whether to build a small church faced with
porphyry and paved with agate, or to raise a vast cathedral in
freestone. But with the Venetians it could not be a question for an
instant; they were exiles from ancient and beautiful cities, and had
been accustomed to build with their ruins, not less in affection than in
admiration: they had thus not only grown familiar with the practice of
inserting older fragments in modern buildings, but they owed to that
practice a great part of the splendor of their city, and whatever charm
of association might aid its change from a Refuge into a Home. The
practice which began in the affections of a fugitive nation, was
prolonged in the pride of a conquering one; and beside the memorials of
departed happiness, were elevated the trophies of returning victory. The
ship of war brought home more marble in triumph than 'the merchant
vessel in speculation; and the front of St. Mark's became rather a
shrine at which to dedicate the splendor of miscellaneous spoil, than
the organized expression of any fixed architectural law, or religious
emotion.

SECTION XXVIII. Thus far, however, the justification of the style of
this church depends on circumstances peculiar to the time of its
erection, and to the spot where it arose. The merit of its method,
considered in the abstract, rests on far broader grounds.

In the fifth chapter of the "Seven Lamps," Section 14, the reader will
find the opinion of a modern architect of some reputation, Mr. Wood,
that the chief thing remarkable in this church "is its extreme
ugliness;" and he will find this opinion associated with another,
namely, that the works of the Caracci are far preferable to those of the
Venetian painters. This second statement of feeling reveals to us one of
the principal causes of the first; namely, that Mr. Wood had not any
perception of color, or delight in it. The perception of color is a gift
just as definitely granted to one person, and denied to another, as an
ear for music; and the very first requisite for true judgment of St.
Mark's, is the perfection of that color-faculty which few people ever
set themselves seriously to find out whether they possess or not. For it
is on its value as a piece of perfect and unchangeable coloring, that
the claims of this edifice to our respect are finally rested; and a deaf
man might as well pretend to pronounce judgment on the merits of a full
orchestra, as an architect trained in the composition of form only, to
discern the beauty of St. Mark's. It possesses the charm of color in
common with the greater part of the architecture, as well as of the
manufactures, of the East; but the Venetians deserve especial note as
the only European people who appear to have sympathized to the full with
the great instinct of the Eastern races. They indeed were compelled to
bring artists from Constantinople to design the mosaics of the vaults of
St. Mark's, and to group the colors of its porches; but they rapidly
took up and developed, under more masculine conditions, the system of
which the Greeks had shown them the example: while the burghers and
barons of the North were building their dark streets and grisly castles
of oak and sandstone, the merchants of Venice were covering their
palaces with porphyry and gold; and at last, when her mighty painters
had created for her a color more priceless than gold or porphyry, even
this, the richest of her treasures, she lavished upon walls whose
foundations were beaten by the sea; and the strong tide, as it runs
beneath the Rialto, is reddened to this day by the reflection of the
frescoes of Giorgione.

SECTION XXIX. If, therefore, the reader does not care for color, I must
protest against his endeavor to form any judgment whatever of this
church of St. Mark's. But, if he both cares for and loves it, let him
remember that the school of incrusted architecture is _the only one in
which perfect and permanent chromatic decoration is possible_; and
let him look upon every piece of jasper and alabaster given to the
architect as a cake of very hard color, of which a certain portion is to
be ground down or cut off, to paint the walls with. Once understand this
thoroughly, and accept the condition that the body and availing strength
of the edifice are to be in brick, and that this under muscular power of
brickwork is to be clothed with the defence and the brightness of the
marble, as the body of an animal is protected and adorned by its scales
or its skin, and all the consequent fitnesses and laws of the structure
will be easily discernible. These I shall state in their natural order.

SECTION XXX. LAW I. _That the plinths and cornices used for binding
the armor are to be light and delicate._ A certain thickness, at
least two or three inches, must be required in the covering pieces (even
when composed of the strongest stone, and set on the least exposed
parts), in order to prevent the chance of fracture, and to allow for the
wear of time. And the weight of this armor must not be trusted to
cement; the pieces must not be merely glued to the rough brick surface,
but connected with the mass which they protect by binding cornices and
string courses; and with each other, so as to secure mutual support,
aided by the rivetings, but by no means dependent upon them. And, for
the full honesty and straightforwardness of the work, it is necessary
that these string courses and binding plinths should not be of such
proportions as would fit them for taking any important part in the hard
work of the inner structure, or render them liable to be mistaken for
the great cornices and plinths already explained as essential parts of
the best solid building. They must be delicate, slight, and visibly
incapable of severer work than that assigned to them.

SECTION XXXI. LAW II. _Science of inner structure is to be abandoned._ As
the body of the structure is confessedly of inferior, and comparatively
incoherent materials, it would be absurd to attempt in it any expression
of the higher refinements of construction. It will be enough that by its
mass we are assured of its sufficiency and strength; and there is the
less reason for endeavoring to diminish the extent of its surface by
delicacy of adjustment, because on the breadth of that surface we are to
depend for the better display of the color, which is to be the chief
source of our pleasure in the building. The main body of the work,
therefore, will be composed of solid walls and massive piers; and
whatever expression of finer structural science we may require, will be
thrown either into subordinate portions of it, or entirely directed to
the support of the external mail, where in arches or vaults it might
otherwise appear dangerously independent of the material within.

SECTION XXXII. LAW III. _All shafts are to be solid._ Wherever, by the
smallness of the parts, we may be driven to abandon the incrusted
structure at all, it must be abandoned altogether. The eye must never be
left in the least doubt as to what is solid and what is coated. Whatever
appears _probably_ solid, must be _assuredly_ so, and therefore it
becomes an inviolable law that no shaft shall ever be incrusted. Not only
does the whole virtue of a shaft depend on its consolidation, but the
labor of cutting and adjusting an incrusted coat to it would be greater
than the saving of material is worth. Therefore the shaft, of whatever
size, is always to be solid; and because the incrusted character of the
rest of the building renders it more difficult for the shafts to clear
themselves from suspicion, they must not, in this incrusted style, be in
any place jointed. No shaft must ever be used but of one block; and this
the more, because the permission given to the builder to have his walls
and piers as ponderous as he likes, renders it quite unnecessary for him
to use shafts of any fixed size. In our Norman and Gothic, where definite
support is required at a definite point, it becomes lawful to build up a
tower of small stones in the shape of a shaft. But the Byzantine is
allowed to have as much support as he wants from the walls in every
direction, and he has no right to ask for further license in the
structure of his shafts. Let him, by generosity in the substance of his
pillars, repay us for the permission we have given him to be superficial
in his walls. The builder in the chalk valleys of France and England may
be blameless in kneading his clumsy pier out of broken flint and calcined
lime; but the Venetian, who has access to the riches of Asia and the
quarries of Egypt, must frame at least his shafts out of flawless stone.

SECTION XXXIII. And this for another reason yet. Although, as we have
said, it is impossible to cover the walls of a large building with
color, except on the condition of dividing the stone into plates, there
is always a certain appearance of meanness and niggardliness in the
procedure. It is necessary that the builder should justify himself from
this suspicion; and prove that it is not in mere economy or poverty, but
in the real impossibility of doing otherwise, that he has sheeted his
walls so thinly with the precious film. Now the shaft is exactly the
portion of the edifice in which it is fittest to recover his honor in
this respect. For if blocks of jasper or porphyry be inserted in the
walls, the spectator cannot tell their thickness, and cannot judge of
the costliness of the sacrifice. But the shaft he can measure with his
eye in an instant, and estimate the quantity of treasure both in the
mass of its existing substance, and in that which has been hewn away to
bring it into its perfect and symmetrical form. And thus the shafts of
all buildings of this kind are justly regarded as an expression of their
wealth, and a form of treasure, just as much as the jewels or gold in
the sacred vessels; they are, in fact, nothing else than large jewels,
[Footnote: "Quivi presso si vedi una colonna di tanta bellezza e finezza
che e riputato _piutosto gioia che pietra_,"--Sansovino, of the
verd-antique pillar in San Jacomo dell' Orio. A remarkable piece of
natural history and moral philosophy, connected with this subject, will
be found in the second chapter of our third volume, quoted from the work
of a Florentine architect of the fifteenth century.] the block of
precious serpentine or jasper being valued according to its size and
brilliancy of color, like a large emerald or ruby; only the bulk
required to bestow value on the one is to be measured in feet and tons,
and on the other in lines and carats. The shafts must therefore be,
without exception, of one block in all buildings of this kind; for the
attempt in any place to incrust or joint them would be a deception like
that of introducing a false stone among jewellery (for a number of
joints of any precious stone are of course not equal in value to a
single piece of equal weight), and would put an end at once to the
spectator's confidence in the expression of wealth in any portion of the
structure, or of the spirit of sacrifice in those who raised it.

SECTION XXXIV. LAW IV. _The shafts may sometimes be independent of the
construction._ Exactly in proportion to the importance which the
shaft assumes as a large jewel, is the diminution of its importance as a
sustaining member; for the delight which we receive in its abstract
bulk, and beauty of color, is altogether independent of any perception
of its adaptation to mechanical necessities. Like other beautiful things
in this world, its end is to _be_ beautiful; and, in proportion to
its beauty, it receives permission to be otherwise useless. We do not
blame emeralds and rubies because we cannot make them into heads of
hammers. Nay, so far from our admiration of the jewel shaft being
dependent on its doing work for us, it is very possible that a chief
part of its preciousness may consist in a delicacy, fragility, and
tenderness of material, which must render it utterly unfit for hard
work; and therefore that we shall admire it the more, because we
perceive that if we were to put much weight upon it, it would be
crushed. But, at all events, it is very clear that the primal object in
the placing of such shafts must be the display of their beauty to the
best advantage, and that therefore all imbedding of them in walls, or
crowding of them into groups, in any position in which either their real
size or any portion of their surface would be concealed, is either
inadmissible together, or objectionable in proportion to their value;
that no symmetrical or scientific arrangements of pillars are therefore
ever to be expected in buildings of this kind, and that all such are
even to be looked upon as positive errors and misapplications of
materials: but that, on the contrary, we must be constantly prepared to
see, and to see with admiration, shafts of great size and importance set
in places where their real service is little more than nominal, and
where the chief end of their existence is to catch the sunshine upon
their polished sides, and lead the eye into delighted wandering among
the mazes of their azure veins.

SECTION XXXV. LAW V. _The shafts may be of variable size._ Since
the value of each shaft depends upon its bulk, and diminishes with the
diminution of its mass, in a greater ratio than the size itself
diminishes, as in the case of all other jewellery, it is evident that we
must not in general expect perfect symmetry and equality among the
series of shafts, any more than definiteness of application; but that,
on the contrary, an accurately observed symmetry ought to give us a kind
of pain, as proving that considerable and useless loss has been
sustained by some of the shafts, in being cut down to match with the
rest. It is true that symmetry is generally sought for in works of
smaller jewellery; but, even there, not a perfect symmetry, and obtained
under circumstances quite different from those which affect the placing
of shafts in architecture. First: the symmetry is usually imperfect. The
stones that seem to match each other in a ring or necklace, appear to do
so only because they are so small that their differences are not easily
measured by the eye; but there is almost always such difference between
them as would be strikingly apparent if it existed in the same
proportion between two shafts nine or ten feet in height. Secondly: the
quantity of stones which pass through a jeweller's hands, and the
facility of exchange of such small objects, enable the tradesman to
select any number of stones of approximate size; a selection, however,
often requiring so much time, that perfect symmetry in a group of very
fine stones adds enormously to their value. But the architect has
neither the time nor the facilities of exchange. He cannot lay aside one
column in a corner of his church till, in the course of traffic, he
obtain another that will match it; he has not hundreds of shafts
fastened up in bundles, out of which he can match sizes at his ease; he
cannot send to a brother-tradesman and exchange the useless stones for
available ones, to the convenience of both. His blocks of stone, or his
ready hewn shafts, have been brought to him in limited number, from
immense distances; no others are to be had; and for those which he does
not bring into use, there is no demand elsewhere. His only means of
obtaining symmetry will therefore be, in cutting down the finer masses
to equality with the inferior ones; and this we ought not to desire him
often to do. And therefore, while sometimes in a Baldacchino, or an
important chapel or shrine, this costly symmetry may be necessary, and
admirable in proportion to its probable cost, in the general fabric we
must expect to see shafts introduced of size and proportion continually
varying, and such symmetry as may be obtained among them never
altogether perfect, and dependent for its charm frequently on strange
complexities and unexpected rising and falling of weight and accent in
its marble syllables; bearing the same relation to a rigidly chiselled
and proportioned architecture that the wild lyric rhythm of Aeschylus or
Pindar bears to the finished measures of Pope.

SECTION XXXVI. The application of the principles of jewellery to the
smaller as well as the larger blocks, will suggest to us another reason
for the method of incrustation adopted in the walls. It often happens
that the beauty of the veining in some varieties of alabaster is so
great, that it becomes desirable to exhibit it by dividing the stone,
not merely to economize its substance, but to display the changes in the
disposition of its fantastic lines. By reversing one of two thin plates
successively taken from the stone, and placing their corresponding edges
in contact, a perfectly symmetrical figure may be obtained, which will
enable the eye to comprehend more thoroughly the position of the veins.
And this is actually the method in which, for the most part, the
alabasters of St. Mark are employed; thus accomplishing a double
good,--directing the spectator, in the first place, to close observation
of the nature of the stone employed, and in the second, giving him a
farther proof of the honesty of intention in the builder: for wherever
similar veining is discovered in two pieces, the fact is declared that
they have been cut from the same stone. It would have been easy to
disguise the similarity by using them in different parts of the
building; but on the contrary they are set edge to edge, so that the
whole system of the architecture may be discovered at a glance by any
one acquainted with the nature of the stones employed. Nay, but, it is
perhaps answered me, not by an ordinary observer; a person ignorant of
the nature of alabaster might perhaps fancy all these symmetrical
patterns to have been found in the stone itself, and thus be doubly
deceived, supposing blocks to be solid and symmetrical which were in
reality subdivided and irregular. I grant it; but be it remembered, that
in all things, ignorance is liable to be deceived, and has no right to
accuse anything but itself as the source of the deception. The style and
the words are dishonest, not which are liable to be misunderstood if
subjected to no inquiry, but which are deliberately calculated to lead
inquiry astray. There are perhaps no great or noble truths, from those
of religion downwards, which present no mistakable aspect to casual or
ignorant contemplation. Both the truth and the lie agree in hiding
themselves at first, but the lie continues to hide itself with effort,
as we approach to examine it; and leads us, if undiscovered, into deeper
lies; the truth reveals itself in proportion to our patience and
knowledge, discovers itself kindly to our pleading, and leads us, as it
is discovered, into deeper truths.

SECTION XXXVII. LAW VI. _The decoration must be shallow in
cutting._ The method of construction being thus systematized, it is
evident that a certain style of decoration must arise out of it, based
on the primal condition that over the greater part of the edifice there
can be _no deep cutting_. The thin sheets of covering stones do not
admit of it; we must not cut them through to the bricks; and whatever
ornaments we engrave upon them cannot, therefore, be more than an inch
deep at the utmost. Consider for an instant the enormous differences
which this single condition compels between the sculptural decoration of
the incrusted style, and that of the solid stones of the North, which
may be hacked and hewn into whatever cavernous hollows and black
recesses we choose; struck into grim darknesses and grotesque
projections, and rugged ploughings up of sinuous furrows, in which any
form or thought may be wrought out on any scale,--mighty statues with
robes of rock and crowned foreheads burning in the sun, or venomous
goblins and stealthy dragons shrunk into lurking-places of untraceable
shade: think of this, and of the play and freedom given to the
sculptor's hand and temper, to smite out and in, hither and thither, as
he will; and then consider what must be the different spirit of the
design which is to be wrought on the smooth surface of a film of marble,
where every line and shadow must be drawn with the most tender
pencilling and cautious reserve of resource,--where even the chisel must
not strike hard, lest it break through the delicate stone, nor the mind
be permitted in any impetuosity of conception inconsistent with the fine
discipline of the hand. Consider that whatever animal or human form is
to be suggested, must be projected on a flat surface; that all the
features of the countenance, the folds of the drapery, the involutions
of the limbs, must be so reduced and subdued that the whole work becomes
rather a piece of fine drawing than of sculpture; and then follow out,
until you begin to perceive their endlessness, the resulting differences
of character which will be necessitated in every part of the ornamental
designs of these incrusted churches, as compared with that of the
Northern schools. I shall endeavor to trace a few of them only.

SECTION XXXVIII. The first would of course be a diminution of the
builder's dependence upon human form as a source of ornament: since
exactly in proportion to the dignity of the form itself is the loss
which it must sustain in being reduced to a shallow and linear
bas-relief, as well as the difficulty of expressing it at all under such
conditions. Wherever sculpture can be solid, the nobler characters of
the human form at once lead the artist to aim at its representation,
rather than at that of inferior organisms; but when all is to be reduced
to outline, the forms of flowers and lower animals are always more
intelligible, and are felt to approach much more to a satisfactory
rendering of the objects intended, than the outlines of the human body.
This inducement to seek for resources of ornament in the lower fields of
creation was powerless in the minds of the great Pagan nations,
Ninevite, Greek, or Egyptian: first, because their thoughts were so
concentrated on their own capacities and fates, that they preferred the
rudest suggestion of human form to the best of an inferior organism;
secondly, because their constant practice in solid sculpture, often
colossal, enabled them to bring a vast amount of science into the
treatment of the lines, whether of the low relief, the monochrome vase,
or shallow hieroglyphic.

SECTION XXXIX. But when various ideas adverse to the representation of
animal, and especially of human, form, originating with the Arabs and
iconoclast Greeks, had begun at any rate to direct the builders' minds
to seek for decorative materials in inferior types, and when diminished
practice in solid sculpture had rendered it more difficult to find
artists capable of satisfactorily reducing the high organisms to their
elementary outlines, the choice of subject for surface sculpture would
be more and more uninterruptedly directed to floral organisms, and human
and animal form would become diminished in size, frequency, and general
importance. So that, while in the Northern solid architecture we
constantly find the effect of its noblest features dependent on ranges
of statues, often colossal, and full of abstract interest, independent
of their architectural service, in the Southern incrusted style we must
expect to find the human form for the most part subordinate and
diminutive, and involved among designs of foliage and flowers, in the
manner of which endless examples had been furnished by the fantastic
ornamentation of the Romans, from which the incrusted style had been
directly derived.

SECTION XL. Farther. In proportion to the degree in which his subject
must be reduced to abstract outline will be the tendency in the sculptor
to abandon naturalism of representation, and subordinate every form to
architectural service. Where the flower or animal can be hewn into bold
relief, there will always be a temptation to render the representation
of it more complete than is necessary, or even to introduce details and
intricacies inconsistent with simplicity of distant effect. Very often a
worse fault than this is committed; and in the endeavor to give vitality
to the stone, the original ornamental purpose of the design is
sacrificed or forgotten. But when nothing of this kind can be attempted,
and a slight outline is all that the sculptor can command, we may
anticipate that this outline will be composed with exquisite grace; and
that the richness of its ornamental arrangement will atone for the
feebleness of its power of portraiture. On the porch of a Northern
cathedral we may seek for the images of the flowers that grow in the
neighboring fields, and as we watch with wonder the gray stones that
fret themselves into thorns, and soften into blossoms, we may care
little that these knots of ornament, as we retire from them to
contemplate the whole building, appear unconsidered or confused. On the
incrusted building we must expect no such deception of the eye or
thoughts. It may sometimes be difficult to determine, from the
involutions of its linear sculpture, what were the natural forms which
originally suggested them: but we may confidently expect that the grace
of their arrangement will always be complete; that there will not be a
line in them which could be taken away without injury, nor one wanting
which could be added with advantage.

SECTION XLI. Farther. While the sculptures of the incrusted school will
thus be generally distinguished by care and purity rather than force,
and will be, for the most part, utterly wanting in depth of shadow,
there will be one means of obtaining darkness peculiarly simple and
obvious, and often in the sculptor's power. Wherever he can, without
danger, leave a hollow behind his covering slabs, or use them, like
glass, to fill an aperture in the wall, he can, by piercing them with
holes, obtain points or spaces of intense blackness to contrast with the
light tracing of the rest of his design. And we may expect to find this
artifice used the more extensively, because, while it will be an
effective means of ornamentation on the exterior of the building, it
will be also the safest way of admitting light to the interior, still
totally excluding both rain and wind. And it will naturally follow that
the architect, thus familiarized with the effect of black and sudden
points of shadow, will often seek to carry the same principle into other
portions of his ornamentation, and by deep drill-holes, or perhaps
inlaid portions of black color, to refresh the eye where it may be
wearied by the lightness of the general handling.

SECTION XLII. Farther. Exactly in proportion to the degree in which the
force of sculpture is subdued, will be the importance attached to color
as a means of effect or constituent of beauty. I have above stated that
the incrusted style was the only one in which perfect or permanent color
decoration was _possible_. It is also the only one in which a true
system of color decoration was ever likely to be invented. In order to
understand this, the reader must permit me to review with some care the
nature of the principles of coloring adopted by the Northern and
Southern nations.

SECTION XLIII. I believe that from the beginning of the world there has
never been a true or fine school of art in which color was despised. It
has often been imperfectly attained and injudiciously applied, but I
believe it to be one of the essential signs of life in a school of art,
that it loves color; and I know it to be one of the first signs of death
in the Renaissance schools, that they despised color.

Observe, it is not now the question whether our Northern cathedrals are
better with color or without. Perhaps the great monotone gray of Nature
and of Time is a better color than any that the human hand can give; but
that is nothing to our present business. The simple fact is, that the
builders of those cathedrals laid upon them the brightest colors they
could obtain, and that there is not, as far as I am aware, in Europe,
any monument of a truly noble school which has not been either painted
all over, or vigorously touched with paint, mosaic, and gilding in its
prominent parts. Thus far Egyptians, Greeks, Goths, Arabs, and mediaeval
Christians all agree: none of them, when in their right senses, ever
think of doing without paint; and, therefore, when I said above that the
Venetians were the only people who had thoroughly sympathized with the
Arabs in this respect, I referred, first, to their intense love of
color, which led them to lavish the most expensive decorations on
ordinary dwelling-houses; and, secondly, to that perfection of the
color-instinct in them, which enabled them to render whatever they did,
in this kind, as just in principle as it was gorgeous in appliance. It
is this principle of theirs, as distinguished from that of the Northern
builders, which we have finally to examine.

SECTION XLIV. In the second chapter of the first volume, it was noticed
that the architect of Bourges Cathedral liked hawthorn, and that the
porch of his cathedral was therefore decorated with a rich wreath of it;
but another of the predilections of that architect was there unnoticed,
namely, that he did not at all like _gray_ hawthorn, but preferred
it green, and he painted it green accordingly, as bright as he could.
The color is still left in every sheltered interstice of the foliage. He
had, in fact, hardly the choice of any other color; he might have gilded
the thorns, by way of allegorizing human life, but if they were to be
painted at all, they could hardly be painted anything but green, and
green all over. People would have been apt to object to any pursuit of
abstract harmonies of color, which might have induced him to paint his
hawthorn blue.

SECTION XLV. In the same way, whenever the subject of the sculpture was
definite, its color was of necessity definite also; and, in the hands of
the Northern builders, it often became, in consequence, rather the means
of explaining and animating the stories of their stone-work, than a
matter of abstract decorative science. Flowers were painted red, trees
green, and faces flesh-color; the result of the whole being often far
more entertaining than beautiful. And also, though in the lines of the
mouldings and the decorations of shafts or vaults, a richer and more
abstract method of coloring was adopted (aided by the rapid development
of the best principles of color in early glass-painting), the vigorous
depths of shadow in the Northern sculpture confused the architect's eye,
compelling him to use violent colors in the recesses, if these were to
be seen as color at all, and thus injured his perception of more
delicate color harmonies; so that in innumerable instances it becomes
very disputable whether monuments even of the best times were improved
by the color bestowed upon them, or the contrary. But, in the South, the
flatness and comparatively vague forms of the sculpture, while they
appeared to call for color in order to enhance their interest, presented
exactly the conditions which would set it off to the greatest advantage;
breadth or surface displaying even the most delicate tints in the
lights, and faintness of shadow joining with the most delicate and
pearly grays of color harmony; while the subject of the design being in
nearly all cases reduced to mere intricacy of ornamental line, might be
colored in any way the architect chose without any loss of rationality.
Where oak-leaves and roses were carved into fresh relief and perfect
bloom, it was necessary to paint the one green and the other red; but in
portions of ornamentation where there was nothing which could be
definitely construed into either an oak-leaf or a rose, but a mere
labyrinth of beautiful lines, becoming here something like a leaf, and
there something like a flower, the whole tracery of the sculpture might
be left white, and grounded with gold or blue, or treated in any other
manner best harmonizing with the colors around it. And as the
necessarily feeble character of the sculpture called for and was ready
to display the best arrangements of color, so the precious marbles in
the architect's hands give him at once the best examples and the best
means of color. The best examples, for the tints of all natural stones
are as exquisite in quality as endless in change; and the best means,
for they are all permanent.

SECTION XLVI. Every motive thus concurred in urging him to the study of
chromatic decoration, and every advantage was given him in the pursuit
of it; and this at the very moment when, as presently to be noticed, the
_naïveté_ of barbaric Christianity could only be forcibly appealed
to by the help of colored pictures: so that, both externally and
internally, the architectural construction became partly merged in
pictorial effect; and the whole edifice is to be regarded less as a
temple wherein to pray, than as itself a Book of Common Prayer, a vast
illuminated missal, bound with alabaster instead of parchment, studded
with porphyry pillars instead of jewels, and written within and without
in letters of enamel and gold.

SECTION XLVII. LAW VII. _That the impression of the architecture is
not to be dependent on size._ And now there is but one final
consequence to be deduced. The reader understands, I trust, by this
time, that the claims of these several parts of the building upon his
attention will depend upon their delicacy of design, their perfection of
color, their preciousness of material, and their legendary interest. All
these qualities are independent of size, and partly even inconsistent
with it. Neither delicacy of surface sculpture, nor subtle gradations of
color, can be appreciated by the eye at a distance; and since we have
seen that our sculpture is generally to be only an inch or two in depth,
and that our coloring is in great part to be produced with the soft
tints and veins of natural stones, it will follow necessarily that none
of the parts of the building can be removed far from the eye, and
therefore that the whole mass of it cannot be large. It is not even
desirable that it should be so; for the temper in which the mind
addresses itself to contemplate minute and beautiful details is
altogether different from that in which it submits itself to vague
impressions of space and size. And therefore we must not be
disappointed, but grateful, when we find all the best work of the
building concentrated within a space comparatively small; and that, for
the great cliff-like buttresses and mighty piers of the North, shooting
up into indiscernible height, we have here low walls spread before us
like the pages of a book, and shafts whose capitals we may touch with
our hand.

SECTION XLVIII. The due consideration of the principles above stated
will enable the traveller to judge with more candor and justice of the
architecture of St. Mark's than usually it would have been possible for
him to do while under the influence of the prejudices necessitated by
familiarity with the very different schools of Northern art. I wish it
were in my power to lay also before the general reader some
exemplification of the manner in which these strange principles are
developed in the lovely building. But exactly in proportion to the
nobility of any work, is the difficulty of conveying a just impression
of it: and wherever I have occasion to bestow high praise, there it is
exactly most dangerous for me to endeavor to illustrate my meaning,
except by reference to the work itself. And, in fact, the principal
reason why architectural criticism is at this day so far behind all
other, is the impossibility of illustrating the best architecture
faithfully. Of the various schools of painting, examples are accessible
to every one, and reference to the works themselves is found sufficient
for all purposes of criticism; but there is nothing like St. Mark's or
the Ducal Palace to be referred to in the National Gallery, and no
faithful illustration of them is possible on the scale of such a volume
as this. And it is exceedingly difficult on any scale. Nothing is so
rare in art, as far as my own experience goes, as a fair illustration of
architecture; _perfect_ illustration of it does not exist. For all
good architecture depends upon the adaptation of its chiselling to the
effect at a certain distance from the eye; and to render the peculiar
confusion in the midst of order, and uncertainty in the midst of
decision, and mystery in the midst of trenchant lines, which are the
result of distance, together with perfect expression of the
peculiarities of the design, requires the skill of the most admirable
artist, devoted to the work with the most severe conscientiousness,
neither the skill nor the determination having as yet been given to the
subject. And in the illustration of details, every building of any
pretensions to high architectural rank would require a volume of plates,
and those finished with extraordinary care. With respect to the two
buildings which are the principal subjects of the present volume, St.
Mark's and the Ducal Palace, I have found it quite impossible to do them
the slightest justice by any kind of portraiture; and I abandoned the
endeavor in the case of the latter with less regret, because in the new
Crystal Palace (as the poetical public insist upon calling it, though it
is neither a palace, nor of crystal) there will be placed, I believe, a
noble cast of one of its angles. As for St. Mark's, the effort was
hopeless from the beginning. For its effect depends not only upon the
most delicate sculpture in every part, out, as we have just stated,
eminently on its color also, and that the most subtle, variable,
inexpressible color in the world,--the color of glass, of transparent
alabaster, of polished marble, and lustrous gold. It would be easier to
illustrate a crest of Scottish mountain, with its purple heather and
pale harebells at their fullest and fairest, or a glade of Jura forest,
with its floor of anemone and moss, than a single portico of St. Mark's.
The fragment of one of its archivolts, given at the bottom of the
opposite Plate, is not to illustrate the thing itself, but to illustrate
the impossibility of illustration.

SECTION XLIX. It is left a fragment, in order to get it on a larger
scale; and yet even on this scale it is too small to show the sharp
folds and points of the marble vine-leaves with sufficient clearness.
The ground of it is gold, the sculpture in the spandrils is not more
than an inch and a half deep, rarely so much. It is in fact nothing more
than an exquisite sketching of outlines in marble, to about the same
depth as in the Elgin frieze; the draperies, however, being filled with
close folds, in the manner of the Byzantine pictures, folds especially
necessary here, as large masses could not be expressed in the shallow
sculpture without becoming insipid; but the disposition of these folds
is always most beautiful, and often opposed by broad and simple spaces,
like that obtained by the scroll in the hand of the prophet seen in the
Plate.

The balls in the archivolt project considerably, and the interstices
between their interwoven bands of marble are filled with colors like the
illuminations of a manuscript; violet, crimson, blue, gold, and green
alternately: but no green is ever used without an intermixture of blue
pieces in the mosaic, nor any blue without a little centre of pale
green; sometimes only a single piece of glass a quarter of an inch
square, so subtle was the feeling for color which was thus to be
satisfied. [Footnote: The fact is, that no two tesserae of the glass are
exactly of the same tint, the greens being all varied with blues, the
blues of different depths, the reds of different clearness, so that the
effect of each mass of color is full of variety, like the stippled color
of a fruit piece.] The intermediate circles have golden stars set on an
azure ground, varied in the same manner; and the small crosses seen in
the intervals are alternately blue and subdued scarlet, with two small
circles of white set in the golden ground above and beneath them, each
only about half an inch across (this work, remember, being on the
outside of the building, and twenty feet above the eye), while the blue
crosses have each a pale green centre. Of all this exquisitely mingled
hue, no plate, however large or expensive, could give any adequate
conception; but, if the reader will supply in imagination to the
engraving what he supplies to a common woodcut of a group of flowers,
the decision of the respective merits of modern and of Byzantine
architecture may be allowed to rest on this fragment of St. Mark's
alone.

From the vine-leaves of that archivolt, though there is no direct
imitation of nature in them, but on the contrary a studious subjection
to architectural purpose more particularly to be noticed hereafter, we
may yet receive the same kind of pleasure which we have in seeing true
vine-leaves and wreathed branches traced upon golden light; its stars
upon their azure ground ought to make us remember, as its builder
remembered, the stars that ascend and fall in the great arch of the sky:
and I believe that stars, and boughs, and leaves, and bright colors are
everlastingly lovely, and to be by all men beloved; and, moreover, that
church walls grimly seared with squared lines, are not better nor nobler
things than these. I believe the man who designed and the men who
delighted in that archivolt to have been wise, happy, and holy. Let the
reader look back to the archivolt I have already given out of the
streets of London (Plate XIII. Vol. I., Stones of Venice), and see what
there is in it to make us any of the three. Let him remember that the
men who design such work as that call St. Mark's a barbaric monstrosity,
and let him judge between us.

SECTION L. Some farther details of the St. Mark's architecture, and
especially a general account of Byzantine capitals, and of the principal
ones at the angles of the church, will be found in the following
chapter. [Footnote: Some illustration, also, of what was said in SECTION
XXXIII above, respecting the value of the shafts of St. Mark's as large
jewels, will be found in Appendix 9, "Shafts of St. Mark's."] Here I
must pass on to the second part of our immediate subject, namely, the
inquiry how far the exquisite and varied ornament of St. Mark's fits it,
as a Temple, for its sacred purpose, and would be applicable in the
churches of modern times. We have here evidently two questions: the
first, that wide and continually agitated one, whether richness of
ornament be right in churches at all; the second, whether the ornament
of St. Mark's be of a truly ecclesiastical and Christian character.

SECTION LI. In the first chapter of the "Seven Lamps of Architecture" I
endeavored to lay before the reader some reasons why churches ought to
be richly adorned, as being the only places in which the desire of
offering a portion of all precious things to God could be legitimately
expressed. But I left wholly untouched the question: whether the church,
as such, stood in need of adornment, or would be better fitted for its
purposes by possessing it. This question I would now ask the reader to
deal with briefly and candidly.

The chief difficulty in deciding it has arisen from its being always
presented to us in an unfair form. It is asked of us, or we ask of
ourselves, whether the sensation which we now feel in passing from our
own modern dwelling-house, through a newly built street, into a
cathedral of the thirteenth century, be safe or desirable as a
preparation for public worship. But we never ask whether that sensation
was at all calculated upon by the builders of the cathedral.

SECTION LII. Now I do not say that the contrast of the ancient with the
modern building, and the strangeness with which the earlier
architectural forms fall upon the eye, are at this day disadvantageous.
But I do say, that their effect, whatever it may be, was entirely
uncalculated upon by the old builder. He endeavored to make his work
beautiful, but never expected it to be strange. And we incapacitate
ourselves altogether from fair judgment of its intention, if we forget
that, when it was built, it rose in the midst of other work fanciful and
beautiful as itself; that every dwelling-house in the middle ages was
rich with the same ornaments and quaint with the same grotesques which
fretted the porches or animated the gargoyles of the cathedral; that
what we now regard with doubt and wonder, as well as with delight, was
then the natural continuation, into the principal edifice of the city,
of a style which was familiar to every eye throughout all its lanes and
streets; and that the architect had often no more idea of producing a
peculiarly devotional impression by the richest color and the most
elaborate carving, than the builder of a modern meetinghouse has by his
white-washed walls and square-cut casements. [Footnote: See the farther
notice of this subject in Vol. III., Chap. IV. Stones of Venice.]

SECTION LIII. Let the reader fix this great fact well in his mind, and
then follow out its important corollaries. We attach, in modern days, a
kind of sacredness to the pointed arch and the groined roof, because,
while we look habitually out of square windows and live under flat
ceilings, we meet with the more beautiful forms in the ruins of our
abbeys. But when those abbeys were built, the pointed arch was used for
every shop door, as well as for that of the cloister, and the feudal
baron and freebooter feasted, as the monk sang, under vaulted roofs; not
because the vaulting was thought especially appropriate to either the
revel or psalm, but because it was then the form in which a strong roof
was easiest built. We have destroyed the goodly architecture of our
cities; we have substituted one wholly devoid of beauty or meaning; and
then we reason respecting the strange effect upon our minds of the
fragments which, fortunately, we have left in our churches, as if those
churches had always been designed to stand out in strong relief from all
the buildings around them, and Gothic architecture had always been, what
it is now, a religious language, like Monkish Latin. Most readers know,
if they would arouse their knowledge, that this was not so; but they
take no pains to reason the matter out: they abandon themselves drowsily
to the impression that Gothic is a peculiarly ecclesiastical style; and
sometimes, even, that richness in church ornament is a condition or
furtherance of the Romish religion. Undoubtedly it has become so in
modern times: for there being no beauty in our recent architecture, and
much in the remains of the past, and these remains being almost
exclusively ecclesiastical, the High Church and Romanist parties have
not been slow in availing themselves of the natural instincts which were
deprived of all food except from this source; and have willingly
promulgated the theory, that because all the good architecture that is
now left is expressive of High Church or Romanist doctrines, all good
architecture ever has been and must be so,--a piece of absurdity from
which, though here and there a country clergyman may innocently believe
it, I hope the common sense of the nation will soon manfully quit
itself. It needs but little inquiry into the spirit of the past, to
ascertain what, once for all, I would desire here clearly and forcibly
to assert, that wherever Christian church architecture has been good and
lovely, it has been merely the perfect development of the common
dwelling-house architecture of the period; that when the pointed arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the round arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the pinnacle
was set over the garret window, it was set over the belfry tower; when
the flat roof was used for the drawing-room, it was used for the nave.
There is no sacredness in round arches, nor in pointed; none in
pinnacles, nor in buttresses; none in pillars, nor traceries. Churches
were larger than in most other buildings, because they had to hold more
people; they were more adorned than most other buildings, because they
were safer from violence, and were the fitting subjects of devotional
offering: but they were never built in any separate, mystical, and
religious style; they were built in the manner that was common and
familiar to everybody at the time. The flamboyant traceries that adorn
the façade of Rouen Cathedral had once their fellows in every window of
every house in the market place; the sculptures that adorn the porches
of St. Mark's had once their match on the walls, of every palace on the
Grand Canal; and the only difference between the church and the
dwelling-house was, that there existed a symbolical meaning in the
distribution of the parts of all buildings meant for worship, and that
the painting or sculpture was, in the one case, less frequently of
profane subject than in the other. A more severe distinction cannot be
drawn: for secular history was constantly introduced into church
architecture; and sacred history or allusion generally formed at least
one half of the ornament of the dwelling-house.

SECTION LIV. This fact is so important, and so little considered, that I
must be pardoned for dwelling upon it at some length, and accurately
marking the limits of the assertion I have made. I do not mean that
every dwelling-house of mediaeval cities was as richly adorned and as
exquisite in composition as the fronts of their cathedrals, but that
they presented features of the same kind, often in parts quite as
beautiful; and that the churches were not separated by any change of
style from the buildings round them, as they are now, but were merely
more finished and full examples of a universal style, rising out of the
confused streets of the city as an oak tree does out of an oak copse,
not differing in leafage, but in size and symmetry. Of course the
quainter and smaller forms of turret and window necessary for domestic
service, the inferior materials, often wood instead of stone, and the
fancy of the inhabitants, which had free play in the design, introduced
oddnesses, vulgarities, and variations into house architecture, which
were prevented by the traditions, the wealth, and the skill of the monks
and freemasons; while, on the other hand, conditions of vaulting,
buttressing, and arch and tower building, were necessitated by the mere
size of the cathedral, of which it would be difficult to find examples
elsewhere. But there was nothing more in these features than the
adaptation of mechanical skill to vaster requirements; there was nothing
intended to be, or felt to be, especially ecclesiastical in any of the
forms so developed; and the inhabitants of every village and city, when
they furnished funds for the decoration of their church, desired merely
to adorn the house of God as they adorned their own, only a little more
richly, and with a somewhat graver temper in the subjects of the
carving. Even this last difference is not always clearly discernible:
all manner of ribaldry occurs in the details of the ecclesiastical
buildings of the North, and at the time when the best of them were
built, every man's house was a kind of temple; a figure of the Madonna,
or of Christ, almost always occupied a niche over the principal door,
and the Old Testament histories were curiously interpolated amidst the
grotesques of the brackets and the gables.

SECTION LV. And the reader will now perceive that the question
respecting fitness of church decoration rests in reality on totally
different grounds from those commonly made foundations of argument. So
long as our streets are walled with barren brick, and our eyes rest
continually, in our daily life, on objects utterly ugly, or of
inconsistent and meaningless design, it may be a doubtful question
whether the faculties of eye and mind which are capable of perceiving
beauty, having been left without food during the whole of our active
life, should be suddenly feasted upon entering a place of worship; and
color, and music, and sculpture should delight the senses, and stir the
curiosity of men unaccustomed to such appeal, at the moment when they
are required to compose themselves for acts of devotion;--this, I say,
may be a doubtful question: but it cannot be a question at all, that if
once familiarized with beautiful form and color, and accustomed to see
in whatever human hands have executed for us, even for the lowest
services, evidence of noble thought and admirable skill, we shall desire
to see this evidence also in whatever is built or labored for the house
of prayer; that the absence of the accustomed loveliness would disturb
instead of assisting devotion; and that we should feel it as vain to ask
whether, with our own house full of goodly craftsmanship, we should
worship God in a house destitute of it, as to ask whether a pilgrim
whose day's journey had led him through fair woods and by sweet waters,
must at evening turn aside into some barren place to pray.

SECTION LVI. Then the second question submitted to us, whether the
ornament of St. Mark's be truly ecclesiastical and Christian, is
evidently determined together with the first; for, if not only the
permission of ornament at all, but the beautiful execution of it, be
dependent on our being familiar with it in daily life, it will follow
that no style of noble architecture can be exclusively ecclesiastical.
It must be practised in the dwelling before it be perfected in the
church, and it is the test of a noble style that it shall be applicable
to both; for if essentially false and ignoble, it may be made to fit the
dwelling-house, but never can be made to fit the church: and just as
there are many principles which will bear the light of the world's
opinion, yet will not bear the light of God's word, while all principles
which will bear the test of Scripture will also bear that of practice,
so in architecture there are many forms which expediency and convenience
may apparently justify, or at least render endurable, in daily use,
which will yet be found offensive the moment they are used for church
service; but there are none good for church service, which cannot bear
daily use. Thus the Renaissance manner of building is a convenient style
for dwelling-houses, but the natural sense of all religious men causes
them to turn from it with pain when it has been used in churches; and
this has given rise to the popular idea that the Roman style is good for
houses and the Gothic for churches. This is not so; the Roman style is
essentially base, and we can bear with it only so long as it gives us
convenient windows and spacious rooms; the moment the question of
convenience is set aside, and the expression or beauty of the style it
tried by its being used in a church, we find it fails. But because the
Gothic and Byzantine styles are fit for churches they are not therefore
less fit for dwellings. They are in the highest sense fit and good for
both, nor were they ever brought to perfection except where they were
used for both.

SECTION LVII. But there is one character of Byzantine work which,
according to the time at which it was employed, may be considered as
either fitting or unfitting it for distinctly ecclesiastical purposes; I
mean the essentially pictorial character of its decoration. We have
already seen what large surfaces it leaves void of bold architectural
features, to be rendered interesting merely by surface ornament or
sculpture. In this respect Byzantine work differs essentially from pure
Gothic styles, which are capable of filling every vacant space by
features purely architectural, and may be rendered, if we please,
altogether independent of pictorial aid. A Gothic church may be rendered
impressive by mere successions of arches, accumulations of niches, and
entanglements of tracery. But a Byzantine church requires expression and
interesting decoration over vast plane surfaces,--decoration which
becomes noble only by becoming pictorial; that is to say, by
representing natural objects,--men, animals, or flowers. And, therefore,
the question whether the Byzantine style be fit for church service in
modern days, becomes involved in the inquiry, what effect upon religion
has been or may yet be produced by pictorial art, and especially by the
art of the mosaicist?

SECTION LVIII. The more I have examined the subject the more dangerous I
have found it to dogmatize respecting the character of the art which is
likely, at a given period, to be most useful to the cause of religion.
One great fact first meets me. I cannot answer for the experience of
others, but I never yet met with a Christian whose heart was thoroughly
set upon the world to come, and, so far as human judgment could
pronounce, perfect and right before God, who cared about art at all. I
have known several very noble Christian men who loved it intensely, but
in them there was always traceable some entanglement of the thoughts
with the matters of this world, causing them to fall into strange
distresses and doubts, and often leading them into what they themselves
would confess to be errors in understanding, or even failures in duty. I
do not say that these men may not, many of them, be in very deed nobler
than those whose conduct is more consistent; they may be more tender in
the tone of all their feelings, and farther-sighted in soul, and for
that very reason exposed to greater trials and fears, than those whose
hardier frame and naturally narrower vision enable them with less effort
to give their hands to God and walk with Him. But still, the general
fact is indeed so, that I have never known a man who seemed altogether
right and calm in faith, who seriously cared about art; and when
casually moved by it, it is quite impossible to say beforehand by what
class of art this impression will on such men be made. Very often it is
by a theatrical commonplace, more frequently still by false sentiment. I
believe that the four painters who have had, and still have, the most
influence, such as it is, on the ordinary Protestant Christian mind, are
Carlo Dolci, Guercino, Benjamin West, and John Martin. Raphael, much as
he is talked about, is, I believe in very fact, rarely looked at by
religious people; much less his master, or any of the truly great
religious men of old. But a smooth Magdalen of Carlo Dolci with a tear
on each cheek, or a Guercino Christ or St. John, or a Scripture
illustration of West's, or a black cloud with a flash of lightning in it
of Martin's, rarely rails of being verily, often deeply, felt for the
time.

SECTION LIX. There are indeed many very evident reasons for this; the
chief one being that, as all truly great religious painters have been
hearty Romanists, there are none of their works which do not embody, in
some portions of them, definitely Romanist doctrines. The Protestant mind
is instantly struck by these, and offended by them, so as to be incapable
of entering, or at least rendered indisposed to enter, farther into the
heart of the work, or to the discovering those deeper characters of it,
which are not Romanist, but Christian, in the everlasting sense and power
of Christianity. Thus most Protestants, entering for the first time a
Paradise of Angelico, would be irrevocably offended by finding that the
first person the painter wished them to speak to was St. Dominic; and
would retire from such a heaven as speedily as possible,--not giving
themselves time to discover, that whether dressed in black, or white, or
gray, and by whatever name in the calendar they might be called, the
figures that filled that Angelico heaven were indeed more, saintly, and
pure, and full of love in every feature, than any that the human hand
ever traced before or since. And thus Protestantism, having foolishly
sought for the little help it requires at the hand of painting from the
men who embodied no Catholic doctrine, has been reduced to receive it
from those who believed neither Catholicism nor Protestantism, but who
read the Bible in search of the picturesque. We thus refuse to regard the
painters who passed their lives in prayer, but are perfectly ready to be
taught by those who spent them in debauchery. There is perhaps no more
popular Protestant picture than Salvator's "Witch of Endor," of which the
subject was chosen by the painter simply because, under the names of Saul
and the Sorceress, he could paint a captain of banditti, and a Neapolitan
hag.

SECTION LX. The fact seems to be that strength of religious feeling is
capable of supplying for itself whatever is wanting in the rudest
suggestions of art, and will either, on the one hand, purify what is
coarse into inoffensiveness, or, on the other, raise what is feeble into
impressiveness. Probably all art, as such, is unsatisfactory to it; and
the effort which it makes to supply the void will be induced rather by
association and accident than by the real merit of the work submitted to
it. The likeness to a beloved friend, the correspondence with a habitual
conception, the freedom from any strange or offensive particularity,
and, above all, an interesting choice of incident, will win admiration
for a picture when the noblest efforts of religious imagination would
otherwise fail of power. How much more, when to the quick capacity of
emotion is joined a childish trust that the picture does indeed
represent a fact! It matters little whether the fact be well or ill
told; the moment we believe the picture to be true, we complain little
of its being ill-painted. Let it be considered for a moment, whether the
child, with its colored print, inquiring eagerly and gravely which is
Joseph, and which is Benjamin, is not more capable of receiving a
strong, even a sublime, impression from the rude symbol which it invests
with reality by its own effort, than the connoisseur who admires the
grouping of the three figures in Raphael's "Telling of the Dreams;" and
whether also, when the human mind is in right religious tone, it has not
always this childish power--I speak advisedly, this power--a noble one,
and possessed more in youth than at any period of after life, but
always, I think, restored in a measure by religion--of raising into
sublimity and reality the rudest symbol which is given to it of
accredited truth.

SECTION LXI. Ever since the period of the Renaissance, however, the
truth has not been accredited; the painter of religious subject is no
longer regarded as the narrator of a fact, but as the inventor of an
idea. [Footnote: I do not mean that modern Christians believe less in
the _facts_ than ancient Christians, but they do not believe in the
representation of the facts as true. We look upon the picture as this or
that painter's conception; the elder Christians looked upon it as this
or that, painter's description of what had actually taken place. And in
the Greek Church all painting is, to this day, strictly a branch of
tradition. See M. Dideron's admirably written introduction to his
Iconographie Chrétienne, p. 7:--"Un de mes compagnons s'étonnait de re
trouver à la Panagia de St. Luc, le saint Jean Chrysostome qu'il avait
dessiné dans le baptistère de St. Marc, à Venise. Le costume des
personnages est partout et en tout temps le même, non-seulement pour la
forme, mais pour la couleur, mais pour le dessin, mais jusque pour le
nombre et l'épaisseur des plis."] We do not severely criticise the
manner in which a true history is told, but we become harsh
investigators of the faults of an invention; so that in the modern
religious mind, the capacity of emotion, which renders judgment
uncertain, is joined with an incredulity which renders it severe; and
this ignorant emotion, joined with ignorant observance of faults, is the
worst possible temper in which any art can be regarded, but more
especially sacred art. For as religious faith renders emotion facile, so
also it generally renders expression simple; that is to say a truly
religious painter will very often be ruder, quainter, simpler, and more
faulty in his manner of working, than a great irreligious one. And it
was in this artless utterance, and simple acceptance, on the part of
both the workman and the beholder, that all noble schools of art have
been cradled; it is in them that they _must_ be cradled to the end
of time. It is impossible to calculate the enormous loss of power in
modern days, owing to the imperative requirement that art shall be
methodical and learned: for as long as the constitution of this world
remains unaltered, there will be more intellect in it than there can be
education; there will be many men capable of just sensation and vivid
invention, who never will have time to cultivate or polish their natural
powers. And all unpolished power is in the present state of society
lost; in other things as well as in the arts, but in the arts
especially: nay, in nine cases out of ten, people mistake the polish for
the power. Until a man has passed through a course of academy
studentship, and can draw in an approved manner with French chalk, and
knows foreshortening, and perspective, and something of anatomy, we do
not think he can possibly be an artist; what is worse, we are very apt
to think that we can _make_ him an artist by teaching him anatomy,
and how to draw with French chalk; whereas the real gift in him is
utterly independent of all such accomplishments: and I believe there are
many peasants on every estate, and laborers in every town of Europe, who
have imaginative powers of a high order, which nevertheless cannot be
used for our good, because we do not choose to look at anything but what
is expressed in a legal and scientific way. I believe there is many a
village mason who, set to carve a series of Scripture or any other
histories, would find many a strange and noble fancy in his head, and
set it down, roughly enough indeed, but in a way well worth our having.
But we are too grand to let him do this, or to set up his clumsy work
when it is done; and accordingly the poor stone-mason is kept hewing
stones smooth at the corners, and we build our church of the smooth
square stones, and consider ourselves wise.

SECTION LXII. I shall pursue this subject farther in another place; but
I allude to it here in order to meet the objections of those persons who
suppose the mosaics of St. Mark's, and others of the period, to be
utterly barbarous as representations of religious history. Let it be
granted that they are so; we are not for that reason to suppose they
were ineffective in religious teaching. I have above spoken of the whole
church as a great Book of Common Prayer; the mosaics were its
illuminations, and the common people of the time were taught their
Scripture history by means of them, more impressively perhaps, though
far less fully, than ours are now by Scripture reading. They had no
other Bible, and--Protestants do not often enough consider this--_could_
have no other. We find it somewhat difficult to furnish our poor with
printed Bibles; consider what the difficulty must have been when they
could be given only in manuscript. The walls of the church necessarily
became the poor man's Bible, and a picture was more easily read upon the
walls than a chapter. Under this view, and considering them merely as the
Bible pictures of a great nation in its youth, I shall finally invite the
reader to examine the connection and subjects of these mosaics; but in
the meantime I have to deprecate the idea of their execution being in any
sense barbarous. I have conceded too much to modern prejudice, in
permitting them to be rated as mere childish efforts at colored
portraiture: they have characters in them of a very noble kind; nor are
they by any means devoid of the remains of the science of the later Roman
empire. The character of the features is almost always fine, the
expression stern and quiet, and very solemn, the attitudes and draperies
always majestic in the single figures, and in those of the groups which
are not in violent action; [Footnote: All the effects of Byzantine art to
represent violent action are inadequate, most of them ludicrously so,
even when the sculptural art is in other respects far advanced. The early
Gothic sculptors, on the other hand, fail in all points of refinement,
but hardly ever in expression of action. This distinction is of course
one of the necessary consequences of the difference in all respects
between the repose of the Eastern, and activity of the Western mind,
which we shall have to trace out completely in the inquiry into the
nature of Gothic.] while the bright coloring and disregard of chiaroscuro
cannot be regarded as imperfections, since they are the only means by
which the figures could be rendered clearly intelligible in the distance
and darkness of the vaulting. So far am I from considering them
barbarous, that I believe of all works of religious art whatsoever,
these, and such as these, have been the most effective. They stand
exactly midway between the debased manufacture of wooden and waxen images
which is the support of Romanist idolatry all over the world, and the
great art which leads the mind away from the religious subject to the art
itself. Respecting neither of these branches of human skill is there, nor
can there be, any question. The manufacture of puppets, however
influential on the Romanist mind of Europe, is certainly not deserving of
consideration as one of the fine arts. It matters literally nothing to a
Romanist what the image he worships is like. Take the vilest doll that is
screwed together in a cheap toy-shop, trust it to the keeping of a large
family of children, let it be beaten about the house by them till it is
reduced to a shapeless block, then dress it in a satin frock and declare
it to have fallen from heaven, and it will satisfactorily answer all
Romanist purposes. Idolatry, [Footnote: Appendix X, "Proper Sense of the
word Idolatry."] it cannot be too often repeated, is no encourager of the
fine arts. But, on the other hand, the highest branches of the fine arts
are no encouragers either of idolatry or of religion. No picture of
Leonardo's or Raphael's, no statue of Michael Angelo's, has ever been
worshipped, except by accident. Carelessly regarded, and by ignorant
persons, there is less to attract in them than in commoner works.
Carefully regarded, and by intelligent persons, they instantly divert the
mind from their subject to their art, so that admiration takes the place
of devotion. I do not say that the Madonna di S. Sisto, the Madonna del
Cardellino, and such others, have not had considerable religious
influence on certain minds, but I say that on the mass of the people of
Europe they have had none whatever, while by far the greater number of
the most celebrated statues and pictures are never regarded with any
other feelings than those of admiration of human beauty, or reverence for
human skill. Effective religious art, therefore, has always lain, and I
believe must always lie, between the two extremes--of barbarous
idol-fashioning on one side, and magnificent craftsmanship on the other.
It consists partly in missal-painting, and such book-illustrations as,
since the invention of printing, have taken its place; partly in
glass-painting; partly in rude sculpture on the outsides of buildings;
partly in mosaics; and partly in the frescoes and tempera pictures which,
in the fourteenth century, formed the link between this powerful, because
imperfect, religious art, and the impotent perfection which succeeded it.

SECTION LXIII. But of all these branches the most important are the
inlaying and mosaic of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, represented
in a central manner by these mosaics of St. Mark's. Missal-painting
could not, from its minuteness, produce the same sublime impressions,
and frequently merged itself in mere ornamentation of the page. Modern
book-illustration has been so little skillful as hardly to be worth
naming. Sculpture, though in some positions it becomes of great
importance, has always a tendency to lose itself in architectural
effect; and was probably seldom deciphered, in all its parts, by the
common people, still less the traditions annealed in the purple burning
of the painted window. Finally, tempera pictures and frescoes were often
of limited size or of feeble color. But the great mosaics of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries covered the walls and roofs of the churches
with inevitable lustre; they could not be ignored or escaped from; their
size rendered them majestic, their distance mysterious, their color
attractive. They did not pass into confused or inferior decorations;
neither were they adorned with any evidences of skill or science, such
as might withdraw the attention from their subjects. They were before
the eyes of the devotee at every interval of his worship; vast
shadowings forth of scenes to whose realization he looked forward, or of
spirits whose presence he invoked. And the man must be little capable of
receiving a religious impression of any kind, who, to this day, does not
acknowledge some feeling of awe, as he looks up at the pale countenances
and ghastly forms which haunt the dark roofs of the Baptisteries of
Parma and Florence, or remains altogether untouched by the majesty of
the colossal images of apostles, and of Him who sent apostles, that look
down from the darkening gold of the domes of Venice and Pisa.

SECTION LXIV. I shall, in a future portion of this work, endeavor to
discover what probabilities there are of our being able to use this kind
of art in modern churches; but at present it remains for us to follow
out the connection of the subjects represented in St. Mark's so as to
fulfil our immediate object, and form an adequate conception of the
feelings of its builders, and of its uses to those for whom it was
built.

Now, there is one circumstance to which I must, in the outset, direct
the reader's special attention, as forming a notable distinction between
ancient and modern days. Our eyes are now familiar and weaned with
writing; and if an inscription is put upon a building, unless it be
large and clear, it is ten to one whether we ever trouble ourselves to
decipher it. But the old architect was sure of readers. He knew that
every one would be glad to decipher all that he wrote; that they would
rejoice in possessing the vaulted leaves of his stone manuscript; and
that the more he gave them, the more grateful would the people be. We
must take some pains, therefore, when we enter St. Mark's, to read all
that is inscribed, or we shall not penetrate into the feeling either of
the builder or of his times.

SECTION LXV. A large atrium or portico is attached to two sides of the
church, a space which was especially reserved for unbaptized persons and
new converts. It was thought right that, before their baptism, these
persons should be led to contemplate the great facts of the Old
Testament history; the history of the Fall of Man, and of the lives of
Patriarchs up to the period of the Covenant by Moses: the order of the
subjects in this series being very nearly the same as in many Northern
churches, but significantly closing with the Fall of the Manna, in order
to mark to the catechumen the insufficiency of the Mosaic covenant for
salvation,--"Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are
dead,"--and to turn his thoughts to the true Bread of which the manna
was the type.

SECTION LXVI. Then, when after his baptism he was permitted to enter the
church, over its main entrance he saw, on looking back, a mosaic of
Christ enthroned, with the Virgin on one side and St. Mark on the other,
in attitudes of adoration. Christ is represented as holding a book open
upon his knee, on which is written: "I AM THE DOOR; BY ME IF ANY MAN
ENTER IN, HE SHALL BE SAVED." On the red marble moulding which surrounds
the mosaic is written: "I AM THE GATE OF LIFE; LET THOSE WHO ARE MINE,
ENTER BY ME." Above, on the red marble fillet which forms the cornice of
the west end of the church, is written, with reference to the figure of
Christ below: "WHO HE WAS, AND FROM WHOM HE CAME, AND AT WHAT PRICE HE
REDEEMED THEE, AND WHY HE MADE THEE, AND GAVE THEE ALL THINGS, DO THOU
CONSIDER."

Now observe, this was not to be seen and read only by the catechumen
when he first entered the church; every one who at any time entered, was
supposed to look back and to read this writing; their daily entrance
into the church was thus made a daily memorial of their first entrance
into the spiritual Church; and we shall find that the rest of the book
which was opened for them upon its walls continually led them in the
same manner to regard the visible temple as in every part a type of the
invisible Church of God.

SECTION LXVII. Therefore the mosaic of the first dome, which is over the
head of the spectator as soon as he has entered by the great door (that
door being the type of baptism), represents the effusion of the Holy
Spirit, as the first consequence and seal of the entrance into the
Church of God. In the centre of the cupola is the Dove, enthroned in the
Greek manner, as the Lamb is enthroned, when the Divinity of the Second
and Third Persons is to be insisted upon together with their peculiar
offices. From the central symbol of the Holy Spirit twelve streams of
fire descend upon the heads of the twelve apostles, who are represented
standing around the dome; and below them, between the windows which are
pierced in its walls, are represented, by groups of two figures for each
separate people, the various nations who heard the apostles speak, at
Pentecost, every man in his own tongue. Finally, on the vaults, at the
four angles which support the cupola, are pictured four angels, each
bearing a tablet upon the end of a rod in his hand: on each of the
tablets of the three first angels is inscribed the word "Holy;" on that
of the fourth is written "Lord;" and the beginning of the hymn being
thus put into the mouths of the four angels, the words of it are
continued around the border of the dome, uniting praise to God for the
gift of the Spirit, with welcome to the redeemed soul received into His
Church:

    "HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF SABAOTH:
       HEAVEN AND EARTH ARE FULL OF THY GLORY.
         HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST:
  BLESSED IS HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD."

And observe in this writing that the convert is required to regard the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit especially as a work of _sanctification_.
It is the _holiness_ of God manifested in the giving of His Spirit to
sanctify those who had become His children, which the four angels
celebrate in their ceaseless praise; and it is on account of this
holiness that the heaven and earth are said to be full of His glory.

SECTION LXVIII. After thus hearing praise rendered to God by the angels
for the salvation of the newly-entered soul, it was thought fittest that
the worshipper should be led to contemplate, in the most comprehensive
forms possible, the past evidence and the future hopes of Christianity,
as summed up in three facts without assurance of which all faith is
vain; namely that Christ died, that He rose again, and that He ascended
into heaven, there to prepare a place for His elect. On the vault
between the first and second cupolas are represented the crucifixion and
resurrection of Christ, with the usual series of intermediate
scenes,--the treason of Judas, the judgment of Pilate, the crowning with
thorns, the descent into Hades, the visit of the women to the sepulchre,
and the apparition to Mary Magdalene. The second cupola itself, which is
the central and principal one of the church, is entirely occupied by the
subject of the Ascension. At the highest point of it Christ is
represented as rising into the blue heaven, borne up by four angels, and
throned upon a rainbow, the type of reconciliation. Beneath him, the
twelve apostles are seen upon the Mount of Olives, with the Madonna,
and, in the midst of them, the two men in white apparel who appeared at
the moment of the Ascension, above whom, as uttered by them, are
inscribed the words, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This Christ, the Son of God, as He is taken from you, shall so
come, the arbiter of the earth, trusted to do judgment and justice."

SECTION LXIX. Beneath the circle of the apostles, between the windows of
the cupola, are represented the Christian virtues, as sequent upon the
crucifixion of the flesh, and the spiritual ascension together with
Christ. Beneath them, on the vaults which support the angles of the
cupola, are placed the four Evangelists, because on their evidence our
assurance of the fact of the ascension rests; and, finally, beneath
their feet, as symbols of the sweetness and fulness of the Gospel which
they declared, are represented the four rivers of Paradise, Pison,
Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates.

SECTION LXX. The third cupola, that over the altar, represents the
witness of the Old Testament to Christ; showing him enthroned in its
centre, and surrounded by the patriarchs and prophets. But this dome was
little seen by the people; [Footnote: It is also of inferior workmanship,
and perhaps later than the rest. Vide Lord Lindsay, vol. i, p. 124,
note.] their contemplation was intended to be chiefly drawn to that of
the centre of the church, and thus the mind of the worshipper was at once
fixed on the main groundwork and hope of Christianity,--"Christ is
risen," and "Christ shall come." If he had time to explore the minor
lateral chapels and cupolas, he could find in them the whole series of
New Testament history, the events of the Life of Christ, and the
Apostolic miracles in their order, and finally the scenery of the Book of
Revelation; [Footnote: The old mosaics from the Revelation have perished,
and have been replaced by miserable work of the seventeenth century.] but
if he only entered, as often the common people do to this hour, snatching
a few moments before beginning the labor of the day to offer up an
ejaculatory prayer, and advanced but from the main entrance as far as the
altar screen, all the splendor of the glittering nave and variegated
dome, if they smote upon his heart, as they might often, in strange
contrast with his reed cabin among the shallows of the lagoon, smote upon
it only that they might proclaim the two great messages--"Christ is
risen," and "Christ shall come." Daily, as the white cupolas rose like
wreaths of sea-foam in the dawn, while the shadowy campanile and frowning
palace were still withdrawn into the night, they rose with the Easter
Voice of Triumph,--"Christ is risen;" and daily, as they looked down upon
the tumult of the people, deepening and eddying in the wide square that
opened from their feet to the sea, they uttered above them the sentence
of warning,--"Christ shall come."

SECTION LXXI. And this thought may surely dispose the reader to look
with some change of temper upon the gorgeous building and wild blazonry
of that shrine of St. Mark's. He now perceives that it was in the hearts
of the old Venetian people far more than a place of worship. It was at
once a type of the Redeemed Church of God, and a scroll for the written
word of God. It was to be to them, both an image of the Bride, all
glorious within, her clothing of wrought gold; and the actual Table of
the Law and the Testimony, written within and without. And whether
honored as the Church or as the Bible, was it not fitting that neither
the gold nor the crystal should be spared in the adornment of it; that,
as the symbol of the Bride, the building of the wall thereof should be
of jasper, [Footnote: Rev. xxi. 18.] and the foundations of it garnished
with all manner of precious stones; and that, as the channel of the
World, that triumphant utterance of the Psalmist should be true of
it,--"I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all
riches"? And shall we not look with changed temper down the long
perspective of St. Mark's Place towards the sevenfold gates and glowing
domes of its temple, when we know with what solemn purpose the shafts of
it were lifted above the pavement of the populous square? Men met there
from all countries of the earth, for traffic or for pleasure; but, above
the crowd swaying for ever to and fro in the restlessness of avarice or
thirst of delight, was seen perpetually the glory of the temple,
attesting to them, whether they would hear or whether they would
forbear, that there was one treasure which the merchantmen might buy
without a price, and one delight better than all others, in the word and
the statutes of God. Not in the wantonness of wealth, not in vain
ministry to the desire of the eyes or the pride of life, were those
marbles hewn into transparent strength, and those arches arrayed in the
colors of the iris. There is a message written in the dyes of them, that
once was written in blood; and a sound in the echoes of their vaults,
that one day shall fill the vault of heaven,--"He shall return, to do
judgment and justice." The strength of Venice was given her, so long as
she remembered this: her destruction found her when she had forgotten
this; and it found her irrevocably, because she forgot it without
excuse. Never had city a more glorious Bible. Among the nations of the
North, a rude and shadowy sculpture filled their temples with confused
and hardly legible imagery; but, for her, the skill and the treasures of
the East had gilded every letter, and illumined every page, till the
Book-Temple shone from afar off like the star of the Magi. In other
cities, the meetings of the people were often in places withdrawn from
religious association, subject to violence and to change; and on the
grass of the dangerous rampart, and in the dust of the troubled street,
there were deeds done and counsels taken, which, if we cannot justify,
we may sometimes forgive. But the sins of Venice, whether in her palace
or in her piazza, were done with the Bible at her right hand. The walls
on which its testimony was written were separated but by a few inches of
marble from those which guarded the secrets of her councils, or confined
the victims of her policy. And when in her last hours she threw off all
shame and all restraint, and the great square of the city became filled
with the madness of the whole earth, be it remembered how much her sin
was greater, because it was done in the face of the House of God,
burning with the letters of His Law. Mountebank and masker laughed their
laugh, and went their way; and a silence has followed them, not
unforetold; for amidst them all, through century after century of
gathering vanity and festering guilt, that white dome of St. Mark's had
uttered in the dead ear of Venice, "Know thou, that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment."




CHAPTER V.

THE DUCAL PALACE.


SECTION I. It was stated in the commencement of the preceding chapter
that the Gothic art of Venice was separated by the building of the Ducal
Palace into two distinct periods; and that in all the domestic edifices
which were raised for half a century after its completion, their
characteristic and chiefly effective portions were more or less directly
copied from it. The fact is, that the Ducal Palace was the great work of
Venice at this period, itself the principal effort of her imagination,
employing her best architects in its masonry, and her best painters in
its decoration, for a long series of years; and we must receive it as a
remarkable testimony to the influence which it possessed over the minds
of those who saw it in its progress, that, while in the other cities of
Italy every palace and church was rising in some original and daily more
daring form, the majesty of this single building was able to give pause
to the Gothic imagination in its full career; stayed the restlessness of
innovation in an instant, and forbade the powers which had created it
thenceforth to exert themselves in new directions, or endeavor to summon
an image more attractive.

SECTION II. The reader will hardly believe that while the architectural
invention of the Venetians was thus lost, Narcissus-like, in
self-contemplation, the various accounts of the progress of the building
thus admired and beloved are so confused as frequently to leave it
doubtful to what portion of the palace they refer; and that there is
actually, at the time being, a dispute between the best Venetian
antiquaries, whether the main façade of the palace be of the fourteenth
or fifteenth century. The determination of this question is of course
necessary before we proceed to draw any conclusions from the style of
the work; and it cannot be determined without a careful review of the
entire history of the palace, and of all the documents relating to it. I
trust that this review may not be found tedious,--assuredly it will not
be fruitless,--bringing many facts before us, singularly illustrative of
the Venetian character.

SECTION III. Before, however, the reader can enter upon any inquiry into
the history of this building, it is necessary that he should be
thoroughly familiar with the arrangement and names of its principal
parts, as it at present stands; otherwise he cannot comprehend so much
as a single sentence of any of the documents referring to it. I must do
what I can, by the help of a rough plan and bird's-eye view, to give him
the necessary topographical knowledge:

Opposite is a rude ground plan of the buildings round St. Mark's Place;
and the following references will clearly explain their relative
positions:

A. St. Mark's Place.
B. Piazzetta.
P. V. Procuratie Vecchie.
P. N. (opposite) Procuratie Nuove.
P. L. Libreria Vecchia.
I. Piazzetta de' Leoni.
T. Tower of St. Mark.
F F. Great Façade of St. Mark's Church.
M. St. Mark's. (It is so united with the Ducal Palace, that the
    separation cannot be indicated in the plan, unless all the walls had
    been marked, which would have confused the whole.)
D D D. Ducal Palace.         g s. Giant's stair.
C. Court of Ducal Palace.    J. Judgement angle.
c. Porta della Carta.        a. Fig-tree angle.
p p. Ponte della Paglia (Bridge of Straw).
S. Ponte de' Sospiri (Bridge of Sighs).
R R. Riva de' Schiavoni.


[Illustration: FIG. I. The Ducal Palace--Ground Plan.]

[Illustration: FIG. II. The Ducal Palace--Bird's eye View.]


The reader will observe that the Ducal Palace is arranged somewhat in
the form of a hollow square, of which one side faces the Piazzetta, B,
and another the quay called the Riva de' Schiavoni, R R; the third is on
the dark canal called the "Rio del Palazzo," and the fourth joins the
Church of St. Mark.

Of this fourth side, therefore, nothing can be seen. Of the other three
sides we shall have to speak constantly; and they will be respectively
called, that towards the Piazzetta, the "Piazzetta Façade;" that towards
the Riva de' Schiavoni, the "Sea Façade;" and that towards the Rio del
Palazzo, the "Rio Façade." This Rio, or canal, is usually looked upon by
the traveller with great respect, or even horror, because it passes
under the Bridge of Sighs. It is, however, one of the principal
thoroughfares of the city; and the bridge and its canal together occupy,
in the mind of a Venetian, very much the position of Fleet Street and
Temple Bar in that of a Londoner,--at least, at the time when Temple Bar
was occasionally decorated with human heads. The two buildings closely
resemble each other in form.

SECTION IV. We must now proceed to obtain some rough idea of the
appearance and distribution of the palace itself; but its arrangement
will be better understood by supposing ourselves raised some hundred and
fifty feet above the point in the lagoon in front of it, so as to get a
general view of the Sea Façade and Rio Façade (the latter in very steep
perspective), and to look down into its interior court. Fig. II. roughly
represents such a view, omitting all details on the roofs, in order to
avoid confusion. In this drawing we have merely to notice that, of the
two bridges seen on the right, the uppermost, above the black canal, is
the Bridge of Sighs; the lower one is the Ponte della Paglia, the
regular thoroughfare from quay to quay, and, I believe, called the
Bridge of Straw, because the boats which brought straw from the mainland
used to sell it at this place. The corner of the palace, rising above
this bridge, and formed by the meeting of the Sea Façade and Rio Façade,
will always be called the Vine angle, because it is decorated by a
sculpture of the drunkenness of Noah. The angle opposite will be called
the Fig-tree angle, because it is decorated by a sculpture of the Fall
of Man. The long and narrow range of building, of which the roof is seen
in perspective behind this angle, is the part of the palace fronting the
Piazzetta; and the angle under the pinnacle most to the left of the two
which terminate it will be called, for a reason presently to be stated,
the Judgment angle. Within the square formed by the building is seen its
interior court (with one of its wells), terminated by small and
fantastic buildings of the Renaissance period, which face the Giant's
Stair, of which the extremity is seen sloping down on the left.

SECTION V. The great façade which fronts the spectator looks southward.
Hence the two traceried windows lower than the rest, and to the right of
the spectator, may be conveniently distinguished as the "Eastern
Windows." There are two others like them, filled with tracery, and at
the same level, which look upon the narrow canal between the Ponte della
Paglia and the Bridge of Sighs: these we may conveniently call the
"Canal Windows." The reader will observe a vertical line in this dark
side of the palace, separating its nearer and plainer wall from a long
four-storied range of rich architecture. This more distant range is
entirely Renaissance: its extremity is not indicated, because I have no
accurate sketch of the small buildings and bridges beyond it, and we
shall have nothing whatever to do with this part of the palace in our
present inquiry. The nearer and undecorated wall is part of the older
palace, though much defaced by modern opening of common windows,
refittings of the brickwork, etc.

SECTION VI. It will be observed that the façade is composed of a smooth
mass of wall, sustained on two tiers of pillars, one above the other.
The manner in which these support the whole fabric will be understood at
once by the rough section, Fig. III., which is supposed to be taken
right through the palace to the interior court, from near the middle of
the Sea Façade. Here _a_ and _d_ are the rows of shafts, both
in the inner court and on the Façade, which carry the main walls;
_b_, _c_ are solid walls variously strengthened with pilasters. A, B, C
are the three stories of the interior of the palace.

[Illustration: FIG. III.]

The reader sees that it is impossible for any plan to be more simple,
and that if the inner floors and walls of the stories A, B were removed,
there would be left merely the form of a basilica,--two high walls,
carried on ranges of shafts, and roofed by a low gable.

The stories A, B are entirely modernized, and divided into confused
ranges of small apartments, among which what vestiges remain of ancient
masonry are entirely undecipherable, except by investigations such as I
have had neither the time nor, as in most cases they would involve the
removal of modern plastering, the opportunity, to make. With the
subdivisions of this story, therefore, I shall not trouble the reader;
but those of the great upper story, C, are highly important.

SECTION VII. In the bird's-eye view above, Fig. II., it will be noticed
that the two windows on the right are lower than the other four of the
façade. In this arrangement there is one of the most remarkable
instances I know of the daring sacrifice of symmetry to convenience,
which was noticed in Chap. VII. as one of the chief noblenesses of the
Gothic schools.

The part of the palace in which the two lower windows occur, we shall
find, was first built, and arranged in four stories in order to obtain
the necessary number of apartments. Owing to circumstances, of which we
shall presently give an account, it became necessary, in the beginning
of the fourteenth century, to provide another large and magnificent
chamber for the meeting of the senate. That chamber was added at the
side of the older building; but, as only one room was wanted, there was
no need to divide the added portion into two stories. The entire height
was given to the single chamber, being indeed not too great for just
harmony with its enormous length and breadth. And then came the question
how to place the windows, whether on a line with the two others, or
above them.

The ceiling of the new room was to be adorned by the paintings of the
best masters in Venice, and it became of great importance to raise the
light near that gorgeous roof, as well as to keep the tone of
illumination in the Council Chamber serene; and therefore to introduce
light rather in simple masses than in many broken streams. A modern
architect, terrified at the idea of violating external symmetry, would
have sacrificed both the pictures and the peace of the council. He would
have placed the larger windows at the same level with the other two, and
have introduced above them smaller windows, like those of the upper
story in the older building, as if that upper story had been continued
along the façade. But the old Venetian thought of the honor of the
paintings, and the comfort of the senate, before his own reputation. He
unhesitatingly raised the large windows to their proper position with
reference to the interior of the chamber, and suffered the external
appearance to take care of itself. And I believe the whole pile rather
gains than loses in effect by the variation thus obtained in the spaces
of wall above and below the windows.

SECTION VIII. On the party wall, between the second and third windows,
which faces the eastern extremity of the Great Council Chamber, is
painted the Paradise of Tintoret; and this wall will therefore be
hereafter called the "Wall of the Paradise."

In nearly the centre of the Sea Façade, and between the first and second
windows of the Great Council Chamber, is a large window to the ground,
opening on a balcony, which is one of the chief ornaments of the palace,
and will be called in future the "Sea Balcony."

The façade which looks on the Piazzetta is very nearly like this to the
Sea, but the greater part of it was built in the fifteenth century, when
people had become studious of their symmetries. Its side windows are all
on the same level. Two light the west end of the Great Council Chamber,
one lights a small room anciently called the Quarantia Civil Nuova; the
other three, and the central one, with a balcony like that to the Sea,
light another large chamber, called Sala del Scrutinio, or "Hall of
Enquiry," which extends to the extremity of the palace above the Porta
della Carta.

SECTION IX. The reader is now well enough acquainted with the topography
of the existing building, to be able to follow the accounts of its
history.

We have seen above, that there were three principal styles of Venetian
architecture; Byzantine, Gothic, and Renaissance.

The Ducal Palace, which was the great work of Venice, was built
successively in the three styles. There was a Byzantine Ducal Palace, a
Gothic Ducal Palace, and a Renaissance Ducal Palace. The second
superseded the first totally; a few stones of it (if indeed so much) are
all that is left. But the third superseded the second in part only, and
the existing building is formed by the union of the two.

We shall review the history of each in succession. [Footnote: The reader
will find it convenient to note the following editions of the printed
books which have been principally consulted in the following inquiry. The
numbers of the manuscripts referred to in the Marcian Library are given
with the quotations.
  Sansovino. Venetia Descritta. 410, Venice, 1663.
  Sansovino. Lettera intorno al Palazzo Ducale, 8vo, Venice, 1829.
  Temanza. Antica Pianta di Venezia, with text. Venice, 1780.
  Cadorin. Pareri di XV. Architetti. Svo, Venice,1838.
  Filiasi. Memorie storiche. 8vo, Padua, 1811.
  Bettio. Lettera discorsiva del Palazzo Ducale, 8vo, Venice, 1837.
  Selvatico. Architettura di Venezia. 8vo, Venice, 1847.]

1st. The BYZANTINE PALACE.

In the year of the death of Charlemagne, 813, the Venetians determined
to make the island of Rialto the seat of the government and capital of
their state. [Footnote: The year commonly given is 810, as in the Savina
Chronicle (Cod. Marcianus), p. 13. "Del 810 fece principiar el pallazzo
Ducal nel luogo ditto Brucio in confin di S. Moise, et fece riedificar
la isola di Eraclia." The Sagornin Chronicle gives 804; and Filiasi,
vol. vi. chap. I, corrects this date to 813.] Their Doge, Angelo or
Agnello Participazio, instantly took vigorous means for the enlargement
of the small group of buildings which were to be the nucleus of the
future Venice. He appointed persons to superintend the raising of the
banks of sand, so as to form more secure foundations, and to build
wooden bridges over the canals. For the offices of religion, he built
the Church of St. Mark; and on, or near, the spot where the Ducal Palace
now stands, he built a palace for the administration of the government.
[Footnote: "Ampliò la città, fornilla di casamenti, _e per il culto d'
Iddio e l' amministrazione della giustizia_ eresse la capella di S.
Marco, e il palazzo di sua residenza."--Pareri, p. 120. Observe, that
piety towards God, and justice towards man, have been at least the
nominal purposes of every act and institution of ancient Venice. Compare
also Temanza, p. 24. "Quello che abbiamo di certo si è che il suddetto
Agnello lo incomminciò da fondamenti, e cosi pure la capella ducale di
S. Marco."]

The history of the Ducal Palace therefore begins with the birth of
Venice, and to what remains of it, at this day, is entrusted the last
representation of her power.

SECTION X. Of the exact position and form of this palace of Participazio
little is ascertained. Sansovino says that it was "built near the Ponte
della Paglia, and answeringly on the Grand Canal," towards San Giorgio;
that is to say, in the place now occupied by the Sea Façade; but this
was merely the popular report of his day. [Footnote: What I call the
Sea, was called "the Grand Canal" by the Venetians, as well as the great
water street of the city; but I prefer calling it "the Sea," in order to
distinguish between that street and the broad water in front of the
Ducal Palace, which, interrupted only by the island of San Giorgio,
stretches for many miles to the south, and for more than two to the
boundary of the Lido. It was the deeper channel, just in front of the
Ducal Palace, continuing the line of the great water street itself which
the Venetians spoke of as "the Grand Canal." The words of Sansovino are:
"Fu cominciato dove si vede, vicino al ponte della paglia, et
rispondente sul canal grande." Filiasi says simply: "The palace was
built where it now is." "Il palazio fu fatto dove ora pure
esiste."--Vol. iii. chap. 27. The Savina Chronicle, already quoted,
says: "in the place called the Bruolo (or Broglio), that is to say on
the Piazzetta."]

We know, however, positively, that it was somewhere upon the site of the
existing palace; and that it had an important front towards the
Piazzetta, with which, as we shall see hereafter, the present palace at
one period was incorporated. We know, also, that it was a pile of some
magnificence, from the account given by Sagornino of the visit paid by
the Emperor Otho the Great, to the Doge Pietro Orseolo II. The
chronicler says that the Emperor "beheld carefully all the beauty of the
palace;" [Footnote: "Omni decoritate illius perlustrata."--Sagornino,
quoted by Cadorin and Temanza.] and the Venetian historians express
pride in the buildings being worthy of an emperor's examination. This
was after the palace had been much injured by fire in the revolt against
Candiano IV., [Footnote: There is an interesting account of this revolt
in Monaci, p. 68. Some historians speak of the palace as having been
destroyed entirely; but, that it did not even need important
restorations, appears from Sagornino's expression, quoted by Cadorin and
Temanza. Speaking of the Doge Participazio, he says: "Qui Palatii
hucusque manentis fuerit fabricator." The reparations of the palace are
usually attributed to the successor of Candiano, Pietro Orseolo I.; but
the legend, under the picture of that Doge in the Council Chamber,
speaks only of his rebuilding St. Mark's, and "performing many
miracles." His whole mind seems to have been occupied with
ecclesiastical affairs; and his piety was finally manifested in a way
somewhat startling to the state, by absconding with a French priest to
St. Michael's in Gascony, and there becoming a monk. What repairs,
therefore, were necessary to the Ducal Palace, were left to be
undertaken by his son, Orseolo II., above named.] and just repaired, and
richly adorned by Orseolo himself, who is spoken of by Sagornino as
having also "adorned the chapel of the Ducal Palace" (St. Mark's) with
ornaments of marble and gold. [Footnote: "Quam non modo marmoreo, verum
aureo compsit ornamento."--_Temanza_] There can be no doubt
whatever that the palace at this period resembled and impressed the
other Byzantine edifices of the city, such as the Fondaco de Turchi,
&c., whose remains have been already described; and that, like them, it
was covered with sculpture, and richly adorned with gold and color.

SECTION XI. In the year 1106, it was for the second time injured by
fire, [Footnote: "L'anno 1106, uscito fuoco d'una casa privata, arse
parte del palazzo."--_Sansovino_. Of the beneficial effect of these
fires, vide Cadorin.] but repaired before 1116, when it received another
emperor, Henry V. (of Germany), and was again honored by imperial
praise. [Footnote: "Urbis situm, aedificiorum decorem, et regiminis
sequitatem multipliciter commendavit."--_Cronaca Dandolo_, quoted
by Cadorin.]

Between 1173 and the close of the century, it seems to have been again
repaired and much enlarged by the Doge Sebastian Ziani. Sansovino says
that this Doge not only repaired it, but "enlarged it in every
direction;" [Footnote: "Non solamente rinovo il palazzo, ma lo aggrandi
per ogni verso."--_Sansovino_. Zanotto quotes the Altinat Chronicle
for account of these repairs.] and, after this enlargement, the palace
seems to have remained untouched for a hundred years, until, in the
commencement of the fourteenth century, the works of the Gothic Palace
were begun. As, therefore, the old Byzantine building was, at the time
when those works first interfered with it, in the form given to it by
Ziani, I shall hereafter always speak of it as the _Ziani_ Palace; and
this the rather, because the only chronicler whose words are perfectly
clear respecting the existence of part of this palace so late as the year
1422, speaks of it as built by Ziani. The old "palace of which half
remains to this day, was built, as we now see it, by Sebastian Ziani."
[Footnote: "El palazzo che anco di mezzo se vede vecchio, per M.
Sebastian Ziani fu fatto compir, come el se vede."--_Chronicle of Pietro
Dolfino_, Cod. Ven. p. 47. This Chronicle is spoken of by Sansovino as
"molto particolare, e distinta."--_Sansovino, Venezia descritta_, p.
593.--It terminates in the year 1422.]

So far, then, of the Byzantine Palace.

SECTION XII. 2nd. The GOTHIC PALACE. The reader, doubtless, recollects
that the important change in the Venetian government which gave
stability to the aristocratic power took place about the year 1297,
[Footnote: See Vol. I. Appendix 3, Stones of Venice.] under the Doge
Pietro Gradenigo, a man thus characterized by Sansovino:--"A prompt and
prudent man, of unconquerable determination and great eloquence, who
laid, so to speak, the foundations of the eternity of this republic, by
the admirable regulations which he introduced into the government."

We may now, with some reason, doubt of their admirableness; but their
importance, and the vigorous will and intellect of the Doge, are not to
be disputed. Venice was in the zenith of her strength, and the heroism
of her citizens was displaying itself in every quarter of the world.
[Footnote: Vide Sansovino's enumeration of those who flourished in the
reign of Gradenigo, p. 564.] The acquiescence in the secure
establishment of the aristocratic power was an expression, by the
people, of respect for the families which had been chiefly instrumental
in raising the commonwealth to such a height of prosperity.

The Serrar del Consiglio fixed the numbers of the Senate within certain
limits, and it conferred upon them a dignity greater than they had ever
before possessed. It was natural that the alteration in the character of
the assembly should be attended by some change in the size, arrangement,
or decoration of the chamber in which they sat.

We accordingly find it recorded by Sansovino, that "in 1301 another
saloon was begun on the Rio del Palazzo, _under the Doge
Gradenigo_, and finished in 1309, _in which year the Grand Council
first sat in it_." [Footnote: Sansovino, 324, I.] In the first year,
therefore, of the fourteenth century, the Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice
was begun; and as the Byzantine Palace was, in its foundation, coeval
with that of the state, so the Gothic Palace was, in its foundation,
coeval with that of the aristocratic power. Considered as the principal
representation of the Venetian school of architecture, the Ducal Palace
is the Parthenon of Venice, and Gradenigo its Pericles.

SECTION XIII. Sansovino, with a caution very frequent among Venetian
historians, when alluding to events connected with the Serrar del
Consiglio, does not specially mention the cause for the requirement of
the new chamber; but the Sivos Chronicle is a little more distinct in
expression. "In 1301, it was determined to build a great saloon _for
the assembling_ of the Great Council, and the room was built which is
_now_ called the Sala del Scrutinio." [Footnote: "1301 fu presa
parte di fare una sala grande per la riduzione del gran consiglio, e fu
fatta quella che ora si chiama dello Scrutinio."--_Cronaca Sivos_,
quoted by Cadorin. There is another most interesting entry in the
Chronicle of Magno, relating to this event; but the passage is so ill
written, that I am not sure if I have deciphered it correctly:--"Del
1301 fu preso de fabrichar la sala fo ruina e fu fata (fatta) quella se
adoperava a far e pregadi e fu adopera per far el Gran Consegio fin
1423, che fu anni 122." This last sentence, which is of great
importance, is luckily unmistakable:--"The room was used for the
meetings of the Great Council until 1423, that is to say, for 122
years."--_Cod. Ven._ tom. i. p. 126. The Chronicle extends from
1253 to 1454.

Abstract 1301 to 1309; Gradenigo's room--1340-42, page 295-1419. New
proposals, p. 298.] _Now_, that is to say, at the time when the
Sivos Chronicle was written; the room has long ago been destroyed, and
its name given to another chamber on the opposite side of the palace:
but I wish the reader to remember the date 1301, as marking the
commencement of a great architectural epoch, in which took place the
first appliance of the energy of the aristocratic power, and of the
Gothic style, to the works of the Ducal Palace. The operations then
begun were continued, with hardly an interruption, during the whole
period of the prosperity of Venice. We shall see the new buildings
consume, and take the place of, the Ziani Palace, piece by piece: and
when the Ziani Palace was destroyed, they fed upon themselves; being
continued round the square, until, in the sixteenth century, they
reached the point where they had been begun in the fourteenth, and
pursued the track they had then followed some distance beyond the
junction; destroying or hiding their own commencement, as the serpent,
which is the type of eternity, conceals its tail in its jaws.

SECTION XIV. We cannot, therefore, _see_ the extremity, wherein lay
the sting and force of the whole creature,--the chamber, namely, built
by the Doge Gradenigo; but the reader must keep that commencement and
the date of it carefully in his mind. The body of the Palace Serpent
will soon become visible to us.

The Gradenigo Chamber was somewhere on the Rio Façade, behind the
present position of the Bridge of Sighs; i.e. about the point marked on
the roof by the dotted lines in the woodcut; it is not known whether low
or high, but probably on a first story. The great façade of the Ziani
Palace being, as above mentioned, on the Piazzetta, this chamber was as
far back and out of the way as possible; secrecy and security being
obviously the points first considered.

SECTION XV. But the newly constituted Senate had need of other additions
to the ancient palace besides the Council Chamber. A short, but most
significant, sentence is added to Sansovino's account of the construction
of that room. "There were, _near it_," he says, "the Cancellaria, and the
_Gheba_ or _Gabbia_, afterwards called the Little Tower." [Footnote: "Vi
era appresso la Cancellarla, e la Gheba o Gabbia, iniamata poi
Torresella,"---P. 324. A small square tower is seen above the Vine angle
in the view of Venice dated 1500, and attributed to Albert Durer. It
appears about 25 feet square, and is very probably the Torresella in
question.]

Gabbia means a "cage;" and there can be no question that certain
apartments were at this time added at the top of the palace and on the
Rio Façade, which were to be used as prisons. Whether any portion of the
old Torresella still remains is a doubtful question; but the apartments
at the top of the palace, in its fourth story, were still used for
prisons as late as the beginning of the seventeenth century. [Footnote:
Vide Bettio, Lettera, p. 23.] I wish the reader especially to notice
that a separate tower or range of apartments was built for this purpose,
in order to clear the government of the accusations so constantly made
against them, by ignorant or partial historians, of wanton cruelty to
prisoners. The stories commonly told respecting the "piombi" of the
Ducal Palace are utterly false. Instead of being, as usually reported,
small furnaces under the leads of the palace, they were comfortable
rooms, with good flat roofs of larch, and carefully ventilated.
[Footnote: Bettio, Lettera, p. 20. "Those who wrote without having seen
them described them as covered with lead; and those who have seen them
know that, between their flat timber roofs and the sloping leaden roof
of the palace the interval is five metres where it is least, and nine
where it is greatest."] The new chamber, then, and the prisons, being
built, the Great Council first sat in their retired chamber on the Rio
in the year 1309.

SECTION XVI. Now, observe the significant progress of events. They had
no sooner thus established themselves in power than they were disturbed
by the conspiracy of the Tiepolos, in the year 1310. In consequence of
that conspiracy the Council of Ten was created, still under the Doge
Gradenigo; who, having finished his work and left the aristocracy of
Venice armed with this terrible power, died in the year 1312, some say
by poison. He was succeeded by the Doge Marino Giorgio, who reigned only
one year; and then followed the prosperous government of John Soranzo.
There is no mention of any additions to the Ducal Palace during his
reign, but he was succeeded by that Francesco Dandolo, the sculptures on
whose tomb, still existing in the cloisters of the Salute, may be
compared by any traveller with those of the Ducal Palace. Of him it is
recorded in the Savina Chronicle: "This Doge also had the great gate
built which is at the entry of the palace, above which is his statue
kneeling, with the gonfalon in hand, before the feet of the Lion of St.
Mark's." [Footnote: "Questo Dose anche fese far la porta granda che se
al intrar del Pallazzo, in su la qual vi e la sua statua che sta in
zenocchioni con lo confalon in man, davanti li pie de lo Lion S.
Marco."--_Savin Chronicle_, Cod. Ven. p. 120.]

SECTION XVII. It appears, then, that after the Senate had completed
their Council Chamber and the prisons, they required a nobler door than
that of the old Ziani Palace for their Magnificences to enter by. This
door is twice spoken of in the government accounts of expenses, which
are fortunately preserved, [Footnote: These documents I have not
examined myself, being satisfied of the accuracy of Cadorin, from whom I
take the passages quoted.] in the following terms:--

"1335, June 1. We, Andrew Dandolo and Mark Loredano, procurators of St.
Mark's, have paid to Martin the stone-cutter and his associates....
[Footnote: "Libras tres, soldeos 15 grossorum."--Cadorin, 189, I.]
for a stone of which the lion is made which is put over the gate of the
palace."

"1344, November 4. We have paid thirty-five golden ducats for making
gold leaf, to gild the lion which is over the door of the palace
stairs."

The position of this door is disputed, and is of no consequence to the
reader, the door itself having long ago disappeared, and been replaced
by the Porta della Carta.

SECTION XVIII. But before it was finished, occasion had been discovered
for farther improvements. The Senate found their new Council Chamber
inconveniently small, and, about thirty years after its completion,
began to consider where a larger and more magnificent one might be
built. The government was now thoroughly established, and it was
probably felt that there was some meanness in the retired position, as
well as insufficiency in the size, of the Council Chamber on the Rio.
The first definite account which I find of their proceedings, under
these circumstances, is in the Caroldo Chronicle: [Footnote: Cod. Ven.,
No. CXLI. p. 365.]

"1340. On the 28th of December, in the preceding year, Master Marco
Erizzo, Nicolo Soranzo, and Thomas Gradenigo, were chosen to examine
where a new saloon might be built in order to assemble therein the
Greater Council.... On the 3rd of June, 1341, the Great Council elected
two procurators of the work of this saloon, with a salary of eighty
ducats a year."

It appears from the entry still preserved in the Archivio, and quoted by
Cadorin, that it was on the 28th of December, 1340, that the
commissioners appointed to decide on this important matter gave in their
report to the Grand Council, and that the decree passed thereupon for the
commencement of a new Council Chamber on the Grand Canal. [Footnote:
Sansovino is more explicit than usual in his reference to this decree:
"For it having appeared that the place (the first Council Chamber) is not
capacious enough, the saloon on the Grand Canal was ordered." "Per cio
parendo che il luogo non fosse capace, fu ordinata la Sala sul Canal
Grande."--P. 324.]

_The room then begun is the one now in existence_, and its building
involved the building of all that is best and most beautiful in the
present Ducal Palace, the rich arcades of the lower stories being all
prepared for sustaining this Sala del Gran Consiglio.

SECTION XIX. In saying that it is the same now in existence, I do not
mean that it has undergone no alterations; as we shall see hereafter, it
has been refitted again and again, and some portions of its walls
rebuilt; but in the place and form in which it first stood, it still
stands; and by a glance at the position which its windows occupy, as
shown in Figure II. above, the reader will see at once that whatever can
be known respecting the design of the Sea Façade, must be gleaned out of
the entries which refer to the building of this Great Council Chamber.

Cadorin quotes two of great importance, to which we shall return in due
time, made during the progress of the work in 1342 and 1344; then one of
1349, resolving that the works at the Ducal Palace, which had been
discontinued during the plague, should be resumed; and finally one in
1362, which speaks of the Great Council Chamber as having been neglected
and suffered to fall into "great desolation," and resolves that it shall
be forthwith completed. [Footnote: Cadorin, 185, 2. The decree of 1342
is falsely given as of 1345 by the Sivos Chronicle, and by Magno; while
Sanuto gives the decree to its right year, 1342, but speaks of the
Council Chamber as only begun in 1345.]

The interruption had not been caused by the plague only, but by the
conspiracy of Faliero, and the violent death of the master builder.
[Footnote: Calendario. See Appendix I., Vol. III.] The work was resumed
in 1362, and completed within the next three years, at least so far as
that Guariento was enabled to paint his Paradise on the walls;
[Footnote: "II primo che vi colorisse fu Guariento il quale l'anno 1365
vi fece il Paradiso in testa della sala."--_Sansovino_.] so that
the building must, at any rate, have been roofed by this time. Its
decorations and fittings, however, were long in completion; the
paintings on the roof being only executed in 1400. [Footnote: "L'an poi
1400 vi fece il ciclo compartita a quadretti d'oro, ripieni di stelle,
ch'era la insegna del Doge Steno."--_Sansovino_, lib. viii.] They
represented the heavens covered with stars, [Footnote: "In questi tempi
si messe in oro il ciclo della sala del Gran Consiglio et si fece il
pergole del finestra grande chi guarda sul canale, adornato l'uno e
l'altro di stelle, eh' erano la insegne del Doge."--_Sansovino_,
lib. xiii. Compare also Pareri, p. 129.] this being, says Sansovino, the
bearings of the Doge Steno. Almost all ceilings and vaults were at this
time in Venice covered with stars, without any reference to armorial
bearings; but Steno claims, under his noble title of Stellifer, an
important share in completing the chamber, in an inscription upon two
square tablets, now inlaid in the walls on each side of the great window
towards the sea:

  "MILLE QUADRINGENTI CURREBANT QUATUOR ANNI
  HOC OPUS ILLUSTRIS MICHAEL DUX STELLIFER AUXIT."

And in fact it is to this Doge that we owe the beautiful balcony of that
window, though the work above it is partly of more recent date; and I
think the tablets bearing this important inscription have been taken out
and reinserted in the newer masonry. The labor of these final
decorations occupied a total period of sixty years. The Grand Council
sat in the finished chamber for the first time in 1423. In that year the
Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice was completed. It had taken, to build it,
the energies of the entire period which I have above described as the
central one of her life.

SECTION XX. 3rd. The RENAISSANCE PALACE. I must go back a step or two,
in order to be certain that the reader understands clearly the state of
the palace in 1423. The works of addition or renovation had now been
proceeding, at intervals, during a space of a hundred and twenty-three
years. Three generations at least had been accustomed to witness the
gradual advancement of the form of the Ducal Palace into more stately
symmetry, and to contrast the Works of sculpture and painting with which
it was decorated,--full of the life, knowledge, and hope of the
fourteenth century,--with the rude Byzantine chiselling of the palace of
the Doge Ziani. The magnificent fabric just completed, of which the new
Council Chamber was the nucleus, was now habitually known in Venice as
the "Palazzo Nuovo;" and the old Byzantine edifice, now ruinous, and
more manifest in its decay by its contrast with the goodly stones of the
building which had been raised at its side, was of course known as the
"Palazzo Vecchio." [Footnote: Baseggio (Pareri, p. 127) is called the
Proto of the _New_ Palace. Farther notes will be found in Appendix I.,
Vol. III.] That fabric, however, still occupied the principal position in
Venice. The new Council Chamber had been erected by the side of it
towards the Sea; but there was not then the wide quay in front, the Riva
dei Schiavoni, which now renders the Sea Façade as important as that to
the Piazzetta. There was only a narrow walk between the pillars and the
water; and the _old_ palace of Ziani still faced the Piazzetta, and
interrupted, by its decrepitude, the magnificence of the square where the
nobles daily met. Every increase of the beauty of the new palace rendered
the discrepancy between it and the companion building more painful; and
then began to arise in the minds of all men a vague idea of the necessity
of destroying the old palace, and completing the front of the Piazzetta
with the same splendor as the Sea Façade. But no such sweeping measure of
renovation had been Contemplated by the Senate when they first formed the
plan of their new Council Chamber. First a single additional room, then a
gateway, then a larger room; but all considered merely as necessary
additions to the palace, not as involving the entire reconstruction of
the ancient edifice. The exhaustion of the treasury, and the shadows upon
the political horizon, rendered it more than imprudent to incur the vast
additional expense which such a project involved; and the Senate, fearful
of itself, and desirous to guard against the weakness of its own
enthusiasm, passed a decree, like the effort of a man fearful of some
strong temptation to keep his thoughts averted from the point of danger.
It was a decree, not merely that the old palace should not be rebuilt,
but that no one should _propose_ rebuilding it. The feeling of the
desirableness of doing so was, too strong to permit fair discussion, and
the Senate knew that to bring forward such a motion was to carry it.

SECTION XXI. The decree, thus passed in order to guard against their own
weakness, forbade any one to speak of rebuilding the old palace under
the penalty of a thousand ducats. But they had rated their own
enthusiasm too low: there was a man among them whom the loss of a
thousand ducats could not deter from proposing what he believed to be
for the good of the state.

Some excuse was given him for bringing forward the motion, by a fire
which occurred in 1419, and which injured both the church of St. Mark's,
and part of the old palace fronting the Piazzetta. What followed, I
shall relate in the words of Sanuto. [Footnote: Cronaca Sanudo, No.
cxxv. in the Marcian Library, p. 568.]

SECTION XXII. "Therefore they set themselves with all diligence and care
to repair and adorn sumptuously, first God's house; but in the Prince's
house things went on more slowly, _for it did not please the Doge_
[Footnote: Tomaso Mocenigo.] _to restore it in the form in which it
was before_; and they could not rebuild it altogether in a better
manner, so great was the parsimony of these old fathers; because it was
forbidden by laws, which condemned in a penalty of a thousand ducats any
one who should propose to throw down the _old_ palace, and to
rebuild it more richly and with greater expense. But the Doge, who was
magnanimous, and who desired above all things what was honorable to the
city, had the thousand ducats carried into the Senate Chamber, and then
proposed that the palace should be rebuilt; saying: that, 'since the
late fire had ruined in great part the Ducal habitation (not only his
own private palace, but all the places used for public business) this
occasion was to be taken for an admonishment sent from God, that they
ought to rebuild the palace more nobly, and in a way more befitting the
greatness to which, by God's grace, their dominions had reached; and
that his motive in proposing this was neither ambition, nor selfish
interest: that, as for ambition, they might have seen in the whole
course of his life, through so many years, that he had never done
anything for ambition, either in the city, or in foreign business; but
in all his actions had kept justice first in his thoughts, and then the
advantage of the state, and the honor of the Venetian name: and that, as
far as regarded his private interest, if it had not been for this
accident of the fire, he would never have thought of changing anything
in the palace into either a more sumptuous or a more honorable form; and
that during the many years in which he had lived in it, he had never
endeavored to make any change, but had always been content with it, as
his predecessors had left it; and that he knew well that, if they took
in hand to build it as he exhorted and besought them, being now very
old, and broken down with many toils, God would call him to another life
before the walls were raised a pace from the ground. And that therefore
they might perceive that he did not advise them to raise this building
for his own convenience, but only for the honor of the city and its
Dukedom; and that the good of it would never be felt by him, but by his
successors.' Then he said, that 'in order, as he had always done, to
observe the laws,... he had brought with him the thousand ducats which
had been appointed as the penalty for proposing such a measure, so that
he might prove openly to all men that it was not his own advantage that
he sought, but the dignity of the state.'" There was no one (Sanuto goes
on to tell us) who ventured, or desired, to oppose the wishes of the
Doge; and the thousand ducats were unanimously devoted to the expenses
of the work. "And they set themselves with much diligence to the work;
and the palace was begun in the form and manner in which it is at
present seen; but, as Mocenigo had prophesied, not long after, he ended
his life, and not only did not see the work brought to a close, but
hardly even begun."

SECTION XXIII. There are one or two expressions in the above extracts
which if they stood alone, might lead the reader to suppose that the
whole palace had been thrown down and rebuilt. We must however remember,
that, at this time, the new Council Chamber, which had been one hundred
years in building, was actually unfinished, the council had not yet sat
in it; and it was just as likely that the Doge should then propose to
destroy and rebuild it, as in this year, 1853, it is that any one should
propose in our House of Commons to throw down the new Houses of
Parliament, under the title of the "old palace," and rebuild _them_.

SECTION XXIV. The manner in which Sanuto expresses himself will at once
be seen to be perfectly natural, when it is remembered that although we
now speak of the whole building as the "Ducal Palace," it consisted, in
the minds of the old Venetians, of four distinct buildings. There were
in it the palace, the state prisons, the senate-house, and the offices
of public business; in other words, it was Buckingham Palace, the Tower
of olden days, the Houses of Parliament, and Downing Street, all in one;
and any of these four portions might be spoken of, without involving an
allusion to any other. "Il Palazzo" was the Ducal residence, which, with
most of the public offices, Mocenigo _did_ propose to pull down and
rebuild, and which was actually pulled down and rebuilt. But the new
Council Chamber, of which the whole façade to the Sea consisted, never
entered into either his or Sanuto's mind for an instant, as necessarily
connected with the Ducal residence.

I said that the new Council Chamber, at the time when Mocenigo brought
forward his measure, had never yet been used. It was in the year 1422
[Footnote: Vide notes in Appendix.] that the decree passed to rebuild
the palace: Mocenigo died in the following year, and Francesco Foscari
was elected in his room. [Footnote: On the 4th of April, 1423, according
to the copy of the Zancarol Chronicle in the Marcian Library, but
previously, according to the Caroldo Chronicle, which makes Foscari
enter the Senate as Doge on the 3rd of April.] The Great Council Chamber
was used for the first time on the day when Foscari entered the Senate
as Doge,--the 3rd of April, 1423, according to the Caroldo Chronicle;
[Footnote: "Nella quale (the Sala del Gran Consiglio) non si fece Gran
Consiglio salvo nell' anno 1423, alli 3, April, et fu il primo giorno
che il Duce Foscari venisse in Gran Consiglio dopo la sua
creatione."--Copy in Marcian Library, p. 365.] the 23rd, which is
probably correct, by an anonymous MS., No. 60, in the Correr Museum;
[Footnote: "E a di 23 April (1423, by the context) sequente fo fatto
Gran Conscio in la salla nuovo dovi avanti non esta piu fatto Gran
Conscio si che el primo Gran Conscio dopo la sua (Foscari's) creation fo
fatto in la sala nuova, nel qual conscio fu el Marchese di Mantoa," &c.,
p. 426.]--and, the following year, on the 27th of March, the first
hammer was lifted up against the old palace of Ziani. [Footnote: Compare
Appendix I. Vol. III.]

SECTION XXV. That hammer stroke was the first act of the period properly
called the "Renaissance" It was the knell of the architecture of
Venice,--and of Venice herself.

The central epoch of her life was past; the decay had already begun: I
dated its commencement above (Ch. I., Vol. I.) from the death of
Mocenigo. A year had not yet elapsed since that great Doge had been
called to his account: his patriotism, always sincere, had been in this
instance mistaken; in his zeal for the honor of future Venice, he had
forgotten what was due to the Venice of long ago. A thousand palaces
might be built upon her burdened islands, but none of them could take
the place, or recall the memory, of that which was first built upon her
unfrequented shore. It fell; and, as if it had been the talisman of her
fortunes, the city never flourished again.

SECTION XXVI. I have no intention of following out, in their intricate
details, the operations which were begun under Foscari and continued
under succeeding Doges till the palace assumed its present form, for I
am not in this work concerned, except by occasional reference, with the
architecture of the fifteenth century: but the main facts are the
following. The palace of Ziani was destroyed; the existing façade to the
Piazzetta built, so as both to continue and to resemble, in most
particulars, the work of the Great Council Chamber. It was carried back
from the Sea as far as the Judgment angle; beyond which is the Porta
della Carta, begun in 1439, and finished in two years, under the Doge
Foscari; [Footnote: "Tutte queste fatture si compirono sotto il dogade
del Foscari, nel 1441."--_Pareri_, p. 131.] the interior buildings
connected with it were added by the Doge Christopher Moro, (the Othello
of Shakspeare) [Footnote: This identification has been accomplished, and
I think conclusively, by my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, who has devoted all
the leisure which, during the last twenty years his manifold office of
kindness to almost every English visitant of Venice have left him, in
discovering and translating the passages of the Venetian records which
bear upon English history and literature. I shall have occasion to take
advantage hereafter of a portion of his labors, which I trust will
shortly be made public.] in 1462.

SECTION XXVII. By reference to the figure the reader will see that we
have now gone the round of the palace, and that the new work of 1462 was
close upon the first piece of the Gothic palace, the _new_ Council
Chamber of 1301. Some remnants of the Ziani Palace were perhaps still
left between the two extremities of the Gothic Palace; or as is more
probable, the last stones of it may have been swept away after the fire
of 1419, and replaced by new apartments for the Doge. But whatever
buildings, old or new, stood on this spot at the time of the completion
of the Porta della Carta were destroyed by another great fire in 1479,
together with so much of the palace on the Rio that, though the saloon
of Gradenigo, then known as the Sala de' Pregadi, was not destroyed, it
became necessary to reconstruct the entire façades of the portion of the
palace behind the Bridge of Sighs, both towards the court and canal.
This work was entrusted to the best Renaissance architects of the close
of the fifteenth and opening of the sixteenth centuries; Antonio Ricci
executing the Giant's staircase, and on his absconding with a large sum
of the public money, Pietro Lombardo taking his place. The whole work
must have been completed towards the middle of the sixteenth century.
The architects of the palace, advancing round the square and led by
fire, had more than reached the point from which they had set out; and
the work of 1560 was joined to the work of 1301-1340, at the point
marked by the conspicuous vertical line in Figure II on the Rio Façade.

SECTION XVIII. But the palace was not long permitted to remain in this
finished form. Another terrific fire, commonly called the great fire,
burst out in 1574, and destroyed the inner fittings and all the precious
pictures of the Great Council Chamber, and of all the upper rooms on the
Sea Façade, and most of those on the Rio Façade, leaving the building a
mere shell, shaken and blasted by the flames. It was debated in the
Great Council whether the ruin should not be thrown down, and an
entirely new palace built in its stead. The opinions of all the leading
architects of Venice were taken, respecting the safety of the walls, or
the possibility of repairing them as they stood. These opinions, given
in writing, have been preserved, and published by the Abbé Cadorin, in
the work already so often referred to; and they form one of the most
important series of documents connected with the Ducal Palace.

I cannot help feeling some childish pleasure in the accidental
resemblance to my own name in that of the architect whose opinion was
first given in favor of the ancient fabric, Giovanni Rusconi. Others,
especially Palladio, wanted to pull down the old palace, and execute
designs of their own; but the best architects in Venice, and to his
immortal honor, chiefly Francesco Sansovino, energetically pleaded for
the Gothic pile, and prevailed. It was successfully repaired, and
Tintoret painted his noblest picture on the wall from which the Paradise
of Guariento had withered before the flames.

SECTION XXIX. The repairs necessarily undertaken at this time were
however extensive, and interfered in many directions with the earlier
work of the palace: still the only serious alteration in its form was
the transposition of the prisons, formerly at the top of the palace to
the other side of the Rio del Palazzo; and the building of the Bridge of
Sighs, to connect them with the palace, by Antonio da Ponte. The
completion of this work brought the whole edifice into its present form;
with the exception of alterations indoors, partitions, and staircases
among the inner apartments, not worth noticing, and such barbarisms and
defacements as have been suffered within the last fifty years, by, I
suppose nearly every building of importance in Italy.

SECTION XXX. Now, therefore, we are at liberty to examine some of the
details of the Ducal Palace, without any doubt about their dates. I
shall not however, give any elaborate illustrations of them here,
because I could not do them justice on the scale of the page of this
volume, or by means of line engraving. I believe a new era is opening to
us in the art of illustration, [Footnote: See the last chapter of the
third volume, Stones of Venice.] and that I shall be able to give large
figures of the details of the Ducal Palace at a price which will enable
every person who is interested in the subject to possess them; so that
the cost and labor of multiplying illustrations here would be altogether
wasted. I shall therefore direct the reader's attention only to such
points of interest as can be explained in the text.

SECTION XXXI. First, then, looking back to the woodcut at the beginning
of this chapter, the reader will observe that, as the building was very
nearly square on the ground plan, a peculiar prominence and importance
were given to its angles, which rendered it necessary that they should
be enriched and softened by sculpture. I do not suppose that the fitness
of this arrangement will be questioned; but if the reader will take the
pains to glance over any series of engravings of church towers or other
four-square buildings in which great refinement of form has been
attained, he will at once observe how their effect depends on some
modification of the sharpness of the angle, either by groups of
buttresses, or by turrets and niches rich in sculpture. It is to be
noted also that this principle of breaking the angle is peculiarly
Gothic, arising partly out of the necessity of strengthening the flanks
of enormous buildings, where composed of imperfect materials, by
buttresses or pinnacles; partly out of the conditions of Gothic warfare,
which generally required a tower at the angle; partly out of the natural
dislike of the meagreness of effect in buildings which admitted large
surfaces of wall, if the angle were entirely unrelieved. The Ducal
Palace, in its acknowledgment of this principle, makes a more definite
concession to the Gothic spirit than any of the previous architecture of
Venice. No angle, up to the time of its erection, had been otherwise
decorated than by a narrow fluted pilaster of red marble, and the
sculpture was reserved always, as in Greek and Roman work, for the plane
surfaces of the building, with, as far as I recollect, two exceptions
only, both in St. Mark's; namely, the bold and grotesque gargoyle on its
north-west angle, and the angels which project from the four inner
angles under the main cupola; both of these arrangements being plainly
made under Lombardic influence. And if any other instances occur, which
I may have at present forgotten, I am very sure the Northern influence
will always be distinctly traceable in them.

SECTION XXXII. The Ducal Palace, however, accepts the principle in its
completeness, and throws the main decoration upon its angles. The
central window, which looks rich and important in the woodcut, was
entirely restored in the Renaissance time, as we have seen, under the
Doge Steno; so that we have no traces of its early treatment; and the
principal interest of the older palace is concentrated in the angle
sculpture, which is arranged in the following manner. The pillars of the
two bearing arcades are much enlarged in thickness at the angles, and
their capitals increased in depth, breadth, and fulness of subject;
above each capital, on the angle of the wall, a sculptural subject is
introduced, consisting, in the great lower arcade, of two or more
figures of the size of life; in the upper arcade, of a single angel
holding a scroll: above these angels rise the twisted pillars with their
crowning niches, already noticed in the account of parapets in the
seventh chapter; thus forming an unbroken line of decoration from the
ground to the top of the angle.

SECTION XXXIII. It was before noticed that one of the corners of the
palace joins the irregular outer buildings connected with St. Mark's,
and is not generally seen. There remain, therefore, to be decorated,
only the three angles, above distinguished as the Vine angle, the
Fig-tree angle, and the Judgment angle; and at these we have, according
to the arrangement just explained,--

First, Three great bearing capitals (lower arcade).

Secondly, Three figure subjects of sculpture above them (lower arcade).

Thirdly, Three smaller bearing capitals (upper arcade).

Fourthly, Three angels above them (upper arcade).

Fifthly, Three spiral, shafts with niches.

SECTION XXXIV. I shall describe the bearing capitals hereafter, in their
order, with the others of the arcade; for the first point to which the
reader's attention ought to be directed is the choice of subject in the
great figure sculptures above them. These, observe, are the very corner
stones of the edifice, and in them we may expect to find the most
important evidences of the feeling, as well as the skill, of the
builder. If he has anything to say to us of the purpose with which he
built the palace, it is sure to be said here; if there was any lesson
which he wished principally to teach to those for whom he built, here it
is sure to be inculcated; if there was any sentiment which they
themselves desired to have expressed in the principal edifice of their
city, this is the place in which we may be secure of finding it legibly
inscribed.

SECTION XXXV. Now the first two angles, of the Vine and Fig-tree, belong
to the old, or true Gothic, Palace; the third angle belongs to the
Renaissance imitation of it: therefore, at the first two angles, it is
the Gothic spirit which is going to speak to us; and, at the third, the
Renaissance spirit.

The reader remembers, I trust, that the most characteristic sentiment of
all that we traced in the working of the Gothic heart, was the frank
confession of its own weakness; and I must anticipate, for a moment, the
results of our inquiry in subsequent chapters, so far as to state that
the principal element in the Renaissance spirit, is its firm confidence
in its own wisdom.

Hear, then, the two spirits speak for themselves.

The first main sculpture of the Gothic Palace is on what I have called
the angle of the Fig-tree:

Its subject is the FALL OF MAN.

The second sculpture is on the angle of the Vine:

Its subject is the DRUNKENNESS OF NOAH.

The Renaissance sculpture is on the Judgment angle:

Its subject is the JUDGMENT OF SOLOMON.

It is impossible to overstate, or to regard with too much admiration,
the significance of this single fact. It is as if the palace had been
built at various epochs, and preserved uninjured to this day, for the
sole purpose of teaching us the difference in the temper of the two
schools.

SECTION XXXVI. I have called the sculpture on the Fig-tree angle the
principal one; because it is at the central bend of the palace, where it
turns to the Piazetta (the façade upon the Piazetta being, as we saw
above, the more important one in ancient times). The great capital,
which sustains this Fig-tree angle, is also by far more elaborate than
the head of the pilaster under the Vine angle, marking the preëminence
of the former in the architect's mind. It is impossible to say which was
first executed, but that of the Fig-tree angle is somewhat rougher in
execution, and more stiff in the design of the figures, so that I rather
suppose it to have been the earliest completed.

SECTION XXXVII. In both the subjects, of the Fall and the Drunkenness,
the tree, which forms the chiefly decorative portion of the
sculpture,--fig in the one case, vine in the other,--was a necessary
adjunct. Its trunk, in both sculptures, forms the true outer angle of
the palace; boldly cut separate from the stonework behind, and branching
out above the figures so as to enwrap each side of the angle, for
several feet, with its deep foliage. Nothing can be more masterly or
superb than the sweep of this foliage on the Fig-tree angle; the broad
leaves lapping round the budding fruit, and sheltering from sight,
beneath their shadows, birds of the most graceful form and delicate
plumage. The branches are, however, so strong, and the masses of stone
hewn into leafage so large, that, notwithstanding the depth of the
undercutting, the work remains nearly uninjured; not so at the Vine
angle, where the natural delicacy of the vine-leaf and tendril having
tempted the sculptor to greater effort, he has passed the proper limits
of his art, and cut the upper stems so delicately that half of them have
been broken away by the casualties to which the situation of the
sculpture necessarily exposes it. What remains is, however, so
interesting in its extreme refinement, that I have chosen it for the
subject of the first illustration [Footnote: See note at end of this
chapter.] rather than the nobler masses of the fig-tree, which ought to
be rendered on a larger scale. Although half of the beauty of the
composition is destroyed by the breaking away of its central masses,
there is still enough in the distribution of the variously bending
leaves, and in the placing of the birds on the lighter branches, to
prove to us the power of the designer. I have already referred to this
Plate as a remarkable instance of the Gothic Naturalism; and, indeed, it
is almost impossible for the copying of nature to be carried farther
than in the fibres of the marble branches, and the careful finishing of
the tendrils: note especially the peculiar expression of the knotty
joints of the vine in the light branch which rises highest. Yet only
half the finish of the work can be seen in the Plate: for, in several
cases, the sculptor has shown the under sides of the leaves turned
boldly to the light, and has literally _carved every rib and vein upon
them, in relief_; not merely the main ribs which sustain the lobes of
the leaf, and actually project in nature, but the irregular and sinuous
veins which chequer the membranous tissues between them, and which the
sculptor has represented conventionally as relieved like the others, in
order to give the vine leaf its peculiar tessellated effect upon the
eye.

SECTION XXXVIII. As must always be the case in early sculpture, the
figures are much inferior to the leafage; yet so skilful in many
respects, that it was a long time before I could persuade myself that
they had indeed been wrought in the first half of the fourteenth
century. Fortunately, the date is inscribed upon a monument in the
Church of San Simeon Grande, bearing a recumbent statue of the saint, of
far finer workmanship, in every respect, than those figures of the Ducal
Palace, yet so like them, that I think there can be no question that the
head of Noah was wrought by the sculptor of the palace in emulation of
that of the statue of St. Simeon. In this latter sculpture, the face is
represented in death; the mouth partly open, the lips thin and sharp,
the teeth carefully sculptured beneath; the face full of quietness and
majesty, though very ghastly; the hair and beard flowing in luxuriant
wreaths, disposed with the most masterly freedom, yet severity, of
design, far down upon the shoulders; the hands crossed upon the body,
carefully studied, and the veins and sinews perfectly and easily
expressed, yet without any attempt at extreme finish or display of
technical skill. This monument bears date 1317, [Footnote: "IN XRI--NOIE
AMEN ANNINCARNATIONIS MCCCXVII. INESETBR." "In the name of Christ, Amen,
in the year of the incarnation, 1317, in the month of September," &c.]
and its sculptor was justly proud of it; thus recording his name:

  "CELAVIT MARCUS OPUS HOC INSIGNE ROMANIS,
      LAUDIBUS NON PARCUS EST SUA DIGNA MANUS."

SECTION XXXIX. The head of the Noah on the Ducal Palace, evidently
worked in emulation of this statue, has the same profusion of flowing
hair and beard, but wrought in smaller and harder curls; and the veins
on the arms and breast are more sharply drawn, the sculptor being
evidently more practised in keen and fine lines of vegetation than in
those of the figure; so that, which is most remarkable in a workman of
this early period, he has failed in telling his story plainly, regret
and wonder being so equally marked on the features of all the three
brothers that it is impossible to say which is intended for Ham. Two of
the heads of the brothers are seen in the Plate; the third figure is not
with the rest of the group, but set at a distance of about twelve feet,
on the other side of the arch which springs from the angle capital.

SECTION XL. It may be observed, as a farther evidence of the date of the
group, that, in the figures of all the three youths, the feet are
protected simply by a bandage arranged in crossed folds round the ankle
and lower part of the limb; a feature of dress which will be found in
nearly every piece of figure sculpture in Venice, from the year 1300 to
1380, and of which the traveller may see an example within three hundred
yards of this very group, in the bas-reliefs on the tomb of the Doge
Andrea Dandolo (in St. Mark's), who died in 1354.

SECTION XLI. The figures of Adam and Eve, sculptured on each side of the
Fig-tree angle, are more stiff than those of Noah and his sons, but are
better fitted for their architectural service; and the trunk of the
tree, with the angular body of the serpent writhed around it, is more
nobly treated as a terminal group of lines than that of the vine.

The Renaissance sculptor of the figures of the Judgment of Solomon has
very nearly copied the fig-tree from this angle, placing its trunk
between the executioner and the mother, who leans forward to stay his
hand. But, though the whole group is much more free in design than those
of the earlier palace, and in many ways excellent in itself, so that it
always strikes the eye of a careless observer more than the others, it
is of immeasurably inferior spirit in the workmanship; the leaves of the
tree, though far more studiously varied in flow than those of the
fig-tree from which they are partially copied, have none of its truth to
nature; they are ill set on the steins, bluntly defined on the edges,
and their curves are not those of growing leaves, but of wrinkled
drapery.

SECTION XLII. Above these three sculptures are set, in the upper arcade,
the statues of the archangels Raphael, Michael, and Gabriel: their
positions will be understood by reference to the lowest figure in Plate
XVII., where that of Raphael above the Vine angle is seen on the right.
A diminutive figure of Tobit follows at his feet, and he bears in his
hand a scroll with this inscription:

  EFICE Q
  SOFRE
  TUR AFA
  EL REVE
  RENDE
  QUIETU

i.e. Effice (quseso?) fretum, Raphael reverende, quietum. [Footnote:
"Oh, venerable Raphael, make thou the gulf calm, we beseech thee." The
peculiar office of the angel Raphael is, in general, according to
tradition, the restraining the harmful influences of evil spirits. Sir
Charles Eastlake told me, that sometimes in this office he is
represented bearing the gall of the fish caught by Tobit; and reminded
me of the peculiar superstitions of the Venetians respecting the raising
of storms by fiends, as embodied in the well known tale of the Fisherman
and St. Mark's ring.] I could not decipher the inscription on the scroll
borne by the angel Michael; and the figure of Gabriel, which is by much
the most beautiful feature of the Renaissance portion of the palace, has
only in its hand the Annunciation lily.

SECTION XLIII. Such are the subjects of the main sculptures decorating
the angles of the palace; notable, observe, for their simple expression
of two feelings, the consciousness of human frailty, and the dependence
upon Divine guidance and protection: this being, of course, the general
purpose of the introduction of the figures of the angels; and, I
imagine, intended to be more particularly conveyed by the manner in
which the small figure of Tobit follows the steps of Raphael, just
touching the hem of his garment. We have next to examine the course of
divinity and of natural history embodied by the old sculpture in the
great series of capitals which support the lower arcade of the palace;
and which, being at a height of little more than eight feet above the
eye, might be read, like the pages of a book, by those (the noblest men
in Venice) who habitually walked beneath the shadow of this great arcade
at the time of their first meeting each other for morning converse.

SECTION XLIV. We will now take the pillars of the Ducal Palace in their
order. It has already been mentioned (Vol. I. Chap. I. Section XLVI.)
that there are, in all, thirty-six great pillars supporting the lower
story; and that these are to be counted from right to left, because then
the more ancient of them come first: and that, thus arranged, the first,
which is not a shaft, but a pilaster, will be the support of the Vine
angle; the eighteenth will be the great shaft of the Fig-tree angle; and
the thirty-sixth, that of the Judgment angle.

SECTION XLV. All their capitals, except that of the first, are
octagonal, and are decorated by sixteen leaves, differently enriched in
every capital, but arranged in the same way; eight of them rising to the
angles, and there forming volutes; the eight others set between them, on
the sides, rising half-way up the bell of the capital; there nodding
forward, and showing above them, rising out of their luxuriance, the
groups or single figures which we have to examine. [Footnote: I have
given one of these capitals carefully already in my folio work, and hope
to give most of the others in due time. It was of no use to draw them
here, as the scale would have been too small to allow me to show the
expression of the figures.] In some instances, the intermediate or lower
leaves are reduced to eight sprays of foliage; and the capital is left
dependent for its effect on the bold position of the figures. In
referring to the figures on the octagonal capitals, I shall call the
outer side, fronting either the Sea or the Piazzetta, the first side;
and so count round from left to right; the fourth side being thus, of
course, the innermost. As, however, the first five arches were walled up
after the great fire, only three sides of their capitals are left
visible, which we may describe as the front and the eastern and western
sides of each.

SECTION XLVI. FIRST CAPITAL: i.e. of the pilaster at the Vine angle.

In front, towards the Sea. A child holding a bird before him, with its
wings expanded, covering his breast.

On its eastern side. Children's heads among leaves.

On its western side. A child carrying in one hand a comb; in the other,
a pair of scissors.

It appears curious, that this, the principal pilaster of the façade,
should have been decorated only by these graceful grotesques, for I can
hardly suppose them anything more. There may be meaning in them, but I
will not venture to conjecture any, except the very plain and practical
meaning conveyed by the last figure to all Venetian children, which it
would be well if they would act upon. For the rest, I have seen the comb
introduced in grotesque work as early as the thirteenth century, but
generally for the purpose of ridiculing too great care in dressing the
hair, which assuredly is not its purpose here. The children's heads are
very sweet and full of life, but the eyes sharp and small.

SECTION XLVII. SECOND CAPITAL. Only three sides of the original work are
left unburied by the mass of added wall. Each side has a bird, one
web-footed, with a fish, one clawed, with a serpent, which opens its
jaws, and darts its tongue at the bird's breast; the third pluming
itself, with a feather between the mandibles of its bill. It is by far
the most beautiful of the three capitals decorated with birds.

THIRD CAPITAL. Also has three sides only left. They have three heads,
large, and very ill cut; one female, and crowned.

FOURTH CAPITAL. Has three children. The eastern one is defaced: the one
in front holds a small bird, whose plumage is beautifully indicated, in
its right hand; and with its left holds up half a walnut, showing the
nut inside: the third holds a fresh fig, cut through, showing the seeds.

The hair of all the three children is differently worked: the first has
luxuriant flowing hair, and a double chin; the second, light flowing
hair falling in pointed locks on the forehead; the third, crisp curling
hair, deep cut with drill holes.

This capital has been copied on the Renaissance side of the palace, only
with such changes in the ideal of the children as the workman thought
expedient and natural. It is highly interesting to compare the child of
the fourteenth with the child of the fifteenth century. The early heads
are full of youthful life, playful, humane, affectionate, beaming with
sensation and vivacity, but with much manliness and firmness, also, not
a little cunning, and some cruelty perhaps, beneath all; the features
small and hard, and the eyes keen. There is the making of rough and
great men in them. But the children of the fifteenth century are dull
smooth-faced dunces, without a single meaning line in the fatness of
their stolid cheeks; and, although, in the vulgar sense, as handsome as
the other children are ugly, capable of becoming nothing but perfumed
coxcombs.

FIFTH CAPITAL. Still three sides only left, bearing three half-length
statues of kings; this is the first capital which bears any inscription.
In front, a king with a sword in his right hand points to a handkerchief
embroidered and fringed, with a head on it, carved on the cavetto of the
abacus. His name is written above, "TITUS VESPASIAN IMPERATOR"
(contracted IPAT.).

On eastern side, "TRAJANUS IMPERATOR." Crowned, a sword in right hand,
and sceptre in left.

On western, "(OCT)AVIANUS AUGUSTUS IMPERATOR." The "OCT" is broken away.
He bears a globe in his right hand, with "MUNDUS PACIS" upon it; a
sceptre in his left, which I think has terminated in a human figure. He
has a flowing beard, and a singularly high crown; the face is much
injured, but has once been very noble in expression.

SIXTH CAPITAL. Has large male and female heads, very coarsely cut, hard,
and bad.

SECTION XLVIII. SEVENTH CAPITAL. This is the first of the series which
is complete; the first open arch of the lower arcade being between it
and the sixth. It begins the representation of the Virtues.

_First side_. Largitas, or Liberality: always distinguished from
the higher Charity. A male figure, with his lap full of money, which he
pours out of his hand. The coins are plain, circular, and smooth; there
is no attempt to mark device upon them. The inscription above is,
"LARGITAS ME ONORAT."

In the copy of this design on the twenty-fifth capital, instead of
showering out the gold from his open hand, the figure holds it in a
plate or salver, introduced for the sake of disguising the direct
imitation. The changes thus made in the Renaissance pillars are always
injuries.

This virtue is the proper opponent of Avarice; though it does not occur
in the systems of Orcagna or Giotto, being included in Charity. It was a
leading virtue with Aristotle and the other ancients.

SECTION XLIX. _Second side_. Constancy; not very characteristic. An
armed man with a sword in his hand, inscribed, "CONSTANTIA SUM, NIL
TIMENS."

This virtue is one of the forms of fortitude, and Giotto therefore sets
as the vice opponent to Fortitude, "Inconstantia," represented as a
woman in loose drapery, falling from a rolling globe. The vision seen in
the interpreter's house in the Pilgrim's Progress, of the man with a
very bold countenance, who says to him who has the writer's ink-horn by
his side, "Set down my name," is the best personification of the
Venetian "Constantia" of which I am aware in literature. It would be
well for us all to consider whether we have yet given the order to the
man with the ink-horn, "Set down my name."

SECTION L. _Third side_. Discord; holding up her finger, but
needing the inscription above to assure us of her meaning, "DISCORDIA
SUM, DISCORDIANS." In the Renaissance copy she is a meek and nun-like
person with a veil.

She is the Atë of Spencer; "mother of debate," thus described in the
fourth book:

  "Her face most fowle and filthy was to see,
   With squinted eyes contrarie wayes intended;
   And loathly mouth, unmeete a mouth to bee,
   That nought but gall and venim comprehended,
   And wicked wordes that God and man offended:
   Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,
   And both the parts did speake, and both contended;
   And as her tongue, so was her hart discided,
   That never thoght one thing, but doubly stil was guided."

Note the fine old meaning of "discided," cut in two; it is a great pity
we have lost this powerful expression. We might keep "determined" for
the other sense of the word.

SECTION LI. _Fourth side_. Patience. A female figure, very
expressive and lovely, in a hood, with her right hand on her breast, the
left extended, inscribed "PATIENTIA MANET MECUM."

She is one of the principal virtues in all the Christian systems: a
masculine virtue in Spenser, and beautifully placed as the _PHYSICIAN_ in
the House of Holinesse. The opponent vice, Impatience, is one of the hags
who attend the Captain of the Lusts of the Flesh; the other being
Impotence. In like manner, in the "Pilgrim's Progress," the opposite of
Patience is Passion; but Spenser's thought is farther carried. His two
hags, Impatience and Impotence, as attendant upon the evil spirit of
Passion, embrace all the phenomena of human conduct, down even to the
smallest matters, according to the adage, "More haste, worse speed."

SECTION LII. _Fifth side_. Despair. A female figure thrusting a
dagger into her throat, and tearing her long hair, which flows down
among the leaves of the capital below her knees. One of the finest
figures of the series; inscribed "DESPERACIO MÔS (mortis?) CRUDELIS." In
the Renaissance copy she is totally devoid of expression, and appears,
instead of tearing her hair, to be dividing it into long curls on each
side.

This vice is the proper opposite of Hope. By Giotto she is represented
as a woman hanging herself, a fiend coming for her soul. Spenser's
vision of Despair is well known, it being indeed currently reported that
this part of the Faerie Queen was the first which drew to it the
attention of Sir Philip Sidney.

SECTION LIII. _Sixth side_. Obedience: with her arms folded; meek,
but rude and commonplace, looking at a little dog standing on its hind
legs and begging, with a collar round its neck. Inscribed "OBEDIENTI *
*;" the rest of the sentence is much defaced, but looks like
"A'ONOEXIBEO."

I suppose the note of contraction above the final A has disappeared and
that the inscription was "Obedientiam domino exhibeo."

This virtue is, of course, a principal one in the monkish systems;
represented by Giotto at Assisi as "an angel robed in black, placing the
finger of his left hand on his mouth, and passing the yoke over the head
of a Franciscan monk kneeling at his feet." [Footnote: Lord Lindsay,
vol. ii. p. 226.]

Obedience holds a less principal place in Spenser. We have seen her
above associated with the other peculiar virtues of womanhood.

SECTION LIV. _Seventh side_. Infidelity. A man in a turban, with a
small image in his hand, or the image of a child. Of the inscription
nothing but "INFIDELITATE * * *" and some fragmentary letters, "ILI,
CERO," remain.

By Giotto Infidelity is most nobly symbolized as a woman helmeted, the
helmet having a broad rim which keeps the light from her eyes. She is
covered with heavy drapery, stands infirmly as if about to fall, _is
bound by a cord round her neck to an image_ which she carries in her
hand, and has flames bursting forth at her feet.

In Spenser, Infidelity is the Saracen knight Sans Foy,--

      "Full large of limbe and every joint
  He was, and cared not for God or man a point."

For the part which he sustains in the contest with Godly Fear, or the
Red-cross knight, see Appendix 2, Vol. III.

SECTION LV. _Eighth side_. Modesty; bearing a pitcher. (In the
Renaissance copy, a vase like a coffeepot.) Inscribed "MODESTIA
ROBUOBTINEO."

I do not find this virtue in any of the Italian series, except that of
Venice. In Spenser she is of course one of those attendant on Womanhood,
but occurs as one of the tenants of the Heart of Man, thus portrayed in
the second book:

  "Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew,
   Close rownd about her tuckt with many a plight:
   Upon her fist the bird which shonneth vew.

         *       *       *       *       *

   And ever and anone with rosy red
   The bashfull blood her snowy cheekes did dye,
   That her became, as polisht yvory
   Which cunning craftesman hand hath overlayd
   With fayre vermilion or pure castory."

SECTION LVI. EIGHTH CAPITAL. It has no inscriptions, and its subjects
are not, by themselves, intelligible; but they appear to be typical of
the degradation of human instincts.

_First side_. A caricature of Arion on his dolphin; he wears a cap
ending in a long proboscis-like horn, and plays a violin with a curious
twitch of the bow and wag of the head, very graphically expressed, but
still without anything approaching to the power of Northern grotesque.
His dolphin has a goodly row of teeth, and the waves beat over his back.

_Second side_. A human figure, with curly hair and the legs of a
bear; the paws laid, with great sculptural skill, upon the foliage. It
plays a violin, shaped like a guitar, with a bent double-stringed bow.

_Third side_. A figure with a serpent's tail and a monstrous head,
founded on a Negro type, hollow-cheeked, large-lipped, and wearing a cap
made of a serpent's skin, holding a fir-cone in its hand.

_Fourth side_. A monstrous figure, terminating below in a tortoise.
It is devouring a gourd, which it grasps greedily with both hands; it
wears a cap ending in a hoofed leg.

_Fifth side_. A centaur wearing a crested helmet, and holding a
curved sword.

_Sixth side_. A knight, riding a headless horse, and wearing a
chain armor, with a triangular shield flung behind his back, and a
two-edged sword.

_Seventh side_. A figure like that on the fifth, wearing a round
helmet, and with the legs and tail of a horse. He bears a long mace with
a top like a fir-cone.

_Eighth side_. A figure with curly hair, and an acorn in its hand,
ending below in a fish.

SECTION LVII. NINTH CAPITAL. _First side_. Faith. She has her left
hand on her breast, and the cross on her right. Inscribed "FIDES OPTIMA
IN DEO." The Faith of Giotto holds the cross in her right hand; in her
left, a scroll with the Apostles' Creed. She treads upon cabalistic
books, and has a key suspended to her waist. Spenser's Faith (Fidelia)
is still more spiritual and noble:

  "She was araied all in lilly white,
  And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
  With wine and water fild up to the hight,
  In which a serpent did himselfe enfold,
  That horrour made to all that did behold;
  But she no whitt did chaunge her constant mood:
  And in her other hand she fast did hold
  A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood;
  Wherein darke things were writt, hard to be understood."

SECTION LVIII. _Second side_. Fortitude. A long-bearded man [Samson?]
tearing open a lion's jaw. The inscription is illegible, and the somewhat
vulgar personification appears to belong rather to Courage than
Fortitude. On the Renaissance copy it is inscribed "FORTITUDO SUM
VIRILIS." The Latin word has, perhaps, been received by the sculptor as
merely signifying "Strength," the rest of the perfect idea of this virtue
having been given in "Constantia" previously. But both these Venetian
symbols together do not at all approach the idea of Fortitude as given
generally by Giotto and the Pisan sculptors; clothed with a lion's skin,
knotted about her neck, and falling to her feet in deep folds; drawing
back her right hand, with the sword pointed towards her enemy; and
slightly retired behind her immovable shield, which, with Giotto, is
square, and rested on the ground like a tower, covering her up to above
her shoulders; bearing on it a lion, and with broken heads of javelins
deeply infixed.

Among the Greeks, this is, of course, one of the principal virtues; apt,
however, in their ordinary conception of it to degenerate into mere
manliness or courage.

SECTION LIX. _Third side_. Temperance; bearing a pitcher of water
and a cup. Inscription, illegible here, and on the Renaissance copy
nearly so, "TEMPERANTIA SUM" (INOM' L'S)? Only left. In this somewhat
vulgar and most frequent conception of this virtue (afterwards
continually repeated, as by Sir Joshua in his window at New-College)
temperance is confused with mere abstinence, the opposite of Gula, or
gluttony; whereas the Greek Temperance, a truly cardinal virtue, is the
moderator of _all_ the passions, and so represented by Giotto, who
has placed a bridle upon her lips, and a sword in her hand, the hilt of
which she is binding to the scabbard. In his system, she is opposed
among the vices, not by Gula or Gluttony, but by Ira, Anger. So also the
Temperance of Spenser, or Sir Guyon, but with mingling of much
sternness:

  "A goodly knight, all armd in harnesse meete,
   That from his head no place appeared to his feete,
   His carriage was full comely and upright;
   His countenance demure and temperate;
   But yett so sterne and terrible in sight,
   That cheard his friendes, and did his foes amate."

The Temperance of the Greeks, [Greek: sophrosunae] involves the idea
of Prudence, and is a most noble virtue, yet properly marked by Plato as
inferior to sacred enthusiasm, though necessary for its government. He
opposes it, under the name "Mortal Temperance" or "the Temperance which
is of men," to divine madness, [Greek: mania,] or inspiration; but he
most justly and nobly expresses the general idea of it under the term
[Greek: ubris], which, in the "Phaedrus," is divided into various
intemperances with respect to various objects, and set forth under the
image of a black, vicious, diseased and furious horse, yoked by the side
of Prudence or Wisdom (set forth under the figure of a white horse with a
crested and noble head, like that which we have among the Elgin Marbles)
to the chariot of the Soul. The system of Aristotle, as above stated, is
throughout a mere complicated blunder, supported by sophistry, the
laboriously developed mistake of Temperance for the essence of the
virtues which it guides. Temperance in the mediaeval systems is generally
opposed by Anger, or by Folly, or Gluttony: but her proper opposite is
Spenser's Acrasia, the principal enemy of Sir Guyon, at whose gates we
find the subordinate vice "Excesse," as the introduction to Intemperance;
a graceful and feminine image, necessary to illustrate the more dangerous
forms of subtle intemperance, as opposed to the brutal "Gluttony" in the
first book. She presses grapes into a cup, because of the words of St.
Paul, "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess;" but always delicately,

  "Into her cup she scruzd with daintie breach
   Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach,
   That so faire winepresse made the wine more sweet."

The reader will, I trust, pardon these frequent extracts from Spenser,
for it is nearly as necessary to point out the profound divinity and
philosophy of our great English poet, as the beauty of the Ducal Palace.

SECTION LX. _Fourth side_. Humility; with a veil upon her head,
carrying a lamp in her lap. Inscribed in the copy, "HUMILITAS HABITAT IN
ME."

This virtue is of course a peculiarly Christian one, hardly recognized
in the Pagan systems, though carefully impressed upon the Greeks in
early life in a manner which at this day it would be well if we were to
imitate, and, together with an almost feminine modesty, giving an
exquisite grace to the conduct and bearing of the well-educated Greek
youth. It is, of course, one of the leading virtues in all the monkish
systems, but I have not any notes of the manner of its representation.

SECTION LXI. _Fifth side_. Charity. A woman with her lap full of
loaves (?), giving one to a child, who stretches his arm out for it
across a broad gap in the leafage of the capital.

Again very far inferior to the Giottesque rendering of this virtue. In
the Arena Chapel she is distinguished from all the other virtues by
having a circular glory round her head, and a cross of fire; she is
crowned with flowers, presents with her right hand a vase of corn and
fruit, and with her left receives treasure from Christ, who appears
above her, to provide her with the means of continual offices of
beneficence, while she tramples under foot the treasures of the earth.

The peculiar beauty of most of the Italian conceptions of Charity, is in
the subjection of mere munificence to the glowing of her love, always
represented by flames; here in the form of a cross round her head; in
Orcagna's shrine at Florence, issuing from a censer in her hand; and,
with Dante, inflaming her whole form, so that, in a furnace of clear
fire, she could not have been discerned.

Spenser represents her as a mother surrounded by happy children, an idea
afterwards grievously hackneyed and vulgarized by English painters and
sculptors.

SECTION LXII. _Sixth side_. Justice. Crowned, and with sword.
Inscribed in the copy, "REX SUM JUSTICIE."

This idea was afterwards much amplified and adorned in the only good
capital of the Renaissance series, under the Judgment angle. Giotto has
also given his whole strength to the painting of this virtue,
representing her as enthroned under a noble Gothic canopy, holding
scales, not by the beam, but one in each hand; a beautiful idea, showing
that the equality of the scales of Justice is not owing to natural laws,
but to her own immediate weighing the opposed causes in her own hands.
In one scale is an executioner beheading a criminal; in the other an
angel crowning a man who seems (in Selvatico's plate) to have been
working at a desk or table.

Beneath her feet is a small predella, representing various persons
riding securely in the woods, and others dancing to the sound of music.

Spenser's Justice, Sir Artegall, is the hero of an entire book, and the
betrothed knight of Britomart, or chastity.

SECTION LXIII. _Seventh side_. Prudence. A man with a book and a
pair of compasses, wearing the noble cap, hanging down towards the
shoulder, and bound in a fillet round the brow, which occurs so
frequently during the fourteenth century in Italy in the portraits of
men occupied in any civil capacity.

This virtue is, as we have seen, conceived under very different degrees
of dignity, from mere worldly prudence up to heavenly wisdom, being
opposed sometimes by Stultitia, sometimes by Ignorantia. I do not find,
in any of the representations of her, that her truly distinctive
character, namely, _forethought_, is enough insisted upon: Giotto
expresses her vigilance and just measurement or estimate of all things
by painting her as Janus-headed, and gazing into a convex mirror, with
compasses in her right hand; the convex mirror showing her power of
looking at many things in small compass. But forethought or
anticipation, by which, independently of greater or less natural
capacities, one man becomes more _prudent_ than another, is never
enough considered or symbolized.

The idea of this virtue oscillates, in the Greek systems, between
Temperance and Heavenly Wisdom.

SECTION LXIV. _Eighth side_. Hope. A figure full of devotional
expression, holding up its hands as in prayer, and looking to a hand
which is extended towards it out of sunbeams. In the Renaissance copy
this hand does not appear.

Of all the virtues, this is the most distinctively Christian (it could
not, of course, enter definitely into any Pagan scheme); and above all
others, it seems to me the _testing_ virtue,--that by the possession of
which we may most certainly determine whether we are Christians or not;
for many men have charity, that is to say, general kindness of heart, or
even a kind of faith, who have not any habitual _hope_ of, or longing
for, heaven. The Hope of Giotto is represented as winged, rising in the
air, while an angel holds a crown before her. I do not know if Spenser
was the first to introduce our marine virtue, leaning on an anchor, a
symbol as inaccurate as it is vulgar: for, in the first place, anchors
are not for men, but for ships; and in the second, anchorage is the
characteristic not of Hope, but of Faith. Faith is dependent, but Hope is
aspirant. Spenser, however, introduces Hope twice,--the first time as the
Virtue with the anchor; but afterwards fallacious Hope, far more
beautifully, in the Masque of Cupid:

  "She always smyld, and in her hand did hold
   An holy-water sprinckle, dipt in deowe."

SECTION LXV. TENTH CAPITAL. _First side_. Luxury (the opposite of
chastity, as above explained). A woman with a jewelled chain across her
forehead, smiling as she looks into a mirror, exposing her breast by
drawing down her dress with one hand. Inscribed "LUXURIA SUM IMENSA."

These subordinate forms of vice are not met with so frequently in art as
those of the opposite virtues, but in Spenser we find them all. His
Luxury rides upon a goat:

  "In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,
   Which underneath did hide his filthinesse,
   And in his hand a burning heart he bare."

But, in fact, the proper and comprehensive expression of this vice is
the Cupid of the ancients; and there is not any minor circumstance more
indicative of the _intense_ difference between the mediaeval and
the Renaissance spirit, than the mode in which this god is represented.

I have above said, that all great European art is rooted in the
thirteenth century; and it seems to me that there is a kind of central
year about which we may consider the energy of the middle ages to be
gathered; a kind of focus of time which, by what is to my mind a most
touching and impressive Divine appointment, has been marked for us by
the greatest writer of the middle ages, in the first words he utters;
namely, the year 1300, the "mezzo del cammin" of the life of Dante. Now,
therefore, to Giotto, the contemporary of Dante, and who drew Dante's
still existing portrait in this very year, 1300, we may always look for
the central mediaeval idea in any subject: and observe how he represents
Cupid; as one of three, a terrible trinity, his companions being Satan
and Death; and he himself "a lean scarecrow, with bow, quiver, and
fillet, and feet ending in claws," [Footnote: Lord Lindsay, vol. ii.
letter iv.] thrust down into Hell by Penance, from the presence of
Purity and Fortitude. Spenser, who has been so often noticed as
furnishing the exactly intermediate type of conception between the
mediaeval and the Renaissance, indeed represents Cupid under the form of
a beautiful winged god, and riding on a lion, but still no plaything of
the Graces, but full of terror:

  "With that the darts which his right hand did straine
   Full dreadfully he shooke, that all did quake,
   And clapt on hye his coloured winges twaine,
   That all his many it afraide did make."

His many, that is to say, his company; and observe what a company it is.
Before him go Fancy, Desire, Doubt, Danger, Fear, Fallacious Hope,
Dissemblance, Suspicion, Grief, Fury, Displeasure, Despite, and Cruelty.
After him, Reproach, Repentance, Shame,

  "Unquiet Care, and fond Unthriftyhead,
   Lewd Losse of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead,
   Inconstant Chaunge, and false Disloyalty,
   Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread
   Of heavenly vengeaunce; faint Infirmity,
   Vile Poverty, and lastly Death with infamy."

Compare these two pictures of Cupid with the Love-god of the
Renaissance, as he is represented to this day, confused with angels, in
every faded form of ornament and allegory, in our furniture, our
literature, and our minds.

SECTION LXVI. _Second side_. Gluttony. A woman in a turban, with a
jewelled cup in her right hand. In her left, the clawed limb of a bird,
which she is gnawing. Inscribed "GULA SINE ORDINE SUM."

Spenser's Gluttony is more than usually fine:

  "His belly was upblownt with luxury,
   And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne,
   And like a crane his necke was long and fyne,
   Wherewith he swallowed up excessive feast,
   For want whereof poore people oft did pyne."

He rides upon a swine, and is clad in vine-leaves, with a garland of
ivy. Compare the account of Excesse, above, as opposed to Temperance.

SECTION LXVII. _Third side_. Pride. A knight, with a heavy and
stupid face, holding a sword with three edges: his armor covered with
ornaments in the form of roses, and with two ears attached to his
helmet. The inscription indecipherable, all but "SUPERBIA."

Spenser has analyzed this vice with great care. He first represents it
as the Pride of life; that is to say, the pride which runs in a deep
under-current through all the thoughts and acts of men. As such, it is a
feminine vice, directly opposed to Holiness, and mistress of a castle
called the House of Pryde, and her chariot is driven by Satan, with a
team of beasts, ridden by the mortal sins. In the throne chamber of her
palace she is thus described:

  "So proud she shyned in her princely state,
   Looking to Heaven, for Earth she did disdayne;
   And sitting high, for lowly she did hate:
   Lo, underneath her scornefull feete was layne
   A dreadfull dragon with an hideous trayne;
   And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,
   Wherein her face she often vewed fayne."

The giant Orgoglio is a baser species of pride, born of the Earth and
Eolus; that is to say, of sensual and vain conceits. His foster-father
and the keeper of his castle is Ignorance. (Book I. canto viii.)

Finally, Disdain is introduced, in other places, as the form of pride
which vents itself in insult to others.

SECTION LXVIII. _Fourth side_. Anger. A woman tearing her dress open at
her breast. Inscription here undecipherable; but in the Renaissance Copy
it IS "IRA CRUDELIS EST IN ME."

Giotto represents this vice under the same symbol; but it is the weakest
of all the figures in the Arena Chapel. The "Wrath" of Spenser rides
upon a lion, brandishing a firebrand, his garments stained with blood.
Rage, or Furor, occurs subordinately in other places. It appears to me
very strange that neither Giotto nor Spenser should have given any
representation of the _restrained_ Anger, which is infinitely the
most terrible; both of them make him violent.

SECTION LXIX. _Fifth side_. Avarice. An old woman with a veil over
her forehead, and a bag of money in each hand. A figure very marvellous
for power of expression. The throat is all made up of sinews with skinny
channels deep between them, strained as by anxiety, and wasted by
famine; the features hunger-bitten, the eyes hollow, the look glaring
and intense, yet without the slightest caricature. Inscribed in the
Renaissance copy, "AVARITIA IMPLETOR."

Spenser's Avarice (the vice) is much feebler than this; but the god
Mammon and his kingdom have been described by him with his usual power.
Note the position of the house of Richesse:

  "Betwixt them both was but a little stride,
  That did the House of Richesse from Hell-mouth divide."

It is curious that most moralists confuse avarice with covetousness,
although they are vices totally different in their operation on the
human heart, and on the frame of society. The love of money, the sin of
Judas and Ananias, is indeed the root of all evil in the hardening of
the heart; but "covetousness, which is idolatry," the sin of Ahab, that
is, the inordinate desire of some seen or recognized good,--thus
destroying peace of mind,--is probably productive of much more misery in
heart, and error in conduct, than avarice itself, only covetousness is
not so inconsistent with Christianity: for covetousness may partly
proceed from vividness of the affections and hopes, as in David, and be
consistent with much charity; not so avarice.

SECTION LXX. _Sixth side_. Idleness. Accidia. A figure much broken
away, having had its arms round two branches of trees.

I do not know why Idleness should be represented as among trees, unless,
in the Italy of the fourteenth century, forest country was considered as
desert, and therefore the domain of Idleness. Spenser fastens this vice
especially upon the clergy,--

  "Upon a slouthfull asse he chose to ryde,
  Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin,
  Like to an holy monck, the service to begin.
  And in his hand his portesse still he bare,
  That much was worne, but therein little redd."

And he properly makes him the leader of the train of the vices:

  "May seem the wayne was very evil ledd,
  When such an one had guiding of the way."

Observe that subtle touch of truth in the "wearing" of the portesse,
indicating the abuse of books by idle readers, so thoroughly
characteristic of unwilling studentship from the schoolboy upwards.

SECTION LXXI. _Seventh side_. Vanity. She is smiling complacently
as she looks into a mirror in her lap. Her robe is embroidered with
roses, and roses form her crown. Undecipherable.

There is some confusion in the expression of this vice, between pride in
the personal appearance and lightness of purpose. The word Vanitas
generally, I think, bears, in the mediaeval period, the sense given it
in Scripture. "Let not him that is deceived trust in Vanity, for Vanity
shall be his recompense." "Vanity of Vanities." "The Lord knoweth the
thoughts of the wise, that they are vain." It is difficult to find this
sin,--which, after Pride, is the most universal, perhaps the most fatal,
of all, fretting the whole depth of our humanity into storm "to waft a
feather or to drown a fly,"--definitely expressed in art. Even Spenser,
I think, has only partially expressed it under the figure of Phaedria,
more properly Idle Mirth, in the second book. The idea is, however,
entirely worked out in the Vanity Fair of the "Pilgrim's Progress."

SECTION LXXII. _Eighth side_. Envy. One of the noblest pieces of
expression in the series. She is pointing malignantly with her finger; a
serpent is wreathed about her head like a cap, another forms the girdle
of her waist, and a dragon rests in her lap.

Giotto has, however, represented her, with still greater subtlety, as
having her fingers terminating in claws, and raising her right hand with
an expression partly of impotent regret, partly of involuntary grasping;
a serpent, issuing from her mouth, is about to bite her between the
eyes; she has long membranous ears, horns on her head, and flames
consuming her body. The Envy of Spenser is only inferior to that of
Giotto, because the idea of folly and quickness of hearing is not
suggested by the size of the ear: in other respects it is even finer,
joining the idea of fury, in the wolf on which he rides, with that of
corruption on his lips, and of discoloration or distortion in the whole
mind:

                      "Malicious Envy rode
  Upon a ravenous wolfe, and still did chaw
  Between his cankred teeth avenemous tode
  That all the poison ran about his jaw.
  _And in a kirtle of discolourd say
  He clothed was, ypaynted full of eies_,
  And in his bosome secretly there lay
  An hatefull snake, the which his taile uptyes
  In many folds, and mortali sting implyes."

He has developed the idea in more detail, and still more loathsomely, in
the twelfth canto of the fifth book.

SECTION LXXIII. ELEVENTH CAPITAL. Its decoration is composed of eight
birds, arranged as shown in Plate V. of the "Seven Lamps," which,
however, was sketched from the Renaissance copy. These birds are all
varied in form and action, but not so as to require special description.

SECTION LXXIV. TWELFTH CAPITAL. This has been very interesting, but is
grievously defaced, four of its figures being entirely broken away, and
the character of two others quite undecipherable. It is fortunate that
it has been copied in the thirty-third capital of the Renaissance
series, from which we are able to identify the lost figures.

_First side_. Misery. A man with a wan face, seemingly pleading with a
child who has its hands crossed on its breast. There is a buckle at his
own breast in the shape of a cloven heart. Inscribed "MISERIA."

The intention of this figure is not altogether apparent, as it is by no
means treated as a vice; the distress seeming real, and like that of a
parent in poverty mourning over his child. Yet it seems placed here as
in direct opposition to the virtue of Cheerfulness, which follows next
in order; rather, however, I believe, with the intention of illustrating
human life, than the character of the vice which, as we have seen, Dante
placed in the circle of hell. The word in that case would, I think, have
been "Tristitia," the "unholy Griefe" of Spenser--

         "All in sable sorrowfully clad,
  Downe hanging his dull head with heavy chere:

       *       *       *       *       *

  A pair of pincers in his hand he had,
  With which he pinched people to the heart."

He has farther amplified the idea under another figure in the fifth
canto of the fourth book:

  "His name was Care; a blacksmith by his trade,
   That neither day nor night from working spared;
   But to small purpose yron wedges made:
   Those be unquiet thoughts that carefull minds invade.

   Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,
   Ne better had he, ne for better cared;
   With blistered hands among the cinders brent."

It is to be noticed, however, that in the Renaissance copy this figure
is stated to be, not Miseria, but "Misericordia." The contraction is a
very moderate one, Misericordia being in old MS. written always as
"Mia." If this reading be right, the figure is placed here rather as the
companion, than the opposite, of Cheerfulness; unless, indeed, it is
intended to unite the idea of Mercy and Compassion with that of Sacred
Sorrow.

SECTION LXXV. _Second side_. Cheerfulness. A woman with long flowing
hair, crowned with roses, playing on a tambourine, and with open lips, as
singing. Inscribed "ALACRITAS."

We have already met with this virtue among those especially set by
Spenser to attend on Womanhood. It is inscribed in the Renaissance Copy,
"ALACHRITAS CHANIT MECUM." Note the gutturals of the rich and fully
developed Venetian dialect now affecting the Latin, which is free from
them in the earlier capitals.

SECTION LXXVI. _Third side_. Destroyed; but, from the copy, we find
it has been Stultitia, Folly; and it is there represented simply as a
man _riding_, a sculpture worth the consideration of the English
residents who bring their horses to Venice. Giotto gives Stultitia a
feather, cap, and club. In early manuscripts he is always eating with
one hand, and striking with the other; in later ones he has a cap and
bells, or cap crested with a cock's head, whence the word "coxcomb."

SECTION LXXVII. _Fourth side_. Destroyed, all but a book, which
identifies it with the "Celestial Chastity" of the Renaissance copy;
there represented as a woman pointing to a book (connecting the convent
life with the pursuit of literature?).

Spenser's Chastity, Britomart, is the most exquisitely wrought of all
his characters; but, as before noticed, she is not the Chastity of the
convent, but of wedded life.

SECTION LXXVIII. _Fifth side_. Only a scroll is left; but, from the
copy, we find it has been Honesty or Truth. Inscribed "HONESTATEM
DILIGO." It is very curious, that among all the Christian systems of the
virtues which we have examined, we should find this one in Venice only.

The Truth of Spenser, Una, is, after Chastity, the most exquisite
character in the "Faerie Queen."

SECTION LXXIX. _Sixth side_. Falsehood. An old woman leaning on a
crutch; and inscribed in the copy, "FALSITAS IN ME SEMPER EST." The
Fidessa of Spenser, the great enemy of Una, or Truth, is far more subtly
conceived, probably not without special reference to the Papal deceits.
In her true form she is a loathsome hag, but in her outward aspect,

  "A goodly lady, clad in scarlet red,
   Purfled with gold and pearle;...
   Her wanton palfrey all was overspred.
   With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave,
   Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave."

Dante's Fraud, Geryon, is the finest personification of all, but the
description (Inferno, canto XVII.) is too long to be quoted.

SECTION LXXX. _Seventh side_. Injustice. An armed figure holding a
halbert; so also in the copy. The figure used by Giotto with the
particular intention of representing unjust government, is represented
at the gate of an embattled castle in a forest, between rocks, while
various deeds of violence are committed at his feet. Spenser's "Adicia"
is a furious hag, at last transformed into a tiger.

_Eighth side_. A man with a dagger looking sorrowfully at a child,
who turns its back to him. I cannot understand this figure. It is
inscribed in the copy, "ASTINECIA (Abstinentia?) OPITIMA?"

SECTION LXXXI. THIRTEENTH CAPITAL. It has lions' heads all round,
coarsely cut.

FOURTEENTH CAPITAL. It has various animals, each sitting on its
haunches. Three dogs, One a greyhound, one long-haired, one short-haired
with bells about its neck; two monkeys, one with fan-shaped hair
projecting on each side of its face; a noble boar, with its tusks,
hoofs, and bristles sharply cut; and a lion and lioness.

SECTION LXXXII. FIFTEENTH CAPITAL. The pillar to which it belongs is
thicker than the rest, as well as the one over it in the upper arcade.

The sculpture of this capital is also much coarser, and seems to me
later than that of the rest; and it has no inscription, which is
embarrassing, as its subjects have had much meaning; but I believe
Selvatico is right in supposing it to have been intended for a general
illustration of Idleness.

_First side_. A woman with a distaff; her girdle richly decorated,
and fastened by a buckle.

_Second side_. A youth in a long mantle, with a rose in his hand.

_Third side_. A woman in a turban stroking a puppy, which she holds
by the haunches.

_Fourth side_. A man with a parrot.

_Fifth side_. A woman in very rich costume, with braided hair, and
dress thrown into minute folds, holding a rosary (?) in her left hand,
her right on her breast.

_Sixth side_. A man with a very thoughtful face, laying his hand
upon the leaves of the capital.

_Seventh side_. A crowned lady, with a rose in her hand.

_Eighth side_. A boy with a ball in his left hand, and his right
laid on his breast.

SECTION LXXXIII. SIXTEENTH CAPITAL. It is decorated with eight large
heads, partly intended to be grotesque, [Footnote: Selvatico states that
these are intended to be representative of eight nations, Latins,
Tartars, Turks, Hungarians, Greeks, Goths, Egyptians, and Persians.
Either the inscriptions are now defaced or I have carelessly omitted to
note them.] and very coarse and bad, except only that in the sixth
side, which is totally different from all the rest, and looks like a
portrait. It is thin, thoughtful, and dignified; thoroughly fine in
every way. It wears a cap surmounted by two winged lions; and,
therefore, I think Selvatico must have inaccurately written the list
given in the note, for this head is certainly meant to express the
superiority of the Venetian character over that of other nations.
Nothing is more remarkable in all early sculpture, than its appreciation
of the signs of dignity of character in the features, and the way in
which it can exalt the principal figure in any subject by a few touches.

SECTION LXXXIV. SEVENTEENTH CAPITAL. This has been so destroyed by the
sea wind, which sweeps at this point of the arcade round the angle of
the palace, that its inscriptions are no longer legible, and great part
of its figures are gone. Selvatico states them as follows: Solomon, the
wise; Priscian, the grammarian; Aristotle, the logician; Tully, the
orator; Pythagoras, the philosopher; Archimedes, the mechanic; Orpheus,
the musician; Ptolemy, the astronomer. The fragments actually remaining
are the following:

_First side_. A figure with two books, in a robe richly decorated
with circles of roses. Inscribed "SALOMON (SAP) IENS."

_Second side_. A man with one book, poring over it: he has had a
long stick or reed in his hand. Of inscription only the letters
"GRAMMATIC" remain.

_Third side_. "ARISTOTLE:" so inscribed. He has a peaked double
beard and a flat cap, from under which his long hair falls down his
back.

_Fourth side_. Destroyed.

_Fifth side_. Destroyed, all but a board with, three (counters?) on
it.

_Sixth side_. A figure with compasses. Inscribed "GEOMET * *"

_Seventh side_. Nothing is left but a guitar with its handle
wrought into a lion's head.

_Eighth side_. Destroyed.

SECTION LXXXV. We have now arrived at the EIGHTEENTH CAPITAL, the most
interesting and beautiful of the palace. It represents the planets, and
the sun and moon, in those divisions of the zodiac known to astrologers
as their "houses;" and perhaps indicates, by the position in which they
are placed, the period of the year at which this great corner-stone was
laid. The inscriptions above have been in quaint Latin rhyme, but are
now decipherable only in fragments, and that with the more difficulty
because the rusty iron bar that binds the abacus has broken away, in its
expansion, nearly all the upper portions of the stone, and with them the
signs of contraction, which are of great importance. I shall give the
fragments of them that I could decipher; first as the letters actually
stand (putting those of which I am doubtful in brackets, with a note of
interrogation), and then as I would read them.

SECTION LXXXVI. It should be premised that, in modern astrology, the
houses of the planets are thus arranged:

The house of the Sun,      is Leo.
      "          Moon,     "  Cancer.
      "          Mars,     "  Aries and Scorpio.
      "          Venus,    "  Taurus and Libra.
      "          Mercury,  "  Gemini and Virgo.
      "          Jupiter,  "  Sagittarius and Pisces.
      "          Saturn,   "  Capricorn.
      "          Herschel, "  Aquarius.

The Herschel planet being of course unknown to the old astrologers, we
have only the other six planetary powers, together with the sun; and
Aquarius is assigned to Saturn as his house. I could not find Capricorn
at all; but this sign may have been broken away, as the whole capital is
grievously defaced. The eighth side of the capital, which the Herschel
planet would now have occupied, bears a sculpture of the Creation of
Man: it is the most conspicuous side, the one set diagonally across the
angle; or the eighth in our usual mode of reading the capitals, from
which I shall not depart.

SECTION LXXXVII. _The first side_, then, or that towards the Sea,
has Aquarius, as the house of Saturn, represented as a seated figure
beautifully draped, pouring a stream of water out of an amphora over the
leaves of the capital. His inscription is:

"ET SATURNE DOMUS (ECLOCERUNT?) I'S 7BRE."

SECTION LXXXVIII. _Second side_. Jupiter, in his houses Sagittarius
and Pisces, represented throned, with an upper dress disposed in
radiating folds about his neck, and hanging down upon his breast,
ornamented by small pendent trefoiled studs or bosses. He wears the
drooping bonnet and long gloves; but the folds about the neck, shot
forth to express the rays of the star, are the most remarkable
characteristic of the figure. He raises his sceptre in his left hand
over Sagittarius, represented as the centaur Chiron; and holds two
thunnies in his right. Something rough, like a third fish, has been
broken away below them; the more easily because this part of the group
is entirely undercut, and the two fish glitter in the light, relieved on
the deep gloom below the leaves. The inscription is:

"INDE JOVI' DONA PISES SIMUL ATQ' CIRONA."
[Footnote: The comma in these inscriptions stands for a small cuneiform
mark, I believe of contraction, and the small for a zigzag mark of the
same kind. The dots or periods are similarly marked on the stone.]

Or,
  "Inde Jovis dona
   Pisces simul atque Chirona."

Domus is, I suppose, to be understood before Jovis: "Then the house of
Jupiter gives (or governs?) the fishes and Chiron."

SECTION LXXXIX. _Third side_. Mars, in his houses Aries and Scorpio.
Represented as a very ugly knight in chain mail, seated sideways on the
ram, whose horns are broken away, and having a large scorpion in his left
hand, whose tail is broken also, to the infinite injury of the group, for
it seems to have curled across to the angle leaf, and formed a bright
line of light, like the fish in the hand of Jupiter. The knight carries a
shield, on which fire and water are sculptured, and bears a banner upon
his lance, with the word "DEFEROSUM," which puzzled me for some time. It
should be read, I believe, "De ferro sum;" which would be good _Venetian_
Latin for "I am of iron."

SECTION XC. _Fourth side_. The Sun, in his house Leo. Represented
under the figure of Apollo, sitting on the Lion, with rays shooting from
his head, and the world in his hand. The inscription:

"TU ES DOMU' SOLIS (QUO?) SIGNE LEONI."

I believe the first phrase is, "Tune est Domus solis;" but there is a
letter gone after the "quo," and I have no idea what case of signum
"signe" stands for.

SECTION XCI. _Fifth side_. Venus, in her houses Taurus and Libra.
The most beautiful figure of the series. She sits upon the bull, who is
deep in the dewlap, and better cut than most of the animals, holding a
mirror in her right hand, and the scales in her left. Her breast is very
nobly and tenderly indicated under the folds of her drapery, which is
exquisitely studied in its fall. What is left of the inscription, runs:

"LIBRA CUM TAURO DOMUS * * * PURIOR AUR*."

SECTION XCII. _Sixth side_. Mercury, represented as wearing a pendent
cap, and holding a book: he is supported by three children in reclining
attitudes, representing his houses Gemini and Virgo. But I cannot
understand the inscription, though more than usually legible.

"OCCUPAT ERIGONE STIBONS GEMINUQ' LAGONE."

SECTION XCIII. _Seventh side_. The Moon, in her house Cancer. This
sculpture, which is turned towards the Piazzetta, is the most
picturesque of the series. The moon is represented as a woman in a boat,
upon the sea, who raises the crescent in her right hand, and with her
left draws a crab out of the waves, up the boat's side. The moon was, I
believe, represented in Egyptian sculptures as in a boat; but I rather
think the Venetian was not aware of this, and that he meant to express
the peculiar sweetness of the moonlight at Venice, as seen across the
lagoons. Whether this was intended by putting the planet in the boat,
may be questionable, but assuredly the idea was meant to be conveyed by
the dress of the figure. For all the draperies of the other figures on
this capital, as well as on the rest of the façade, are disposed in
severe but full folds, showing little of the forms beneath them; but the
moon's drapery _ripples_ down to her feet, so as exactly to suggest
the trembling of the moonlight on the waves. This beautiful idea is
highly characteristic of the thoughtfulness of the early sculptors: five
hundred men may be now found who could have cut the drapery, as such,
far better, for one who would have disposed its folds with this
intention. The inscription is:

"LUNE CANCER DOMU T. PBET IORBE SIGNORU."

SECTION XCIV. _Eighth side_. God creating Man. Represented as a
throned figure, with a glory round the head, laying his left hand on the
head of a naked youth, and sustaining him with his right hand. The
inscription puzzled me for a long time; but except the lost r and m of
"formavit," and a letter quite undefaced, but to me unintelligble,
before the word Eva, in the shape of a figure of 7, I have safely
ascertained the rest.

"DELIMO DSADA DECO STAFO * * AVIT7EVA."

Or

   "De limo Dominus Adam, de costa fo(rm) avit Evam;"
  From the dust the Lord made Adam, and from the rib Eve.

I imagine the whole of this capital, therefore--the principal one of the
old palace,--to have been intended to signify, first, the formation of
the planets for the service of man upon the earth; secondly, the entire
subjection of the fates and fortune of man to the will of God, as
determined from the time when the earth and stars were made, and, in
fact, written in the volume of the stars themselves.

Thus interpreted, the doctrines of judicial astrology were not only
consistent with, but an aid to, the most spiritual and humble
Christianity.

In the workmanship and grouping of its foliage, this capital is, on the
whole, the finest I know in Europe. The Sculptor has put his whole
strength into it. I trust that it will appear among the other Venetian
casts lately taken for the Crystal Palace; but if not, I have myself
cast all its figures, and two of its leaves, and I intend to give
drawings of them on a large scale in my folio work.

SECTION XCV. NINETEENTH CAPITAL. This is, of course, the second counting
from the Sea, on the Piazzetta side of the palace, calling that of the
Fig-tree angle the first.

It is the most important capital, as a piece of evidence in point of
dates, in the whole palace. Great pains have been taken with it, and in
some portion of the accompanying furniture or ornaments of each of its
figures a small piece of colored marble has been inlaid, with peculiar
significance: for the capital represents the _arts of sculpture and
architecture_; and the inlaying of the colored stones (which are far
too small to be effective at a distance, and are found in this one
capital only of the whole series) is merely an expression of the
architect's feeling of the essential importance of this art of inlaying,
and of the value of color generally in his own art.

SECTION XCVI. _First side_. "ST. SIMPLICIUS": so inscribed. A
figure working with a pointed chisel on a small oblong block of green
serpentine, about four inches long by one wide, inlaid in the capital.
The chisel is, of course, in the left hand, but the right is held up
open, with the palm outwards.

_Second side_. A crowned figure, carving the image of a child on a
small statue, with a ground of red marble. The sculptured figure is
highly finished, and is in type of head much like the Ham or Japheth at
the Vine angle. Inscription effaced.

_Third side_. An old man, uncrowned, but with curling hair, at work
on a small column, with its capital complete, and a little shaft of dark
red marble, spotted with paler red. The capital is precisely of the form
of that found in the palace of the Tiepolos and the other thirteenth
century work of Venice. This one figure would be quite enough, without
any other evidence whatever, to determine the date of this flank of the
Ducal Palace as not later, at all events, than the first half of the
fourteenth century. Its inscription is broken away, all but "DISIPULO."

_Fourth side_. A crowned figure; but the object on which it has
been working is broken away, and all the inscription except "ST.
E(N?)AS."

_Fifth side_. A man with a turban, and a sharp chisel, at work on a
kind of panel or niche, the back of which is of red marble.

_Sixth side_. A crowned figure, with hammer and chisel, employed
_on a little range of windows of the fifth order_, having roses
set, instead of orbicular ornaments, between the spandrils with a rich
cornice, and a band of marble inserted above. This sculpture assures us
of the date of the fifth order window, which it shows to have been
universal in the early fourteenth century.

There are also five arches in the block on which the sculptor is
working, marking the frequency of the number five in the window groups
of the time.

_Seventh side_. A figure at work on a pilaster, with Lombardic thirteenth
century capital (for account of the series of forms in Venetian capitals,
see the final Appendix of the next volume), the shaft of dark red spotted
marble.

_Eighth side_. A figure with a rich open crown, working on a
delicate recumbent statue, the head of which is laid on a pillow covered
with a rich chequer pattern; the whole supported on a block of dark red
marble. Inscription broken away, all but "ST. SYM. (Symmachus?) TV * *
ANVS." There appear, therefore, altogether to have been five saints, two
of them popes, if Simplicius is the pope of that name (three in front,
two on the fourth and sixth sides), alternating with the three uncrowned
workmen in the manual labor of sculpture. I did not, therefore, insult
our present architects in saying above that they "ought to work in the
mason's yard with their men." It would be difficult to find a more
interesting expression of the devotional spirit in which all great work
was undertaken at this time.

SECTION XCVII. TWENTIETH CAPITAL. It is adorned with heads of animals,
and is the finest of the whole series in the broad massiveness of its
effect; so simply characteristic, indeed, of the grandeur of style in
the entire building, that I chose it for the first Plate in my folio
work. In spite of the sternness of its plan, however, it is wrought with
great care in surface detail; and the ornamental value of the minute
chasing obtained by the delicate plumage of the birds, and the clustered
bees on the honeycomb in the bear's mouth, opposed to the strong
simplicity of its general form, cannot be too much admired. There are
also more grace, life, and variety in the sprays of foliage on each side
of it, and under the heads, than in any other capital of the series,
though the earliness of the workmanship is marked by considerable
hardness and coldness in the larger heads. A Northern Gothic workman,
better acquainted with bears and wolves than it was possible to become
in St. Mark's Place, would have put far more life into these heads, but
he could not have composed them more skilfully.

SECTION XCVIII. _First side_. A lion with a stag's haunch in his
mouth. Those readers who have the folio plate, should observe the
peculiar way in which the ear is cut into the shape of a ring, jagged or
furrowed on the edge; an archaic mode of treatment peculiar, in the
Ducal Palace, to the lion's heads of the fourteenth century. The moment
we reach the Renaissance work, the lion's ears are smooth. Inscribed
simply, "LEO."

_Second side_. A wolf with a dead bird in his mouth, its body
wonderfully true in expression of the passiveness of death. The feathers
are each wrought with a central quill and radiating filaments. Inscribed
"LUPUS."

_Third side_. A fox, not at all like one, with a dead cock in his mouth,
its comb and pendent neck admirably designed so as to fall across
the great angle leaf of the capital, its tail hanging down on the other
side, its long straight feathers exquisitely cut. Inscribed ("VULP?)IS."

_Fourth side_. Entirely broken away.

_Fifth side_. "APER." Well tusked, with a head of maize in his mouth; at
least I suppose it to be maize, though shaped like a pine-cone.

_Sixth side_. "CHANIS." With a bone, very ill cut; and a bald-headed
species of dog, with ugly flap ears.

_Seventh side_. "MUSCIPULUS." With a rat (?) in his mouth.

_Eighth side_. "URSUS." With a honeycomb, covered with large bees.

SECTION XCIX. TWENTY-FIRST CAPITAL. Represents the principal inferior
professions.

_First side_. An old man, with his brow deeply wrinkled, and very
expressive features, beating in a kind of mortar with a hammer.
Inscribed "LAPICIDA SUM."

_Second side_. I believe, a goldsmith; he is striking a small flat bowl
or patera, on a pointed anvil, with a light hammer. The inscription is
gone.

_Third side_. A shoemaker with a shoe in his hand, and an instrument for
cutting leather suspended beside him. Inscription undecipherable.

_Fourth side_. Much broken. A carpenter planing a beam resting on
two horizontal logs. Inscribed "CARPENTARIUS SUM."

_Fifth side_. A figure shovelling fruit into a tub; the latter very
carefully carved from what appears to have been an excellent piece of
cooperage. Two thin laths cross each other over the top of it. The
inscription, now lost, was, according to Selvatico, "MENSURATOR"?

_Sixth side_. A man, with a large hoe, breaking the ground, which
lies in irregular furrows and clods before him. Now undecipherable, but
according to Selvatico, "AGRICHOLA."

_Seventh side_. A man, in a pendent cap, writing on a large scroll
which falls over his knee. Inscribed "NOTARIUS SUM."

_Eighth side_. A man forging a sword, or scythe-blade: he wears a
large skull-cap; beats with a large hammer on a solid anvil; and is
inscribed "FABER SUM."

SECTION C. TWENTY-SECOND CAPITAL. The Ages of Man; and the influence of
the planets on human life.

_First side_. The moon, governing infancy for four years, according
to Selvatico. I have no note of this side, having, I suppose, been
prevented from raising the ladder against it by some fruit-stall or
other impediment in the regular course of my examination; and then
forgotten to return to it.

_Second side_. A child with a tablet, and an alphabet inscribed on
it. The legend above is

"MECUREU' DNT. PUERICIE PAN. X."

Or, "Mercurius dominatur puerilite per annos X." (Selvatico reads VII.)
"Mercury governs boyhood for ten (or seven) years."

_Third side_. An older youth, with another tablet, but broken.
Inscribed

"ADOLOSCENCIE * * * P. AN. VII."

Selvatico misses this side altogether, as I did the first, so that the
lost planet is irrecoverable, as the inscription is now defaced. Note
the o for e in adolescentia; so also we constantly find u for o;
showing, together with much other incontestable evidence of the same
kind, how full and deep the old pronunciation of Latin always remained,
and how ridiculous our English mincing of the vowels would have sounded
to a Roman ear.

_Fourth side_. A youth with a hawk on his fist.

"IUVENTUTI DNT. SOL. P. AN. XIX."
The sue governs youth for nineteen years.

_Fifth side_. A man sitting, helmed, with a sword over his shoulder.
Inscribed

"SENECTUTI DNT MARS. P. AN. XV."
Mars governs manhood for fifteen years.

_Sixth side_. A very graceful and serene figure, in the pendent cap,
reading.

"SENICIE DNT JUPITER, P. ANN. XII."
Jupiter governs age for twelve years.

_Seventh side_. An old man in a skull-cap, praying.

"DECREPITE DNT SATN UQ' ADMOTE." (Saturnus usque ad mortem.)
Saturn governs decrepitude until death.

_Eighth side_. The dead body lying on a mattress.

"ULTIMA EST MORS PENA PECCATI."
Last comes death, the penalty of sin.

SECTION CI. Shakespeare's Seven Ages are of course merely the expression
of this early and well-known system. He has deprived the dotage of its
devotion; but I think wisely, as the Italian system would imply that
devotion was, or should be, always delayed until dotage.

TWENTY-THIRD CAPITAL. I agree with Selvatico in thinking this has been
restored. It is decorated with large and vulgar heads.

SECTION CII. TWENTY-FOURTH CAPITAL. This belongs to the large shaft
which sustains the great party wall of the Sala del Gran Consiglio. The
shaft is thicker than the rest; but the capital, though ancient, is
coarse and somewhat inferior in design to the others of the series. It
represents the history of marriage: the lover first seeing his mistress
at a window, then addressing her, bringing her presents; then the
bridal, the birth and the death of a child. But I have not been able to
examine these sculptures properly, because the pillar is encumbered by
the railing which surrounds the two guns set before the Austrian
guard-house.

SECTION CIII. TWENTY-FIFTH CAPITAL. We have here the employments of the
months, with which we are already tolerably acquainted. There are,
however, one or two varieties worth noticing in this series.

_First side_. March. Sitting triumphantly in a rich dress, as the
beginning of the year.

_Second side_. April and May. April with a lamb: May with a feather
fan in her hand.

_Third side_. June. Carrying cherries in a basket.

I did not give this series with the others in the previous chapter,
because this representation of June is peculiarly Venetian. It is called
"the month of cherries," mese delle ceriese, in the popular rhyme on the
conspiracy of Tiepolo, quoted above, Vol. I.

The cherries principally grown near Venice are of a deep red color, and
large, but not of high flavor, though refreshing. They are carved upon
the pillar with great care, all their stalks undercut.

_Fourth side_. July and August. The first reaping; the leaves of the
straw being given, shooting out from the tubular stalk. August, opposite,
beats (the grain?) in a basket.

_Fifth side_. September. A woman standing in a wine-tub, and holding a
branch of vine. Very beautiful.

_Sixth side_. October and November. I could not make out their
occupation; they seem to be roasting or boiling some root over a fire.

_Seventh side_. December. Killing pigs, as usual.

_Eighth side_. January warming his feet, and February frying fish.
This last employment is again as characteristic of the Venetian winter
as the cherries are of the Venetian summer.

The inscriptions are undecipherable, except a few letters here and
there, and the words MARCIUS, APRILIS, and FEBRUARIUS.

This is the last of the capitals of the early palace; the next, or
twenty-sixth capital, is the first of those executed in the fifteenth
century under Foscari; and hence to the Judgment angle the traveller has
nothing to do but to compare the base copies of the earlier work with
their originals, or to observe the total want of invention in the
Renaissance sculptor, wherever he has depended on his own resources.
This, however, always with the exception of the twenty-seventh and of
the last capital, which are both fine.

I shall merely enumerate the subjects and point out the plagiarisms of
these capitals, as they are not worth description.

SECTION CIV. TWENTY-SIXTH CAPITAL. Copied from the fifteenth, merely
changing the succession of the figures.

TWENTY-SEVENTH CAPITAL. I think it possible that this may be part of the
old work displaced in joining the new palace with the old; at all
events, it is well designed, though a little coarse. It represents eight
different kinds of fruit, each in a basket; the characters well given,
and groups well arranged, but without much care or finish. The names are
inscribed above, though somewhat unnecessarily, and with certainly as
much disrespect to the beholder's intelligence as the sculptor's art,
namely, ZEREXIS, PIRI, CHUCUMERIS, PERSICI, ZUCHE, MOLONI, FICI, HUVA.
Zerexis (cherries) and Zuche (gourds) both begin with the same letter,
whether meant for z, s, or c I am not sure. The Zuche are the common
gourds, divided into two protuberances, one larger than the other, like
a bottle compressed near the neck; and the Moloni are the long
water-melons, which, roasted, form a staple food of the Venetians to
this day.

SECTION CV. TWENTY-EIGHTH CAPITAL. Copied from the seventh.

TWENTY-NINTH CAPITAL. Copied from the ninth.

THIRTIETH CAPITAL. Copied from the tenth. The "Accidia" is noticeable as
having the inscription complete, "ACCIDIA ME STRINGIT;" and the
"Luxuria" for its utter want of expression, having a severe and calm
face, a robe up to the neck, and her hand upon her breast. The
inscription is also different: "LUXURIA SUM STERC'S (?) INFERI"(?).

THIRTY-FIRST CAPITAL. Copied from the eighth.

THIRTY-SECOND CAPITAL. Has no inscription, only fully robed figures
laying their hands, without any meaning, on their own shoulders, heads,
or chins, or on the leaves around them.

THIRTY-THIRD CAPITAL. Copied from the twelfth.

THIRTY-FOURTH CAPITAL. Copied from the eleventh.

THIRTY-FIFTH CAPITAL. Has children, with birds or fruit, pretty in
features, and utterly inexpressive, like the cherubs of the eighteenth
century.

SECTION CVI. THIRTY-SIXTH CAPITAL. This is the last of the Piazzetta
façade, the elaborate one under the Judgment angle. Its foliage is
copied from the eighteenth at the opposite side, with an endeavor on the
part of the Renaissance sculptor to refine upon it, by which he has
merely lost some of its truth and force. This capital will, however, be
always thought, at first, the most beautiful of the whole series: and
indeed it is very noble; its groups of figures most carefully studied,
very graceful, and much more pleasing than those of the earlier work,
though with less real power in them; and its foliage is only inferior to
that of the magnificent Fig-tree angle. It represents, on its front or
first side, Justice enthroned, seated on two lions; and on the seven
other sides examples of acts of justice or good government, or figures
of lawgivers, in the following order:

_Second side_. Aristotle, with two pupils, giving laws. Inscribed:

"ARISTOT * * CHE DIE LEGE."
Aristotle who declares laws.

_Third side_. I have mislaid my note of this side: Selvatico and Lazari
call it "Isidore" (?). [Footnote: Can they have mistaken the ISIPIONE of
the fifth side for the word Isidore?]

_Fourth side_. Solon with his pupils. Inscribed:

"SAL'O UNO DEI SETE SAVI DI GRECIA CHE DIE LEGE."
Solon, one of the seven sages of Greece, who declares
laws.

Note, by the by, the pure Venetian dialect used in this capital, instead
of the Latin in the more ancient ones. One of the seated pupils in this
sculpture is remarkably beautiful in the sweep of his flowing drapery.

_Fifth side_. The chastity of Scipio. Inscribed:

"ISIPIONE A CHASTITA CH * * * E LA FIA (e la figlia?) * * ARE."

A soldier in a plumed bonnet presents a kneeling maiden to the seated
Scipio, who turns thoughtfully away.

_Sixth side_. Numa Pompilius building churches.

"NUMA POMPILIO IMPERADOR EDIFICHADOR DI TEMPI E CHIESE."

Numa, in a kind of hat with a crown above it, directing a soldier in
Roman armor (note this, as contrasted with the mail of the earlier
capitals). They point to a tower of three stories filled with tracery.

_Seventh side_. Moses receiving the law. Inscribed:

"QUANDO MOSE RECEVE LA LECE I SUL MONTE."

Moses kneels on a rock, whence springs a beautifully fancied tree, with
clusters of three berries in the centre of the three leaves, sharp and
quaint, like fine Northern Gothic. The half figure of the Deity comes
out of the abacus, the arm meeting that of Moses, both at full stretch,
with the stone tablets between.

_Eighth side_. Trajan doing justice to the Widow.

"TRAJANO IMPERADOR CHE FA JUSTITIA A LA VEDOVA."

He is riding spiritedly, his mantle blown out behind; the widow kneeling
before his horse.

SECTION CVII. The reader will observe that this capital is of peculiar
interest in its relation to the much disputed question of the character
of the later government of Venice. It is the assertion by that
government of its belief that Justice only could be the foundation of
its stability; as these stones of Justice and Judgment are the
foundation of its halls of council. And this profession of their faith
may be interpreted in two ways. Most modern historians would call it, in
common with the continual reference to the principles of justice in the
political and judicial language of the period, [Footnote: Compare the
speech of the Doge Mocenigo, above,--"first justice, and _then_ the
interests of the state:" and see Vol. III. Chap. II Section LIX.]
nothing more than a cloak for consummate violence and guilt; and it may
easily be proved to have been so in myriads of instances. But in the
main, I believe the expression of feeling to be genuine. I do not
believe, of the majority of the leading Venetians of this period whose
portraits have come down to us, that they were deliberately and
everlastingly hypocrites. I see no hypocrisy in their countenances. Much
capacity of it, much subtlety, much natural and acquired reserve; but no
meanness. On the contrary, infinite grandeur, repose, courage, and the
peculiar unity and tranquillity of expression which come of sincerity or
_wholeness_ of heart, and which it would take much demonstration to
make me believe could by any possibility be seen on the countenance of
an insincere man. I trust, therefore, that these Venetian nobles of the
fifteenth century did, in the main, desire to do judgment and justice to
all men; but, as the whole system of morality had been by this time
undermined by the teaching of the Romish Church, the idea of justice had
become separated from that of truth, so that dissimulation in the
interest of the state assumed the aspect of duty. We had, perhaps,
better consider, with some carefulness, the mode in which our own
government is carried on, and the occasional difference between
parliamentary and private morality, before we judge mercilessly of the
Venetians in this respect. The secrecy with which their political and
criminal trials were conducted, appears to modern eyes like a confession
of sinister intentions; but may it not also be considered, and with more
probability, as the result of an endeavor to do justice in an age of
violence?--the only means by which Law could establish its footing in
the midst of feudalism. Might not Irish juries at this day justifiably
desire to conduct their proceedings with some greater approximation to
the judicial principles of the Council of Ten? Finally, if we examine,
with critical accuracy, the evidence on which our present impressions of
Venetian government are founded, we shall discover, in the first place,
that two-thirds of the traditions of its cruelties are romantic fables:
in the second, that the crimes of which it can be proved to have been
guilty, differ only from those committed by the other Italian powers in
being done less wantonly, and under profounder conviction of their
political expediency: and lastly, that the final degradation of the
Venetian power appears owing not so much to the principles of its
government, as to their being forgotten in the pursuit of pleasure.

SECTION CVIII. We have now examined the portions of the palace which
contain the principal evidence of the feeling of its builders. The
capitals of the, upper arcade are exceedingly various in their
character; their design is formed, as in the lower series, of eight
leaves, thrown into volutes at the angles, and sustaining figures at the
flanks; but these figures have no inscriptions, and though evidently not
without meaning, cannot be interpreted without more knowledge than I
possess of ancient symbolism. Many of the capitals toward the Sea appear
to have been restored, and to be rude copies of the ancient ones;
others, though apparently original, have been somewhat carelessly
wrought; but those of them, which are both genuine and carefully
treated, are even finer in composition than any, except the eighteenth,
in the lower arcade. The traveller in Venice ought to ascend into the
corridor, and examine with great care the series of capitals which
extend on the Piazzetta side from the Fig-tree angle to the pilaster
which carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran Consiglio. As examples
of graceful composition in massy capitals meant for hard service and
distant effect, these are among the finest things I know in Gothic art;
and that above the fig-tree is remarkable for its sculpture of the four
winds; each on the side turned towards the wind represented. Levante,
the east wind; a figure with rays round its head, to show that it is
always clear weather when that wind blows, raising the sun out of the
sea: Hotro, the south wind; crowned, holding the sun in its right hand:
Ponente, the west wind; plunging the sun into the sea: and Tramontana,
the north wind; looking up at the north star. This capital should be
carefully examined, if for no other reason than to attach greater
distinctness of idea to the magnificent verbiage of Milton:

            "Thwart of these, as fierce,
  Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds,
  Eurus, and Zephyr; with their lateral noise,
  Sirocco and Libecchio."

I may also especially point out the bird feeding its three young ones on
the seventh pillar on the Piazzetta side; but there is no end to the
fantasy of these sculptures; and the traveller ought to observe them all
carefully, until he comes to the great Pilaster or complicated pier
which sustains the party wall of the Sala del Consiglio; that is to say,
the forty-seventh capital of the whole series, counting from the
pilaster of the Vine angle inclusive, as in the series of the lower
arcade. The forty-eighth, forty-ninth, and fiftieth are bad work, but
they are old; the fifty-first is the first Renaissance capital of the
upper arcade: the first new lion's head with smooth ears, cut in the
time of Foscari, is over the fiftieth capital; and that capital, with
its shaft, stands on the apex of the eighth arch from the Sea, on the
Piazzetta side, of which one spandril is masonry of the fourteenth and
the other of the fifteenth century.

SECTION CIX. The reader who is not able to examine the building on the
spot may be surprised at the definiteness with which the point of
junction is ascertainable; but a glance at the lowest range of leaves in
the opposite Plate (XX.) will enable him to judge of the grounds on
which the above statement is made. Fig. 12 is a cluster of leaves from
the capital of the Four Winds; early work of the finest time. Fig. 13 is
a leaf from the great Renaissance capital at the Judgment angle, worked
in imitation of the older leafage. Fig. 14 is a leaf from one of the
Renaissance capitals of the upper arcade, which are all worked in the
natural manner of the period. It will be seen that it requires no great
ingenuity to distinguish between such design as that of fig. 12 and that
of fig. 14.

SECTION CX. It is very possible that the reader may at first like fig.
14 best. I shall endeavor, in the next chapter, to show why he should
not; but it must also be noted, that fig. 12 has lost, and fig. 14
gained, both largely, under the hands of the engraver. All the bluntness
and coarseness of feeling in the workmanship of fig. 14 have disappeared
on this small scale, and all the subtle refinements in the broad masses
of fig. 12 have vanished. They could not, indeed, be rendered in line
engraving, unless by the hand of Albert Durer; and I have, therefore,
abandoned, for the present, all endeavor to represent any more important
mass of the early sculpture of the Ducal Palace: but I trust that, in a
few months, casts of many portions will be within the reach of the
inhabitants of London, and that they will be able to judge for
themselves of their perfect, pure, unlabored naturalism; the freshness,
elasticity, and softness of their leafage, united with the most noble
symmetry and severe reserve,--no running to waste, no loose or
experimental lines, no extravagance, and no weakness. Their design is
always sternly architectural; there is none of the wildness or
redundance of natural vegetation, but there is all the strength,
freedom, and tossing flow of the breathing leaves, and all the
undulation of their surfaces, rippled, as they grew, by the summer
winds, as the sands are by the sea.

SECTION CXI. This early sculpture of the Ducal Palace, then, represents
the state of Gothic work in Venice at its central and proudest period,
i. e. circa 1350. After this time, all is decline,--of what nature and
by what steps, we shall inquire in the ensuing chapter; for as this
investigation, though still referring to Gothic architecture, introduces
us to the first symptoms of the Renaissance influence, I have considered
it as properly belonging to the third division of our subject.

SECTION CXII. And as, under the shadow of these nodding leaves, we bid
farewell to the great Gothic spirit, here also we may cease our
examination of the details of the Ducal Palace; for above its upper
arcade there are only the four traceried windows, and one or two of the
third order on the Rio Façade, which can be depended upon as exhibiting
the original workmanship of the older palace. [Footnote: Some further
details respecting these portions, as well as some necessary
confirmations of my statements of dates, are, however, given in Appendix
I., Vol. III. I feared wearying the general reader by introducing them
into the text.] I examined the capitals of the four other windows on the
façade, and of those on the Piazzetta, one by one, with great care, and
I found them all to be of far inferior workmanship to those which retain
their traceries: I believe the stone framework of these windows must
have been so cracked and injured by the flames of the great fire, as to
render it necessary to replace it by new traceries; and that the present
mouldings and capitals are base imitations of the original ones. The
traceries were at first, however, restored in their complete form, as
the holes for the bolts which fastened the bases of their shafts are
still to be seen in the window-sills, as well as the marks of the inner
mouldings on the soffits. How much the stone facing of the façade, the
parapets, and the shafts and niches of the angles, retain of their
original masonry, it is also impossible to determine; but there is
nothing in the workmanship of any of them demanding especial notice;
still less in the large central windows on each façade which are
entirely of Renaissance execution. All that is admirable in these
portions of the building is the disposition of their various parts and
masses, which is without doubt the same as in the original fabric, and
calculated, when seen from a distance, to produce the same impression.

SECTION CXIII. Not so in the interior. All vestige of the earlier modes
of decoration was here, of course, destroyed by the fires; and the
severe and religious work of Guariento and Bellini has been replaced by
the wildness of Tintoret and the luxury of Veronese. But in this case,
though widely different in temper, the art of the renewal was at least
intellectually as great as that which had perished: and though the halls
of the Ducal Palace are no more representative of the character of the
men by whom it was built, each of them is still a colossal casket of
priceless treasure; a treasure whose safety has till now depended on its
being despised, and which at this moment, and as I write, is piece by
piece being destroyed for ever.

SECTION CXIV. The reader will forgive my quitting our more immediate
subject, in order briefly to explain the causes and the nature of this
destruction; for the matter is simply the most important of all that can
be brought under our present consideration respecting the state of art
in Europe.

The fact is, that the greater number of persons or societies throughout
Europe, whom wealth, or chance, or inheritance has put in possession of
valuable pictures, do not know a good picture from a bad one, and have
no idea in what the value of a picture really consists. [Footnote: Many
persons, capable of quickly sympathizing with any excellence, when once
pointed out to them, easily deceive themselves into the supposition that
they are judges of art. There is only one real test of such power of
judgment. Can they, at a glance, discover a good picture obscured by the
filth, and confused among the rubbish, of the pawnbroker's or dealer's
garret?] The reputation of certain work is raised partly by accident,
partly by the just testimony of artists, partly by the various and
generally bad taste of the public (no picture, that I know of, has ever,
in modern times, attained popularity, in the full sense of the term,
without having some exceedingly bad qualities mingled with its good
ones), and when this reputation has once been completely established, it
little matters to what state the picture may be reduced: few minds are
so completely devoid of imagination as to be unable to invest it with
the beauties which they have heard attributed to it.

SECTION CXV. This being so, the pictures that are most valued are for
the most part those by masters of established renown, which are highly
or neatly finished, and of a size small enough to admit of their being
placed in galleries or saloons, so as to be made subjects of
ostentation, and to be easily seen by a crowd. For the support of the
fame and value of such pictures, little more is necessary than that they
should be kept bright, partly by cleaning, which is incipient
destruction, and partly by what is called "restoring," that is, painting
over, which is of course total destruction. Nearly all the gallery
pictures in modern Europe have been more or less destroyed by one or
other of these operations, generally exactly in proportion to the
estimation in which they are held; and as, originally, the smaller and
more highly finished works of any great master are usually his worst,
the contents of many of our most celebrated galleries are by this time,
in reality, of very small value indeed.

SECTION CXVI. On the other hand, the most precious works of any noble
painter are usually those which have been done quickly, and in the heat
of the first thought, on a large scale, for places where there was
little likelihood of their being well seen, or for patrons from whom
there was little prospect of rich remuneration. In general, the best
things are done in this way, or else in the enthusiasm and pride of
accomplishing some great purpose, such as painting a cathedral or a
camposanto from one end to the other, especially when the time has been
short, and circumstances disadvantageous.

SECTION CXVII. Works thus executed are of course despised, on account of
their quantity, as well as their frequent slightness, in the places
where they exist; and they are too large to be portable, and too vast
and comprehensive to be read on the spot, in the hasty temper of the
present age. They are, therefore, almost universally neglected,
whitewashed by custodes, shot at by soldiers, suffered to drop from the
walls, piecemeal in powder and rags by society in general; but, which is
an advantage more than counterbalancing all this evil, they are not
often "restored." What is left of them, however fragmentary, however
ruinous, however obscured and defiled, is almost always _the real
thing_; there are no fresh readings: and therefore the greatest
treasures of art which Europe at this moment possesses are pieces of old
plaster on ruinous brick walls, where the lizards burrow and bask, and
which few other living creatures ever approach; and torn sheets of dim
canvas, in waste corners of churches; and mildewed stains, in the shape
of human figures, on the walls of dark chambers, which now and then an
exploring traveller causes to be unlocked by their tottering custode,
looks hastily round, and retreats from in a weary satisfaction at his
accomplished duty.

SECTION CXVIII. Many of the pictures on the ceilings and walls of the
Ducal Palace, by Paul Veronese and Tintoret, have been more or less
reduced, by neglect, to this condition. Unfortunately they are not
altogether without reputation, and their state has drawn the attention
of the Venetian authorities and academicians. It constantly happens,
that public bodies who will not pay five pounds to preserve a picture,
will pay fifty to repaint it; [Footnote: This is easily explained. There
are, of course, in every place and at all periods, bad painters who
conscientiously believe that they can improve every picture they touch;
and these men are generally, in their presumption, the most influential
over the innocence, whether of monarchs or municipalities. The carpenter
and slater have little influence in recommending the repairs of the
roof; but the bad painter has great influence, as well as interest, in
recommending those of the picture.] and when I was at Venice in 1846,
there were two remedial operations carrying on, at one and the same
time, in the two buildings which contain the pictures of greatest value
in the city (as pieces of color, of greatest value in the world),
curiously illustrative of this peculiarity in human nature. Buckets were
set on the floor of the Scuola di San Rocco, in every shower, to catch
the rain which came through the pictures of Tintoret on the ceiling;
while in the Ducal Palace, those of Paul Veronese were themselves laid
on the floor to be repainted; and I was myself present at the
re-illumination of the breast of a white horse, with a brush, at the end
of a stick five feet long, luxuriously dipped in a common
house-painter's vessel of paint.

This was, of course, a large picture. The process has already been
continued in an equally destructive, though somewhat more delicate
manner, over the whole of the humbler canvases on the ceiling of the
Sala del Gran Consiglio; and I heard it threatened when I was last in
Venice (1851-2) to the "Paradise" at its extremity, which is yet in
tolerable condition,--the largest work of Tintoret, and the most
wonderful piece of pure, manly, and masterly oil-painting in the world.

SECTION CXIX. I leave these facts to the consideration of the European
patrons of art. Twenty years hence they will be acknowledged and
regretted; at present, I am well aware, that it is of little use to
bring them forward, except only to explain the present impossibility of
stating what pictures _are_, and what _were_, in the interior
of the Ducal Palace. I can only say, that in the winter of 1851, the
"Paradise" of Tintoret was still comparatively uninjured, and that the
Camera di Collegio, and its antechamber, and the Sala de' Pregadi were
full of pictures by Veronese and Tintoret, that made their walls as
precious as so many kingdoms; so precious indeed, and so full of
majesty, that sometimes when walking at evening on the Lido, whence the
great chain of the Alps, crested with silver clouds, might be seen
rising above the front of the Ducal Palace, I used to feel as much awe
in gazing on the building as on the hills, and could believe that God
had done a greater work in breathing into the narrowness of dust the
mighty spirits by whom its haughty walls had been raised, and its
burning legends written, than in lifting the rocks of granite higher
than the clouds of heaven, and veiling them with their various mantle of
purple flower and shadowy pine.




NOTE.


I have printed the chapter on the Ducal Palace, quite one of the most
important pieces of work done in my life, without alteration of its
references to the plates of the first edition, because I hope both to
republish some of those plates, and together with them, a few permanent
photographs (both from the sculpture of the Palace itself, and from my
own drawings of its detail), which may be purchased by the possessors of
this smaller edition to bind with the book or not, as they please. This
separate publication I can now soon set in hand; and I believe it will
cause much less confusion to leave for the present the references to the
old plates untouched. The wood-blocks used for the first three figures
in this chapter, are the original ones: that of the Ducal Palace façade
was drawn on the wood by my own hand, and cost me more trouble than it
is worth, being merely given for division and proportion. The greater
part of the first volume, omitted in this edition after "the Quarry,"
will be republished in the series of my reprinted works, with its
original wood-blocks.

But my mind is mainly set now on getting some worthy illustration of the
St. Mark's mosaics, and of such remains of the old capitals (now for
ever removed, in process of the Palace restoration, from their life in
sea wind and sunlight, and their ancient duty, to a museum-grave) as I
have useful record of, drawn in their native light. The series, both of
these and of the earlier mosaics, of which the sequence is sketched in
the preceding volume, and farther explained in the third number of "St.
Mark's Rest," become to me every hour of my life more precious both for
their art and their meaning; and if any of my readers care to help me,
in my old age, to fulfil my life's work rightly, let them send what
pence they can spare for these objects to my publisher, Mr. Allen,
Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent.

Since writing the first part of this note, I have received a letter from
Mr. Burne Jones, assuring me of his earnest sympathy in its object, and
giving me hope even of his superintendence of the drawings, which I have
already desired to be undertaken. But I am no longer able to continue
work of this kind at my own cost; and the fulfilment of my purpose must
entirely depend on the money-help given me by my readers.






Illustrated Library Edition

THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE

Also

MUNERA PULVERIS

PRE-RAPHAELITISM--ARATRA PENTELICI

THE ETHICS OF THE DUST

FICTION, FAIR AND FOUL

THE ELEMENTS OF DRAWING

by

JOHN RUSKIN, M.A.







[Illustration: _Portrait of Carlyle_

Etched by E. A. Fowle--From Painting by Samuel Lawrence]



[Illustration]

Boston and New York
Colonial Press Company
Publishers




CONTENTS.


THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE.


                                           PAGE
LECTURE I.

WORK,                                        17

LECTURE II.

TRAFFIC,                                     44

LECTURE III.

WAR,                                         66


MUNERA PULVERIS.

PREFACE,                                     97

CHAP.

I. DEFINITIONS,                             111

II. STORE-KEEPING,                          125

III. COIN-KEEPING,                          151

IV. COMMERCE,                               170

V. GOVERNMENT,                              181

VI. MASTERSHIP,                             204

APPENDICES,                                 222


PRE-RAPHAELITISM.

PREFACE,                                    235

PRE-RAPHAELITISM,                           237


ARATRA PENTELICI.

PREFACE,                                    283

LECTURE

I. OF THE DIVISION OF ARTS,                 287

II. IDOLATRY,                               304

III. IMAGINATION,                           322

IV. LIKENESS,                               350

V. STRUCTURE,                               372

VI. THE SCHOOL OF ATHENS,                   395


THE FUTURE OF ENGLAND,                      415


NOTES ON POLITICAL ECONOMY OF PRUSSIA,      435




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


ARATRA PENTELICI.

PLATES                                            FACING PAGE

I. PORCH OF SAN ZENONE. VERONA,                           300

II. THE ARETHUSA OF SYRACUSE,                             302

III. THE WARNING TO THE KINGS,                            302

IV. THE NATIVITY OF ATHENA,                               308

V. TOMB OF THE DOGES JACOPO AND LORENZO TIEPOLO,          333

VI. ARCHAIC ATHENA OF ATHENS AND CORINTH,                 334

VII. ARCHAIC, CENTRAL AND DECLINING ART OF GREECE,        355

VIII. THE APOLLO OF SYRACUSE AND THE SELF-MADE MAN,       366

IX. APOLLO CHRYSOCOMES OF CLAZOMENÆ,                      368

X. MARBLE MASONRY IN THE DUOMO OF VERONA,                 381

XI. THE FIRST ELEMENTS OF SCULPTURE,                      382

XII. BRANCH OF PHILLYREA. DARK PURPLE,                    390

XIII. GREEK FLAT RELIEF AND SCULPTURE BY EDGED INCISION,  392

XIV. APOLLO AND THE PYTHON. HERACLES AND THE NEMEAN LION, 400

XV. HERA OF ARGOS. ZEUS OF SYRACUSE,                      401

XVI. DEMETER OF MESSENE. HERA OF CROSSUS,                 402

XVII. ATHENA OF THURIUM. SEREIE LIGEIA OF TERINA,         402

XVIII. ARTEMIS OF SYRACUSE. HERA OF LACINIAN CAPE,        404

XIX. ZEUS OF MESSENE. AJAX OF OPUS,                       405

XX. GREEK AND BARBARIAN SCULPTURE,                        407

XXI. THE BEGINNINGS OF CHIVALRY,                          409


FIGURE                                                   PAGE

1. SPECIMEN OF PLATE,                                     293

2. WOODCUT,                                               323

3. FIGURE ON GREEK TYPE OF VASES,                         326

4. EARLY DRAWING OF THE MYTH                              330

5. CUT, "GIVE IT TO ME,"                                  332

6. ENGRAVING ON COIN,                                     335

7. DRAWING OF FISH. BY TURNER,                            362

8. IRON BAR,                                              379

9. DIAGRAM OF LEAF,                                       391




THE

CROWN OF WILD OLIVE

THREE LECTURES ON

WORK, TRAFFIC AND WAR




PREFACE.


Twenty years ago, there was no lovelier piece of lowland scenery in
South England, nor any more pathetic in the world, by its expression of
sweet human character and life, than that immediately bordering on the
sources of the Wandle, and including the lower moors of Addington, and
the villages of Beddington and Carshalton, with all their pools and
streams. No clearer or diviner waters ever sang with constant lips of
the hand which 'giveth rain from heaven;' no pastures ever lightened in
spring time with more passionate blossoming; no sweeter homes ever
hallowed the heart of the passer-by with their pride of peaceful
gladness--fain-hidden--yet full-confessed. The place remains, or, until
a few months ago, remained, nearly unchanged in its larger features;
but, with deliberate mind I say, that I have never seen anything so
ghastly in its inner tragic meaning,--not in Pisan Maremma--not by
Campagna tomb,--not by the sand-isles of the Torcellan shore,--as the
slow stealing of aspects of reckless, indolent, animal neglect, over the
delicate sweetness of that English scene: nor is any blasphemy or
impiety--any frantic saying or godless thought--more appalling to me,
using the best power of judgment I have to discern its sense and scope,
than the insolent defilings of those springs by the human herds that
drink of them. Just where the welling of stainless water, trembling and
pure, like a body of light, enters the pool of Carshalton, cutting
itself a radiant channel down to the gravel, through warp of feathery
weeds, all waving, which it traverses with its deep threads of
clearness, like the chalcedony in moss-agate, starred here and there
with white grenouillette; just in the very rush and murmur of the first
spreading currents, the human wretches of the place cast their street
and house foulness; heaps of dust and slime, and broken shreds of old
metal, and rags of putrid clothes; they having neither energy to cart it
away, nor decency enough to dig it into the ground, thus shed into the
stream, to diffuse what venom of it will float and melt, far away, in
all places where God meant those waters to bring joy and health. And, in
a little pool, behind some houses farther in the village, where another
spring rises, the shattered stones of the well, and of the little
fretted channel which was long ago built and traced for it by gentler
hands, lie scattered, each from each, under a ragged bank of mortar, and
scoria; and brick-layers' refuse, on one side, which the clean water
nevertheless chastises to purity; but it cannot conquer the dead earth
beyond; and there, circled and coiled under festering scum, the stagnant
edge of the pool effaces itself into a slope of black slime, the
accumulation of indolent years. Half-a-dozen men, with one day's work,
could cleanse those pools, and trim the flowers about their banks, and
make every breath of summer air above them rich with cool balm; and
every glittering wave medicinal, as if it ran, troubled of angels, from
the porch of Bethesda. But that day's work is never given, nor will be;
nor will any joy be possible to heart of man, for evermore, about those
wells of English waters.

When I last left them, I walked up slowly through the back streets of
Croydon, from the old church to the hospital; and, just on the left,
before coming up to the crossing of the High Street, there was a new
public-house built. And the front of it was built in so wise manner,
that a recess of two feet was left below its front windows, between them
and the street-pavement--a recess too narrow for any possible use (for
even if it had been occupied by a seat, as in old time it might have
been, everybody walking along the street would have fallen over the legs
of the reposing wayfarers). But, by way of making this two feet depth of
freehold land more expressive of the dignity of an establishment for the
sale of spirituous liquors, it was fenced from the pavement by an
imposing iron railing, having four or five spearheads to the yard of it,
and six feet high; containing as much iron and iron-work, indeed as
could well be put into the space; and by this stately arrangement, the
little piece of dead ground within, between wall and street, became a
protective receptacle of refuse; cigar ends, and oyster shells, and the
like, such as an open-handed English street-populace habitually scatters
from its presence, and was thus left, unsweepable by any ordinary
methods. Now the iron bars which, uselessly (or in great degree worse
than uselessly), enclosed this bit of ground, and made it pestilent,
represented a quantity of work which would have cleansed the Carshalton
pools three times over;--of work, partly cramped and deadly, in the
mine; partly fierce[1] and exhaustive, at the furnace; partly foolish
and sedentary, of ill-taught students making bad designs: work from the
beginning to the last fruits of it, and in all the branches of it,
venomous, deathful, and miserable. Now, how did it come to pass that
this work was done instead of the other; that the strength and life of
the English operative were spent in defiling ground, instead of
redeeming it; and in producing an entirely (in that place) valueless
piece of metal, which can neither be eaten nor breathed, instead of
medicinal fresh air, and pure water?

There is but one reason for it, and at present a conclusive one,--that
the capitalist can charge per-centage on the work in the one case, and
cannot in the other. If, having certain funds for supporting labour at
my disposal, I pay men merely to keep my ground in order, my money is,
in that function, spent once for all; but if I pay them to dig iron out
of my ground, and work it, and sell it, I can charge rent for the
ground, and per-centage both on the manufacture and the sale, and make
my capital profitable in these three bye-ways. The greater part of the
profitable investment of capital, in the present day, is in operations
of this kind, in which the public is persuaded to buy something of no
use to it, on production, or sale, of which, the capitalist may charge
per-centage; the said public remaining all the while under the
persuasion that the per-centages thus obtained are real national gains,
whereas, they are merely filchings out of partially light pockets, to
swell heavy ones.

Thus, the Croydon publican buys the iron railing, to make himself more
conspicuous to drunkards. The public-housekeeper on the other side of
the way presently buys another railing, to out-rail him with. Both are,
as to their _relative_ attractiveness to customers of taste, just where
they were before; but they have lost the price of the railings; which
they must either themselves finally lose, or make their aforesaid
customers of taste pay, by raising the price of their beer, or
adulterating it. Either the publicans, or their customers, are thus
poorer by precisely what the capitalist has gained; and the value of the
work itself, meantime, has been lost to the nation; the iron bars in
that form and place being wholly useless. It is this mode of taxation of
the poor by the rich which is referred to in the text (page 31), in
comparing the modern acquisitive power of capital with that of the lance
and sword; the only difference being that the levy of black mail in old
times was by force, and is now by cozening. The old rider and reiver
frankly quartered himself on the publican for the night; the modern one
merely makes his lance into an iron spike, and persuades his host to buy
it. One comes as an open robber, the other as a cheating pedlar; but the
result, to the injured person's pocket, is absolutely the same. Of
course many useful industries mingle with, and disguise the useless
ones; and in the habits of energy aroused by the struggle, there is a
certain direct good. It is far better to spend four thousand pounds in
making a good gun, and then to blow it to pieces, than to pass life in
idleness. Only do not let it be called 'political economy.' There is
also a confused notion in the minds of many persons, that the gathering
of the property of the poor into the hands of the rich does no ultimate
harm; since, in whosesoever hands it may be, it must be spent at last,
and thus, they think, return to the poor again. This fallacy has been
again and again exposed; but grant the plea true, and the same apology
may, of course, be made for black mail, or any other form of robbery. It
might be (though practically it never is) as advantageous for the nation
that the robber should have the spending of the money he extorts, as
that the person robbed should have spent it. But this is no excuse for
the theft. If I were to put a turnpike on the road where it passes my
own gate, and endeavour to exact a shilling from every passenger, the
public would soon do away with my gate, without listening to any plea on
my part that 'it was as advantageous to them, in the end, that I should
spend their shillings, as that they themselves should.' But if, instead
of out-facing them with a turnpike, I can only persuade them to come in
and buy stones, or old iron, or any other useless thing, out of my
ground, I may rob them to the same extent, and be, moreover, thanked as
a public benefactor, and promoter of commercial prosperity. And this
main question for the poor of England--for the poor of all countries--is
wholly omitted in every common treatise on the subject of wealth. Even
by the labourers themselves, the operation of capital is regarded only
in its effect on their immediate interests; never in the far more
terrific power of its appointment of the kind and the object of labour.
It matters little, ultimately, how much a labourer is paid for making
anything; but it matters fearfully what the thing is, which he is
compelled to make. If his labour is so ordered as to produce food, and
fresh air, and fresh water, no matter that his wages are low;--the food
and fresh air and water will be at last there; and he will at last get
them. But if he is paid to destroy food and fresh air or to produce
iron bars instead of them,--the food and air will finally _not_ be
there, and he will _not_ get them, to his great and final inconvenience.
So that, conclusively, in political as in household economy, the great
question is, not so much what money you have in your pocket, as what you
will buy with it, and do with it.

I have been long accustomed, as all men engaged in work of investigation
must be, to hear my statements laughed at for years, before they are
examined or believed; and I am generally content to wait the public's
time. But it has not been without displeased surprise that I have found
myself totally unable, as yet, by any repetition, or illustration, to
force this plain thought into my readers' heads,--that the wealth of
nations, as of men, consists in substance, not in ciphers; and that the
real good of all work, and of all commerce, depends on the final worth
of the thing you make, or get by it. This is a practical enough
statement, one would think: but the English public has been so possessed
by its modern school of economists with the notion that Business is
always good, whether it be busy in mischief or in benefit; and that
buying and selling are always salutary, whatever the intrinsic worth of
what you buy or sell,--that it seems impossible to gain so much as a
patient hearing for any inquiry respecting the substantial result of our
eager modern labours. I have never felt more checked by the sense of
this impossibility than in arranging the heads of the following three
lectures, which, though delivered at considerable intervals of time, and
in different places, were not prepared without reference to each other.
Their connection would, however, have been made far more distinct, if I
had not been prevented, by what I feel to be another great difficulty in
addressing English audiences, from enforcing, with any decision, the
common, and to me the most important, part of their subjects. I chiefly
desired (as I have just said) to question my hearers--operatives,
merchants, and soldiers, as to the ultimate meaning of the _business_
they had in hand; and to know from them what they expected or intended
their manufacture to come to, their selling to come to, and their
killing to come to. That appeared the first point needing determination
before I could speak to them with any real utility or effect. 'You
craftsmen--salesmen--swordsmen,--do but tell me clearly what you want,
then, if I can say anything to help you, I will; and if not, I will
account to you as I best may for my inability.' But in order to put this
question into any terms, one had first of all to face the difficulty
just spoken of--to me for the present insuperable,--the difficulty of
knowing whether to address one's audience as believing, or not
believing, in any other world than this. For if you address any average
modern English company as believing in an Eternal life, and endeavour to
draw any conclusions, from this assumed belief, as to their present
business, they will forthwith tell you that what you say is very
beautiful, but it is not practical. If, on the contrary, you frankly
address them as unbelievers in Eternal life, and try to draw any
consequences from that unbelief,--they immediately hold you for an
accursed person, and shake off the dust from their feet at you. And the
more I thought over what I had got to say, the less I found I could say
it, without some reference to this intangible or intractable part of the
subject. It made all the difference, in asserting any principle of war,
whether one assumed that a discharge of artillery would merely knead
down a certain quantity of red clay into a level line, as in a brick
field; or whether, out of every separately Christian-named portion of
the ruinous heap, there went out, into the smoke and dead-fallen air of
battle, some astonished condition of soul, unwillingly released. It made
all the difference, in speaking of the possible range of commerce,
whether one assumed that all bargains related only to visible
property--or whether property, for the present invisible, but
nevertheless real, was elsewhere purchasable on other terms. It made all
the difference, in addressing a body of men subject to considerable
hardship, and having to find some way out of it--whether one could
confidentially say to them, 'My friends,--you have only to die, and all
will be right;' or whether one had any secret misgiving that such advice
was more blessed to him that gave, than to him that took it. And
therefore the deliberate reader will find, throughout these lectures, a
hesitation in driving points home, and a pausing short of conclusions
which he will feel I would fain have come to; hesitation which arises
wholly from this uncertainty of my hearers' temper. For I do not now
speak, nor have I ever spoken, since the time of my first forward youth,
in any proselyting temper, as desiring to persuade any one of what, in
such matters, I thought myself; but, whomsoever I venture to address, I
take for the time his creed as I find it; and endeavour to push it into
such vital fruit as it seems capable of. Thus, it is a creed with a
great part of the existing English people, that they are in possession
of a book which tells them, straight from the lips of God all they ought
to do, and need to know. I have read that book, with as much care as
most of them, for some forty years; and am thankful that, on those who
trust it, I can press its pleadings. My endeavour has been uniformly to
make them trust it more deeply than they do; trust it, not in their own
favourite verses only, but in the sum of all; trust it not as a fetish
or talisman, which they are to be saved by daily repetitions of; but as
a Captain's order, to be heard and obeyed at their peril. I was always
encouraged by supposing my hearers to hold such belief. To these, if to
any, I once had hope of addressing, with acceptance, words which
insisted on the guilt of pride, and the futility of avarice; from these,
if from any, I once expected ratification of a political economy, which
asserted that the life was more than the meat, and the body than
raiment; and these, it once seemed to me, I might ask without accusation
or fanaticism, not merely in doctrine of the lips, but in the bestowal
of their heart's treasure, to separate themselves from the crowd of whom
it is written, 'After all these things do the Gentiles seek.'

It cannot, however, be assumed, with any semblance of reason, that a
general audience is now wholly, or even in majority, composed of these
religious persons. A large portion must always consist of men who admit
no such creed; or who, at least, are inaccessible to appeals founded on
it. And as, with the so-called Christian, I desired to plead for honest
declaration and fulfilment of his belief in life,--with the so-called
Infidel, I desired to plead for an honest declaration and fulfilment of
his belief in death. The dilemma is inevitable. Men must either
hereafter live, or hereafter die; fate may be bravely met, and conduct
wisely ordered, on either expectation; but never in hesitation between
ungrasped hope, and unconfronted fear. We usually believe in
immortality, so far as to avoid preparation for death; and in mortality,
so far as to avoid preparation for anything after death. Whereas, a wise
man will at least hold himself prepared for one or other of two events,
of which one or other is inevitable; and will have all things in order,
for his sleep, or in readiness, for his awakening.

Nor have we any right to call it an ignoble judgment, if he determine to
put them in order, as for sleep. A brave belief in life is indeed an
enviable state of mind, but, as far as I can discern, an unusual one. I
know few Christians so convinced of the splendour of the rooms in their
Father's house, as to be happier when their friends are called to those
mansions, than they would have been if the Queen had sent for them to
live at Court: nor has the Church's most ardent 'desire to depart, and
be with Christ,' ever cured it of the singular habit of putting on
mourning for every person summoned to such departure. On the contrary, a
brave belief in death has been assuredly held by many not ignoble
persons, and it is a sign of the last depravity in the Church itself,
when it assumes that such a belief is inconsistent with either purity of
character, or energy of hand. The shortness of life is not, to any
rational person, a conclusive reason for wasting the space of it which
may be granted him; nor does the anticipation of death to-morrow
suggest, to any one but a drunkard, the expediency of drunkenness
to-day. To teach that there is no device in the grave, may indeed make
the deviceless person more contented in his dulness; but it will make
the deviser only more earnest in devising, nor is human conduct likely,
in every case, to be purer under the conviction that all its evil may in
a moment be pardoned, and all its wrong-doing in a moment redeemed; and
that the sigh of repentance, which purges the guilt of the past, will
waft the soul into a felicity which forgets its pain,--than it may be
under the sterner, and to many not unwise minds, more probable,
apprehension, that 'what a man soweth that shall he also reap'--or
others reap,--when he, the living seed of pestilence, walketh no more in
darkness, but lies down therein.

But to men whose feebleness of sight, or bitterness of soul, or the
offence given by the conduct of those who claim higher hope, may have
rendered this painful creed the only possible one, there is an appeal to
be made, more secure in its ground than any which can be addressed to
happier persons. I would fain, if I might offencelessly, have spoken to
them as if none others heard; and have said thus: Hear me, you dying
men, who will soon be deaf for ever. For these others, at your right
hand and your left, who look forward to a state of infinite existence,
in which all their errors will be overruled, and all their faults
forgiven; for these, who, stained and blackened in the battle smoke of
mortality, have but to dip themselves for an instant in the font of
death, and to rise renewed of plumage, as a dove that is covered with
silver, and her feathers like gold; for these, indeed, it may be
permissible to waste their numbered moments, through faith in a future
of innumerable hours; to these, in their weakness, it may be conceded
that they should tamper with sin which can only bring forth fruit of
righteousness, and profit by the iniquity which, one day, will be
remembered no more. In them, it may be no sign of hardness of heart to
neglect the poor, over whom they know their Master is watching; and to
leave those to perish temporarily, who cannot perish eternally. But, for
you, there is no such hope, and therefore no such excuse. This fate,
which you ordain for the wretched, you believe to be all their
inheritance; you may crush them, before the moth, and they will never
rise to rebuke you;--their breath, which fails for lack of food, once
expiring, will never be recalled to whisper against you a word of
accusing;--they and you, as you think, shall lie down together in the
dust, and the worms cover you;--and for them there shall be no
consolation, and on you no vengeance,--only the question murmured above
your grave: 'Who shall repay him what he hath done?' Is it therefore
easier for you in your heart to inflict the sorrow for which there is no
remedy? Will you take, wantonly, this little all of his life from your
poor brother, and make his brief hours long to him with pain? Will you
be readier to the injustice which can never be redressed; and niggardly
of mercy which you _can_ bestow but once, and which, refusing, you
refuse for ever? I think better of you, even of the most selfish, than
that you would do this, well understood. And for yourselves, it seems to
me, the question becomes not less grave, in these curt limits. If your
life were but a fever fit,--the madness of a night, whose follies were
all to be forgotten in the dawn, it might matter little how you fretted
away the sickly hours,--what toys you snatched at, or let fall,--what
visions you followed wistfully with the deceived eyes of sleepless
phrenzy. Is the earth only an hospital? Play, if you care to play, on
the floor of the hospital dens. Knit its straw into what crowns please
you; gather the dust of it for treasure, and die rich in that, clutching
at the black motes in the air with your dying hands;--and yet, it may be
well with you. But if this life be no dream, and the world no hospital;
if all the peace and power and joy you can ever win, must be won now;
and all fruit of victory gathered here, or never;--will you still,
throughout the puny totality of your life, weary yourselves in the fire
for vanity? If there is no rest which remaineth for you, is there none
you might presently take? was this grass of the earth made green for
your shroud only, not for your bed? and can you never lie down _upon_
it, but only _under_ it? The heathen, to whose creed you have returned,
thought not so. They knew that life brought its contest, but they
expected from it also the crown of all contest: No proud one! no
jewelled circlet flaming through Heaven above the height of the
unmerited throne; only some few leaves of wild olive, cool to the tired
brow, through a few years of peace. It should have been of gold, they
thought; but Jupiter was poor; this was the best the god could give
them. Seeking a greater than this, they had known it a mockery. Not in
war, not in wealth, not in tyranny, was there any happiness to be found
for them--only in kindly peace, fruitful and free. The wreath was to be
of _wild_ olive, mark you:--the tree that grows carelessly, tufting the
rocks with no vivid bloom, no verdure of branch; only with soft snow of
blossom, and scarcely fulfilled fruit, mixed with grey leaf and thornset
stem; no fastening of diadem for you but with such sharp embroidery! But
this, such as it is, you may win while yet you live; type of grey honour
and sweet rest.[2] Free-heartedness, and graciousness, and undisturbed
trust, and requited love, and the sight of the peace of others, and the
ministry to their pain;--these, and the blue sky above you, and the
sweet waters and flowers of the earth beneath; and mysteries and
presences, innumerable, of living things,--these may yet be here your
riches; untormenting and divine: serviceable for the life that now is
nor, it may be, without promise of that which is to come.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] 'A fearful occurrence took place a few days since, near
Wolverhampton. Thomas Snape, aged nineteen, was on duty as the "keeper"
of a blast furnace at Deepfield, assisted by John Gardner, aged
eighteen, and Joseph Swift, aged thirty-seven. The furnace contained
four tons of molten iron, and an equal amount of cinders, and ought to
have been run out at 7.30 P.M. But Snape and his mates, engaged in
talking and drinking, neglected their duty, and in the meantime, the
iron rose in the furnace until it reached a pipe wherein water was
contained. Just as the men had stripped, and were proceeding to tap the
furnace, the water in the pipe, converted into steam, burst down its
front and let loose on them the molten metal, which instantaneously
consumed Gardner; Snape, terribly burnt, and mad with pain, leaped into
the canal and then ran home and fell dead on the threshold, Swift
survived to reach the hospital, where he died too.

In further illustration of this matter, I beg the reader to look at the
article on the 'Decay of the English Race,' in the '_Pall-Mall Gazette_'
of April 17, of this year; and at the articles on the 'Report of the
Thames Commission,' in any journals of the same date.

[2] [Greek: melitoessa, aethlôn g' eneken].




THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE.




LECTURE I.

_WORK._

(_Delivered before the Working Men's Institute, at Camberwell._)


My Friends,--I have not come among you to-night to endeavour to give you
an entertaining lecture; but to tell you a few plain facts, and ask you
some plain, but necessary questions. I have seen and known too much of
the struggle for life among our labouring population, to feel at ease,
even under any circumstances, in inviting them to dwell on the
trivialities of my own studies; but, much more, as I meet to-night, for
the first time, the members of a working Institute established in the
district in which I have passed the greater part of my life, I am
desirous that we should at once understand each other, on graver
matters. I would fain tell you, with what feelings, and with what hope,
I regard this Institution, as one of many such, now happily established
throughout England, as well as in other countries;--Institutions which
are preparing the way for a great change in all the circumstances of
industrial life; but of which the success must wholly depend upon our
clearly understanding the circumstances and necessary _limits_ of this
change. No teacher can truly promote the cause of education, until he
knows the conditions of the life for which that education is to prepare
his pupil. And the fact that he is called upon to address you nominally,
as a 'Working Class,' must compel him, if he is in any wise earnest or
thoughtful, to inquire in the outset, on what you yourselves suppose
this class distinction has been founded in the past, and must be founded
in the future. The manner of the amusement, and the matter of the
teaching, which any of us can offer you, must depend wholly on our first
understanding from you, whether you think the distinction heretofore
drawn between working men and others, is truly or falsely founded. Do
you accept it as it stands? do you wish it to be modified? or do you
think the object of education is to efface it, and make us forget it for
ever?

Let me make myself more distinctly understood. We call this--you and
I--a 'Working Men's' Institute, and our college in London, a 'Working
Men's' College. Now, how do you consider that these several institutes
differ, or ought to differ, from 'idle men's' institutes and 'idle
men's' colleges? Or by what other word than 'idle' shall I distinguish
those whom the happiest and wisest of working men do not object to call
the 'Upper Classes?' Are there really upper classes,--are there lower?
How much should they always be elevated, how much always depressed? And,
gentlemen and ladies--I pray those of you who are here to forgive me the
offence there may be in what I am going to say. It is not _I_ who wish
to say it. Bitter voices say it; voices of battle and of famine through
all the world, which must be heard some day, whoever keeps silence.
Neither is it to _you_ specially that I say it. I am sure that most now
present know their duties of kindness, and fulfil them, better perhaps
than I do mine. But I speak to you as representing your whole class,
which errs, I know, chiefly by thoughtlessness, but not therefore the
less terribly. Wilful error is limited by the will, but what limit is
there to that of which we are unconscious?

Bear with me, therefore, while I turn to these workmen, and ask them,
also as representing a great multitude, what they think the 'upper
classes' are, and ought to be, in relation to them. Answer, you workmen
who are here, as you would among yourselves, frankly; and tell me how
you would have me call those classes. Am I to call them--would _you_
think me right in calling them--the idle classes? I think you would feel
somewhat uneasy, and as if I were not treating my subject honestly, or
speaking from my heart, if I went on under the supposition that all rich
people were idle. You would be both unjust and unwise if you allowed me
to say that;--not less unjust than the rich people who say that all the
poor are idle, and will never work if they can help it, or more than
they can help.

For indeed the fact is, that there are idle poor and idle rich; and
there are busy poor and busy rich. Many a beggar is as lazy as if he had
ten thousand a year; and many a man of large fortune is busier than his
errand-boy, and never would think of stopping in the street to play
marbles. So that, in a large view, the distinction between workers and
idlers, as between knaves and honest men, runs through the very heart
and innermost economies of men of all ranks and in all positions. There
is a working class--strong and happy--among both rich and poor; there is
an idle class--weak, wicked, and miserable--among both rich and poor.
And the worst of the misunderstandings arising between the two orders
come of the unlucky fact that the wise of one class habitually
contemplate the foolish of the other. If the busy rich people watched
and rebuked the idle rich people, all would be right; and if the busy
poor people watched and rebuked the idle poor people, all would be
right. But each class has a tendency to look for the faults of the
other. A hard-working man of property is particularly offended by an
idle beggar; and an orderly, but poor, workman is naturally intolerant
of the licentious luxury of the rich. And what is severe judgment in the
minds of the just men of either class, becomes fierce enmity in the
unjust--but among the unjust _only_. None but the dissolute among the
poor look upon the rich as their natural enemies, or desire to pillage
their houses and divide their property. None but the dissolute among the
rich speak in opprobrious terms of the vices and follies of the poor.

There is, then, no class distinction between idle and industrious
people; and I am going to-night to speak only of the industrious. The
idle people we will put out of our thoughts at once--they are mere
nuisances--what ought to be done with _them_, we'll talk of at another
time. But there are class distinctions, among the industrious
themselves; tremendous distinctions, which rise and fall to every
degree in the infinite thermometer of human pain and of human
power--distinctions of high and low, of lost and won, to the whole reach
of man's soul and body.

These separations we will study, and the laws of them, among energetic
men only, who, whether they work or whether they play, put their
strength into the work, and their strength into the game; being in the
full sense of the word 'industrious,' one way or another--with a
purpose, or without. And these distinctions are mainly four:

I. Between those who work, and those who play.

II. Between those who produce the means of life, and those who consume
them.

III. Between those who work with the head, and those who work with the
hand.

IV. Between those who work wisely, and who work foolishly.

For easier memory, let us say we are going to oppose, in our
examination.--

    I.   Work to play;
    II.  Production to consumption;
    III. Head to Hand; and,
    IV.  Sense to nonsense.

I. First, then, of the distinction between the classes who work and the
classes who play. Of course we must agree upon a definition of these
terms,--work and play,--before going farther. Now, roughly, not with
vain subtlety of definition, but for plain use of the words, 'play' is
an exertion of body or mind, made to please ourselves, and with no
determined end; and work is a thing done because it ought to be done,
and with a determined end. You play, as you call it, at cricket, for
instance. That is as hard work as anything else; but it amuses you, and
it has no result but the amusement. If it were done as an ordered form
of exercise, for health's sake, it would become work directly. So, in
like manner, whatever we do to please ourselves, and only for the sake
of the pleasure, not for an ultimate object, is 'play,' the 'pleasing
thing,' not the useful thing. Play may be useful in a secondary sense
(nothing is indeed more useful or necessary); but the use of it depends
on its being spontaneous.

Let us, then, enquire together what sort of games the playing class in
England spend their lives in playing at.

The first of all English games is making money. That is an all-absorbing
game; and we knock each other down oftener in playing at that than at
foot-ball, or any other roughest sport; and it is absolutely without
purpose; no one who engages heartily in that game ever knows why. Ask a
great money-maker what he wants to do with his money--he never knows. He
doesn't make it to do anything with it. He gets it only that he _may_
get it. 'What will you make of what you have got?' you ask. 'Well, I'll
get more,' he says. Just as, at cricket, you get more runs. There's no
use in the runs, but to get more of them than other people is the game.
And there's no use in the money, but to have more of it than other
people is the game. So all that great foul city of London
there,--rattling, growling, smoking, stinking,--a ghastly heap of
fermenting brick-work, pouring out poison at every pore,--you fancy it
is a city of work? Not a street of it! It is a great city of play; very
nasty play, and very hard play, but still play. It is only Lord's
cricket ground without the turf,--a huge billiard table without the
cloth, and with pockets as deep as the bottomless pit; but mainly a
billiard table, after all.

Well, the first great English game is this playing at counters. It
differs from the rest in that it appears always to be producing money,
while every other game is expensive. But it does not always produce
money. There's a great difference between 'winning' money and 'making'
it; a great difference between getting it out of another man's pocket
into ours, or filling both. Collecting money is by no means the same
thing as making it; the tax-gatherer's house is not the Mint; and much
of the apparent gain (so called), in commerce, is only a form of
taxation on carriage or exchange.

Our next great English game, however, hunting and shooting, is costly
altogether; and how much we are fined for it annually in land, horses,
gamekeepers, and game laws, and all else that accompanies that
beautiful and special English game, I will not endeavour to count now:
but note only that, except for exercise, this is not merely a useless
game, but a deadly one, to all connected with it. For through
horse-racing, you get every form of what the higher classes everywhere
call 'Play,' in distinction from all other plays; that is--gambling; by
no means a beneficial or recreative game: and, through game-preserving,
you get also some curious laying out of ground; that beautiful
arrangement of dwelling-house for man and beast, by which we have grouse
and black-cock--so many brace to the acre, and men and women--so many
brace to the garret. I often wonder what the angelic builders and
surveyors--the angelic builders who build the 'many mansions' up above
there; and the angelic surveyors, who measured that four-square city
with their measuring reeds--I wonder what they think, or are supposed to
think, of the laying out of ground by this nation, which has set itself,
as it seems, literally to accomplish, word for word, or rather fact for
word, in the persons of those poor whom its Master left to represent
him, what that Master said of himself--that foxes and birds had homes,
but He none.

Then, next to the gentlemen's game of hunting, we must put the ladies'
game of dressing. It is not the cheapest of games. I saw a brooch at a
jeweller's in Bond Street a fortnight ago, not an inch wide, and without
any singular jewel in it, yet worth 3,000_l._ And I wish I could tell
you what this 'play' costs, altogether, in England, France, and Russia
annually. But it is a pretty game, and on certain terms, I like it; nay,
I don't see it played quite as much as I would fain have it. You ladies
like to lead the fashion:--by all means lead it--lead it thoroughly,
lead it far enough. Dress yourselves nicely, and dress everybody else
nicely. Lead the _fashions for the poor_ first; make _them_ look well,
and you yourselves will look, in ways of which you have now no
conception, all the better. The fashions you have set for some time
among your peasantry are not pretty ones; their doublets are too
irregularly slashed, and the wind blows too frankly through them.

Then there are other games, wild enough, as I could show you if I had
time.

There's playing at literature, and playing at art--very different, both,
from working at literature, or working at art, but I've no time to speak
of these. I pass to the greatest of all--the play of plays, the great
gentlemen's game, which ladies like them best to play at,--the game of
War. It is entrancingly pleasant to the imagination; the facts of it,
not always so pleasant. We dress for it, however, more finely than for
any other sport; and go out to it, not merely in scarlet, as to hunt,
but in scarlet and gold, and all manner of fine colours: of course we
could fight better in grey, and without feathers; but all nations have
agreed that it is good to be well dressed at this play. Then the bats
and balls are very costly; our English and French bats, with the balls
and wickets, even those which we don't make any use of, costing, I
suppose, now about fifteen millions of money annually to each nation;
all of which, you know is paid for by hard labourer's work in the furrow
and furnace. A costly game!--not to speak of its consequences; I will
say at present nothing of these. The mere immediate cost of all these
plays is what I want you to consider; they all cost deadly work
somewhere, as many of us know too well. The jewel-cutter, whose sight
fails over the diamonds; the weaver, whose arm fails over the web; the
iron-forger, whose breath fails before the furnace--_they_ know what
work is--they, who have all the work, and none of the play, except a
kind they have named for themselves down in the black north country,
where 'play' means being laid up by sickness. It is a pretty example for
philologists, of varying dialect, this change in the sense of the word
'play,' as used in the black country of Birmingham, and the red and
black country of Baden Baden. Yes, gentlemen, and gentlewomen, of
England, who think 'one moment unamused a misery, not made for feeble
man,' this is what you have brought the word 'play' to mean, in the
heart of merry England! You may have your fluting and piping; but there
are sad children sitting in the market-place, who indeed cannot say to
you, 'We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced:' but eternally
shall say to you, 'We have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.'

This, then, is the first distinction between the 'upper and lower'
classes. And this is one which is by no means necessary; which indeed
must, in process of good time, be by all honest men's consent abolished.
Men will be taught that an existence of play, sustained by the blood of
other creatures, is a good existence for gnats and sucking fish; but not
for men: that neither days, nor lives, can be made holy by doing nothing
in them: that the best prayer at the beginning of a day is that we may
not lose its moments; and the best grace before meat, the consciousness
that we have justly earned our dinner. And when we have this much of
plain Christianity preached to us again, and enough respect for what we
regard as inspiration, as not to think that 'Son, go work to-day in my
vineyard,' means 'Fool, go play to-day in my vineyard,' we shall all be
workers, in one way or another; and this much at least of the
distinction between 'upper' and 'lower' forgotten.

II. I pass then to our second distinction; between the rich and poor,
between Dives and Lazarus,--distinction which exists more sternly, I
suppose, in this day, than ever in the world, Pagan or Christian, till
now. I will put it sharply before you, to begin with, merely by reading
two paragraphs which I cut from two papers that lay on my breakfast
table on the same morning, the 25th of November, 1864. The piece about
the rich Russian at Paris is commonplace enough, and stupid besides (for
fifteen francs,--12_s._ 6_d._,--is nothing for a rich man to give for a
couple of peaches, out of season). Still, the two paragraphs printed on
the same day are worth putting side by side.

'Such a man is now here. He is a Russian, and, with your permission, we
will call him Count Teufelskine. In dress he is sublime; art is
considered in that toilet, the harmony of colour respected, the _chiar'
oscuro_ evident in well-selected contrast. In manners he is
dignified--nay, perhaps apathetic; nothing disturbs the placid serenity
of that calm exterior. One day our friend breakfasted _chez_ Bignon.
When the bill came he read, "Two peaches, 15f." He paid. "Peaches
scarce, I presume?" was his sole remark. "No, sir," replied the waiter,
"but Teufelskines are."' _Telegraph_, November 25, 1864.

'Yesterday morning, at eight o'clock, a woman, passing a dung heap in
the stone yard near the recently-erected alms-houses in Shadwell Gap,
High Street, Shadwell, called the attention of a Thames police-constable
to a man in a sitting position on the dung heap, and said she was afraid
he was dead. Her fears proved to be true. The wretched creature appeared
to have been dead several hours. He had perished of cold and wet, and
the rain had been beating down on him all night. The deceased was a
bone-picker. He was in the lowest stage of poverty, poorly clad, and
half-starved. The police had frequently driven him away from the stone
yard, between sunset and sunrise, and told him to go home. He selected a
most desolate spot for his wretched death. A penny and some bones were
found in his pockets. The deceased was between fifty and sixty years of
age. Inspector Roberts, of the K division, has given directions for
inquiries to be made at the lodging-houses respecting the deceased, to
ascertain his identity if possible.'--_Morning Post_, November 25, 1864.

You have the separation thus in brief compass; and I want you to take
notice of the 'a penny and some bones were found in his pockets,' and to
compare it with this third statement, from the _Telegraph_ of January
16th of this year:--

'Again, the dietary scale for adult and juvenile paupers was drawn up by
the most conspicuous political economists in England. It is low in
quantity, but it is sufficient to support nature; yet within ten years
of the passing of the Poor Law Act, we heard of the paupers in the
Andover Union gnawing the scraps of putrid flesh and sucking the marrow
from the bones of horses which they were employed to crush.'

You see my reason for thinking that our Lazarus of Christianity has some
advantage over the Jewish one. Jewish Lazarus expected, or at least
prayed, to be fed with crumbs from the rich man's table; but _our_
Lazarus is fed with crumbs from the dog's table.

Now this distinction between rich and poor rests on two bases. Within
its proper limits, on a basis which is lawful and everlastingly
necessary; beyond them, on a basis unlawful, and everlastingly
corrupting the framework of society. The lawful basis of wealth is, that
a man who works should be paid the fair value of his work; and that if
he does not choose to spend it to-day, he should have free leave to keep
it, and spend it to-morrow. Thus, an industrious man working daily, and
laying by daily, attains at last the possession of an accumulated sum of
wealth, to which he has absolute right. The idle person who will not
work, and the wasteful person who lays nothing by, at the end of the
same time will be doubly poor--poor in possession, and dissolute in
moral habit; and he will then naturally covet the money which the other
has saved. And if he is then allowed to attack the other, and rob him of
his well-earned wealth, there is no more any motive for saving, or any
reward for good conduct; and all society is thereupon dissolved, or
exists only in systems of rapine. Therefore the first necessity of
social life is the clearness of national conscience in enforcing the
law--that he should keep who has JUSTLY EARNED.

That law, I say, is the proper basis of distinction between rich and
poor. But there is also a false basis of distinction; namely, the power
held over those who earn wealth by those who levy or exact it. There
will be always a number of men who would fain set themselves to the
accumulation of wealth as the sole object of their lives. Necessarily,
that class of men is an uneducated class, inferior in intellect, and
more or less cowardly. It is physically impossible for a well-educated,
intellectual, or brave man to make money the chief object of his
thoughts; as physically impossible as it is for him to make his dinner
the principal object of them. All healthy people like their dinners, but
their dinner is not the main object of their lives. So all healthily
minded people like making money--ought to like it, and to enjoy the
sensation of winning it; but the main object of their life is not money;
it is something better than money. A good soldier, for instance, mainly
wishes to do his fighting well. He is glad of his pay--very properly
so, and justly grumbles when you keep him ten years without it--still,
his main notion of life is to win battles, not to be paid for winning
them. So of clergymen. They like pew-rents, and baptismal fees, of
course; but yet, if they are brave and well educated, the pew-rent is
not the sole object of their lives, and the baptismal fee is not the
sole purpose of the baptism; the clergyman's object is essentially to
baptize and preach, not to be paid for preaching. So of doctors. They
like fees no doubt,--ought to like them; yet if they are brave and well
educated, the entire object of their lives is not fees. They, on the
whole, desire to cure the sick; and,--if they are good doctors, and the
choice were fairly put to them,--would rather cure their patient, and
lose their fee, than kill him, and get it. And so with all other brave
and rightly trained men; their work is first, their fee second--very
important always, but still _second_. But in every nation, as I said,
there are a vast class who are ill-educated, cowardly, and more or less
stupid. And with these people, just as certainly the fee is first, and
the work second, as with brave people the work is first and the fee
second. And this is no small distinction. It is the whole distinction in
a man; distinction between life and death _in_ him, between heaven and
hell _for_ him. You cannot serve two masters;--you _must_ serve one or
other. If your work is first with you, and your fee second, work is your
master, and the lord of work, who is God. But if your fee is first with
you, and your work second, fee is your master, and the lord of fee, who
is the Devil; and not only the Devil, but the lowest of devils--the
'least erected fiend that fell.' So there you have it in brief terms;
Work first--you are God's servants; Fee first--you are the Fiend's. And
it makes a difference, now and ever, believe me, whether you serve Him
who has on His vesture and thigh written, 'King of Kings,' and whose
service is perfect freedom; or him on whose vesture and thigh the name
is written, 'Slave of Slaves,' and whose service is perfect slavery.

However, in every nation there are, and must always be, a certain number
of these Fiend's servants, who have it principally for the object of
their lives to make money. They are always, as I said, more or less
stupid, and cannot conceive of anything else so nice as money. Stupidity
is always the basis of the Judas bargain. We do great injustice to
Iscariot, in thinking him wicked above all common wickedness. He was
only a common money-lover, and, like all money-lovers, didn't understand
Christ;--couldn't make out the worth of Him, or meaning of Him. He
didn't want Him to be killed. He was horror-struck when he found that
Christ would be killed; threw his money away instantly, and hanged
himself. How many of our present money-seekers, think you, would have
the grace to hang themselves, whoever was killed? But Judas was a
common, selfish, muddle-headed, pilfering fellow; his hand always in the
bag of the poor, not caring for them. He didn't understand Christ;--yet
believed in Him, much more than most of us do; had seen Him do miracles,
thought He was quite strong enough to shift for Himself, and he, Judas,
might as well make his own little bye-perquisites out of the affair.
Christ would come out of it well enough, and he have his thirty pieces.
Now, that is the money-seeker's idea, all over the world. He doesn't
hate Christ, but can't understand Him--doesn't care for him--sees no
good in that benevolent business; makes his own little job out of it at
all events, come what will. And thus, out of every mass of men, you have
a certain number of bag-men--your 'fee-first' men, whose main object is
to make money. And they do make it--make it in all sorts of unfair ways,
chiefly by the weight and force of money itself, or what is called the
power of capital; that is to say, the power which money, once obtained,
has over the labour of the poor, so that the capitalist can take all its
produce to himself, except the labourer's food. That is the modern
Judas's way of 'carrying the bag,' and 'bearing what is put therein.'

Nay, but (it is asked) how is that an unfair advantage? Has not the man
who has worked for the money a right to use it as he best can? No; in
this respect, money is now exactly what mountain promontories over
public roads were in old times. The barons fought for them fairly:--the
strongest and cunningest got them; then fortified them, and made
everyone who passed below pay toll. Well, capital now is exactly what
crags were then. Men fight fairly (we will, at least, grant so much,
though it is more than we ought) for their money; but, once having got
it, the fortified millionaire can make everybody who passes below pay
toll to his million, and build another tower of his money castle. And I
can tell you, the poor vagrants by the roadside suffer now quite as much
from the bag-baron, as ever they did from the crag-baron. Bags and crags
have just the same result on rags. I have not time, however, to-night to
show you in how many ways the power of capital is unjust; but this one
great principle I have to assert--you will find it quite indisputably
true--that whenever money is the principal object of life with either
man or nation, it is both got ill, and spent ill; and does harm both in
the getting and spending; but when it is not the principal object, it
and all other things will be well got, and well spent. And here is the
test, with every man, of whether money is the principal object with him,
or not. If in mid-life he could pause and say, "Now I have enough to
live upon, I'll live upon it; and having well earned it, I will also
well spend it, and go out of the world poor, as I came into it," then
money is not principal with him; but if, having enough to live upon in
the manner befitting his character and rank, he still wants to make
more, and to _die_ rich, then money is the principal object with him,
and it becomes a curse to himself, and generally to those who spend it
after him. For you know it _must_ be spent some day; the only question
is whether the man who makes it shall spend it, or some one else. And
generally it is better for the maker to spend it, for he will know best
its value and use. This is the true law of life. And if a man does not
choose thus to spend his money, he must either hoard it or lend it, and
the worst thing he can generally do is to lend it; for borrowers are
nearly always ill-spenders, and it is with lent money that all evil is
mainly done, and all unjust war protracted.

For observe what the real fact is, respecting loans to foreign military
governments, and how strange it is. If your little boy came to you to
ask for money to spend in squibs and crackers, you would think twice
before you gave it him; and you would have some idea that it was wasted,
when you saw it fly off in fireworks, even though he did no mischief
with it. But the Russian children, and Austrian children, come to you,
borrowing money, not to spend in innocent squibs, but in cartridges and
bayonets to attack you in India with, and to keep down all noble life in
Italy with, and to murder Polish women and children with; and _that_ you
will give at once, because they pay you interest for it. Now, in order
to pay you that interest, they must tax every working peasant in their
dominions; and on that work you live. You therefore at once rob the
Austrian peasant, assassinate or banish the Polish peasant, and you live
on the produce of the theft, and the bribe for the assassination! That
is the broad fact--that is the practical meaning of your foreign loans,
and of most large interest of money; and then you quarrel with Bishop
Colenso, forsooth, as if _he_ denied the Bible, and you believed it!
though, wretches as you are, every deliberate act of your lives is a new
defiance of its primary orders; and as if, for most of the rich men of
England at this moment, it were not indeed to be desired, as the best
thing at least for _them_, that the Bible should _not_ be true, since
against them these words are written in it: 'The rust of your gold and
silver shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it
were fire.'


III. I pass now to our third condition of separation, between the men
who work with the hand, and those who work with the head.

And here we have at last an inevitable distinction. There _must_ be work
done by the arms, or none of us could live. There _must_ be work done by
the brains, or the life we get would not be worth having. And the same
men cannot do both. There is rough work to be done, and rough men must
do it; there is gentle work to be done, and gentlemen must do it; and it
is physically impossible that one class should do, or divide, the work
of the other. And it is of no use to try to conceal this sorrowful fact
by fine words, and to talk to the workman about the honourableness of
manual labour and the dignity of humanity. That is a grand old proverb
of Sancho Panza's, 'Fine words butter no parsnips;' and I can tell you
that, all over England just now, you workmen are buying a great deal too
much butter at that dairy. Rough work, honourable or not, takes the life
out of us; and the man who has been heaving clay out of a ditch all day,
or driving an express train against the north wind all night, or holding
a collier's helm in a gale on a lee-shore, or whirling white hot iron at
a furnace mouth, that man is not the same at the end of his day, or
night, as one who has been sitting in a quiet room, with everything
comfortable about him, reading books, or classing butterflies, or
painting pictures. If it is any comfort to you to be told that the rough
work is the more honourable of the two, I should be sorry to take that
much of consolation from you; and in some sense I need not. The rough
work is at all events real, honest, and, generally, though not always,
useful; while the fine work is, a great deal of it, foolish and false as
well as fine, and therefore dishonourable; but when both kinds are
equally well and worthily done, the head's is the noble work, and the
hand's the ignoble; and of all hand work whatsoever, necessary for the
maintenance of life, those old words, 'In the sweat of thy face thou
shalt eat bread,' indicate that the inherent nature of it is one of
calamity; and that the ground, cursed for our sake, casts also some
shadow of degradation into our contest with its thorn and its thistle;
so that all nations have held their days honourable, or 'holy,' and
constituted them 'holydays' or 'holidays,' by making them days of rest;
and the promise, which, among all our distant hopes, seems to cast the
chief brightness over death, is that blessing of the dead who die in the
Lord, that 'they rest from their labours, and their works do follow
them.'

And thus the perpetual question and contest must arise, who is to do
this rough work? and how is the worker of it to be comforted, redeemed,
and rewarded? and what kind of play should he have, and what rest, in
this world, sometimes, as well as in the next? Well, my good working
friends, these questions will take a little time to answer yet. They
must be answered: all good men are occupied with them, and all honest
thinkers. There's grand head work doing about them; but much must be
discovered, and much attempted in vain, before anything decisive can be
told you. Only note these few particulars, which are already sure.

As to the distribution of the hard work. None of us, or very few of us,
do either hard or soft work because we think we ought; but because we
have chanced to fall into the way of it, and cannot help ourselves. Now,
nobody does anything well that they cannot help doing: work is only done
well when it is done with a will; and no man has a thoroughly sound will
unless he knows he is doing what he should, and is in his place. And,
depend upon it, all work must be done at last, not in a disorderly,
scrambling, doggish way, but in an ordered, soldierly, human way--a
lawful way. Men are enlisted for the labour that kills--the labour of
war: they are counted, trained, fed, dressed, and praised for that. Let
them be enlisted also for the labour that feeds: let them be counted,
trained, fed, dressed, praised for that. Teach the plough exercise as
carefully as you do the sword exercise, and let the officers of troops
of life be held as much gentlemen as the officers of troops of death;
and all is done: but neither this, nor any other right thing, can be
accomplished--you can't even see your way to it--unless, first of all,
both servant and master are resolved that, come what will of it, they
will do each other justice. People are perpetually squabbling about what
will be best to do, or easiest to do, or adviseablest to do, or
profitablest to do; but they never, so far as I hear them talk, ever ask
what it is _just_ to do. And it is the law of heaven that you shall not
be able to judge what is wise or easy, unless you are first resolved to
judge what is just, and to do it. That is the one thing constantly
reiterated by our Master--the order of all others that is given
oftenest--'Do justice and judgment.' That's your Bible order; that's the
'Service of God,' not praying nor psalm-singing. You are told, indeed,
to sing psalms when you are merry, and to pray when you need anything;
and, by the perversion of the Evil Spirit, we get to think that praying
and psalm-singing are 'service.' If a child finds itself in want of
anything, it runs in and asks its father for it--does it call that,
doing its father a service? If it begs for a toy or a piece of
cake--does it call that serving its father? That, with God, is prayer,
and He likes to hear it: He likes you to ask Him for cake when you want
it; but He doesn't call that 'serving Him.' Begging is not serving: God
likes mere beggars as little as you do--He likes honest servants, not
beggars. So when a child loves its father very much, and is very happy,
it may sing little songs about him; but it doesn't call that serving its
father; neither is singing songs about God, serving God. It is enjoying
ourselves, if it's anything; most probably it is nothing; but if it's
anything, it is serving ourselves, not God. And yet we are impudent
enough to call our beggings and chauntings 'Divine Service:' we say
'Divine service will be "performed"' (that's our word--the form of it
gone through) 'at eleven o'clock.' Alas!--unless we perform Divine
service in every willing act of our life, we never perform it at all.
The one Divine work--the one ordered sacrifice--is to do justice; and it
is the last we are ever inclined to do. Anything rather than that! As
much charity as you choose, but no justice. 'Nay,' you will say,
'charity is greater than justice.' Yes, it is greater; it is the summit
of justice--it is the temple of which justice is the foundation. But you
can't have the top without the bottom; you cannot build upon charity.
You must build upon justice, for this main reason, that you have not, at
first, charity to build with. It is the last reward of good work. Do
justice to your brother (you can do that, whether you love him or not),
and you will come to love him. But do injustice to him, because you
don't love him; and you will come to hate him. It is all very fine to
think you can build upon charity to begin with; but you will find all
you have got to begin with, begins at home, and is essentially love of
yourself. You well-to-do people, for instance, who are here to-night,
will go to 'Divine service' next Sunday, all nice and tidy, and your
little children will have their tight little Sunday boots on, and lovely
little Sunday feathers in their hats; and you'll think, complacently and
piously, how lovely they look! So they do: and you love them heartily
and you like sticking feathers in their hats. That's all right: that
_is_ charity; but it is charity beginning at home. Then you will come to
the poor little crossing-sweeper, got up also,--it, in its Sunday
dress,--the dirtiest rags it has,--that it may beg the better: we shall
give it a penny, and think how good we are. That's charity going abroad.
But what does Justice say, walking and watching near us? Christian
Justice has been strangely mute, and seemingly blind; and, if not blind,
decrepit, this many a day: she keeps her accounts still, however--quite
steadily--doing them at nights, carefully, with her bandage off, and
through acutest spectacles (the only modern scientific invention she
cares about). You must put your ear down ever so close to her lips to
hear her speak; and then you will start at what she first whispers, for
it will certainly be, 'Why shouldn't that little crossing-sweeper have a
feather on its head, as well as your own child?' Then you may ask
Justice, in an amazed manner, 'How she can possibly be so foolish as to
think children could sweep crossings with feathers on their heads?' Then
you stoop again, and Justice says--still in her dull, stupid way--'Then,
why don't you, every other Sunday, leave your child to sweep the
crossing, and take the little sweeper to church in a hat and feather?'
Mercy on us (you think), what will she say next? And you answer, of
course, that 'you don't, because every body ought to remain content in
the position in which Providence has placed them.' Ah, my friends,
that's the gist of the whole question. _Did_ Providence put them in that
position, or did _you_? You knock a man into a ditch, and then you tell
him to remain content in the 'position in which Providence has placed
him.' That's modern Christianity. You say--'_We_ did not knock him into
the ditch.' How do you know what you have done, or are doing? That's
just what we have all got to know, and what we shall never know, until
the question with us every morning, is, not how to do the gainful thing,
but how to do the just thing; nor until we are at least so far on the
way to being Christian, as to have understood that maxim of the poor
half-way Mahometan, 'One hour in the execution of justice is worth
seventy years of prayer.'

Supposing, then, we have it determined with appropriate justice, _who_
is to do the hand work, the next questions must be how the hand-workers
are to be paid, and how they are to be refreshed, and what play they are
to have. Now, the possible quantity of play depends on the possible
quantity of pay; and the quantity of pay is not a matter for
consideration to hand-workers only, but to all workers. Generally, good,
useful work, whether of the hand or head, is either ill-paid, or not
paid at all. I don't say it should be so, but it always is so. People,
as a rule, only pay for being amused or being cheated, not for being
served. Five thousand a year to your talker, and a shilling a day to
your fighter, digger, and thinker, is the rule. None of the best head
work in art, literature, or science, is ever paid for. How much do you
think Homer got for his Iliad? or Dante for his Paradise? only bitter
bread and salt, and going up and down other people's stairs. In science,
the man who discovered the telescope, and first saw heaven, was paid
with a dungeon; the man who invented the microscope, and first saw
earth, died of starvation, driven from his home: it is indeed very clear
that God means all thoroughly good work and talk to be done for nothing.
Baruch, the scribe, did not get a penny a line for writing Jeremiah's
second roll for him, I fancy; and St. Stephen did not get bishop's pay
for that long sermon of his to the Pharisees; nothing but stones. For
indeed that is the world-father's proper payment. So surely as any of
the world's children work for the world's good, honestly, with head and
heart; and come to it, saying, 'Give us a little bread, just to keep the
life in us,' the world-father answers them, 'No, my children, not bread;
a stone, if you like, or as many as you need, to keep you quiet.' But
the hand-workers are not so ill off as all this comes to. The worst that
can happen to _you_ is to break stones; not be broken by them. And for
you there will come a time for better payment; some day, assuredly, more
pence will be paid to Peter the Fisherman, and fewer to Peter the Pope;
we shall pay people not quite so much for talking in Parliament and
doing nothing, as for holding their tongues out of it and doing
something; we shall pay our ploughman a little more and our lawyer a
little less, and so on: but, at least, we may even now take care that
whatever work is done shall be fully paid for; and the man who does it
paid for it, not somebody else; and that it shall be done in an orderly,
soldierly, well-guided, wholesome way, under good captains and
lieutenants of labour; and that it shall have its appointed times of
rest, and enough of them; and that in those times the play shall be
wholesome play, not in theatrical gardens, with tin flowers and gas
sunshine, and girls dancing because of their misery; but in true
gardens, with real flowers, and real sunshine, and children dancing
because of their gladness; so that truly the streets shall be full (the
'streets,' mind you, not the gutters) of children, playing in the midst
thereof. We may take care that working-men shall have at least as good
books to read as anybody else, when they've time to read them; and as
comfortable fire-sides to sit at as anybody else, when they've time to
sit at them. This, I think, can be managed for you, my working friends,
in the good time.

IV. I must go on, however, to our last head, concerning ourselves all,
as workers. What is wise work, and what is foolish work? What the
difference between sense and nonsense, in daily occupation?

Well, wise work is, briefly, work _with_ God. Foolish work is work
_against_ God. And work done with God, which He will help, may be
briefly described as 'Putting in Order'--that is, enforcing God's law of
order, spiritual and material, over men and things. The first thing you
have to do, essentially; the real 'good work' is, with respect to men,
to enforce justice, and with respect to things, to enforce tidiness, and
fruitfulness. And against these two great human deeds, justice and
order, there are perpetually two great demons contending,--the devil of
iniquity, or inequity, and the devil of disorder, or of death; for death
is only consummation of disorder. You have to fight these two fiends
daily. So far as you don't fight against the fiend of iniquity, you work
for him. You 'work iniquity,' and the judgment upon you, for all your
'Lord, Lord's,' will be 'Depart from me, ye that work iniquity.' And so
far as you do not resist the fiend of disorder, you work disorder, and
you yourself do the work of Death, which is sin, and has for its wages,
Death himself.

Observe then, all wise work is mainly threefold in character. It is
honest, useful, and cheerful.


I. It is HONEST. I hardly know anything more strange than that you
recognise honesty in play, and you do not in work. In your lightest
games, you have always some one to see what you call 'fair-play.' In
boxing, you must hit fair; in racing, start fair. Your English watchword
is fair-play, your English hatred, foul-play. Did it ever strike you
that you wanted another watchword also, fair-work, and another hatred
also, foul-work? Your prize-fighter has some honour in him yet; and so
have the men in the ring round him: they will judge him to lose the
match, by foul hitting. But your prize-merchant gains his match by foul
selling, and no one cries out against that. You drive a gambler out of
the gambling-room who loads dice, but you leave a tradesman in
flourishing business, who loads scales! For observe, all dishonest
dealing _is_ loading scales. What does it matter whether I get short
weight, adulterate substance, or dishonest fabric? The fault in the
fabric is incomparably the worst of the two. Give me short measure of
food, and I only lose by you; but give me adulterate food, and I die by
you. Here, then, is your chief duty, you workmen and tradesmen--to be
true to yourselves, and to us who would help you. We can do nothing for
you, nor you for yourselves, without honesty. Get that, you get all;
without that, your suffrages, your reforms, your free-trade measures,
your institutions of science, are all in vain. It is useless to put your
heads together, if you can't put your hearts together. Shoulder to
shoulder, right hand to right hand, among yourselves, and no wrong hand
to anybody else, and you'll win the world yet.


II. Then, secondly, wise work is USEFUL. No man minds, or ought to mind,
its being hard, if only it comes to something; but when it is hard, and
comes to nothing; when all our bees' business turns to spiders'; and
for honeycomb we have only resultant cobweb, blown away by the next
breeze--that is the cruel thing for the worker. Yet do we ever ask
ourselves, personally, or even nationally, whether our work is coming to
anything or not? We don't care to keep what has been nobly done; still
less do we care to do nobly what others would keep; and, least of all,
to make the work itself useful instead of deadly to the doer, so as to
use his life indeed, but not to waste it. Of all wastes, the greatest
waste that you can commit is the waste of labour. If you went down in
the morning into your dairy, and you found that your youngest child had
got down before you; and that he and the cat were at play together, and
that he had poured out all the cream on the floor for the cat to lap up,
you would scold the child, and be sorry the milk was wasted. But if,
instead of wooden bowls with milk in them, there are golden bowls with
human life in them, and instead of the cat to play with--the devil to
play with; and you yourself the player; and instead of leaving that
golden bowl to be broken by God at the fountain, you break it in the
dust yourself, and pour the human blood out on the ground for the fiend
to lick up--that is no waste! What! you perhaps think, 'to waste the
labour of men is not to kill them.' Is it not? I should like to know how
you could kill them more utterly--kill them with second deaths, seventh
deaths, hundredfold deaths? It is the slightest way of killing to stop a
man's breath. Nay, the hunger, and the cold, and the little whistling
bullets--our love-messengers between nation and nation--have brought
pleasant messages from us to many a man before now; orders of sweet
release, and leave at last to go where he will be most welcome and most
happy. At the worst you do but shorten his life, you do not corrupt his
life. But if you put him to base labour, if you bind his thoughts, if
you blind his eyes, if you blunt his hopes, if you steal his joys, if
you stunt his body, and blast his soul, and at last leave him not so
much as to reap the poor fruit of his degradation, but gather that for
yourself, and dismiss him to the grave, when you have done with him,
having, so far as in you lay, made the walls of that grave everlasting
(though, indeed, I fancy the goodly bricks of some of our family vaults
will hold closer in the resurrection day than the sod over the
labourer's head), this you think is no waste, and no sin!


III. Then, lastly, wise work is CHEERFUL, as a child's work is. And now
I want you to take one thought home with you, and let it stay with you.

Everybody in this room has been taught to pray daily, 'Thy kingdom
come.' Now, if we hear a man swear in the streets, we think it very
wrong, and say he 'takes God's name in vain.' But there's a twenty times
worse way of taking His name in vain, than that. It is to _ask God for
what we don't want_. He doesn't like that sort of prayer. If you don't
want a thing, don't ask for it: such asking is the worst mockery of your
King you can mock Him with; the soldiers striking Him on the head with
the reed was nothing to that. If you do not wish for His kingdom, don't
pray for it. But if you do, you must do more than pray for it; you must
work for it. And, to work for it, you must know what it is: we have all
prayed for it many a day without thinking. Observe, it is a kingdom that
is to come to us; we are not to go to it. Also, it is not to be a
kingdom of the dead, but of the living. Also, it is not to come all at
once, but quietly; nobody knows how. 'The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation.' Also, it is not to come outside of us, but in the hearts
of us: 'the kingdom of God is within you.' And, being within us, it is
not a thing to be seen, but to be felt; and though it brings all
substance of good with it, it does not consist in that: 'the kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost:' joy, that is to say, in the holy, healthful, and helpful Spirit.
Now, if we want to work for this kingdom, and to bring it, and enter
into it, there's just one condition to be first accepted. You must enter
it as children, or not at all; 'Whosoever will not receive it as a
little child shall not enter therein.' And again, 'Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven.'

_Of such_, observe. Not of children themselves, but of such as
children. I believe most mothers who read that text think that all
heaven is to be full of babies. But that's not so. There will be
children there, but the hoary head is the crown. 'Length of days, and
long life and peace,' that is the blessing, not to die in babyhood.
Children die but for their parents sins; God means them to live, but He
can't let them always; then they have their earlier place in heaven: and
the little child of David, vainly prayed for;--the little child of
Jeroboam, killed by its mother's step on its own threshold,--they will
be there. But weary old David, and weary old Barzillai, having learned
children's lessons at last, will be there too: and the one question for
us all, young or old, is, have we learned our child's lesson? it is the
_character_ of children we want, and must gain at our peril; let us see,
briefly, in what it consists.

The first character of right childhood is that it is Modest. A well-bred
child does not think it can teach its parents, or that it knows
everything. It may think its father and mother know everything,--perhaps
that all grown-up people know everything; very certainly it is sure that
_it_ does not. And it is always asking questions, and wanting to know
more. Well, that is the first character of a good and wise man at his
work. To know that he knows very little;--to perceive that there are
many above him wiser than he; and to be always asking questions, wanting
to learn, not to teach. No one ever teaches well who wants to teach, or
governs well who wants to govern; it is an old saying (Plato's, but I
know not if his, first), and as wise as old.

Then, the second character of right childhood is to be Faithful.
Perceiving that its father knows best what is good for it, and having
found always, when it has tried its own way against his, that he was
right and it was wrong, a noble child trusts him at last wholly, gives
him its hand, and will walk blindfold with him, if he bids it. And that
is the true character of all good men also, as obedient workers, or
soldiers under captains. They must trust their captains;--they are bound
for their lives to choose none but those whom they _can_ trust. Then,
they are not always to be thinking that what seems strange to them, or
wrong in what they are desired to do, _is_ strange or wrong. They know
their captain: where he leads they must follow, what he bids, they must
do; and without this trust and faith, without this captainship and
soldiership, no great deed, no great salvation, is possible to man.
Among all the nations it is only when this faith is attained by them
that they become great: the Jew, the Greek, and the Mahometan, agree at
least in testifying to this. It was a deed of this absolute trust which
made Abraham the father of the faithful; it was the declaration of the
power of God as captain over all men, and the acceptance of a leader
appointed by Him as commander of the faithful, which laid the foundation
of whatever national power yet exists in the East; and the deed of the
Greeks, which has become the type of unselfish and noble soldiership to
all lands, and to all times, was commemorated, on the tomb of those who
gave their lives to do it, in the most pathetic, so far as I know, or
can feel, of all human utterances: 'Oh, stranger, go and tell our people
that we are lying here, having _obeyed_ their words.'

Then the third character of right childhood is to be Loving and
Generous. Give a little love to a child, and you get a great deal back.
It loves everything near it, when it is a right kind of child--would
hurt nothing, would give the best it has away, always, if you need
it--does not lay plans for getting everything in the house for itself,
and delights in helping people; you cannot please it so much as by
giving it a chance of being useful, in ever so little a way.

And because of all these characters, lastly, it is Cheerful. Putting its
trust in its father, it is careful for nothing--being full of love to
every creature, it is happy always, whether in its play or in its duty.
Well, that's the great worker's character also. Taking no thought for
the morrow; taking thought only for the duty of the day; trusting
somebody else to take care of to-morrow; knowing indeed what labour is,
but not what sorrow is; and always ready for play--beautiful play,--for
lovely human play is like the play of the Sun. There's a worker for you.
He, steady to his time, is set as a strong man to run his course, but
also, he _rejoiceth_ as a strong man to run his course. See how he
plays in the morning, with the mists below, and the clouds above, with a
ray here and a flash there, and a shower of jewels everywhere; that's
the Sun's play; and great human play is like his--all various--all full
of light and life, and tender, as the dew of the morning.

So then, you have the child's character in these four things--Humility,
Faith, Charity, and Cheerfulness. That's what you have got to be
converted to. 'Except ye be converted and become as little
children'--You hear much of conversion now-a-days; but people always
seem to think they have got to be made wretched by conversion,--to be
converted to long faces. No, friends, you have got to be converted to
short ones; you have to repent into childhood, to repent into delight,
and delightsomeness. You can't go into a conventicle but you'll hear
plenty of talk of backsliding. Backsliding, indeed! I can tell you, on
the ways most of us go, the faster we slide back the better. Slide back
into the cradle, if going on is into the grave--back, I tell you;
back--out of your long faces, and into your long clothes. It is among
children only, and as children only, that you will find medicine for
your healing and true wisdom for your teaching. There is poison in the
counsels of the _men_ of this world; the words they speak are all
bitterness, 'the poison of asps is under their lips,' but, 'the sucking
child shall play by the hole of the asp.' There is death in the looks of
men. 'Their eyes are privily set against the poor;' they are as the
uncharmable serpent, the cockatrice, which slew by seeing. But 'the
weaned child shall lay his hand on the cockatrice den.' There is death
in the steps of men: 'their feet are swift to shed blood; they have
compassed us in our steps like the lion that is greedy of his prey, and
the young lion lurking in secret places,' but, in that kingdom, the wolf
shall lie down with the lamb, and the fatling with the lion, and 'a
little child shall lead them.' There is death in the thoughts of men:
the world is one wide riddle to them, darker and darker as it draws to a
close; but the secret of it is known to the child, and the Lord of
heaven and earth is most to be thanked in that 'He has hidden these
things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed them unto babes.'
Yes, and there is death--infinitude of death in the principalities and
powers of men. As far as the east is from the west, so far our sins
are--_not_ set from us, but multiplied around us: the Sun himself, think
you he _now_ 'rejoices' to run his course, when he plunges westward to
the horizon, so widely red, not with clouds, but blood? And it will be
red more widely yet. Whatever drought of the early and latter rain may
be, there will be none of that red rain. You fortify yourselves, you arm
yourselves against it in vain; the enemy and avenger will be upon you
also, unless you learn that it is not out of the mouths of the knitted
gun, or the smoothed rifle, but 'out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings' that the strength is ordained which shall 'still the enemy
and avenger.'




LECTURE II.

_TRAFFIC._

(_Delivered in the Town Hall, Bradford._)


My good Yorkshire friends, you asked me down here among your hills that
I might talk to you about this Exchange you are going to build: but
earnestly and seriously asking you to pardon me, I am going to do
nothing of the kind. I cannot talk, or at least can say very little,
about this same Exchange. I must talk of quite other things, though not
willingly;--I could not deserve your pardon, if when you invited me to
speak on one subject, I wilfully spoke on another. But I cannot speak,
to purpose, of anything about which I do not care; and most simply and
sorrowfully I have to tell you, in the outset, that I do _not_ care
about this Exchange of yours.

If, however, when you sent me your invitation, I had answered, 'I won't
come, I don't care about the Exchange of Bradford,' you would have been
justly offended with me, not knowing the reasons of so blunt a
carelessness. So I have come down, hoping that you will patiently let me
tell you why, on this, and many other such occasions, I now remain
silent, when formerly I should have caught at the opportunity of
speaking to a gracious audience.

In a word, then, I do not care about this Exchange,--because _you_
don't; and because you know perfectly well I cannot make you. Look at
the essential circumstances of the case, which you, as business men,
know perfectly well, though perhaps you think I forget them. You are
going to spend 30,000_l._, which to you, collectively, is nothing; the
buying a new coat is, as to the cost of it, a much more important matter
of consideration to me than building a new Exchange is to you. But you
think you may as well have the right thing for your money. You know
there are a great many odd styles of architecture about; you don't want
to do anything ridiculous; you hear of me, among others, as a
respectable architectural man-milliner: and you send for me, that I may
tell you the leading fashion; and what is, in our shops, for the moment,
the newest and sweetest thing in pinnacles.

Now, pardon me for telling you frankly, you cannot have good
architecture merely by asking people's advice on occasion. All good
architecture is the expression of national life and character; and it is
produced by a prevalent and eager national taste, or desire for beauty.
And I want you to think a little of the deep significance of this word
'taste;' for no statement of mine has been more earnestly or oftener
controverted than that good taste is essentially a moral quality. 'No,'
say many of my antagonists, 'taste is one thing, morality is another.
Tell us what is pretty; we shall be glad to know that; but preach no
sermons to us.'

Permit me, therefore, to fortify this old dogma of mine somewhat. Taste
is not only a part and an index of morality--it is the ONLY morality.
The first, and last, and closest trial question to any living creature
is, 'What do you like?' Tell me what you like, and I'll tell you what
you are. Go out into the street, and ask the first man or woman you
meet, what their 'taste' is, and if they answer candidly, you know them,
body and soul. 'You, my friend in the rags, with the unsteady gait, what
do _you_ like?' 'A pipe and a quartern of gin.' I know you. 'You, good
woman, with the quick step and tidy bonnet, what do you like?' 'A swept
hearth and a clean tea-table, and my husband opposite me, and a baby at
my breast.' Good, I know you also. 'You, little girl with the golden
hair and the soft eyes, what do you like?' 'My canary, and a run among
the wood hyacinths.' 'You, little boy with the dirty hands and the low
forehead, what do you like?' 'A shy at the sparrows, and a game at
pitch-farthing.' Good; we know them all now. What more need we ask?

'Nay,' perhaps you answer: 'we need rather to ask what these people and
children do, than what they like. If they _do_ right, it is no matter
that they like what is wrong; and if they _do_ wrong, it is no matter
that they like what is right. Doing is the great thing; and it does not
matter that the man likes drinking, so that he does not drink; nor that
the little girl likes to be kind to her canary, if she will not learn
her lessons; nor that the little boy likes throwing stones at the
sparrows, if he goes to the Sunday school.' Indeed, for a short time,
and in a provisional sense, this is true. For if, resolutely, people do
what is right, in time they come to like doing it. But they only are in
a right moral state when they _have_ come to like doing it; and as long
as they don't like it, they are still in a vicious state. The man is not
in health of body who is always thirsting for the bottle in the
cupboard, though he bravely bears his thirst; but the man who heartily
enjoys water in the morning and wine in the evening, each in its proper
quantity and time. And the entire object of true education is to make
people not merely _do_ the right things, but _enjoy_ the right
things--not merely industrious, but to love industry--not merely
learned, but to love knowledge--not merely pure, but to love purity--not
merely just, but to hunger and thirst after justice.

But you may answer or think, 'Is the liking for outside ornaments,--for
pictures, or statues, or furniture, or architecture,--a moral quality?'
Yes, most surely, if a rightly set liking. Taste for _any_ pictures or
statues is not a moral quality, but taste for good ones is. Only here
again we have to define the word 'good.' I don't mean by 'good,'
clever--or learned--or difficult in the doing. Take a picture by
Teniers, of sots quarrelling over their dice: it is an entirely clever
picture; so clever that nothing in its kind has ever been done equal to
it; but it is also an entirely base and evil picture. It is an
expression of delight in the prolonged contemplation of a vile thing,
and delight in that is an 'unmannered,' or 'immoral' quality. It is 'bad
taste' in the profoundest sense--it is the taste of the devils. On the
other hand, a picture of Titian's, or a Greek statue, or a Greek coin,
or a Turner landscape, expresses delight in the perpetual contemplation
of a good and perfect thing. That is an entirely moral quality--it is
the taste of the angels. And all delight in art, and all love of it,
resolve themselves into simple love of that which deserves love. That
deserving is the quality which we call 'loveliness'--(we ought to have
an opposite word, hateliness, to be said of the things which deserve to
be hated); and it is not an indifferent nor optional thing whether we
love this or that; but it is just the vital function of all our being.
What we _like_ determines what we _are_, and is the sign of what we are;
and to teach taste is inevitably to form character. As I was thinking
over this, in walking up Fleet Street the other day, my eye caught the
title of a book standing open in a bookseller's window. It was--'On the
necessity of the diffusion of taste among all classes.' 'Ah,' I thought
to myself, 'my classifying friend, when you have diffused your taste,
where will your classes be? The man who likes what you like, belongs to
the same class with you, I think. Inevitably so. You may put him to
other work if you choose; but, by the condition you have brought him
into, he will dislike the other work as much as you would yourself. You
get hold of a scavenger, or a costermonger, who enjoyed the Newgate
Calendar for literature, and "Pop goes the Weasel" for music. You think
you can make him like Dante and Beethoven? I wish you joy of your
lessons; but if you do, you have made a gentleman of him:--he won't like
to go back to his costermongering.'

And so completely and unexceptionally is this so, that, if I had time
to-night, I could show you that a nation cannot be affected by any vice,
or weakness, without expressing it, legibly, and for ever, either in bad
art, or by want of art; and that there is no national virtue, small or
great, which is not manifestly expressed in all the art which
circumstances enable the people possessing that virtue to produce. Take,
for instance, your great English virtue of enduring and patient courage.
You have at present in England only one art of any consequence--that is,
iron-working. You know thoroughly well how to cast and hammer iron. Now,
do you think in those masses of lava which you build volcanic cones to
melt, and which you forge at the mouths of the Infernos you have
created; do you think, on those iron plates, your courage and endurance
are not written for ever--not merely with an iron pen, but on iron
parchment? And take also your great English vice--European vice--vice of
all the world--vice of all other worlds that roll or shine in heaven,
bearing with them yet the atmosphere of hell--the vice of jealousy,
which brings competition into your commerce, treachery into your
councils, and dishonour into your wars--that vice which has rendered for
you, and for your next neighbouring nation, the daily occupations of
existence no longer possible, but with the mail upon your breasts and
the sword loose in its sheath; so that, at last, you have realised for
all the multitudes of the two great peoples who lead the so-called
civilisation of the earth,--you have realised for them all, I say, in
person and in policy, what was once true only of the rough Border riders
of your Cheviot hills--

                  'They carved at the meal
                   With gloves of steel,
    And they drank the red wine through the helmet barr'd;--

do you think that this national shame and dastardliness of heart are not
written as legibly on every rivet of your iron armour as the strength of
the right hands that forged it? Friends, I know not whether this thing
be the more ludicrous or the more melancholy. It is quite unspeakably
both. Suppose, instead of being now sent for by you, I had been sent for
by some private gentleman, living in a suburban house, with his garden
separated only by a fruit-wall from his next door neighbour's; and he
had called me to consult with him on the furnishing of his drawing room.
I begin looking about me, and find the walls rather bare; I think such
and such a paper might be desirable--perhaps a little fresco here and
there on the ceiling--a damask curtain or so at the windows. 'Ah,' says
my employer, 'damask curtains, indeed! That's all very fine, but you
know I can't afford that kind of thing just now!' 'Yet the world credits
you with a splendid income!' 'Ah, yes,' says my friend, 'but do you
know, at present, I am obliged to spend it nearly all in steel-traps?'
'Steel-traps! for whom?' 'Why, for that fellow on the other side the
wall, you know: we're very good friends, capital friends; but we are
obliged to keep our traps set on both sides of the wall; we could not
possibly keep on friendly terms without them, and our spring guns. The
worst of it is, we are both clever fellows enough; and there's never a
day passes that we don't find out a new trap, or a new gun-barrel, or
something; we spend about fifteen millions a year each in our traps,
take it all together; and I don't see how we're to do with less.' A
highly comic state of life for two private gentlemen! but for two
nations, it seems to me, not wholly comic? Bedlam would be comic,
perhaps, if there were only one madman in it; and your Christmas
pantomime is comic, when there is only one clown in it; but when the
whole world turns clown, and paints itself red with its own heart's
blood instead of vermilion, it is something else than comic, I think.

Mind, I know a great deal of this is play, and willingly allow for that.
You don't know what to do with yourselves for a sensation: fox-hunting
and cricketing will not carry you through the whole of this unendurably
long mortal life: you liked pop-guns when you were schoolboys, and
rifles and Armstrongs are only the same things better made: but then the
worst of it is, that what was play to you when boys, was not play to the
sparrows; and what is play to you now, is not play to the small birds of
State neither; and for the black eagles, you are somewhat shy of taking
shots at them, if I mistake not.

I must get back to the matter in hand, however. Believe me, without
farther instance, I could show you, in all time, that every nation's
vice, or virtue, was written in its art: the soldiership of early
Greece; the sensuality of late Italy; the visionary religion of Tuscany;
the splendid human energy and beauty of Venice. I have no time to do
this to-night (I have done it elsewhere before now); but I proceed to
apply the principle to ourselves in a more searching manner.

I notice that among all the new buildings that cover your once wild
hills, churches and schools are mixed in due, that is to say, in large
proportion, with your mills and mansions and I notice also that the
churches and schools are almost always Gothic, and the mansions and
mills are never Gothic. Will you allow me to ask precisely the meaning
of this? For, remember, it is peculiarly a modern phenomenon. When
Gothic was invented, houses were Gothic as well as churches; and when
the Italian style superseded the Gothic, churches were Italian as well
as houses. If there is a Gothic spire to the cathedral of Antwerp, there
is a Gothic belfry to the Hôtel de Ville at Brussels; if Inigo Jones
builds an Italian Whitehall, Sir Christopher Wren builds an Italian St.
Paul's. But now you live under one school of architecture, and worship
under another. What do you mean by doing this? Am I to understand that
you are thinking of changing your architecture back to Gothic; and that
you treat your churches experimentally, because it does not matter what
mistakes you make in a church? Or am I to understand that you consider
Gothic a pre-eminently sacred and beautiful mode of building, which you
think, like the fine frankincense, should be mixed for the tabernacle
only, and reserved for your religious services? For if this be the
feeling, though it may seem at first as if it were graceful and
reverent, you will find that, at the root of the matter, it signifies
neither more nor less than that you have separated your religion from
your life.

For consider what a wide significance this fact has; and remember that
it is not you only, but all the people of England, who are behaving thus
just now.

You have all got into the habit of calling the church 'the house of
God.' I have seen, over the doors of many churches, the legend actually
carved, '_This_ is the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.'
Now, note where that legend comes from, and of what place it was first
spoken. A boy leaves his father's house to go on a long journey on foot,
to visit his uncle; he has to cross a wild hill-desert; just as if one
of your own boys had to cross the wolds of Westmoreland, to visit an
uncle at Carlisle. The second or third day your boy finds himself
somewhere between Hawes and Brough, in the midst of the moors, at
sunset. It is stony ground, and boggy; he cannot go one foot farther
that night. Down he lies, to sleep, on Wharnside, where best he may,
gathering a few of the stones together to put under his head;--so wild
the place is, he cannot get anything but stones. And there, lying under
the broad night, he has a dream; and he sees a ladder set up on the
earth, and the top of it reaches to heaven, and the angels of God are
ascending and descending upon it. And when he wakes out of his sleep, he
says, 'How dreadful is this place; surely, this is none other than the
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.' This PLACE, observe; not
this church; not this city; not this stone, even, which he puts up for a
memorial--the piece of flint on which his head has lain. But this
_place_; this windy slope of Wharnside; this moorland hollow,
torrent-bitten, snow-blighted; this _any_ place where God lets down the
ladder. And how are you to know where that will be? or how are you to
determine where it may be, but by being ready for it always? Do you know
where the lightning is to fall next? You _do_ know that, partly; you can
guide the lightning; but you cannot guide the going forth of the Spirit,
which is that lightning when it shines from the east to the west.

But the perpetual and insolent warping of that strong verse to serve a
merely ecclesiastical purpose, is only one of the thousand instances in
which we sink back into gross Judaism. We call our churches 'temples.'
Now, you know, or ought to know, they are _not_ temples. They have never
had, never can have, anything whatever to do with temples. They are
'synagogues'--'gathering places'--where you gather yourselves together
as an assembly; and by not calling them so, you again miss the force of
another mighty text--'Thou, when thou prayest, shalt not be as the
hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the _churches_' [we
should translate it], 'that they may be seen of men. But thou, when thou
prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray
to thy Father,'--which is, not in chancel nor in aisle, but 'in
secret.'

Now, you feel, as I say this to you--I know you feel--as if I were
trying to take away the honour of your churches. Not so; I am trying to
prove to you the honour of your houses and your hills; I am trying to
show you--not that the Church is not sacred--but that the whole Earth
is. I would have you feel, what careless, what constant, what infectious
sin there is in all modes of thought, whereby, in calling your churches
only 'holy,' you call your hearths and homes profane; and have separated
yourselves from the heathen by casting all your household gods to the
ground, instead of recognising, in the place of their many and feeble
Lares, the presence of your One and Mighty Lord and Lar.


'But what has all this to do with our Exchange?' you ask me,
impatiently. My dear friends, it has just everything to do with it; on
these inner and great questions depend all the outer and little ones;
and if you have asked me down here to speak to you, because you had
before been interested in anything I have written, you must know that
all I have yet said about architecture was to show this. The book I
called 'The Seven Lamps' was to show that certain right states of temper
and moral feeling were the magic powers by which all good architecture,
without exception, had been produced. 'The Stones of Venice,' had, from
beginning to end, no other aim than to show that the Gothic architecture
of Venice had arisen out of, and indicated in all its features, a state
of pure national faith, and of domestic virtue; and that its Renaissance
architecture had arisen out of, and in all its features indicated, a
state of concealed national infidelity, and of domestic corruption. And
now, you ask me what style is best to build in; and how can I answer,
knowing the meaning of the two styles, but by another question--do you
mean to build as Christians or as Infidels? And still more--do you mean
to build as honest Christians or as honest Infidels? as thoroughly and
confessedly either one or the other? You don't like to be asked such
rude questions. I cannot help it; they are of much more importance than
this Exchange business; and if they can be at once answered, the
Exchange business settles itself in a moment. But, before I press them
farther, I must ask leave to explain one point clearly. In all my past
work, my endeavour has been to show that good architecture is
essentially religious--the production of a faithful and virtuous, not of
an infidel and corrupted people. But in the course of doing this, I have
had also to show that good architecture is not _ecclesiastical_. People
are so apt to look upon religion as the business of the clergy, not
their own, that the moment they hear of anything depending on
'religion,' they think it must also have depended on the priesthood; and
I have had to take what place was to be occupied between these two
errors, and fight both, often with seeming contradiction. Good
architecture is the work of good and believing men; therefore, you say,
at least some people say, 'Good architecture must essentially have been
the work of the clergy, not of the laity.' No--a thousand times no; good
architecture has always been the work of the commonalty, _not_ of the
clergy. What, you say, those glorious cathedrals--the pride of
Europe--did their builders not form Gothic architecture? No; they
corrupted Gothic architecture. Gothic was formed in the baron's castle,
and the burgher's street. It was formed by the thoughts, and hands, and
powers of free citizens and soldier kings. By the monk it was used as an
instrument for the aid of his superstition; when that superstition
became a beautiful madness, and the best hearts of Europe vainly dreamed
and pined in the cloister, and vainly raged and perished in the
crusade--through that fury of perverted faith and wasted war, the Gothic
rose also to its loveliest, most fantastic, and, finally, most foolish
dreams; and, in those dreams, was lost.

I hope, now, that there is no risk of your misunderstanding me when I
come to the gist of what I want to say to-night--when I repeat, that
every great national architecture has been the result and exponent of a
great national religion. You can't have bits of it here, bits there--you
must have it everywhere, or nowhere. It is not the monopoly of a
clerical company--it is not the exponent of a theological dogma--it is
not the hieroglyphic writing of an initiated priesthood; it is the manly
language of a people inspired by resolute and common purpose, and
rendering resolute and common fidelity to the legible laws of an
undoubted God.

Now, there have as yet been three distinct schools of European
architecture. I say, European, because Asiatic and African architectures
belong so entirely to other races and climates, that there is no
question of them here; only, in passing, I will simply assure you that
whatever is good or great in Egypt, and Syria, and India, is just good
or great for the same reasons as the buildings on our side of the
Bosphorus. We Europeans, then, have had three great religions: the
Greek, which was the worship of the God of Wisdom and Power; the
Mediæval, which was the Worship of the God of Judgment and Consolation;
the Renaissance, which was the worship of the God of Pride and Beauty;
these three we have had--they are past,--and now, at last, we English
have got a fourth religion, and a God of our own, about which I want to
ask you. But I must explain these three old ones first.

I repeat, first, the Greeks essentially worshipped the God of Wisdom; so
that whatever contended against their religion,--to the Jews a stumbling
block,--was, to the Greeks--_Foolishness_.

The first Greek idea of Deity was that expressed in the word, of which
we keep the remnant in our words '_Di_-urnal' and '_Di_-vine'--the god
of _Day_, Jupiter the revealer. Athena is his daughter, but especially
daughter of the Intellect, springing armed from the head. We are only
with the help of recent investigation beginning to penetrate the depth
of meaning couched under the Athenaic symbols: but I may note rapidly,
that her ægis, the mantle with the serpent fringes, in which she often,
in the best statues, is represented as folding up her left hand for
better guard, and the Gorgon on her shield, are both representative
mainly of the chilling horror and sadness (turning men to stone, as it
were,) of the outmost and superficial spheres of knowledge--that
knowledge which separates, in bitterness, hardness, and sorrow, the
heart of the full-grown man from the heart of the child. For out of
imperfect knowledge spring terror, dissension, danger, and disdain; but
from perfect knowledge, given by the full-revealed Athena, strength and
peace, in sign of which she is crowned with the olive spray, and bears
the resistless spear.

This, then, was the Greek conception of purest Deity, and every habit of
life, and every form of his art developed themselves from the seeking
this bright, serene, resistless wisdom; and setting himself, as a man,
to do things evermore rightly and strongly;[3] not with any ardent
affection or ultimate hope; but with a resolute and continent energy of
will, as knowing that for failure there was no consolation, and for sin
there was no remission. And the Greek architecture rose unerring,
bright, clearly defined, and self-contained.

Next followed in Europe the great Christian faith, which was essentially
the religion of Comfort. Its great doctrine is the remission of sins;
for which cause it happens, too often, in certain phases of
Christianity, that sin and sickness themselves are partly glorified, as
if, the more you had to be healed of, the more divine was the healing.
The practical result of this doctrine, in art, is a continual
contemplation of sin and disease, and of imaginary states of
purification from them; thus we have an architecture conceived in a
mingled sentiment of melancholy and aspiration, partly severe, partly
luxuriant, which will bend itself to every one of our needs, and every
one of our fancies, and be strong or weak with us, as we are strong or
weak ourselves. It is, of all architecture, the basest, when base people
build it--of all, the noblest, when built by the noble.

And now note that both these religions--Greek and Mediæval--perished by
falsehood in their own main purpose. The Greek religion of Wisdom
perished in a false philosophy--'Oppositions of science, falsely so
called.' The Mediæval religion of Consolation perished in false comfort;
in remission of sins given lyingly. It was the selling of absolution
that ended the Mediæval faith; and I can tell you more, it is the
selling of absolution which, to the end of time, will mark false
Christianity. Pure Christianity gives her remission of sins only by
_ending_ them; but false Christianity gets her remission of sins by
_compounding for_ them. And there are many ways of compounding for them.
We English have beautiful little quiet ways of buying absolution,
whether in low Church or high, far more cunning than any of Tetzel's
trading.

Then, thirdly, there followed the religion of Pleasure, in which all
Europe gave itself to luxury, ending in death. First, _bals masqués_ in
every saloon, and then guillotines in every square. And all these three
worships issue in vast temple building. Your Greek worshipped Wisdom,
and built you the Parthenon--the Virgin's temple. The Mediæval
worshipped Consolation, and built you Virgin temples also--but to our
Lady of Salvation. Then the Revivalist worshipped beauty, of a sort, and
built you Versailles, and the Vatican. Now, lastly, will you tell me
what _we_ worship, and what _we_ build?

You know we are speaking always of the real, active, continual, national
worship; that by which men act while they live; not that which they talk
of when they die. Now, we have, indeed, a nominal religion, to which we
pay tithes of property, and sevenths of time; but we have also a
practical and earnest religion, to which we devote nine-tenths of our
property and six-sevenths of our time. And we dispute a great deal about
the nominal religion; but we are all unanimous about this practical one,
of which I think you will admit that the ruling goddess may be best
generally described as the 'Goddess of Getting-on,' or 'Britannia of the
Market.' The Athenians had an 'Athena Agoraia,' or Minerva of the
Market: but she was a subordinate type of their goddess, while our
Britannia Agoraia is the principal type of ours. And all your great
architectural works, are, of course, built to her. It is long since you
built a great cathedral; and how you would laugh at me, if I proposed
building a cathedral on the top of one of these hills of yours, taking
it for an Acropolis! But your railroad mounds, prolonged masses of
Acropolis; your railroad stations, vaster than the Parthenon, and
innumerable; your chimneys, how much more mighty and costly than
cathedral spires! your harbour-piers; your warehouses; your
exchanges!--all these are built to your great Goddess of 'Getting-on;'
and she has formed, and will continue to form, your architecture, as
long as you worship her; and it is quite vain to ask me to tell you how
to build to _her_; you know far better than I.

There might indeed, on some theories, be a conceivably good architecture
for Exchanges--that is to say if there were any heroism in the fact or
deed of exchange, which might be typically carved on the outside of your
building. For, you know, all beautiful architecture must be adorned with
sculpture or painting; and for sculpture or painting, you must have a
subject. And hitherto it has been a received opinion among the nations
of the world that the only right subjects for either, were _heroisms_ of
some sort. Even on his pots and his flagons, the Greek put a Hercules
slaying lions, or an Apollo slaying serpents, or Bacchus slaying
melancholy giants, and earth-born despondencies. On his temples, the
Greek put contests of great warriors in founding states, or of gods with
evil spirits. On his houses and temples alike, the Christian put
carvings of angels conquering devils; or of hero-martyrs exchanging this
world for another; subject inappropriate, I think, to our manner of
exchange here. And the Master of Christians not only left his followers
without any orders as to the sculpture of affairs of exchange on the
outside of buildings, but gave some strong evidence of his dislike of
affairs of exchange within them. And yet there might surely be a heroism
in such affairs; and all commerce become a kind of selling of doves, not
impious. The wonder has always been great to me, that heroism has never
been supposed to be in anywise consistent with the practice of
supplying people with food, or clothes; but rather with that of
quartering oneself upon them for food, and stripping them of their
clothes. Spoiling of armour is an heroic deed in all ages; but the
selling of clothes, old, or new, has never taken any colour of
magnanimity. Yet one does not see why feeding the hungry and clothing
the naked should ever become base businesses, even when engaged in on a
large scale. If one could contrive to attach the notion of conquest to
them anyhow? so that, supposing there were anywhere an obstinate race,
who refused to be comforted, one might take some pride in giving them
compulsory comfort; and as it were, 'occupying a country' with one's
gifts, instead of one's armies? If one could only consider it as much a
victory to get a barren field sown, as to get an eared field stripped;
and contend who should build villages, instead of who should 'carry'
them. Are not all forms of heroism, conceivable in doing these
serviceable deeds? You doubt who is strongest? It might be ascertained
by push of spade, as well as push of sword. Who is wisest? There are
witty things to be thought of in planning other business than campaigns.
Who is bravest? There are always the elements to fight with, stronger
than men; and nearly as merciless. The only absolutely and
unapproachably heroic element in the soldier's work seems to be--that he
is paid little for it--and regularly: while you traffickers, and
exchangers, and others occupied in presumably benevolent business, like
to be paid much for it--and by chance. I never can make out how it is
that a knight-errant does not expect to be paid for his trouble, but a
pedlar-errant always does;--that people are willing to take hard knocks
for nothing, but never to sell ribands cheap;--that they are ready to go
on fervent crusades to recover the tomb of a buried God, never on any
travels to fulfil the orders of a living God;--that they will go
anywhere barefoot to preach their faith, but must be well bribed to
practise it, and are perfectly ready to give the Gospel gratis, but
never the loaves and fishes. If you chose to take the matter up on any
such soldierly principle, to do your commerce, and your feeding of
nations, for fixed salaries; and to be as particular about giving people
the best food, and the best cloth, as soldiers are about giving them the
best gunpowder, I could carve something for you on your exchange worth
looking at. But I can only at present suggest decorating its frieze with
pendant purses; and making its pillars broad at the base for the
sticking of bills. And in the innermost chambers of it there might be a
statue of Britannia of the Market, who may have, perhaps advisably, a
partridge for her crest, typical at once of her courage in fighting for
noble ideas; and of her interest in game; and round its neck the
inscription in golden letters, 'Perdix fovit quæ non peperit.'[4] Then,
for her spear, she might have a weaver's beam; and on her shield,
instead of her Cross, the Milanese boar, semi-fleeced, with the town of
Gennesaret proper, in the field and the legend 'In the best market,' and
her corslet, of leather, folded over her heart in the shape of a purse,
with thirty slits in it for a piece of money to go in at, on each day of
the month. And I doubt not but that people would come to see your
exchange, and its goddess, with applause.

Nevertheless, I want to point out to you certain strange characters in
this goddess of yours. She differs from the great Greek and Mediæval
deities essentially in two things--first, as to the continuance of her
presumed power; secondly, as to the extent of it.

1st, as to the Continuance.

The Greek Goddess of Wisdom gave continual increase of wisdom, as the
Christian Spirit of Comfort (or Comforter) continual increase of
comfort. There was no question, with these, of any limit or cessation of
function. But with your Agora Goddess, that is just the most important
question. Getting on--but where to? Gathering together--but how much? Do
you mean to gather always--never to spend? If so, I wish you joy of your
goddess, for I am just as well off as you, without the trouble of
worshipping her at all. But if you do not spend, somebody else
will--somebody else must. And it is because of this (among many other
such errors) that I have fearlessly declared your so-called science of
Political Economy to be no science; because, namely, it has omitted the
study of exactly the most important branch of the business--the study of
_spending_. For spend you must, and as much as you make, ultimately. You
gather corn:--will you bury England under a heap of grain; or will you,
when you have gathered, finally eat? You gather gold:--will you make
your house-roofs of it, or pave your streets with it? That is still one
way of spending it. But if you keep it, that you may get more, I'll give
you more; I'll give you all the gold you want--all you can imagine--if
you can tell me what you'll do with it. You shall have thousands of gold
pieces;--thousands of thousands--millions--mountains, of gold: where
will you keep them? Will you put an Olympus of silver upon a golden
Pelion--make Ossa like a wart? Do you think the rain and dew would then
come down to you, in the streams from such mountains, more blessedly
than they will down the mountains which God has made for you, of moss
and whinstone? But it is not gold that you want to gather! What is it?
greenbacks? No; not those neither. What is it then--is it ciphers after
a capital I? Cannot you practise writing ciphers, and write as many as
you want? Write ciphers for an hour every morning, in a big book, and
say every evening, I am worth all those noughts more than I was
yesterday. Won't that do? Well, what in the name of Plutus is it you
want? Not gold, not greenbacks, not ciphers after a capital I? You will
have to answer, after all, 'No; we want, somehow or other, money's
_worth_.' Well, what is that? Let your Goddess of Getting-on discover
it, and let her learn to stay therein.


II. But there is yet another question to be asked respecting this
Goddess of Getting-on. The first was of the continuance of her power;
the second is of its extent.

Pallas and the Madonna were supposed to be all the world's Pallas, and
all the world's Madonna. They could teach all men, and they could
comfort all men. But, look strictly into the nature of the power of your
Goddess of Getting-on; and you will find she is the Goddess--not of
everybody's getting on--but only of somebody's getting on. This is a
vital, or rather deathful, distinction. Examine it in your own ideal of
the state of national life which this Goddess is to evoke and maintain.
I asked you what it was, when I was last here;[5]--you have never told
me. Now, shall I try to tell you?

Your ideal of human life then is, I think, that it should be passed in a
pleasant undulating world, with iron and coal everywhere underneath it.
On each pleasant bank of this world is to be a beautiful mansion, with
two wings; and stables, and coach-houses; a moderately sized park; a
large garden and hot houses; and pleasant carriage drives through the
shrubberies. In this mansion are to live the favoured votaries of the
Goddess; the English gentleman, with his gracious wife, and his
beautiful family; always able to have the boudoir and the jewels for the
wife, and the beautiful ball dresses for the daughters, and hunters for
the sons, and a shooting in the Highlands for himself. At the bottom of
the bank, is to be the mill; not less than a quarter of a mile long,
with a steam engine at each end, and two in the middle, and a chimney
three hundred feet high. In this mill are to be in constant employment
from eight hundred to a thousand workers, who never drink, never strike,
always go to church on Sunday, and always express themselves in
respectful language.

Is not that, broadly, and in the main features, the kind of thing you
propose to yourselves? It is very pretty indeed seen from above; not at
all so pretty, seen from below. For, observe, while to one family this
deity is indeed the Goddess of Getting on, to a thousand families she is
the Goddess of _not_ Getting on. 'Nay,' you say, 'they have all their
chance.' Yes, so has every one in a lottery, but there must always be
the same number of blanks. 'Ah! but in a lottery it is not skill and
intelligence which take the lead, but blind chance.' What then! do you
think the old practice, that 'they should take who have the power, and
they should keep who can,' is less iniquitous, when the power has become
power of brains instead of fist? and that, though we may not take
advantage of a child's or a woman's weakness, we may of a man's
foolishness? 'Nay, but finally, work must be done, and some one must be
at the top, some one at the bottom.' Granted, my friends. Work must
always be, and captains of work must always be; and if you in the least
remember the tone of any of my writings, you must know that they are
thought unfit for this age, because they are always insisting on need of
government, and speaking with scorn of liberty. But I beg you to observe
that there is a wide difference between being captains or governors of
work, and taking the profits of it. It does not follow, because you are
general of an army, that you are to take all the treasure, or land, it
wins (if it fight for treasure or land); neither, because you are king
of a nation, that you are to consume all the profits of the nation's
work. Real kings, on the contrary, are known invariably by their doing
quite the reverse of this,--by their taking the least possible quantity
of the nation's work for themselves. There is no test of real kinghood
so infallible as that. Does the crowned creature live simply, bravely,
unostentatiously? probably he _is_ a King. Does he cover his body with
jewels, and his table with delicates? in all probability he is _not_ a
King. It is possible he may be, as Solomon was; but that is when the
nation shares his splendour with him. Solomon made gold, not only to be
in his own palace as stones, but to be in Jerusalem as stones. But even
so, for the most part, these splendid kinghoods expire in ruin, and only
the true kinghoods live, which are of royal labourers governing loyal
labourers; who, both leading rough lives, establish the true dynasties.
Conclusively you will find that because you are king of a nation, it
does not follow that you are to gather for yourself all the wealth of
that nation; neither, because you are king of a small part of the
nation, and lord over the means of its maintenance--over field, or mill,
or mine, are you to take all the produce of that piece of the foundation
of national existence for yourself.

You will tell me I need not preach against these things, for I cannot
mend them. No, good friends, I cannot; but you can, and you will; or
something else can and will. Do you think these phenomena are to stay
always in their present power or aspect? All history shows, on the
contrary, that to be the exact thing they never can do. Change _must_
come; but it is ours to determine whether change of growth, or change of
death. Shall the Parthenon be in ruins on its rock, and Bolton priory in
its meadow, but these mills of yours be the consummation of the
buildings of the earth, and their wheels be as the wheels of eternity?
Think you that 'men may come, and men may go,' but--mills--go on
forever? Not so; out of these, better or worse shall come; and it is for
you to choose which.

I know that none of this wrong is done with deliberate purpose. I know,
on the contrary, that you wish your workmen well; that you do much for
them, and that you desire to do more for them, if you saw your way to it
safely. I know that many of you have done, and are every day doing,
whatever you feel to be in your power; and that even all this wrong and
misery are brought about by a warped sense of duty, each of you striving
to do his best, without noticing that this best is essentially and
centrally the best for himself, not for others. And all this has come of
the spreading of that thrice accursed, thrice impious doctrine of the
modern economist, that 'To do the best for yourself, is finally to do
the best for others.' Friends, our great Master said not so; and most
absolutely we shall find this world is not made so. Indeed, to do the
best for others, is finally to do the best for ourselves; but it will
not do to have our eyes fixed on that issue. The Pagans had got beyond
that. Hear what a Pagan says of this matter; hear what were, perhaps,
the last written words of Plato,--if not the last actually written (for
this we cannot know), yet assuredly in fact and power his parting
words--in which, endeavouring to give full crowning and harmonious close
to all his thoughts, and to speak the sum of them by the imagined
sentence of the Great Spirit, his strength and his heart fail him, and
the words cease, broken off for ever. It is the close of the dialogue
called 'Critias,' in which he describes, partly from real tradition,
partly in ideal dream, the early state of Athens; and the genesis, and
order, and religion, of the fabled isle of Atlantis; in which genesis he
conceives the same first perfection and final degeneracy of man, which
in our own Scriptural tradition is expressed by saying that the Sons of
God intermarried with the daughters of men, for he supposes the earliest
race to have been indeed the children of God; and to have corrupted
themselves, until 'their spot was not the spot of his children.' And
this, he says, was the end; that indeed 'through many generations, so
long as the God's nature in them yet was full, they were submissive to
the sacred laws, and carried themselves lovingly to all that had kindred
with them in divineness; for their uttermost spirit was faithful and
true, and in every wise great; so that, in all meekness of wisdom, they
dealt with each other, and took all the chances of life; and despising
all things except virtue, they cared little what happened day by day,
and _bore lightly the burden_ of gold and of possessions; for they saw
that, if only their common love and virtue increased, all these things
would be increased together with them; but to set their esteem and
ardent pursuit upon material possession would be to lose that first, and
their virtue and affection together with it. And by such reasoning, and
what of the divine nature remained in them, they gained all this
greatness of which we have already told, but when the God's part of them
faded and became extinct, being mixed again and again, and effaced by
the prevalent mortality; and the human nature at last exceeded, they
then became unable to endure the courses of fortune; and fell into
shapelessness of life, and baseness in the sight of him who could see,
having lost everything that was fairest of their honour; while to the
blind hearts which could not discern the true life, tending to
happiness, it seemed that they were then chiefly noble and happy, being
filled with all iniquity of inordinate possession and power. Whereupon,
the God of God's, whose Kinghood is in laws, beholding a once just
nation thus cast into misery, and desiring to lay such punishment upon
them as might make them repent into restraining, gathered together all
the gods into his dwelling-place, which from heaven's centre overlooks
whatever has part in creation; and having assembled them, he said'----

The rest is silence. So ended are the last words of the chief wisdom of
the heathen, spoken of this idol of riches; this idol of yours; this
golden image high by measureless cubits, set up where your green fields
of England are furnace-burnt into the likeness of the plain of Dura:
this idol, forbidden to us, first of all idols, by our own Master and
faith; forbidden to us also by every human lip that has ever, in any age
or people, been accounted of as able to speak according to the purposes
of God. Continue to make that forbidden deity your principal one, and
soon no more art, no more science, no more pleasure will be possible.
Catastrophe will come; or worse than catastrophe, slow mouldering and
withering into Hades. But if you can fix some conception of a true human
state of life to be striven for--life for all men as for yourselves--if
you can determine some honest and simple order of existence; following
those trodden ways of wisdom, which are pleasantness, and seeking her
quiet and withdrawn paths, which are peace;--then, and so sanctifying
wealth into 'commonwealth,' all your art, your literature, your daily
labours, your domestic affection, and citizen's duty, will join and
increase into one magnificent harmony. You will know then how to build,
well enough; you will build with stone well, but with flesh better;
temples not made with hands, but riveted of hearts; and that kind of
marble, crimson-veined, is indeed eternal.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] It is an error to suppose that the Greek worship, or seeking, was
chiefly of Beauty. It was essentially of Rightness and Strength, founded
on Forethought: the principal character of Greek art is not Beauty, but
Design: and the Dorian Apollo-worship and Athenian Virgin-worship are
both expressions of adoration of divine Wisdom and Purity. Next to these
great deities rank, in power over the national mind, Dionysus and Ceres,
the givers of human strength and life: then, for heroic example,
Hercules. There is no Venus-worship among the Greek in the great times:
and the Muses are essentially teachers of Truth, and of its harmonies.

[4] Jerem. xvii. 11 (best in Septuagint and Vulgate). 'As the partridge,
fostering what she brought not forth, so he that getteth riches, not by
right shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be
a fool.'

[5] Two Paths, p. 98.




LECTURE III.

_WAR._

(_Delivered at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich._)


Young soldiers, I do not doubt but that many of you came unwillingly
to-night, and many in merely contemptuous curiosity, to hear what a
writer on painting could possibly say, or would venture to say,
respecting your great art of war. You may well think within yourselves,
that a painter might, perhaps without immodesty, lecture younger
painters upon painting, but not young lawyers upon law, nor young
physicians upon medicine--least of all, it may seem to you, young
warriors upon war. And, indeed, when I was asked to address you, I
declined at first, and declined long; for I felt that you would not be
interested in my special business, and would certainly think there was
small need for me to come to teach you yours. Nay, I knew that there
ought to be _no_ such need, for the great veteran soldiers of England
are now men every way so thoughtful, so noble, and so good, that no
other teaching than their knightly example, and their few words of grave
and tried counsel should be either necessary for you, or even, without
assurance of due modesty in the offerer, endured by you.

But being asked, not once nor twice, I have not ventured persistently to
refuse; and I will try, in very few words, to lay before you some reason
why you should accept my excuse, and hear me patiently. You may imagine
that your work is wholly foreign to, and separate from mine. So far from
that, all the pure and noble arts of peace are founded on war; no great
art ever yet rose on earth, but among a nation of soldiers. There is no
art among a shepherd people, if it remains at peace. There is no art
among an agricultural people, if it remains at peace. Commerce is barely
consistent with fine art; but cannot produce it. Manufacture not only is
unable to produce it, but invariably destroys whatever seeds of it
exist. There is no great art possible to a nation but that which is
based on battle.

Now, though I hope you love fighting for its own sake, you must, I
imagine, be surprised at my assertion that there is any such good fruit
of fighting. You supposed, probably, that your office was to defend the
works of peace, but certainly not to found them: nay, the common course
of war, you may have thought, was only to destroy them. And truly, I who
tell you this of the use of war, should have been the last of men to
tell you so, had I trusted my own experience only. Hear why: I have
given a considerable part of my life to the investigation of Venetian
painting and the result of that enquiry was my fixing upon one man as
the greatest of all Venetians, and therefore, as I believed, of all
painters whatsoever. I formed this faith, (whether right or wrong
matters at present nothing,) in the supremacy of the painter Tintoret,
under a roof covered with his pictures; and of those pictures, three of
the noblest were then in the form of shreds of ragged canvas, mixed up
with the laths of the roof, rent through by three Austrian shells. Now
it is not every lecturer who _could_ tell you that he had seen three of
his favourite pictures torn to rags by bombshells. And after such a
sight, it is not every lecturer who _would_ tell you that, nevertheless,
war was the foundation of all great art.

Yet the conclusion is inevitable, from any careful comparison of the
states of great historic races at different periods. Merely to show you
what I mean, I will sketch for you, very briefly, the broad steps of the
advance of the best art of the world. The first dawn of it is in Egypt;
and the power of it is founded on the perpetual contemplation of death,
and of future judgment, by the mind of a nation of which the ruling
caste were priests, and the second, soldiers. The greatest works
produced by them are sculptures of their kings going out to battle, or
receiving the homage of conquered armies. And you must remember also,
as one of the great keys to the splendour of the Egyptian nation, that
the priests were not occupied in theology only. Their theology was the
basis of practical government and law, so that they were not so much
priests as religious judges, the office of Samuel, among the Jews, being
as nearly as possible correspondent to theirs.

All the rudiments of art then, and much more than the rudiments of all
science, are laid first by this great warrior-nation, which held in
contempt all mechanical trades, and in absolute hatred the peaceful life
of shepherds. From Egypt art passes directly into Greece, where all
poetry, and all painting, are nothing else than the description, praise,
or dramatic representation of war, or of the exercises which prepare for
it, in their connection with offices of religion. All Greek institutions
had first respect to war; and their conception of it, as one necessary
office of all human and divine life, is expressed simply by the images
of their guiding gods. Apollo is the god of all wisdom of the intellect;
he bears the arrow and the bow, before he bears the lyre. Again, Athena
is the goddess of all wisdom in conduct. It is by the helmet and the
shield, oftener than by the shuttle, that she is distinguished from
other deities.

There were, however, two great differences in principle between the
Greek and the Egyptian theories of policy. In Greece there was no
soldier caste; every citizen was necessarily a soldier. And, again,
while the Greeks rightly despised mechanical arts as much as the
Egyptians, they did not make the fatal mistake of despising agricultural
and pastoral life; but perfectly honoured both. These two conditions of
truer thought raise them quite into the highest rank of wise manhood
that has yet been reached; for all our great arts, and nearly all our
great thoughts, have been borrowed or derived from them. Take away from
us what they have given; and I hardly can imagine how low the modern
European would stand.

Now, you are to remember, in passing to the next phase of history, that
though you _must_ have war to produce art--you must also have much more
than war; namely, an art-instinct or genius in the people; and that,
though all the talent for painting in the world won't make painters of
you, unless you have a gift for fighting as well, you may have the gift
for fighting, and none for painting. Now, in the next great dynasty of
soldiers, the art-instinct is wholly wanting. I have not yet
investigated the Roman character enough to tell you the causes of this;
but I believe, paradoxical as it may seem to you, that, however truly
the Roman might say of himself that he was born of Mars, and suckled by
the wolf, he was nevertheless, at heart, more of a farmer than a
soldier. The exercises of war were with him practical, not poetical; his
poetry was in domestic life only, and the object of battle, 'pacis
imponere morem.' And the arts are extinguished in his hands, and do not
rise again, until, with Gothic chivalry, there comes back into the mind
of Europe a passionate delight in war itself, for the sake of war. And
then, with the romantic knighthood which can imagine no other noble
employment,--under the fighting kings of France, England, and Spain; and
under the fighting dukeships and citizenships of Italy, art is born
again, and rises to her height in the great valleys of Lombardy and
Tuscany, through which there flows not a single stream, from all their
Alps or Apennines, that did not once run dark red from battle: and it
reaches its culminating glory in the city which gave to history the most
intense type of soldiership yet seen among men;--the city whose armies
were led in their assault by their king, led through it to victory by
their king, and so led, though that king of theirs was blind, and in the
extremity of his age.

And from this time forward, as peace is established or extended in
Europe, the arts decline. They reach an unparalleled pitch of
costliness, but lose their life, enlist themselves at last on the side
of luxury and various corruption, and, among wholly tranquil nations,
wither utterly away; remaining only in partial practice among races who,
like the French and us, have still the minds, though we cannot all live
the lives, of soldiers.

'It may be so,' I can suppose that a philanthropist might exclaim.
'Perish then the arts, if they can flourish only at such a cost. What
worth is there in toys of canvas and stone if compared to the joy and
peace of artless domestic life?' And the answer is--truly, in
themselves, none. But as expressions of the highest state of the human
spirit, their worth is infinite. As results they may be worthless, but,
as signs, they are above price. For it is an assured truth that,
whenever the faculties of men are at their fulness, they _must_ express
themselves by art; and to say that a state is without such expression,
is to say that it is sunk from its proper level of manly nature. So
that, when I tell you that war is the foundation of all the arts, I mean
also that it is the foundation of all the high virtues and faculties of
men.

It was very strange to me to discover this; and very dreadful--but I saw
it to be quite an undeniable fact. The common notion that peace and the
virtues of civil life flourished together, I found, to be wholly
untenable. Peace and the _vices_ of civil life only flourish together.
We talk of peace and learning, and of peace and plenty, and of peace and
civilisation; but I found that those were not the words which the Muse
of History coupled together: that on her lips, the words were--peace and
sensuality, peace and selfishness, peace and corruption, peace and
death. I found, in brief, that all great nations learned their truth of
word, and strength of thought, in war; that they were nourished in war,
and wasted by peace; taught by war, and deceived by peace; trained by
war, and betrayed by peace;--in a word, that they were born in war, and
expired in peace.

Yet now note carefully, in the second place, it is not _all_ war of
which this can be said--nor all dragon's teeth, which, sown, will start
up into men. It is not the ravage of a barbarian wolf-flock, as under
Genseric or Suwarrow; nor the habitual restlessness and rapine of
mountaineers, as on the old borders of Scotland; nor the occasional
struggle of a strong peaceful nation for its life, as in the wars of the
Swiss with Austria; nor the contest of merely ambitious nations for
extent of power, as in the wars of France under Napoleon, or the just
terminated war in America. None of these forms of war build anything but
tombs. But the creative or foundational war is that in which the
natural restlessness and love of contest among men are disciplined, by
c