nd hat disclosed in the middle of the floor by the moving of the table
rocked slightly on its crown in the wind of her flight.




CHAPTER XII


Winnie Verloc, the widow of Mr Verloc, the sister of the late faithful
Stevie (blown to fragments in a state of innocence and in the conviction
of being engaged in a humanitarian enterprise), did not run beyond the
door of the parlour.  She had indeed run away so far from a mere trickle
of blood, but that was a movement of instinctive repulsion.  And there
she had paused, with staring eyes and lowered head.  As though she had
run through long years in her flight across the small parlour, Mrs Verloc
by the door was quite a different person from the woman who had been
leaning over the sofa, a little swimmy in her head, but otherwise free to
enjoy the profound calm of idleness and irresponsibility.  Mrs Verloc was
no longer giddy.  Her head was steady.  On the other hand, she was no
longer calm.  She was afraid.

If she avoided looking in the direction of her reposing husband it was
not because she was afraid of him.  Mr Verloc was not frightful to
behold.  He looked comfortable.  Moreover, he was dead.  Mrs Verloc
entertained no vain delusions on the subject of the dead.  Nothing brings
them back, neither love nor hate.  They can do nothing to you.  They are
as nothing.  Her mental state was tinged by a sort of austere contempt
for that man who had let himself be killed so easily.  He had been the
master of a house, the husband of a woman, and the murderer of her
Stevie.  And now he was of no account in every respect.  He was of less
practical account than the clothing on his body, than his overcoat, than
his boots—than that hat lying on the floor.  He was nothing.  He was not
worth looking at.  He was even no longer the murderer of poor Stevie.
The only murderer that would be found in the room when people came to
look for Mr Verloc would be—herself!

Her hands shook so that she failed twice in the task of refastening her
veil.  Mrs Verloc was no longer a person of leisure and responsibility.
She was afraid.  The stabbing of Mr Verloc had been only a blow.  It had
relieved the pent-up agony of shrieks strangled in her throat, of tears
dried up in her hot eyes, of the maddening and indignant rage at the
atrocious part played by that man, who was less than nothing now, in
robbing her of the boy.

It had been an obscurely prompted blow.  The blood trickling on the floor
off the handle of the knife had turned it into an extremely plain case of
murder.  Mrs Verloc, who always refrained from looking deep into things,
was compelled to look into the very bottom of this thing.  She saw there
no haunting face, no reproachful shade, no vision of remorse, no sort of
ideal conception.  She saw there an object.  That object was the gallows.
Mrs Verloc was afraid of the gallows.

She was terrified of them ideally.  Having never set eyes on that last
argument of men’s justice except in illustrative woodcuts to a certain
type of tales, she first saw them erect against a black and stormy
background, festooned with chains and human bones, circled about by birds
that peck at dead men’s eyes.  This was frightful enough, but Mrs Verloc,
though not a well-informed woman, had a sufficient knowledge of the
institutions of her country to know that gallows are no longer erected
romantically on the banks of dismal rivers or on wind-swept headlands,
but in the yards of jails.  There within four high walls, as if into a
pit, at dawn of day, the murderer was brought out to be executed, with a
horrible quietness and, as the reports in the newspapers always said, “in
the presence of the authorities.”  With her eyes staring on the floor,
her nostrils quivering with anguish and shame, she imagined herself all
alone amongst a lot of strange gentlemen in silk hats who were calmly
proceeding about the business of hanging her by the neck.  That—never!
Never!  And how was it done?  The impossibility of imagining the details
of such quiet execution added something maddening to her abstract terror.
The newspapers never gave any details except one, but that one with some
affectation was always there at the end of a meagre report.  Mrs Verloc
remembered its nature.  It came with a cruel burning pain into her head,
as if the words “The drop given was fourteen feet” had been scratched on
her brain with a hot needle.  “The drop given was fourteen feet.”

These words affected her physically too.  Her throat became convulsed in
waves to resist strangulation; and the apprehension of the jerk was so
vivid that she seized her head in both hands as if to save it from being
torn off her shoulders.  “The drop given was fourteen feet.”  No! that
must never be.  She could not stand _that_.  The thought of it even was
not bearable.  She could not stand thinking of it.  Therefore Mrs Verloc
formed the resolution to go at once and throw herself into the river off
one of the bridges.

This time she managed to refasten her veil.  With her face as if masked,
all black from head to foot except for some flowers in her hat, she
looked up mechanically at the clock.  She thought it must have stopped.
She could not believe that only two minutes had passed since she had
looked at it last.  Of course not.  It had been stopped all the time.  As
a matter of fact, only three minutes had elapsed from the moment she had
drawn the first deep, easy breath after the blow, to this moment when Mrs
Verloc formed the resolution to drown herself in the Thames.  But Mrs
Verloc could not believe that.  She seemed to have heard or read that
clocks and watches always stopped at the moment of murder for the undoing
of the murderer.  She did not care.  “To the bridge—and over I go.” . . .
But her movements were slow.

She dragged herself painfully across the shop, and had to hold on to the
handle of the door before she found the necessary fortitude to open it.
The street frightened her, since it led either to the gallows or to the
river.  She floundered over the doorstep head forward, arms thrown out,
like a person falling over the parapet of a bridge.  This entrance into
the open air had a foretaste of drowning; a slimy dampness enveloped her,
entered her nostrils, clung to her hair.  It was not actually raining,
but each gas lamp had a rusty little halo of mist.  The van and horses
were gone, and in the black street the curtained window of the carters’
eating-house made a square patch of soiled blood-red light glowing
faintly very near the level of the pavement.  Mrs Verloc, dragging
herself slowly towards it, thought that she was a very friendless woman.
It was true.  It was so true that, in a sudden longing to see some
friendly face, she could think of no one else but of Mrs Neale, the
charwoman.  She had no acquaintances of her own.  Nobody would miss her
in a social way.  It must not be imagined that the Widow Verloc had
forgotten her mother.  This was not so.  Winnie had been a good daughter
because she had been a devoted sister.  Her mother had always leaned on
her for support.  No consolation or advice could be expected there.  Now
that Stevie was dead the bond seemed to be broken.  She could not face
the old woman with the horrible tale.  Moreover, it was too far.  The
river was her present destination.  Mrs Verloc tried to forget her
mother.

Each step cost her an effort of will which seemed the last possible.  Mrs
Verloc had dragged herself past the red glow of the eating-house window.
“To the bridge—and over I go,” she repeated to herself with fierce
obstinacy.  She put out her hand just in time to steady herself against a
lamp-post.  “I’ll never get there before morning,” she thought.  The fear
of death paralysed her efforts to escape the gallows.  It seemed to her
she had been staggering in that street for hours.  “I’ll never get
there,” she thought.  “They’ll find me knocking about the streets.  It’s
too far.”  She held on, panting under her black veil.

“The drop given was fourteen feet.”

She pushed the lamp-post away from her violently, and found herself
walking.  But another wave of faintness overtook her like a great sea,
washing away her heart clean out of her breast.  “I will never get
there,” she muttered, suddenly arrested, swaying lightly where she stood.
“Never.”

And perceiving the utter impossibility of walking as far as the nearest
bridge, Mrs Verloc thought of a flight abroad.

It came to her suddenly.  Murderers escaped.  They escaped abroad.  Spain
or California.  Mere names.  The vast world created for the glory of man
was only a vast blank to Mrs Verloc.  She did not know which way to turn.
Murderers had friends, relations, helpers—they had knowledge.  She had
nothing.  She was the most lonely of murderers that ever struck a mortal
blow.  She was alone in London: and the whole town of marvels and mud,
with its maze of streets and its mass of lights, was sunk in a hopeless
night, rested at the bottom of a black abyss from which no unaided woman
could hope to scramble out.

She swayed forward, and made a fresh start blindly, with an awful dread
of falling down; but at the end of a few steps, unexpectedly, she found a
sensation of support, of security.  Raising her head, she saw a man’s
face peering closely at her veil.  Comrade Ossipon was not afraid of
strange women, and no feeling of false delicacy could prevent him from
striking an acquaintance with a woman apparently very much intoxicated.
Comrade Ossipon was interested in women.  He held up this one between his
two large palms, peering at her in a business-like way till he heard her
say faintly “Mr Ossipon!” and then he very nearly let her drop to the
ground.

“Mrs Verloc!” he exclaimed.  “You here!”

It seemed impossible to him that she should have been drinking.  But one
never knows.  He did not go into that question, but attentive not to
discourage kind fate surrendering to him the widow of Comrade Verloc, he
tried to draw her to his breast.  To his astonishment she came quite
easily, and even rested on his arm for a moment before she attempted to
disengage herself.  Comrade Ossipon would not be brusque with kind fate.
He withdrew his arm in a natural way.

“You recognised me,” she faltered out, standing before him, fairly steady
on her legs.

“Of course I did,” said Ossipon with perfect readiness.  “I was afraid
you were going to fall.  I’ve thought of you too often lately not to
recognise you anywhere, at any time.  I’ve always thought of you—ever
since I first set eyes on you.”

Mrs Verloc seemed not to hear.  “You were coming to the shop?” she said
nervously.

“Yes; at once,” answered Ossipon.  “Directly I read the paper.”

In fact, Comrade Ossipon had been skulking for a good two hours in the
neighbourhood of Brett Street, unable to make up his mind for a bold
move.  The robust anarchist was not exactly a bold conqueror.  He
remembered that Mrs Verloc had never responded to his glances by the
slightest sign of encouragement.  Besides, he thought the shop might be
watched by the police, and Comrade Ossipon did not wish the police to
form an exaggerated notion of his revolutionary sympathies.  Even now he
did not know precisely what to do.  In comparison with his usual amatory
speculations this was a big and serious undertaking.  He ignored how much
there was in it and how far he would have to go in order to get hold of
what there was to get—supposing there was a chance at all.  These
perplexities checking his elation imparted to his tone a soberness well
in keeping with the circumstances.

“May I ask you where you were going?” he inquired in a subdued voice.

“Don’t ask me!” cried Mrs Verloc with a shuddering, repressed violence.
All her strong vitality recoiled from the idea of death.  “Never mind
where I was going. . . .”

Ossipon concluded that she was very much excited but perfectly sober.
She remained silent by his side for moment, then all at once she did
something which he did not expect.  She slipped her hand under his arm.
He was startled by the act itself certainly, and quite as much too by the
palpably resolute character of this movement.  But this being a delicate
affair, Comrade Ossipon behaved with delicacy.  He contented himself by
pressing the hand slightly against his robust ribs.  At the same time he
felt himself being impelled forward, and yielded to the impulse.  At the
end of Brett Street he became aware of being directed to the left.  He
submitted.

The fruiterer at the corner had put out the blazing glory of his oranges
and lemons, and Brett Place was all darkness, interspersed with the misty
halos of the few lamps defining its triangular shape, with a cluster of
three lights on one stand in the middle.  The dark forms of the man and
woman glided slowly arm in arm along the walls with a loverlike and
homeless aspect in the miserable night.

“What would you say if I were to tell you that I was going to find you?”
Mrs Verloc asked, gripping his arm with force.

“I would say that you couldn’t find anyone more ready to help you in your
trouble,” answered Ossipon, with a notion of making tremendous headway.
In fact, the progress of this delicate affair was almost taking his
breath away.

“In my trouble!” Mrs Verloc repeated slowly.

“Yes.”

“And do you know what my trouble is?” she whispered with strange
intensity.

“Ten minutes after seeing the evening paper,” explained Ossipon with
ardour, “I met a fellow whom you may have seen once or twice at the shop
perhaps, and I had a talk with him which left no doubt whatever in my
mind.  Then I started for here, wondering whether you—I’ve been fond of
you beyond words ever since I set eyes on your face,” he cried, as if
unable to command his feelings.

Comrade Ossipon assumed correctly that no woman was capable of wholly
disbelieving such a statement.  But he did not know that Mrs Verloc
accepted it with all the fierceness the instinct of self-preservation
puts into the grip of a drowning person.  To the widow of Mr Verloc the
robust anarchist was like a radiant messenger of life.

They walked slowly, in step.  “I thought so,” Mrs Verloc murmured
faintly.

“You’ve read it in my eyes,” suggested Ossipon with great assurance.

“Yes,” she breathed out into his inclined ear.

“A love like mine could not be concealed from a woman like you,” he went
on, trying to detach his mind from material considerations such as the
business value of the shop, and the amount of money Mr Verloc might have
left in the bank.  He applied himself to the sentimental side of the
affair.  In his heart of hearts he was a little shocked at his success.
Verloc had been a good fellow, and certainly a very decent husband as far
as one could see.  However, Comrade Ossipon was not going to quarrel with
his luck for the sake of a dead man.  Resolutely he suppressed his
sympathy for the ghost of Comrade Verloc, and went on.

“I could not conceal it.  I was too full of you.  I daresay you could not
help seeing it in my eyes.  But I could not guess it.  You were always so
distant. . . .”

“What else did you expect?” burst out Mrs Verloc.  “I was a respectable
woman—”

She paused, then added, as if speaking to herself, in sinister
resentment: “Till he made me what I am.”

Ossipon let that pass, and took up his running.  “He never did seem to me
to be quite worthy of you,” he began, throwing loyalty to the winds.
“You were worthy of a better fate.”

Mrs Verloc interrupted bitterly:

“Better fate!  He cheated me out of seven years of life.”

“You seemed to live so happily with him.”  Ossipon tried to exculpate the
lukewarmness of his past conduct.  “It’s that what’s made me timid.  You
seemed to love him.  I was surprised—and jealous,” he added.

“Love him!” Mrs Verloc cried out in a whisper, full of scorn and rage.
“Love him!  I was a good wife to him.  I am a respectable woman.  You
thought I loved him!  You did!  Look here, Tom—”

The sound of this name thrilled Comrade Ossipon with pride.  For his name
was Alexander, and he was called Tom by arrangement with the most
familiar of his intimates.  It was a name of friendship—of moments of
expansion.  He had no idea that she had ever heard it used by anybody.
It was apparent that she had not only caught it, but had treasured it in
her memory—perhaps in her heart.

“Look here, Tom!  I was a young girl.  I was done up.  I was tired.  I
had two people depending on what I could do, and it did seem as if I
couldn’t do any more.  Two people—mother and the boy.  He was much more
mine than mother’s.  I sat up nights and nights with him on my lap, all
alone upstairs, when I wasn’t more than eight years old myself.  And
then—He was mine, I tell you. . . . You can’t understand that.  No man
can understand it.  What was I to do?  There was a young fellow—”

The memory of the early romance with the young butcher survived,
tenacious, like the image of a glimpsed ideal in that heart quailing
before the fear of the gallows and full of revolt against death.

“That was the man I loved then,” went on the widow of Mr Verloc.  “I
suppose he could see it in my eyes too.  Five and twenty shillings a
week, and his father threatened to kick him out of the business if he
made such a fool of himself as to marry a girl with a crippled mother and
a crazy idiot of a boy on her hands.  But he would hang about me, till
one evening I found the courage to slam the door in his face.  I had to
do it.  I loved him dearly.  Five and twenty shillings a week!  There was
that other man—a good lodger.  What is a girl to do?  Could I’ve gone on
the streets?  He seemed kind.  He wanted me, anyhow.  What was I to do
with mother and that poor boy?  Eh?  I said yes.  He seemed good-natured,
he was freehanded, he had money, he never said anything.  Seven
years—seven years a good wife to him, the kind, the good, the generous,
the—And he loved me.  Oh yes.  He loved me till I sometimes wished
myself—Seven years.  Seven years a wife to him.  And do you know what he
was, that dear friend of yours?  Do you know what he was?  He was a
devil!”

The superhuman vehemence of that whispered statement completely stunned
Comrade Ossipon.  Winnie Verloc turning about held him by both arms,
facing him under the falling mist in the darkness and solitude of Brett
Place, in which all sounds of life seemed lost as if in a triangular well
of asphalt and bricks, of blind houses and unfeeling stones.

“No; I didn’t know,” he declared, with a sort of flabby stupidity, whose
comical aspect was lost upon a woman haunted by the fear of the gallows,
“but I do now.  I—I understand,” he floundered on, his mind speculating
as to what sort of atrocities Verloc could have practised under the
sleepy, placid appearances of his married estate.  It was positively
awful.  “I understand,” he repeated, and then by a sudden inspiration
uttered an—“Unhappy woman!” of lofty commiseration instead of the more
familiar “Poor darling!” of his usual practice.  This was no usual case.
He felt conscious of something abnormal going on, while he never lost
sight of the greatness of the stake.  “Unhappy, brave woman!”

He was glad to have discovered that variation; but he could discover
nothing else.

“Ah, but he is dead now,” was the best he could do.  And he put a
remarkable amount of animosity into his guarded exclamation.  Mrs Verloc
caught at his arm with a sort of frenzy.

“You guessed then he was dead,” she murmured, as if beside herself.
“You!  You guessed what I had to do.  Had to!”

There were suggestions of triumph, relief, gratitude in the indefinable
tone of these words.  It engrossed the whole attention of Ossipon to the
detriment of mere literal sense.  He wondered what was up with her, why
she had worked herself into this state of wild excitement.  He even began
to wonder whether the hidden causes of that Greenwich Park affair did not
lie deep in the unhappy circumstances of the Verlocs’ married life.  He
went so far as to suspect Mr Verloc of having selected that extraordinary
manner of committing suicide.  By Jove! that would account for the utter
inanity and wrong-headedness of the thing.  No anarchist manifestation
was required by the circumstances.  Quite the contrary; and Verloc was as
well aware of that as any other revolutionist of his standing.  What an
immense joke if Verloc had simply made fools of the whole of Europe, of
the revolutionary world, of the police, of the press, and of the cocksure
Professor as well.  Indeed, thought Ossipon, in astonishment, it seemed
almost certain that he did!  Poor beggar!  It struck him as very possible
that of that household of two it wasn’t precisely the man who was the
devil.

Alexander Ossipon, nicknamed the Doctor, was naturally inclined to think
indulgently of his men friends.  He eyed Mrs Verloc hanging on his arm.
Of his women friends he thought in a specially practical way.  Why Mrs
Verloc should exclaim at his knowledge of Mr Verloc’s death, which was no
guess at all, did not disturb him beyond measure.  They often talked like
lunatics.  But he was curious to know how she had been informed.  The
papers could tell her nothing beyond the mere fact: the man blown to
pieces in Greenwich Park not having been identified.  It was
inconceivable on any theory that Verloc should have given her an inkling
of his intention—whatever it was.  This problem interested Comrade
Ossipon immensely.  He stopped short.  They had gone then along the three
sides of Brett Place, and were near the end of Brett Street again.

“How did you first come to hear of it?” he asked in a tone he tried to
render appropriate to the character of the revelations which had been
made to him by the woman at his side.

She shook violently for a while before she answered in a listless voice.

“From the police.  A chief inspector came, Chief Inspector Heat he said
he was.  He showed me—”

Mrs Verloc choked.  “Oh, Tom, they had to gather him up with a shovel.”

Her breast heaved with dry sobs.  In a moment Ossipon found his tongue.

“The police!  Do you mean to say the police came already?  That Chief
Inspector Heat himself actually came to tell you.”

“Yes,” she confirmed in the same listless tone.  “He came just like this.
He came.  I didn’t know.  He showed me a piece of overcoat, and—just like
that.  Do you know this? he says.”

“Heat!  Heat!  And what did he do?”

Mrs Verloc’s head dropped.  “Nothing.  He did nothing.  He went away.
The police were on that man’s side,” she murmured tragically.  “Another
one came too.”

“Another—another inspector, do you mean?” asked Ossipon, in great
excitement, and very much in the tone of a scared child.

“I don’t know.  He came.  He looked like a foreigner.  He may have been
one of them Embassy people.”

Comrade Ossipon nearly collapsed under this new shock.

“Embassy!  Are you aware what you are saying?  What Embassy?  What on
earth do you mean by Embassy?”

“It’s that place in Chesham Square.  The people he cursed so.  I don’t
know.  What does it matter!”

“And that fellow, what did he do or say to you?”

“I don’t remember. . . . Nothing . . . . I don’t care.  Don’t ask me,”
she pleaded in a weary voice.

“All right.  I won’t,” assented Ossipon tenderly.  And he meant it too,
not because he was touched by the pathos of the pleading voice, but
because he felt himself losing his footing in the depths of this
tenebrous affair.  Police!  Embassy!  Phew!  For fear of adventuring his
intelligence into ways where its natural lights might fail to guide it
safely he dismissed resolutely all suppositions, surmises, and theories
out of his mind.  He had the woman there, absolutely flinging herself at
him, and that was the principal consideration.  But after what he had
heard nothing could astonish him any more.  And when Mrs Verloc, as if
startled suddenly out of a dream of safety, began to urge upon him wildly
the necessity of an immediate flight on the Continent, he did not exclaim
in the least.  He simply said with unaffected regret that there was no
train till the morning, and stood looking thoughtfully at her face,
veiled in black net, in the light of a gas lamp veiled in a gauze of
mist.

Near him, her black form merged in the night, like a figure half
chiselled out of a block of black stone.  It was impossible to say what
she knew, how deep she was involved with policemen and Embassies.  But if
she wanted to get away, it was not for him to object.  He was anxious to
be off himself.  He felt that the business, the shop so strangely
familiar to chief inspectors and members of foreign Embassies, was not
the place for him.  That must be dropped.  But there was the rest.  These
savings.  The money!

“You must hide me till the morning somewhere,” she said in a dismayed
voice.

“Fact is, my dear, I can’t take you where I live.  I share the room with
a friend.”

He was somewhat dismayed himself.  In the morning the blessed ’tecs will
be out in all the stations, no doubt.  And if they once got hold of her,
for one reason or another she would be lost to him indeed.

“But you must.  Don’t you care for me at all—at all?  What are you
thinking of?”

She said this violently, but she let her clasped hands fall in
discouragement.  There was a silence, while the mist fell, and darkness
reigned undisturbed over Brett Place.  Not a soul, not even the vagabond,
lawless, and amorous soul of a cat, came near the man and the woman
facing each other.

“It would be possible perhaps to find a safe lodging somewhere,” Ossipon
spoke at last.  “But the truth is, my dear, I have not enough money to go
and try with—only a few pence.  We revolutionists are not rich.”

He had fifteen shillings in his pocket.  He added:

“And there’s the journey before us, too—first thing in the morning at
that.”

She did not move, made no sound, and Comrade Ossipon’s heart sank a
little.  Apparently she had no suggestion to offer.  Suddenly she
clutched at her breast, as if she had felt a sharp pain there.

“But I have,” she gasped.  “I have the money.  I have enough money.  Tom!
Let us go from here.”

“How much have you got?” he inquired, without stirring to her tug; for he
was a cautious man.

“I have the money, I tell you.  All the money.”

“What do you mean by it?  All the money there was in the bank, or what?”
he asked incredulously, but ready not to be surprised at anything in the
way of luck.

“Yes, yes!” she said nervously.  “All there was.  I’ve it all.”

“How on earth did you manage to get hold of it already?” he marvelled.

“He gave it to me,” she murmured, suddenly subdued and trembling.
Comrade Ossipon put down his rising surprise with a firm hand.

“Why, then—we are saved,” he uttered slowly.

She leaned forward, and sank against his breast.  He welcomed her there.
She had all the money.  Her hat was in the way of very marked effusion;
her veil too.  He was adequate in his manifestations, but no more.  She
received them without resistance and without abandonment, passively, as
if only half-sensible.  She freed herself from his lax embraces without
difficulty.

“You will save me, Tom,” she broke out, recoiling, but still keeping her
hold on him by the two lapels of his damp coat.  “Save me.  Hide me.
Don’t let them have me.  You must kill me first.  I couldn’t do it
myself—I couldn’t, I couldn’t—not even for what I am afraid of.”

She was confoundedly bizarre, he thought.  She was beginning to inspire
him with an indefinite uneasiness.  He said surlily, for he was busy with
important thoughts:

“What the devil _are_ you afraid of?”

“Haven’t you guessed what I was driven to do!” cried the woman.
Distracted by the vividness of her dreadful apprehensions, her head
ringing with forceful words, that kept the horror of her position before
her mind, she had imagined her incoherence to be clearness itself.  She
had no conscience of how little she had audibly said in the disjointed
phrases completed only in her thought.  She had felt the relief of a full
confession, and she gave a special meaning to every sentence spoken by
Comrade Ossipon, whose knowledge did not in the least resemble her own.
“Haven’t you guessed what I was driven to do!”  Her voice fell.  “You
needn’t be long in guessing then what I am afraid of,” she continued, in
a bitter and sombre murmur.  “I won’t have it.  I won’t.  I won’t.  I
won’t.  You must promise to kill me first!”  She shook the lapels of his
coat.  “It must never be!”

He assured her curtly that no promises on his part were necessary, but he
took good care not to contradict her in set terms, because he had had
much to do with excited women, and he was inclined in general to let his
experience guide his conduct in preference to applying his sagacity to
each special case.  His sagacity in this case was busy in other
directions.  Women’s words fell into water, but the shortcomings of
time-tables remained.  The insular nature of Great Britain obtruded
itself upon his notice in an odious form.  “Might just as well be put
under lock and key every night,” he thought irritably, as nonplussed as
though he had a wall to scale with the woman on his back.  Suddenly he
slapped his forehead.  He had by dint of cudgelling his brains just
thought of the Southampton—St Malo service.  The boat left about
midnight.  There was a train at 10.30.  He became cheery and ready to
act.

“From Waterloo.  Plenty of time.  We are all right after all. . . .
What’s the matter now?  This isn’t the way,” he protested.

Mrs Verloc, having hooked her arm into his, was trying to drag him into
Brett Street again.

“I’ve forgotten to shut the shop door as I went out,” she whispered,
terribly agitated.

The shop and all that was in it had ceased to interest Comrade Ossipon.
He knew how to limit his desires.  He was on the point of saying “What of
that?  Let it be,” but he refrained.  He disliked argument about trifles.
He even mended his pace considerably on the thought that she might have
left the money in the drawer.  But his willingness lagged behind her
feverish impatience.

The shop seemed to be quite dark at first.  The door stood ajar.  Mrs
Verloc, leaning against the front, gasped out:

“Nobody has been in.  Look!  The light—the light in the parlour.”

Ossipon, stretching his head forward, saw a faint gleam in the darkness
of the shop.

“There is,” he said.

“I forgot it.” Mrs Verloc’s voice came from behind her veil faintly.  And
as he stood waiting for her to enter first, she said louder: “Go in and
put it out—or I’ll go mad.”

He made no immediate objection to this proposal, so strangely motived.
“Where’s all that money?” he asked.

“On me!  Go, Tom.  Quick!  Put it out. . . . Go in!” she cried, seizing
him by both shoulders from behind.

Not prepared for a display of physical force, Comrade Ossipon stumbled
far into the shop before her push.  He was astonished at the strength of
the woman and scandalised by her proceedings.  But he did not retrace his
steps in order to remonstrate with her severely in the street.  He was
beginning to be disagreeably impressed by her fantastic behaviour.
Moreover, this or never was the time to humour the woman.  Comrade
Ossipon avoided easily the end of the counter, and approached calmly the
glazed door of the parlour.  The curtain over the panes being drawn back
a little he, by a very natural impulse, looked in, just as he made ready
to turn the handle.  He looked in without a thought, without intention,
without curiosity of any sort.  He looked in because he could not help
looking in.  He looked in, and discovered Mr Verloc reposing quietly on
the sofa.

A yell coming from the innermost depths of his chest died out unheard and
transformed into a sort of greasy, sickly taste on his lips.  At the same
time the mental personality of Comrade Ossipon executed a frantic leap
backward.  But his body, left thus without intellectual guidance, held on
to the door handle with the unthinking force of an instinct.  The robust
anarchist did not even totter.  And he stared, his face close to the
glass, his eyes protruding out of his head.  He would have given anything
to get away, but his returning reason informed him that it would not do
to let go the door handle.  What was it—madness, a nightmare, or a trap
into which he had been decoyed with fiendish artfulness?  Why—what for?
He did not know.  Without any sense of guilt in his breast, in the full
peace of his conscience as far as these people were concerned, the idea
that he would be murdered for mysterious reasons by the couple Verloc
passed not so much across his mind as across the pit of his stomach, and
went out, leaving behind a trail of sickly faintness—an indisposition.
Comrade Ossipon did not feel very well in a very special way for a
moment—a long moment.  And he stared.  Mr Verloc lay very still
meanwhile, simulating sleep for reasons of his own, while that savage
woman of his was guarding the door—invisible and silent in the dark and
deserted street.  Was all this a some sort of terrifying arrangement
invented by the police for his especial benefit?  His modesty shrank from
that explanation.

But the true sense of the scene he was beholding came to Ossipon through
the contemplation of the hat.  It seemed an extraordinary thing, an
ominous object, a sign.  Black, and rim upward, it lay on the floor
before the couch as if prepared to receive the contributions of pence
from people who would come presently to behold Mr Verloc in the fullness
of his domestic ease reposing on a sofa.  From the hat the eyes of the
robust anarchist wandered to the displaced table, gazed at the broken
dish for a time, received a kind of optical shock from observing a white
gleam under the imperfectly closed eyelids of the man on the couch.  Mr
Verloc did not seem so much asleep now as lying down with a bent head and
looking insistently at his left breast.  And when Comrade Ossipon had
made out the handle of the knife he turned away from the glazed door, and
retched violently.

The crash of the street door flung to made his very soul leap in a panic.
This house with its harmless tenant could still be made a trap of—a trap
of a terrible kind.  Comrade Ossipon had no settled conception now of
what was happening to him.  Catching his thigh against the end of the
counter, he spun round, staggered with a cry of pain, felt in the
distracting clatter of the bell his arms pinned to his side by a
convulsive hug, while the cold lips of a woman moved creepily on his very
ear to form the words:

“Policeman!  He has seen me!”

He ceased to struggle; she never let him go.  Her hands had locked
themselves with an inseparable twist of fingers on his robust back.
While the footsteps approached, they breathed quickly, breast to breast,
with hard, laboured breaths, as if theirs had been the attitude of a
deadly struggle, while, in fact, it was the attitude of deadly fear.  And
the time was long.

The constable on the beat had in truth seen something of Mrs Verloc; only
coming from the lighted thoroughfare at the other end of Brett Street,
she had been no more to him than a flutter in the darkness.  And he was
not even quite sure that there had been a flutter.  He had no reason to
hurry up.  On coming abreast of the shop he observed that it had been
closed early.  There was nothing very unusual in that.  The men on duty
had special instructions about that shop: what went on about there was
not to be meddled with unless absolutely disorderly, but any observations
made were to be reported.  There were no observations to make; but from a
sense of duty and for the peace of his conscience, owing also to that
doubtful flutter of the darkness, the constable crossed the road, and
tried the door.  The spring latch, whose key was reposing for ever off
duty in the late Mr Verloc’s waistcoat pocket, held as well as usual.
While the conscientious officer was shaking the handle, Ossipon felt the
cold lips of the woman stirring again creepily against his very ear:

“If he comes in kill me—kill me, Tom.”

The constable moved away, flashing as he passed the light of his dark
lantern, merely for form’s sake, at the shop window.  For a moment longer
the man and the woman inside stood motionless, panting, breast to breast;
then her fingers came unlocked, her arms fell by her side slowly.
Ossipon leaned against the counter.  The robust anarchist wanted support
badly.  This was awful.  He was almost too disgusted for speech.  Yet he
managed to utter a plaintive thought, showing at least that he realised
his position.

“Only a couple of minutes later and you’d have made me blunder against
the fellow poking about here with his damned dark lantern.”

The widow of Mr Verloc, motionless in the middle of the shop, said
insistently:

“Go in and put that light out, Tom.  It will drive me crazy.”

She saw vaguely his vehement gesture of refusal.  Nothing in the world
would have induced Ossipon to go into the parlour.  He was not
superstitious, but there was too much blood on the floor; a beastly pool
of it all round the hat.  He judged he had been already far too near that
corpse for his peace of mind—for the safety of his neck, perhaps!

“At the meter then!  There.  Look.  In that corner.”

The robust form of Comrade Ossipon, striding brusque and shadowy across
the shop, squatted in a corner obediently; but this obedience was without
grace.  He fumbled nervously—and suddenly in the sound of a muttered
curse the light behind the glazed door flicked out to a gasping,
hysterical sigh of a woman.  Night, the inevitable reward of men’s
faithful labours on this earth, night had fallen on Mr Verloc, the tried
revolutionist—“one of the old lot”—the humble guardian of society; the
invaluable Secret Agent [delta] of Baron Stott-Wartenheim’s despatches; a
servant of law and order, faithful, trusted, accurate, admirable, with
perhaps one single amiable weakness: the idealistic belief in being loved
for himself.

Ossipon groped his way back through the stuffy atmosphere, as black as
ink now, to the counter.  The voice of Mrs Verloc, standing in the middle
of the shop, vibrated after him in that blackness with a desperate
protest.

“I will not be hanged, Tom.  I will not—”

She broke off.  Ossipon from the counter issued a warning: “Don’t shout
like this,” then seemed to reflect profoundly.  “You did this thing quite
by yourself?” he inquired in a hollow voice, but with an appearance of
masterful calmness which filled Mrs Verloc’s heart with grateful
confidence in his protecting strength.

“Yes,” she whispered, invisible.

“I wouldn’t have believed it possible,” he muttered.  “Nobody would.”
She heard him move about and the snapping of a lock in the parlour door.
Comrade Ossipon had turned the key on Mr Verloc’s repose; and this he did
not from reverence for its eternal nature or any other obscurely
sentimental consideration, but for the precise reason that he was not at
all sure that there was not someone else hiding somewhere in the house.
He did not believe the woman, or rather he was incapable by now of
judging what could be true, possible, or even probable in this astounding
universe.  He was terrified out of all capacity for belief or disbelief
in regard of this extraordinary affair, which began with police
inspectors and Embassies and would end goodness knows where—on the
scaffold for someone.  He was terrified at the thought that he could not
prove the use he made of his time ever since seven o’clock, for he had
been skulking about Brett Street.  He was terrified at this savage woman
who had brought him in there, and would probably saddle him with
complicity, at least if he were not careful.  He was terrified at the
rapidity with which he had been involved in such dangers—decoyed into it.
It was some twenty minutes since he had met her—not more.

The voice of Mrs Verloc rose subdued, pleading piteously: “Don’t let them
hang me, Tom!  Take me out of the country.  I’ll work for you.  I’ll
slave for you.  I’ll love you.  I’ve no one in the world. . . .  Who
would look at me if you don’t!”  She ceased for a moment; then in the
depths of the loneliness made round her by an insignificant thread of
blood trickling off the handle of a knife, she found a dreadful
inspiration to her—who had been the respectable girl of the Belgravian
mansion, the loyal, respectable wife of Mr Verloc.  “I won’t ask you to
marry me,” she breathed out in shame-faced accents.

She moved a step forward in the darkness.  He was terrified at her.  He
would not have been surprised if she had suddenly produced another knife
destined for his breast.  He certainly would have made no resistance.  He
had really not enough fortitude in him just then to tell her to keep
back.  But he inquired in a cavernous, strange tone: “Was he asleep?”

“No,” she cried, and went on rapidly.  “He wasn’t.  Not he.  He had been
telling me that nothing could touch him.  After taking the boy away from
under my very eyes to kill him—the loving, innocent, harmless lad.  My
own, I tell you.  He was lying on the couch quite easy—after killing the
boy—my boy.  I would have gone on the streets to get out of his sight.
And he says to me like this: ‘Come here,’ after telling me I had helped
to kill the boy.  You hear, Tom?  He says like this: ‘Come here,’ after
taking my very heart out of me along with the boy to smash in the dirt.”

She ceased, then dreamily repeated twice: “Blood and dirt.  Blood and
dirt.”  A great light broke upon Comrade Ossipon.  It was that
half-witted lad then who had perished in the park.  And the fooling of
everybody all round appeared more complete than ever—colossal.  He
exclaimed scientifically, in the extremity of his astonishment: “The
degenerate—by heavens!”

“Come here.”  The voice of Mrs Verloc rose again.  “What did he think I
was made of?  Tell me, Tom.  Come here!  Me!  Like this!  I had been
looking at the knife, and I thought I would come then if he wanted me so
much.  Oh yes!  I came—for the last time. . . . With the knife.”

He was excessively terrified at her—the sister of the degenerate—a
degenerate herself of a murdering type . . . or else of the lying type.
Comrade Ossipon might have been said to be terrified scientifically in
addition to all other kinds of fear.  It was an immeasurable and
composite funk, which from its very excess gave him in the dark a false
appearance of calm and thoughtful deliberation.  For he moved and spoke
with difficulty, being as if half frozen in his will and mind—and no one
could see his ghastly face.  He felt half dead.

He leaped a foot high.  Unexpectedly Mrs Verloc had desecrated the
unbroken reserved decency of her home by a shrill and terrible shriek.

“Help, Tom!  Save me.  I won’t be hanged!”

He rushed forward, groping for her mouth with a silencing hand, and the
shriek died out.  But in his rush he had knocked her over.  He felt her
now clinging round his legs, and his terror reached its culminating
point, became a sort of intoxication, entertained delusions, acquired the
characteristics of delirium tremens.  He positively saw snakes now.  He
saw the woman twined round him like a snake, not to be shaken off.  She
was not deadly.  She was death itself—the companion of life.

Mrs Verloc, as if relieved by the outburst, was very far from behaving
noisily now.  She was pitiful.

“Tom, you can’t throw me off now,” she murmured from the floor.  “Not
unless you crush my head under your heel.  I won’t leave you.”

“Get up,” said Ossipon.

His face was so pale as to be quite visible in the profound black
darkness of the shop; while Mrs Verloc, veiled, had no face, almost no
discernible form.  The trembling of something small and white, a flower
in her hat, marked her place, her movements.

It rose in the blackness.  She had got up from the floor, and Ossipon
regretted not having run out at once into the street.  But he perceived
easily that it would not do.  It would not do.  She would run after him.
She would pursue him shrieking till she sent every policeman within
hearing in chase.  And then goodness only knew what she would say of him.
He was so frightened that for a moment the insane notion of strangling
her in the dark passed through his mind.  And he became more frightened
than ever!  She had him!  He saw himself living in abject terror in some
obscure hamlet in Spain or Italy; till some fine morning they found him
dead too, with a knife in his breast—like Mr Verloc.  He sighed deeply.
He dared not move.  And Mrs Verloc waited in silence the good pleasure of
her saviour, deriving comfort from his reflective silence.

Suddenly he spoke up in an almost natural voice.  His reflections had
come to an end.

“Let’s get out, or we will lose the train.”

“Where are we going to, Tom?” she asked timidly.  Mrs Verloc was no
longer a free woman.

“Let’s get to Paris first, the best way we can. . . . Go out first, and
see if the way’s clear.”

She obeyed.  Her voice came subdued through the cautiously opened door.

“It’s all right.”

Ossipon came out.  Notwithstanding his endeavours to be gentle, the
cracked bell clattered behind the closed door in the empty shop, as if
trying in vain to warn the reposing Mr Verloc of the final departure of
his wife—accompanied by his friend.

In the hansom they presently picked up, the robust anarchist became
explanatory.  He was still awfully pale, with eyes that seemed to have
sunk a whole half-inch into his tense face.  But he seemed to have
thought of everything with extraordinary method.

“When we arrive,” he discoursed in a queer, monotonous tone, “you must go
into the station ahead of me, as if we did not know each other.  I will
take the tickets, and slip in yours into your hand as I pass you.  Then
you will go into the first-class ladies’ waiting-room, and sit there till
ten minutes before the train starts.  Then you come out.  I will be
outside.  You go in first on the platform, as if you did not know me.
There may be eyes watching there that know what’s what.  Alone you are
only a woman going off by train.  I am known.  With me, you may be
guessed at as Mrs Verloc running away.  Do you understand, my dear?” he
added, with an effort.

“Yes,” said Mrs Verloc, sitting there against him in the hansom all rigid
with the dread of the gallows and the fear of death.  “Yes, Tom.”  And
she added to herself, like an awful refrain: “The drop given was fourteen
feet.”

Ossipon, not looking at her, and with a face like a fresh plaster cast of
himself after a wasting illness, said: “By-the-by, I ought to have the
money for the tickets now.”

Mrs Verloc, undoing some hooks of her bodice, while she went on staring
ahead beyond the splashboard, handed over to him the new pigskin
pocket-book.  He received it without a word, and seemed to plunge it deep
somewhere into his very breast.  Then he slapped his coat on the outside.

All this was done without the exchange of a single glance; they were like
two people looking out for the first sight of a desired goal.  It was not
till the hansom swung round a corner and towards the bridge that Ossipon
opened his lips again.

“Do you know how much money there is in that thing?” he asked, as if
addressing slowly some hobgoblin sitting between the ears of the horse.

“No,” said Mrs Verloc.  “He gave it to me.  I didn’t count.  I thought
nothing of it at the time.  Afterwards—”

She moved her right hand a little.  It was so expressive that little
movement of that right hand which had struck the deadly blow into a man’s
heart less than an hour before that Ossipon could not repress a shudder.
He exaggerated it then purposely, and muttered:

“I am cold.  I got chilled through.”

Mrs Verloc looked straight ahead at the perspective of her escape.  Now
and then, like a sable streamer blown across a road, the words “The drop
given was fourteen feet” got in the way of her tense stare.  Through her
black veil the whites of her big eyes gleamed lustrously like the eyes of
a masked woman.

Ossipon’s rigidity had something business-like, a queer official
expression.  He was heard again all of a sudden, as though he had
released a catch in order to speak.

“Look here!  Do you know whether your—whether he kept his account at the
bank in his own name or in some other name.”

Mrs Verloc turned upon him her masked face and the big white gleam of her
eyes.

“Other name?” she said thoughtfully.

“Be exact in what you say,” Ossipon lectured in the swift motion of the
hansom.  “It’s extremely important.  I will explain to you.  The bank has
the numbers of these notes.  If they were paid to him in his own name,
then when his—his death becomes known, the notes may serve to track us
since we have no other money.  You have no other money on you?”

She shook her head negatively.

“None whatever?” he insisted.

“A few coppers.”

“It would be dangerous in that case.  The money would have then to be
dealt specially with.  Very specially.  We’d have perhaps to lose more
than half the amount in order to get these notes changed in a certain
safe place I know of in Paris.  In the other case I mean if he had his
account and got paid out under some other name—say Smith, for
instance—the money is perfectly safe to use.  You understand?  The bank
has no means of knowing that Mr Verloc and, say, Smith are one and the
same person.  Do you see how important it is that you should make no
mistake in answering me?  Can you answer that query at all?  Perhaps not.
Eh?”

She said composedly:

“I remember now!  He didn’t bank in his own name.  He told me once that
it was on deposit in the name of Prozor.”

“You are sure?”

“Certain.”

“You don’t think the bank had any knowledge of his real name?  Or anybody
in the bank or—”

She shrugged her shoulders.

“How can I know?  Is it likely, Tom?

“No.  I suppose it’s not likely.  It would have been more comfortable to
know. . . . Here we are.  Get out first, and walk straight in.  Move
smartly.”

He remained behind, and paid the cabman out of his own loose silver.  The
programme traced by his minute foresight was carried out.  When Mrs
Verloc, with her ticket for St Malo in her hand, entered the ladies’
waiting-room, Comrade Ossipon walked into the bar, and in seven minutes
absorbed three goes of hot brandy and water.

“Trying to drive out a cold,” he explained to the barmaid, with a
friendly nod and a grimacing smile.  Then he came out, bringing out from
that festive interlude the face of a man who had drunk at the very
Fountain of Sorrow.  He raised his eyes to the clock.  It was time.  He
waited.

Punctual, Mrs Verloc came out, with her veil down, and all black—black as
commonplace death itself, crowned with a few cheap and pale flowers.  She
passed close to a little group of men who were laughing, but whose
laughter could have been struck dead by a single word.  Her walk was
indolent, but her back was straight, and Comrade Ossipon looked after it
in terror before making a start himself.

The train was drawn up, with hardly anybody about its row of open doors.
Owing to the time of the year and to the abominable weather there were
hardly any passengers.  Mrs Verloc walked slowly along the line of empty
compartments till Ossipon touched her elbow from behind.

“In here.”

She got in, and he remained on the platform looking about.  She bent
forward, and in a whisper:

“What is it, Tom?  Is there any danger?  Wait a moment.  There’s the
guard.”

She saw him accost the man in uniform.  They talked for a while.  She
heard the guard say “Very well, sir,” and saw him touch his cap.  Then
Ossipon came back, saying: “I told him not to let anybody get into our
compartment.”

She was leaning forward on her seat.  “You think of everything. . . .
You’ll get me off, Tom?” she asked in a gust of anguish, lifting her veil
brusquely to look at her saviour.

She had uncovered a face like adamant.  And out of this face the eyes
looked on, big, dry, enlarged, lightless, burnt out like two black holes
in the white, shining globes.

“There is no danger,” he said, gazing into them with an earnestness
almost rapt, which to Mrs Verloc, flying from the gallows, seemed to be
full of force and tenderness.  This devotion deeply moved her—and the
adamantine face lost the stern rigidity of its terror.  Comrade Ossipon
gazed at it as no lover ever gazed at his mistress’s face.  Alexander
Ossipon, anarchist, nicknamed the Doctor, author of a medical (and
improper) pamphlet, late lecturer on the social aspects of hygiene to
working men’s clubs, was free from the trammels of conventional
morality—but he submitted to the rule of science.  He was scientific, and
he gazed scientifically at that woman, the sister of a degenerate, a
degenerate herself—of a murdering type.  He gazed at her, and invoked
Lombroso, as an Italian peasant recommends himself to his favourite
saint.  He gazed scientifically.  He gazed at her cheeks, at her nose, at
her eyes, at her ears. . . . Bad! . . . Fatal!  Mrs Verloc’s pale lips
parting, slightly relaxed under his passionately attentive gaze, he gazed
also at her teeth. . . . Not a doubt remained . . . a murdering type. . . .
If Comrade Ossipon did not recommend his terrified soul to Lombroso, it
was only because on scientific grounds he could not believe that he
carried about him such a thing as a soul.  But he had in him the
scientific spirit, which moved him to testify on the platform of a
railway station in nervous jerky phrases.

“He was an extraordinary lad, that brother of yours.  Most interesting to
study.  A perfect type in a way.  Perfect!”

He spoke scientifically in his secret fear.  And Mrs Verloc, hearing
these words of commendation vouchsafed to her beloved dead, swayed
forward with a flicker of light in her sombre eyes, like a ray of
sunshine heralding a tempest of rain.

“He was that indeed,” she whispered softly, with quivering lips.  “You
took a lot of notice of him, Tom.  I loved you for it.”

“It’s almost incredible the resemblance there was between you two,”
pursued Ossipon, giving a voice to his abiding dread, and trying to
conceal his nervous, sickening impatience for the train to start.  “Yes;
he resembled you.”

These words were not especially touching or sympathetic.  But the fact of
that resemblance insisted upon was enough in itself to act upon her
emotions powerfully.  With a little faint cry, and throwing her arms out,
Mrs Verloc burst into tears at last.

Ossipon entered the carriage, hastily closed the door and looked out to
see the time by the station clock.  Eight minutes more.  For the first
three of these Mrs Verloc wept violently and helplessly without pause or
interruption.  Then she recovered somewhat, and sobbed gently in an
abundant fall of tears.  She tried to talk to her saviour, to the man who
was the messenger of life.

“Oh, Tom!  How could I fear to die after he was taken away from me so
cruelly!  How could I!  How could I be such a coward!”

She lamented aloud her love of life, that life without grace or charm,
and almost without decency, but of an exalted faithfulness of purpose,
even unto murder.  And, as often happens in the lament of poor humanity,
rich in suffering but indigent in words, the truth—the very cry of
truth—was found in a worn and artificial shape picked up somewhere among
the phrases of sham sentiment.

“How could I be so afraid of death!  Tom, I tried.  But I am afraid.  I
tried to do away with myself.  And I couldn’t.  Am I hard?  I suppose the
cup of horrors was not full enough for such as me.  Then when you came. . . . ”

She paused.  Then in a gust of confidence and gratitude, “I will live all
my days for you, Tom!” she sobbed out.

“Go over into the other corner of the carriage, away from the platform,”
said Ossipon solicitously.  She let her saviour settle her comfortably,
and he watched the coming on of another crisis of weeping, still more
violent than the first.  He watched the symptoms with a sort of medical
air, as if counting seconds.  He heard the guard’s whistle at last.  An
involuntary contraction of the upper lip bared his teeth with all the
aspect of savage resolution as he felt the train beginning to move.  Mrs
Verloc heard and felt nothing, and Ossipon, her saviour, stood still.  He
felt the train roll quicker, rumbling heavily to the sound of the woman’s
loud sobs, and then crossing the carriage in two long strides he opened
the door deliberately, and leaped out.

He had leaped out at the very end of the platform; and such was his
determination in sticking to his desperate plan that he managed by a sort
of miracle, performed almost in the air, to slam to the door of the
carriage.  Only then did he find himself rolling head over heels like a
shot rabbit.  He was bruised, shaken, pale as death, and out of breath
when he got up.  But he was calm, and perfectly able to meet the excited
crowd of railway men who had gathered round him in a moment.  He
explained, in gentle and convincing tones, that his wife had started at a
moment’s notice for Brittany to her dying mother; that, of course, she
was greatly up-set, and he considerably concerned at her state; that he
was trying to cheer her up, and had absolutely failed to notice at first
that the train was moving out.  To the general exclamation, “Why didn’t
you go on to Southampton, then, sir?” he objected the inexperience of a
young sister-in-law left alone in the house with three small children,
and her alarm at his absence, the telegraph offices being closed.  He had
acted on impulse.  “But I don’t think I’ll ever try that again,” he
concluded; smiled all round; distributed some small change, and marched
without a limp out of the station.

Outside, Comrade Ossipon, flush of safe banknotes as never before in his
life, refused the offer of a cab.

“I can walk,” he said, with a little friendly laugh to the civil driver.

He could walk.  He walked.  He crossed the bridge.  Later on the towers
of the Abbey saw in their massive immobility the yellow bush of his hair
passing under the lamps.  The lights of Victoria saw him too, and Sloane
Square, and the railings of the park.  And Comrade Ossipon once more
found himself on a bridge.  The river, a sinister marvel of still shadows
and flowing gleams mingling below in a black silence, arrested his
attention.  He stood looking over the parapet for a long time.  The clock
tower boomed a brazen blast above his drooping head.  He looked up at the
dial. . . . Half-past twelve of a wild night in the Channel.

And again Comrade Ossipon walked.  His robust form was seen that night in
distant parts of the enormous town slumbering monstrously on a carpet of
mud under a veil of raw mist.  It was seen crossing the streets without
life and sound, or diminishing in the interminable straight perspectives
of shadowy houses bordering empty roadways lined by strings of gas lamps.
He walked through Squares, Places, Ovals, Commons, through monotonous
streets with unknown names where the dust of humanity settles inert and
hopeless out of the stream of life.  He walked.  And suddenly turning
into a strip of a front garden with a mangy grass plot, he let himself
into a small grimy house with a latch-key he took out of his pocket.

He threw himself down on his bed all dressed, and lay still for a whole
quarter of an hour.  Then he sat up suddenly, drawing up his knees, and
clasping his legs.  The first dawn found him open-eyed, in that same
posture.  This man who could walk so long, so far, so aimlessly, without
showing a sign of fatigue, could also remain sitting still for hours
without stirring a limb or an eyelid.  But when the late sun sent its
rays into the room he unclasped his hands, and fell back on the pillow.
His eyes stared at the ceiling.  And suddenly they closed.  Comrade
Ossipon slept in the sunlight.




CHAPTER XIII


The enormous iron padlock on the doors of the wall cupboard was the only
object in the room on which the eye could rest without becoming afflicted
by the miserable unloveliness of forms and the poverty of material.
Unsaleable in the ordinary course of business on account of its noble
proportions, it had been ceded to the Professor for a few pence by a
marine dealer in the east of London.  The room was large, clean,
respectable, and poor with that poverty suggesting the starvation of
every human need except mere bread.  There was nothing on the walls but
the paper, an expanse of arsenical green, soiled with indelible smudges
here and there, and with stains resembling faded maps of uninhabited
continents.

At a deal table near a window sat Comrade Ossipon, holding his head
between his fists.  The Professor, dressed in his only suit of shoddy
tweeds, but flapping to and fro on the bare boards a pair of incredibly
dilapidated slippers, had thrust his hands deep into the overstrained
pockets of his jacket.  He was relating to his robust guest a visit he
had lately been paying to the Apostle Michaelis.  The Perfect Anarchist
had even been unbending a little.

“The fellow didn’t know anything of Verloc’s death.  Of course!  He never
looks at the newspapers.  They make him too sad, he says.  But never
mind.  I walked into his cottage.  Not a soul anywhere.  I had to shout
half-a-dozen times before he answered me.  I thought he was fast asleep
yet, in bed.  But not at all.  He had been writing his book for four
hours already.  He sat in that tiny cage in a litter of manuscript.
There was a half-eaten raw carrot on the table near him.  His breakfast.
He lives on a diet of raw carrots and a little milk now.”

“How does he look on it?” asked Comrade Ossipon listlessly.

“Angelic. . . . I picked up a handful of his pages from the floor.  The
poverty of reasoning is astonishing.  He has no logic.  He can’t think
consecutively.  But that’s nothing.  He has divided his biography into
three parts, entitled—‘Faith, Hope, Charity.’  He is elaborating now the
idea of a world planned out like an immense and nice hospital, with
gardens and flowers, in which the strong are to devote themselves to the
nursing of the weak.”

The Professor paused.

“Conceive you this folly, Ossipon?  The weak!  The source of all evil on
this earth!” he continued with his grim assurance.  “I told him that I
dreamt of a world like shambles, where the weak would be taken in hand
for utter extermination.”

“Do you understand, Ossipon?  The source of all evil!  They are our
sinister masters—the weak, the flabby, the silly, the cowardly, the faint
of heart, and the slavish of mind.  They have power.  They are the
multitude.  Theirs is the kingdom of the earth.  Exterminate,
exterminate!  That is the only way of progress.  It is!  Follow me,
Ossipon.  First the great multitude of the weak must go, then the only
relatively strong.  You see?  First the blind, then the deaf and the
dumb, then the halt and the lame—and so on.  Every taint, every vice,
every prejudice, every convention must meet its doom.”

“And what remains?” asked Ossipon in a stifled voice.

“I remain—if I am strong enough,” asserted the sallow little Professor,
whose large ears, thin like membranes, and standing far out from the
sides of his frail skull, took on suddenly a deep red tint.

“Haven’t I suffered enough from this oppression of the weak?” he
continued forcibly.  Then tapping the breast-pocket of his jacket: “And
yet _I am_ the force,” he went on.  “But the time!  The time!  Give me
time!  Ah! that multitude, too stupid to feel either pity or fear.
Sometimes I think they have everything on their side.  Everything—even
death—my own weapon.”

“Come and drink some beer with me at the Silenus,” said the robust
Ossipon after an interval of silence pervaded by the rapid flap, flap of
the slippers on the feet of the Perfect Anarchist.  This last accepted.
He was jovial that day in his own peculiar way.  He slapped Ossipon’s
shoulder.

“Beer!  So be it!  Let us drink and he merry, for we are strong, and
to-morrow we die.”

He busied himself with putting on his boots, and talked meanwhile in his
curt, resolute tones.

“What’s the matter with you, Ossipon?  You look glum and seek even my
company.  I hear that you are seen constantly in places where men utter
foolish things over glasses of liquor.  Why?  Have you abandoned your
collection of women?  They are the weak who feed the strong—eh?”

He stamped one foot, and picked up his other laced boot, heavy,
thick-soled, unblacked, mended many times.  He smiled to himself grimly.

“Tell me, Ossipon, terrible man, has ever one of your victims killed
herself for you—or are your triumphs so far incomplete—for blood alone
puts a seal on greatness?  Blood.  Death.  Look at history.”

“You be damned,” said Ossipon, without turning his head.

“Why?  Let that be the hope of the weak, whose theology has invented hell
for the strong.  Ossipon, my feeling for you is amicable contempt.  You
couldn’t kill a fly.”

But rolling to the feast on the top of the omnibus the Professor lost his
high spirits.  The contemplation of the multitudes thronging the
pavements extinguished his assurance under a load of doubt and uneasiness
which he could only shake off after a period of seclusion in the room
with the large cupboard closed by an enormous padlock.

“And so,” said over his shoulder Comrade Ossipon, who sat on the seat
behind.  “And so Michaelis dreams of a world like a beautiful and cheery
hospital.”

“Just so.  An immense charity for the healing of the weak,” assented the
Professor sardonically.

“That’s silly,” admitted Ossipon.  “You can’t heal weakness.  But after
all Michaelis may not be so far wrong.  In two hundred years doctors will
rule the world.  Science reigns already.  It reigns in the shade
maybe—but it reigns.  And all science must culminate at last in the
science of healing—not the weak, but the strong.  Mankind wants to
live—to live.”

“Mankind,” asserted the Professor with a self-confident glitter of his
iron-rimmed spectacles, “does not know what it wants.”

“But you do,” growled Ossipon.  “Just now you’ve been crying for
time—time.  Well.  The doctors will serve you out your time—if you are
good.  You profess yourself to be one of the strong—because you carry in
your pocket enough stuff to send yourself and, say, twenty other people
into eternity.  But eternity is a damned hole.  It’s time that you need.
You—if you met a man who could give you for certain ten years of time,
you would call him your master.”

“My device is: No God!  No Master,” said the Professor sententiously as
he rose to get off the ’bus.

Ossipon followed.  “Wait till you are lying flat on your back at the end
of your time,” he retorted, jumping off the footboard after the other.
“Your scurvy, shabby, mangy little bit of time,” he continued across the
street, and hopping on to the curbstone.

“Ossipon, I think that you are a humbug,” the Professor said, opening
masterfully the doors of the renowned Silenus.  And when they had
established themselves at a little table he developed further this
gracious thought.  “You are not even a doctor.  But you are funny.  Your
notion of a humanity universally putting out the tongue and taking the
pill from pole to pole at the bidding of a few solemn jokers is worthy of
the prophet.  Prophecy!  What’s the good of thinking of what will be!”
He raised his glass.  “To the destruction of what is,” he said calmly.

He drank and relapsed into his peculiarly close manner of silence.  The
thought of a mankind as numerous as the sands of the sea-shore, as
indestructible, as difficult to handle, oppressed him.  The sound of
exploding bombs was lost in their immensity of passive grains without an
echo.  For instance, this Verloc affair.  Who thought of it now?

Ossipon, as if suddenly compelled by some mysterious force, pulled a
much-folded newspaper out of his pocket.  The Professor raised his head at
the rustle.

“What’s that paper?  Anything in it?” he asked.

Ossipon started like a scared somnambulist.

“Nothing.  Nothing whatever.  The thing’s ten days old.  I forgot it in
my pocket, I suppose.”

But he did not throw the old thing away.  Before returning it to his
pocket he stole a glance at the last lines of a paragraph.  They ran
thus: “_An impenetrable mystery seems destined to hang for ever over this
act of madness or despair_.”

Such were the end words of an item of news headed: “Suicide of Lady
Passenger from a cross-Channel Boat.”  Comrade Ossipon was familiar with
the beauties of its journalistic style.  “_An impenetrable mystery seems
destined to hang for ever_. . . . ”  He knew every word by heart.  “_An
impenetrable mystery_. . . . ”

And the robust anarchist, hanging his head on his breast, fell into a
long reverie.

He was menaced by this thing in the very sources of his existence.  He
could not issue forth to meet his various conquests, those that he
courted on benches in Kensington Gardens, and those he met near area
railings, without the dread of beginning to talk to them of an
impenetrable mystery destined. . . . He was becoming scientifically
afraid of insanity lying in wait for him amongst these lines.  “_To hang
for ever over_.”  It was an obsession, a torture.  He had lately failed
to keep several of these appointments, whose note used to be an unbounded
trustfulness in the language of sentiment and manly tenderness.  The
confiding disposition of various classes of women satisfied the needs of
his self-love, and put some material means into his hand.  He needed it
to live.  It was there.  But if he could no longer make use of it, he ran
the risk of starving his ideals and his body . . . “_This act of madness
or despair_.”

“An impenetrable mystery” was sure “to hang for ever” as far as all
mankind was concerned.  But what of that if he alone of all men could
never get rid of the cursed knowledge?  And Comrade Ossipon’s knowledge
was as precise as the newspaper man could make it—up to the very
threshold of the “_mystery destined to hang for ever_. . . .”

Comrade Ossipon was well informed.  He knew what the gangway man of the
steamer had seen: “A lady in a black dress and a black veil, wandering at
midnight alongside, on the quay.  ‘Are you going by the boat, ma’am,’ he
had asked her encouragingly.  ‘This way.’  She seemed not to know what to
do.  He helped her on board.  She seemed weak.”

And he knew also what the stewardess had seen: A lady in black with a
white face standing in the middle of the empty ladies’ cabin.  The
stewardess induced her to lie down there.  The lady seemed quite
unwilling to speak, and as if she were in some awful trouble.  The next
the stewardess knew she was gone from the ladies’ cabin.  The stewardess
then went on deck to look for her, and Comrade Ossipon was informed that
the good woman found the unhappy lady lying down in one of the hooded
seats.  Her eyes were open, but she would not answer anything that was
said to her.  She seemed very ill.  The stewardess fetched the chief
steward, and those two people stood by the side of the hooded seat
consulting over their extraordinary and tragic passenger.  They talked in
audible whispers (for she seemed past hearing) of St Malo and the Consul
there, of communicating with her people in England.  Then they went away
to arrange for her removal down below, for indeed by what they could see
of her face she seemed to them to be dying.  But Comrade Ossipon knew
that behind that white mask of despair there was struggling against
terror and despair a vigour of vitality, a love of life that could resist
the furious anguish which drives to murder and the fear, the blind, mad
fear of the gallows.  He knew.  But the stewardess and the chief steward
knew nothing, except that when they came back for her in less than five
minutes the lady in black was no longer in the hooded seat.  She was
nowhere.  She was gone.  It was then five o’clock in the morning, and it
was no accident either.  An hour afterwards one of the steamer’s hands
found a wedding ring left lying on the seat.  It had stuck to the wood in
a bit of wet, and its glitter caught the man’s eye.  There was a date,
24th June 1879, engraved inside.  “_An impenetrable mystery is destined
to hang for ever_. . . . ”

And Comrade Ossipon raised his bowed head, beloved of various humble
women of these isles, Apollo-like in the sunniness of its bush of hair.

The Professor had grown restless meantime.  He rose.

“Stay,” said Ossipon hurriedly.  “Here, what do you know of madness and
despair?”

The Professor passed the tip of his tongue on his dry, thin lips, and
said doctorally:

“There are no such things.  All passion is lost now.  The world is
mediocre, limp, without force.  And madness and despair are a force.  And
force is a crime in the eyes of the fools, the weak and the silly who
rule the roost.  You are mediocre.  Verloc, whose affair the police has
managed to smother so nicely, was mediocre.  And the police murdered him.
He was mediocre.  Everybody is mediocre.  Madness and despair!  Give me
that for a lever, and I’ll move the world.  Ossipon, you have my cordial
scorn.  You are incapable of conceiving even what the fat-fed citizen
would call a crime.  You have no force.”  He paused, smiling sardonically
under the fierce glitter of his thick glasses.

“And let me tell you that this little legacy they say you’ve come into
has not improved your intelligence.  You sit at your beer like a dummy.
Good-bye.”

“Will you have it?” said Ossipon, looking up with an idiotic grin.

“Have what?”

“The legacy.  All of it.”

The incorruptible Professor only smiled.  His clothes were all but
falling off him, his boots, shapeless with repairs, heavy like lead, let
water in at every step.  He said:

“I will send you by-and-by a small bill for certain chemicals which I
shall order to-morrow.  I need them badly.  Understood—eh?”

Ossipon lowered his head slowly.  He was alone.  “_An impenetrable
mystery_. . . . ”  It seemed to him that suspended in the air before him
he saw his own brain pulsating to the rhythm of an impenetrable mystery.
It was diseased clearly. . . .  “_This act of madness or despair_.”

The mechanical piano near the door played through a valse cheekily, then
fell silent all at once, as if gone grumpy.

Comrade Ossipon, nicknamed the Doctor, went out of the Silenus beer-hall.
At the door he hesitated, blinking at a not too splendid sunlight—and the
paper with the report of the suicide of a lady was in his pocket.  His
heart was beating against it.  The suicide of a lady—_this act of madness
or despair_.

He walked along the street without looking where he put his feet; and he
walked in a direction which would not bring him to the place of
appointment with another lady (an elderly nursery governess putting her
trust in an Apollo-like ambrosial head).  He was walking away from it.
He could face no woman.  It was ruin.  He could neither think, work,
sleep, nor eat.  But he was beginning to drink with pleasure, with
anticipation, with hope.  It was ruin.  His revolutionary career,
sustained by the sentiment and trustfulness of many women, was menaced by
an impenetrable mystery—the mystery of a human brain pulsating wrongfully
to the rhythm of journalistic phrases.  “ . . . _Will hang for ever over
this act_. . . . It was inclining towards the gutter . . . _of madness or
despair_.”

“I am seriously ill,” he muttered to himself with scientific insight.
Already his robust form, with an Embassy’s secret-service money
(inherited from Mr Verloc) in his pockets, was marching in the gutter as
if in training for the task of an inevitable future.  Already he bowed
his broad shoulders, his head of ambrosial locks, as if ready to receive
the leather yoke of the sandwich board.  As on that night, more than a
week ago, Comrade Ossipon walked without looking where he put his feet,
feeling no fatigue, feeling nothing, seeing nothing, hearing not a sound.
“_An impenetrable mystery_. . . .”  He walked disregarded. . . .  “_This
act of madness or despair_.”

And the incorruptible Professor walked too, averting his eyes from the
odious multitude of mankind.  He had no future.  He disdained it.  He was
a force.  His thoughts caressed the images of ruin and destruction.  He
walked frail, insignificant, shabby, miserable—and terrible in the
simplicity of his idea calling madness and despair to the regeneration of
the world.  Nobody looked at him.  He passed on unsuspected and deadly,
like a pest in the street full of men.





THE SECRET SHARER

By Joseph Conrad




I


On my right hand there were lines of fishing stakes resembling a
mysterious system of half-submerged bamboo fences, incomprehensible in
its division of the domain of tropical fishes, and crazy of aspect as if
abandoned forever by some nomad tribe of fishermen now gone to the other
end of the ocean; for there was no sign of human habitation as far as
the eye could reach. To the left a group of barren islets, suggesting
ruins of stone walls, towers, and blockhouses, had its foundations set
in a blue sea that itself looked solid, so still and stable did it lie
below my feet; even the track of light from the westering sun shone
smoothly, without that animated glitter which tells of an imperceptible
ripple. And when I turned my head to take a parting glance at the tug
which had just left us anchored outside the bar, I saw the straight line
of the flat shore joined to the stable sea, edge to edge, with a perfect
and unmarked closeness, in one leveled floor half brown, half blue under
the enormous dome of the sky. Corresponding in their insignificance to
the islets of the sea, two small clumps of trees, one on each side of
the only fault in the impeccable joint, marked the mouth of the river
Meinam we had just left on the first preparatory stage of our homeward
journey; and, far back on the inland level, a larger and loftier mass,
the grove surrounding the great Paknam pagoda, was the only thing on
which the eye could rest from the vain task of exploring the monotonous
sweep of the horizon. Here and there gleams as of a few scattered pieces
of silver marked the windings of the great river; and on the nearest of
them, just within the bar, the tug steaming right into the land became
lost to my sight, hull and funnel and masts, as though the impassive
earth had swallowed her up without an effort, without a tremor. My eye
followed the light cloud of her smoke, now here, now there, above the
plain, according to the devious curves of the stream, but always fainter
and farther away, till I lost it at last behind the miter-shaped hill
of the great pagoda. And then I was left alone with my ship, anchored at
the head of the Gulf of Siam.

She floated at the starting point of a long journey, very still in an
immense stillness, the shadows of her spars flung far to the eastward by
the setting sun. At that moment I was alone on her decks. There was not
a sound in her--and around us nothing moved, nothing lived, not a canoe
on the water, not a bird in the air, not a cloud in the sky. In this
breathless pause at the threshold of a long passage we seemed to be
measuring our fitness for a long and arduous enterprise, the appointed
task of both our existences to be carried out, far from all human eyes,
with only sky and sea for spectators and for judges.

There must have been some glare in the air to interfere with one's
sight, because it was only just before the sun left us that my roaming
eyes made out beyond the highest ridges of the principal islet of the
group something which did away with the solemnity of perfect solitude.
The tide of darkness flowed on swiftly; and with tropical suddenness a
swarm of stars came out above the shadowy earth, while I lingered yet,
my hand resting lightly on my ship's rail as if on the shoulder of a
trusted friend. But, with all that multitude of celestial bodies staring
down at one, the comfort of quiet communion with her was gone for good.
And there were also disturbing sounds by this time--voices, footsteps
forward; the steward flitted along the main-deck, a busily ministering
spirit; a hand bell tinkled urgently under the poop deck....

I found my two officers waiting for me near the supper table, in the
lighted cuddy. We sat down at once, and as I helped the chief mate, I
said:

"Are you aware that there is a ship anchored inside the islands? I saw
her mastheads above the ridge as the sun went down."

He raised sharply his simple face, overcharged by a terrible growth of
whisker, and emitted his usual ejaculations: "Bless my soul, sir! You
don't say so!"

My second mate was a round-cheeked, silent young man, grave beyond his
years, I thought; but as our eyes happened to meet I detected a slight
quiver on his lips. I looked down at once. It was not my part to
encourage sneering on board my ship. It must be said, too, that I knew
very little of my officers. In consequence of certain events of no
particular significance, except to myself, I had been appointed to the
command only a fortnight before. Neither did I know much of the hands
forward. All these people had been together for eighteen months or so,
and my position was that of the only stranger on board. I mention this
because it has some bearing on what is to follow. But what I felt most
was my being a stranger to the ship; and if all the truth must be
told, I was somewhat of a stranger to myself. The youngest man on board
(barring the second mate), and untried as yet by a position of the
fullest responsibility, I was willing to take the adequacy of the others
for granted. They had simply to be equal to their tasks; but I wondered
how far I should turn out faithful to that ideal conception of one's own
personality every man sets up for himself secretly.

Meantime the chief mate, with an almost visible effect of collaboration
on the part of his round eyes and frightful whiskers, was trying to
evolve a theory of the anchored ship. His dominant trait was to take all
things into earnest consideration. He was of a painstaking turn of mind.
As he used to say, he "liked to account to himself" for practically
everything that came in his way, down to a miserable scorpion he had
found in his cabin a week before. The why and the wherefore of that
scorpion--how it got on board and came to select his room rather than
the pantry (which was a dark place and more what a scorpion would be
partial to), and how on earth it managed to drown itself in the inkwell
of his writing desk--had exercised him infinitely. The ship within the
islands was much more easily accounted for; and just as we were about
to rise from table he made his pronouncement. She was, he doubted not, a
ship from home lately arrived. Probably she drew too much water to cross
the bar except at the top of spring tides. Therefore she went into that
natural harbor to wait for a few days in preference to remaining in an
open roadstead.

"That's so," confirmed the second mate, suddenly, in his slightly hoarse
voice. "She draws over twenty feet. She's the Liverpool ship Sephora
with a cargo of coal. Hundred and twenty-three days from Cardiff."

We looked at him in surprise.

"The tugboat skipper told me when he came on board for your letters,
sir," explained the young man. "He expects to take her up the river the
day after tomorrow."

After thus overwhelming us with the extent of his information he slipped
out of the cabin. The mate observed regretfully that he "could not
account for that young fellow's whims." What prevented him telling us
all about it at once, he wanted to know.

I detained him as he was making a move. For the last two days the crew
had had plenty of hard work, and the night before they had very little
sleep. I felt painfully that I--a stranger--was doing something unusual
when I directed him to let all hands turn in without setting an
anchor watch. I proposed to keep on deck myself till one o'clock or
thereabouts. I would get the second mate to relieve me at that hour.

"He will turn out the cook and the steward at four," I concluded, "and
then give you a call. Of course at the slightest sign of any sort of
wind we'll have the hands up and make a start at once."

He concealed his astonishment. "Very well, sir." Outside the cuddy he
put his head in the second mate's door to inform him of my unheard-of
caprice to take a five hours' anchor watch on myself. I heard the other
raise his voice incredulously--"What? The Captain himself?" Then a few
more murmurs, a door closed, then another. A few moments later I went on
deck.

My strangeness, which had made me sleepless, had prompted that
unconventional arrangement, as if I had expected in those solitary hours
of the night to get on terms with the ship of which I knew nothing,
manned by men of whom I knew very little more. Fast alongside a wharf,
littered like any ship in port with a tangle of unrelated things,
invaded by unrelated shore people, I had hardly seen her yet properly.
Now, as she lay cleared for sea, the stretch of her main-deck seemed to
me very fine under the stars. Very fine, very roomy for her size,
and very inviting. I descended the poop and paced the waist, my mind
picturing to myself the coming passage through the Malay Archipelago,
down the Indian Ocean, and up the Atlantic. All its phases were familiar
enough to me, every characteristic, all the alternatives which were
likely to face me on the high seas--everything!... except the novel
responsibility of command. But I took heart from the reasonable thought
that the ship was like other ships, the men like other men, and that
the sea was not likely to keep any special surprises expressly for my
discomfiture.

Arrived at that comforting conclusion, I bethought myself of a cigar and
went below to get it. All was still down there. Everybody at the
after end of the ship was sleeping profoundly. I came out again on
the quarter-deck, agreeably at ease in my sleeping suit on that warm
breathless night, barefooted, a glowing cigar in my teeth, and, going
forward, I was met by the profound silence of the fore end of the ship.
Only as I passed the door of the forecastle, I heard a deep, quiet,
trustful sigh of some sleeper inside. And suddenly I rejoiced in the
great security of the sea as compared with the unrest of the land, in
my choice of that untempted life presenting no disquieting
problems, invested with an elementary moral beauty by the absolute
straightforwardness of its appeal and by the singleness of its purpose.

The riding light in the forerigging burned with a clear, untroubled, as
if symbolic, flame, confident and bright in the mysterious shades of
the night. Passing on my way aft along the other side of the ship, I
observed that the rope side ladder, put over, no doubt, for the master
of the tug when he came to fetch away our letters, had not been hauled
in as it should have been. I became annoyed at this, for exactitude in
some small matters is the very soul of discipline. Then I reflected that
I had myself peremptorily dismissed my officers from duty, and by my
own act had prevented the anchor watch being formally set and things
properly attended to. I asked myself whether it was wise ever to
interfere with the established routine of duties even from the kindest
of motives. My action might have made me appear eccentric. Goodness only
knew how that absurdly whiskered mate would "account" for my conduct,
and what the whole ship thought of that informality of their new
captain. I was vexed with myself.

Not from compunction certainly, but, as it were mechanically, I
proceeded to get the ladder in myself. Now a side ladder of that sort
is a light affair and comes in easily, yet my vigorous tug, which should
have brought it flying on board, merely recoiled upon my body in a
totally unexpected jerk. What the devil!... I was so astounded by
the immovableness of that ladder that I remained stock-still, trying to
account for it to myself like that imbecile mate of mine. In the end, of
course, I put my head over the rail.

The side of the ship made an opaque belt of shadow on the darkling
glassy shimmer of the sea. But I saw at once something elongated and
pale floating very close to the ladder. Before I could form a guess a
faint flash of phosphorescent light, which seemed to issue suddenly
from the naked body of a man, flickered in the sleeping water with the
elusive, silent play of summer lightning in a night sky. With a gasp I
saw revealed to my stare a pair of feet, the long legs, a broad livid
back immersed right up to the neck in a greenish cadaverous glow. One
hand, awash, clutched the bottom rung of the ladder. He was complete
but for the head. A headless corpse! The cigar dropped out of my gaping
mouth with a tiny plop and a short hiss quite audible in the absolute
stillness of all things under heaven. At that I suppose he raised up his
face, a dimly pale oval in the shadow of the ship's side. But even then
I could only barely make out down there the shape of his black-haired
head. However, it was enough for the horrid, frost-bound sensation
which had gripped me about the chest to pass off. The moment of vain
exclamations was past, too. I only climbed on the spare spar and leaned
over the rail as far as I could, to bring my eyes nearer to that mystery
floating alongside.

As he hung by the ladder, like a resting swimmer, the sea lightning
played about his limbs at every stir; and he appeared in it ghastly,
silvery, fishlike. He remained as mute as a fish, too. He made no motion
to get out of the water, either. It was inconceivable that he should
not attempt to come on board, and strangely troubling to suspect that
perhaps he did not want to. And my first words were prompted by just
that troubled incertitude.

"What's the matter?" I asked in my ordinary tone, speaking down to the
face upturned exactly under mine.

"Cramp," it answered, no louder. Then slightly anxious, "I say, no need
to call anyone."

"I was not going to," I said.

"Are you alone on deck?"

"Yes."

I had somehow the impression that he was on the point of letting go the
ladder to swim away beyond my ken--mysterious as he came. But, for the
moment, this being appearing as if he had risen from the bottom of the
sea (it was certainly the nearest land to the ship) wanted only to know
the time. I told him. And he, down there, tentatively:

"I suppose your captain's turned in?"

"I am sure he isn't," I said.

He seemed to struggle with himself, for I heard something like the low,
bitter murmur of doubt. "What's the good?" His next words came out with
a hesitating effort.

"Look here, my man. Could you call him out quietly?"

I thought the time had come to declare myself.

"I am the captain."

I heard a "By Jove!" whispered at the level of the water. The
phosphorescence flashed in the swirl of the water all about his limbs,
his other hand seized the ladder.

"My name's Leggatt."

The voice was calm and resolute. A good voice. The self-possession of
that man had somehow induced a corresponding state in myself. It was
very quietly that I remarked:

"You must be a good swimmer."

"Yes. I've been in the water practically since nine o'clock. The
question for me now is whether I am to let go this ladder and go on
swimming till I sink from exhaustion, or--to come on board here."

I felt this was no mere formula of desperate speech, but a real
alternative in the view of a strong soul. I should have gathered from
this that he was young; indeed, it is only the young who are ever
confronted by such clear issues. But at the time it was pure intuition
on my part. A mysterious communication was established already between
us two--in the face of that silent, darkened tropical sea. I was
young, too; young enough to make no comment. The man in the water began
suddenly to climb up the ladder, and I hastened away from the rail to
fetch some clothes.

Before entering the cabin I stood still, listening in the lobby at the
foot of the stairs. A faint snore came through the closed door of the
chief mate's room. The second mate's door was on the hook, but the
darkness in there was absolutely soundless. He, too, was young and could
sleep like a stone. Remained the steward, but he was not likely to
wake up before he was called. I got a sleeping suit out of my room and,
coming back on deck, saw the naked man from the sea sitting on the main
hatch, glimmering white in the darkness, his elbows on his knees and
his head in his hands. In a moment he had concealed his damp body in a
sleeping suit of the same gray-stripe pattern as the one I was wearing
and followed me like my double on the poop. Together we moved right aft,
barefooted, silent.

"What is it?" I asked in a deadened voice, taking the lighted lamp out
of the binnacle, and raising it to his face.

"An ugly business."

He had rather regular features; a good mouth; light eyes under somewhat
heavy, dark eyebrows; a smooth, square forehead; no growth on his
cheeks; a small, brown mustache, and a well-shaped, round chin. His
expression was concentrated, meditative, under the inspecting light of
the lamp I held up to his face; such as a man thinking hard in solitude
might wear. My sleeping suit was just right for his size. A well-knit
young fellow of twenty-five at most. He caught his lower lip with the
edge of white, even teeth.

"Yes," I said, replacing the lamp in the binnacle. The warm, heavy
tropical night closed upon his head again.

"There's a ship over there," he murmured.

"Yes, I know. The Sephora. Did you know of us?"

"Hadn't the slightest idea. I am the mate of her--" He paused and
corrected himself. "I should say I _was_."

"Aha! Something wrong?"

"Yes. Very wrong indeed. I've killed a man."

"What do you mean? Just now?"

"No, on the passage. Weeks ago. Thirty-nine south. When I say a man--"

"Fit of temper," I suggested, confidently.

The shadowy, dark head, like mine, seemed to nod imperceptibly above the
ghostly gray of my sleeping suit. It was, in the night, as though I had
been faced by my own reflection in the depths of a somber and immense
mirror.

"A pretty thing to have to own up to for a Conway boy," murmured my
double, distinctly.

"You're a Conway boy?"

"I am," he said, as if startled. Then, slowly... "Perhaps you too--"

It was so; but being a couple of years older I had left before he
joined. After a quick interchange of dates a silence fell; and I thought
suddenly of my absurd mate with his terrific whiskers and the "Bless my
soul--you don't say so" type of intellect. My double gave me an inkling
of his thoughts by saying: "My father's a parson in Norfolk. Do you see
me before a judge and jury on that charge? For myself I can't see the
necessity. There are fellows that an angel from heaven--And I am not
that. He was one of those creatures that are just simmering all the time
with a silly sort of wickedness. Miserable devils that have no business
to live at all. He wouldn't do his duty and wouldn't let anybody else do
theirs. But what's the good of talking! You know well enough the sort of
ill-conditioned snarling cur--"

He appealed to me as if our experiences had been as identical as
our clothes. And I knew well enough the pestiferous danger of such a
character where there are no means of legal repression. And I knew well
enough also that my double there was no homicidal ruffian. I did not
think of asking him for details, and he told me the story roughly in
brusque, disconnected sentences. I needed no more. I saw it all going on
as though I were myself inside that other sleeping suit.

"It happened while we were setting a reefed foresail, at dusk. Reefed
foresail! You understand the sort of weather. The only sail we had left
to keep the ship running; so you may guess what it had been like for
days. Anxious sort of job, that. He gave me some of his cursed insolence
at the sheet. I tell you I was overdone with this terrific weather that
seemed to have no end to it. Terrific, I tell you--and a deep ship. I
believe the fellow himself was half crazed with funk. It was no time for
gentlemanly reproof, so I turned round and felled him like an ox. He up
and at me. We closed just as an awful sea made for the ship. All hands
saw it coming and took to the rigging, but I had him by the throat, and
went on shaking him like a rat, the men above us yelling, 'Look out!
look out!' Then a crash as if the sky had fallen on my head. They
say that for over ten minutes hardly anything was to be seen of the
ship--just the three masts and a bit of the forecastle head and of the
poop all awash driving along in a smother of foam. It was a miracle that
they found us, jammed together behind the forebitts. It's clear that I
meant business, because I was holding him by the throat still when they
picked us up. He was black in the face. It was too much for them.
It seems they rushed us aft together, gripped as we were, screaming
'Murder!' like a lot of lunatics, and broke into the cuddy. And the ship
running for her life, touch and go all the time, any minute her last in
a sea fit to turn your hair gray only a-looking at it. I understand that
the skipper, too, started raving like the rest of them. The man had been
deprived of sleep for more than a week, and to have this sprung on him
at the height of a furious gale nearly drove him out of his mind. I
wonder they didn't fling me overboard after getting the carcass of their
precious shipmate out of my fingers. They had rather a job to separate
us, I've been told. A sufficiently fierce story to make an old judge and
a respectable jury sit up a bit. The first thing I heard when I came to
myself was the maddening howling of that endless gale, and on that the
voice of the old man. He was hanging on to my bunk, staring into my face
out of his sou'wester.

"'Mr. Leggatt, you have killed a man. You can act no longer as chief
mate of this ship.'"

His care to subdue his voice made it sound monotonous. He rested a hand
on the end of the skylight to steady himself with, and all that time did
not stir a limb, so far as I could see. "Nice little tale for a quiet
tea party," he concluded in the same tone.

One of my hands, too, rested on the end of the skylight; neither did
I stir a limb, so far as I knew. We stood less than a foot from each
other. It occurred to me that if old "Bless my soul--you don't say so"
were to put his head up the companion and catch sight of us, he would
think he was seeing double, or imagine himself come upon a scene of
weird witchcraft; the strange captain having a quiet confabulation
by the wheel with his own gray ghost. I became very much concerned to
prevent anything of the sort. I heard the other's soothing undertone.

"My father's a parson in Norfolk," it said. Evidently he had forgotten
he had told me this important fact before. Truly a nice little tale.

"You had better slip down into my stateroom now," I said, moving off
stealthily. My double followed my movements; our bare feet made no
sound; I let him in, closed the door with care, and, after giving a call
to the second mate, returned on deck for my relief.

"Not much sign of any wind yet," I remarked when he approached.

"No, sir. Not much," he assented, sleepily, in his hoarse voice, with
just enough deference, no more, and barely suppressing a yawn.

"Well, that's all you have to look out for. You have got your orders."

"Yes, sir."

I paced a turn or two on the poop and saw him take up his position face
forward with his elbow in the ratlines of the mizzen rigging before I
went below. The mate's faint snoring was still going on peacefully.
The cuddy lamp was burning over the table on which stood a vase with
flowers, a polite attention from the ship's provision merchant--the
last flowers we should see for the next three months at the very least.
Two bunches of bananas hung from the beam symmetrically, one on each
side of the rudder casing. Everything was as before in the ship--except
that two of her captain's sleeping suits were simultaneously in use, one
motionless in the cuddy, the other keeping very still in the captain's
stateroom.

It must be explained here that my cabin had the form of the capital
letter L, the door being within the angle and opening into the short
part of the letter. A couch was to the left, the bed place to the right;
my writing desk and the chronometers' table faced the door. But anyone
opening it, unless he stepped right inside, had no view of what I call
the long (or vertical) part of the letter. It contained some lockers
surmounted by a bookcase; and a few clothes, a thick jacket or two,
caps, oilskin coat, and such like, hung on hooks. There was at the
bottom of that part a door opening into my bathroom, which could be
entered also directly from the saloon. But that way was never used.

The mysterious arrival had discovered the advantage of this particular
shape. Entering my room, lighted strongly by a big bulkhead lamp swung
on gimbals above my writing desk, I did not see him anywhere till he
stepped out quietly from behind the coats hung in the recessed part.

"I heard somebody moving about, and went in there at once," he
whispered.

I, too, spoke under my breath.

"Nobody is likely to come in here without knocking and getting
permission."

He nodded. His face was thin and the sunburn faded, as though he had
been ill. And no wonder. He had been, I heard presently, kept under
arrest in his cabin for nearly seven weeks. But there was nothing sickly
in his eyes or in his expression. He was not a bit like me, really; yet,
as we stood leaning over my bed place, whispering side by side, with our
dark heads together and our backs to the door, anybody bold enough to
open it stealthily would have been treated to the uncanny sight of a
double captain busy talking in whispers with his other self.

"But all this doesn't tell me how you came to hang on to our side
ladder," I inquired, in the hardly audible murmurs we used, after he had
told me something more of the proceedings on board the Sephora once the
bad weather was over.

"When we sighted Java Head I had had time to think all those matters out
several times over. I had six weeks of doing nothing else, and with only
an hour or so every evening for a tramp on the quarter-deck."

He whispered, his arms folded on the side of my bed place, staring
through the open port. And I could imagine perfectly the manner of this
thinking out--a stubborn if not a steadfast operation; something of
which I should have been perfectly incapable.

"I reckoned it would be dark before we closed with the land," he
continued, so low that I had to strain my hearing near as we were to
each other, shoulder touching shoulder almost. "So I asked to speak to
the old man. He always seemed very sick when he came to see me--as if he
could not look me in the face. You know, that foresail saved the ship.
She was too deep to have run long under bare poles. And it was I
that managed to set it for him. Anyway, he came. When I had him in my
cabin--he stood by the door looking at me as if I had the halter round
my neck already--I asked him right away to leave my cabin door unlocked
at night while the ship was going through Sunda Straits. There would
be the Java coast within two or three miles, off Angier Point. I wanted
nothing more. I've had a prize for swimming my second year in the
Conway."

"I can believe it," I breathed out.

"God only knows why they locked me in every night. To see some of
their faces you'd have thought they were afraid I'd go about at night
strangling people. Am I a murdering brute? Do I look it? By Jove! If I
had been he wouldn't have trusted himself like that into my room. You'll
say I might have chucked him aside and bolted out, there and then--it
was dark already. Well, no. And for the same reason I wouldn't think of
trying to smash the door. There would have been a rush to stop me at the
noise, and I did not mean to get into a confounded scrimmage. Somebody
else might have got killed--for I would not have broken out only to
get chucked back, and I did not want any more of that work. He refused,
looking more sick than ever. He was afraid of the men, and also of
that old second mate of his who had been sailing with him for years--a
gray-headed old humbug; and his steward, too, had been with him devil
knows how long--seventeen years or more--a dogmatic sort of loafer who
hated me like poison, just because I was the chief mate. No chief mate
ever made more than one voyage in the Sephora, you know. Those two old
chaps ran the ship. Devil only knows what the skipper wasn't afraid of
(all his nerve went to pieces altogether in that hellish spell of bad
weather we had)--of what the law would do to him--of his wife, perhaps.
Oh, yes! she's on board. Though I don't think she would have meddled.
She would have been only too glad to have me out of the ship in any way.
The 'brand of Cain' business, don't you see. That's all right. I was
ready enough to go off wandering on the face of the earth--and that was
price enough to pay for an Abel of that sort. Anyhow, he wouldn't listen
to me. 'This thing must take its course. I represent the law here.' He
was shaking like a leaf. 'So you won't?' 'No!' 'Then I hope you will
be able to sleep on that,' I said, and turned my back on him. 'I wonder
that you can,' cries he, and locks the door.

"Well after that, I couldn't. Not very well. That was three weeks ago.
We have had a slow passage through the Java Sea; drifted about Carimata
for ten days. When we anchored here they thought, I suppose, it was
all right. The nearest land (and that's five miles) is the ship's
destination; the consul would soon set about catching me; and there
would have been no object in holding to these islets there. I don't
suppose there's a drop of water on them. I don't know how it was, but
tonight that steward, after bringing me my supper, went out to let me
eat it, and left the door unlocked. And I ate it--all there was, too.
After I had finished I strolled out on the quarter-deck. I don't know
that I meant to do anything. A breath of fresh air was all I wanted, I
believe. Then a sudden temptation came over me. I kicked off my slippers
and was in the water before I had made up my mind fairly. Somebody heard
the splash and they raised an awful hullabaloo. 'He's gone! Lower the
boats! He's committed suicide! No, he's swimming.' Certainly I was
swimming. It's not so easy for a swimmer like me to commit suicide by
drowning. I landed on the nearest islet before the boat left the ship's
side. I heard them pulling about in the dark, hailing, and so on, but
after a bit they gave up. Everything quieted down and the anchorage
became still as death. I sat down on a stone and began to think. I felt
certain they would start searching for me at daylight. There was no
place to hide on those stony things--and if there had been, what would
have been the good? But now I was clear of that ship, I was not going
back. So after a while I took off all my clothes, tied them up in a
bundle with a stone inside, and dropped them in the deep water on the
outer side of that islet. That was suicide enough for me. Let them think
what they liked, but I didn't mean to drown myself. I meant to swim till
I sank--but that's not the same thing. I struck out for another of these
little islands, and it was from that one that I first saw your riding
light. Something to swim for. I went on easily, and on the way I came
upon a flat rock a foot or two above water. In the daytime, I dare say,
you might make it out with a glass from your poop. I scrambled up on it
and rested myself for a bit. Then I made another start. That last spell
must have been over a mile."

His whisper was getting fainter and fainter, and all the time he stared
straight out through the porthole, in which there was not even a star
to be seen. I had not interrupted him. There was something that made
comment impossible in his narrative, or perhaps in himself; a sort of
feeling, a quality, which I can't find a name for. And when he ceased,
all I found was a futile whisper: "So you swam for our light?"

"Yes--straight for it. It was something to swim for. I couldn't see any
stars low down because the coast was in the way, and I couldn't see the
land, either. The water was like glass. One might have been swimming in
a confounded thousand-feet deep cistern with no place for scrambling out
anywhere; but what I didn't like was the notion of swimming round and
round like a crazed bullock before I gave out; and as I didn't mean to
go back... No. Do you see me being hauled back, stark naked, off one
of these little islands by the scruff of the neck and fighting like a
wild beast? Somebody would have got killed for certain, and I did not
want any of that. So I went on. Then your ladder--"

"Why didn't you hail the ship?" I asked, a little louder.

He touched my shoulder lightly. Lazy footsteps came right over our heads
and stopped. The second mate had crossed from the other side of the poop
and might have been hanging over the rail for all we knew.

"He couldn't hear us talking--could he?" My double breathed into my very
ear, anxiously.

His anxiety was in answer, a sufficient answer, to the question I had
put to him. An answer containing all the difficulty of that situation. I
closed the porthole quietly, to make sure. A louder word might have been
overheard.

"Who's that?" he whispered then.

"My second mate. But I don't know much more of the fellow than you do."

And I told him a little about myself. I had been appointed to take
charge while I least expected anything of the sort, not quite a
fortnight ago. I didn't know either the ship or the people. Hadn't had
the time in port to look about me or size anybody up. And as to the
crew, all they knew was that I was appointed to take the ship home.
For the rest, I was almost as much of a stranger on board as himself,
I said. And at the moment I felt it most acutely. I felt that it would
take very little to make me a suspect person in the eyes of the ship's
company.

He had turned about meantime; and we, the two strangers in the ship,
faced each other in identical attitudes.

"Your ladder--" he murmured, after a silence. "Who'd have thought of
finding a ladder hanging over at night in a ship anchored out here! I
felt just then a very unpleasant faintness. After the life I've been
leading for nine weeks, anybody would have got out of condition. I
wasn't capable of swimming round as far as your rudder chains. And, lo
and behold! there was a ladder to get hold of. After I gripped it I said
to myself, 'What's the good?' When I saw a man's head looking over I
thought I would swim away presently and leave him shouting--in whatever
language it was. I didn't mind being looked at. I--I liked it. And then
you speaking to me so quietly--as if you had expected me--made me hold
on a little longer. It had been a confounded lonely time--I don't mean
while swimming. I was glad to talk a little to somebody that didn't
belong to the Sephora. As to asking for the captain, that was a mere
impulse. It could have been no use, with all the ship knowing about me
and the other people pretty certain to be round here in the morning. I
don't know--I wanted to be seen, to talk with somebody, before I went
on. I don't know what I would have said.... 'Fine night, isn't it?'
or something of the sort."

"Do you think they will be round here presently?" I asked with some
incredulity.

"Quite likely," he said, faintly.

"He looked extremely haggard all of a sudden. His head rolled on his
shoulders.

"H'm. We shall see then. Meantime get into that bed," I whispered. "Want
help? There."

It was a rather high bed place with a set of drawers underneath. This
amazing swimmer really needed the lift I gave him by seizing his leg. He
tumbled in, rolled over on his back, and flung one arm across his eyes.
And then, with his face nearly hidden, he must have looked exactly as I
used to look in that bed. I gazed upon my other self for a while before
drawing across carefully the two green serge curtains which ran on a
brass rod. I thought for a moment of pinning them together for greater
safety, but I sat down on the couch, and once there I felt unwilling
to rise and hunt for a pin. I would do it in a moment. I was extremely
tired, in a peculiarly intimate way, by the strain of stealthiness, by
the effort of whispering and the general secrecy of this excitement. It
was three o'clock by now and I had been on my feet since nine, but I
was not sleepy; I could not have gone to sleep. I sat there, fagged
out, looking at the curtains, trying to clear my mind of the confused
sensation of being in two places at once, and greatly bothered by an
exasperating knocking in my head. It was a relief to discover suddenly
that it was not in my head at all, but on the outside of the door.
Before I could collect myself the words "Come in" were out of my mouth,
and the steward entered with a tray, bringing in my morning coffee. I
had slept, after all, and I was so frightened that I shouted, "This way!
I am here, steward," as though he had been miles away. He put down the
tray on the table next the couch and only then said, very quietly, "I
can see you are here, sir." I felt him give me a keen look, but I dared
not meet his eyes just then. He must have wondered why I had drawn the
curtains of my bed before going to sleep on the couch. He went out,
hooking the door open as usual.

I heard the crew washing decks above me. I knew I would have been told
at once if there had been any wind. Calm, I thought, and I was doubly
vexed. Indeed, I felt dual more than ever. The steward reappeared
suddenly in the doorway. I jumped up from the couch so quickly that he
gave a start.

"What do you want here?"

"Close your port, sir--they are washing decks."

"It is closed," I said, reddening.

"Very well, sir." But he did not move from the doorway and returned my
stare in an extraordinary, equivocal manner for a time. Then his eyes
wavered, all his expression changed, and in a voice unusually gentle,
almost coaxingly:

"May I come in to take the empty cup away, sir?"

"Of course!" I turned my back on him while he popped in and out. Then
I unhooked and closed the door and even pushed the bolt. This sort of
thing could not go on very long. The cabin was as hot as an oven, too. I
took a peep at my double, and discovered that he had not moved, his arm
was still over his eyes; but his chest heaved; his hair was wet; his
chin glistened with perspiration. I reached over him and opened the
port.

"I must show myself on deck," I reflected.

Of course, theoretically, I could do what I liked, with no one to say
nay to me within the whole circle of the horizon; but to lock my cabin
door and take the key away I did not dare. Directly I put my head out
of the companion I saw the group of my two officers, the second mate
barefooted, the chief mate in long India-rubber boots, near the break of
the poop, and the steward halfway down the poop ladder talking to them
eagerly. He happened to catch sight of me and dived, the second ran down
on the main-deck shouting some order or other, and the chief mate came
to meet me, touching his cap.

There was a sort of curiosity in his eye that I did not like. I don't
know whether the steward had told them that I was "queer" only, or
downright drunk, but I know the man meant to have a good look at me. I
watched him coming with a smile which, as he got into point-blank range,
took effect and froze his very whiskers. I did not give him time to open
his lips.

"Square the yards by lifts and braces before the hands go to breakfast."

It was the first particular order I had given on board that ship; and I
stayed on deck to see it executed, too. I had felt the need of asserting
myself without loss of time. That sneering young cub got taken down a
peg or two on that occasion, and I also seized the opportunity of having
a good look at the face of every foremast man as they filed past me
to go to the after braces. At breakfast time, eating nothing myself, I
presided with such frigid dignity that the two mates were only too glad
to escape from the cabin as soon as decency permitted; and all the
time the dual working of my mind distracted me almost to the point of
insanity. I was constantly watching myself, my secret self, as dependent
on my actions as my own personality, sleeping in that bed, behind that
door which faced me as I sat at the head of the table. It was very much
like being mad, only it was worse because one was aware of it.

I had to shake him for a solid minute, but when at last he opened his
eyes it was in the full possession of his senses, with an inquiring
look.

"All's well so far," I whispered. "Now you must vanish into the
bathroom."

He did so, as noiseless as a ghost, and then I rang for the steward,
and facing him boldly, directed him to tidy up my stateroom while I
was having my bath--"and be quick about it." As my tone admitted of
no excuses, he said, "Yes, sir," and ran off to fetch his dustpan and
brushes. I took a bath and did most of my dressing, splashing, and
whistling softly for the steward's edification, while the secret sharer
of my life stood drawn up bolt upright in that little space, his face
looking very sunken in daylight, his eyelids lowered under the stern,
dark line of his eyebrows drawn together by a slight frown.

When I left him there to go back to my room the steward was finishing
dusting. I sent for the mate and engaged him in some insignificant
conversation. It was, as it were, trifling with the terrific character
of his whiskers; but my object was to give him an opportunity for a
good look at my cabin. And then I could at last shut, with a clear
conscience, the door of my stateroom and get my double back into the
recessed part. There was nothing else for it. He had to sit still on a
small folding stool, half smothered by the heavy coats hanging there.
We listened to the steward going into the bathroom out of the saloon,
filling the water bottles there, scrubbing the bath, setting things
to rights, whisk, bang, clatter--out again into the saloon--turn the
key--click. Such was my scheme for keeping my second self invisible.
Nothing better could be contrived under the circumstances. And there
we sat; I at my writing desk ready to appear busy with some papers, he
behind me out of sight of the door. It would not have been prudent to
talk in daytime; and I could not have stood the excitement of that queer
sense of whispering to myself. Now and then, glancing over my shoulder,
I saw him far back there, sitting rigidly on the low stool, his
bare feet close together, his arms folded, his head hanging on his
breast--and perfectly still. Anybody would have taken him for me.

I was fascinated by it myself. Every moment I had to glance over my
shoulder. I was looking at him when a voice outside the door said:

"Beg pardon, sir."

"Well!..." I kept my eyes on him, and so when the voice outside the
door announced, "There's a ship's boat coming our way, sir," I saw him
give a start--the first movement he had made for hours. But he did not
raise his bowed head.

"All right. Get the ladder over."

I hesitated. Should I whisper something to him? But what? His immobility
seemed to have been never disturbed. What could I tell him he did not
know already?... Finally I went on deck.




II

The skipper of the Sephora had a thin red whisker all round his face,
and the sort of complexion that goes with hair of that color; also the
particular, rather smeary shade of blue in the eyes. He was not exactly
a showy figure; his shoulders were high, his stature but middling--one
leg slightly more bandy than the other. He shook hands, looking vaguely
around. A spiritless tenacity was his main characteristic, I judged. I
behaved with a politeness which seemed to disconcert him. Perhaps he was
shy. He mumbled to me as if he were ashamed of what he was saying; gave
his name (it was something like Archbold--but at this distance of years
I hardly am sure), his ship's name, and a few other particulars of
that sort, in the manner of a criminal making a reluctant and
doleful confession. He had had terrible weather on the passage
out--terrible--terrible--wife aboard, too.

By this time we were seated in the cabin and the steward brought in a
tray with a bottle and glasses. "Thanks! No." Never took liquor. Would
have some water, though. He drank two tumblerfuls. Terrible thirsty
work. Ever since daylight had been exploring the islands round his ship.

"What was that for--fun?" I asked, with an appearance of polite
interest.

"No!" He sighed. "Painful duty."

As he persisted in his mumbling and I wanted my double to hear every
word, I hit upon the notion of informing him that I regretted to say I
was hard of hearing.

"Such a young man, too!" he nodded, keeping his smeary blue,
unintelligent eyes fastened upon me. "What was the cause of it--some
disease?" he inquired, without the least sympathy and as if he thought
that, if so, I'd got no more than I deserved.

"Yes; disease," I admitted in a cheerful tone which seemed to shock him.
But my point was gained, because he had to raise his voice to give me
his tale. It is not worth while to record his version. It was just over
two months since all this had happened, and he had thought so much
about it that he seemed completely muddled as to its bearings, but still
immensely impressed.

"What would you think of such a thing happening on board your own
ship? I've had the Sephora for these fifteen years. I am a well-known
shipmaster."

He was densely distressed--and perhaps I should have sympathized with
him if I had been able to detach my mental vision from the unsuspected
sharer of my cabin as though he were my second self. There he was on the
other side of the bulkhead, four or five feet from us, no more, as we
sat in the saloon. I looked politely at Captain Archbold (if that was
his name), but it was the other I saw, in a gray sleeping suit, seated
on a low stool, his bare feet close together, his arms folded, and every
word said between us falling into the ears of his dark head bowed on his
chest.

"I have been at sea now, man and boy, for seven-and-thirty years, and
I've never heard of such a thing happening in an English ship. And that
it should be my ship. Wife on board, too."

I was hardly listening to him.

"Don't you think," I said, "that the heavy sea which, you told me, came
aboard just then might have killed the man? I have seen the sheer weight
of a sea kill a man very neatly, by simply breaking his neck."

"Good God!" he uttered, impressively, fixing his smeary blue eyes on
me. "The sea! No man killed by the sea ever looked like that." He seemed
positively scandalized at my suggestion. And as I gazed at him certainly
not prepared for anything original on his part, he advanced his head
close to mine and thrust his tongue out at me so suddenly that I
couldn't help starting back.

After scoring over my calmness in this graphic way he nodded wisely. If
I had seen the sight, he assured me, I would never forget it as long as
I lived. The weather was too bad to give the corpse a proper sea burial.
So next day at dawn they took it up on the poop, covering its face with
a bit of bunting; he read a short prayer, and then, just as it was, in
its oilskins and long boots, they launched it amongst those mountainous
seas that seemed ready every moment to swallow up the ship herself and
the terrified lives on board of her.

"That reefed foresail saved you," I threw in.

"Under God--it did," he exclaimed fervently. "It was by a special mercy,
I firmly believe, that it stood some of those hurricane squalls."

"It was the setting of that sail which--" I began.

"God's own hand in it," he interrupted me. "Nothing less could have
done it. I don't mind telling you that I hardly dared give the order.
It seemed impossible that we could touch anything without losing it, and
then our last hope would have been gone."

The terror of that gale was on him yet. I let him go on for a bit, then
said, casually--as if returning to a minor subject:

"You were very anxious to give up your mate to the shore people, I
believe?"

He was. To the law. His obscure tenacity on that point had in it
something incomprehensible and a little awful; something, as it were,
mystical, quite apart from his anxiety that he should not be suspected
of "countenancing any doings of that sort." Seven-and-thirty virtuous
years at sea, of which over twenty of immaculate command, and the last
fifteen in the Sephora, seemed to have laid him under some pitiless
obligation.

"And you know," he went on, groping shame-facedly amongst his feelings,
"I did not engage that young fellow. His people had some interest with
my owners. I was in a way forced to take him on. He looked very smart,
very gentlemanly, and all that. But do you know--I never liked him,
somehow. I am a plain man. You see, he wasn't exactly the sort for the
chief mate of a ship like the Sephora."

I had become so connected in thoughts and impressions with the secret
sharer of my cabin that I felt as if I, personally, were being given to
understand that I, too, was not the sort that would have done for the
chief mate of a ship like the Sephora. I had no doubt of it in my mind.

"Not at all the style of man. You understand," he insisted,
superfluously, looking hard at me.

I smiled urbanely. He seemed at a loss for a while.

"I suppose I must report a suicide."

"Beg pardon?"

"Suicide! That's what I'll have to write to my owners directly I get
in."

"Unless you manage to recover him before tomorrow," I assented,
dispassionately.... "I mean, alive."

He mumbled something which I really did not catch, and I turned my ear
to him in a puzzled manner. He fairly bawled:

"The land--I say, the mainland is at least seven miles off my
anchorage."

"About that."

My lack of excitement, of curiosity, of surprise, of any sort of
pronounced interest, began to arouse his distrust. But except for the
felicitous pretense of deafness I had not tried to pretend anything. I
had felt utterly incapable of playing the part of ignorance properly,
and therefore was afraid to try. It is also certain that he had brought
some ready-made suspicions with him, and that he viewed my politeness
as a strange and unnatural phenomenon. And yet how else could I have
received him? Not heartily! That was impossible for psychological
reasons, which I need not state here. My only object was to keep off his
inquiries. Surlily? Yes, but surliness might have provoked a point-blank
question. From its novelty to him and from its nature, punctilious
courtesy was the manner best calculated to restrain the man. But there
was the danger of his breaking through my defense bluntly. I could
not, I think, have met him by a direct lie, also for psychological (not
moral) reasons. If he had only known how afraid I was of his putting
my feeling of identity with the other to the test! But, strangely
enough--(I thought of it only afterwards)--I believe that he was not
a little disconcerted by the reverse side of that weird situation, by
something in me that reminded him of the man he was seeking--suggested a
mysterious similitude to the young fellow he had distrusted and disliked
from the first.

However that might have been, the silence was not very prolonged. He
took another oblique step.

"I reckon I had no more than a two-mile pull to your ship. Not a bit
more."

"And quite enough, too, in this awful heat," I said.

Another pause full of mistrust followed. Necessity, they say, is mother
of invention, but fear, too, is not barren of ingenious suggestions. And
I was afraid he would ask me point-blank for news of my other self.

"Nice little saloon, isn't it?" I remarked, as if noticing for the first
time the way his eyes roamed from one closed door to the other. "And
very well fitted out, too. Here, for instance," I continued, reaching
over the back of my seat negligently and flinging the door open, "is my
bathroom."

He made an eager movement, but hardly gave it a glance. I got up, shut
the door of the bathroom, and invited him to have a look round, as if I
were very proud of my accommodation. He had to rise and be shown round,
but he went through the business without any raptures whatever.

"And now we'll have a look at my stateroom," I declared, in a voice as
loud as I dared to make it, crossing the cabin to the starboard side
with purposely heavy steps.

He followed me in and gazed around. My intelligent double had vanished.
I played my part.

"Very convenient--isn't it?"

"Very nice. Very comf..." He didn't finish and went out brusquely as
if to escape from some unrighteous wiles of mine. But it was not to be.
I had been too frightened not to feel vengeful; I felt I had him on the
run, and I meant to keep him on the run. My polite insistence must have
had something menacing in it, because he gave in suddenly. And I did
not let him off a single item; mate's room, pantry, storerooms, the very
sail locker which was also under the poop--he had to look into them
all. When at last I showed him out on the quarter-deck he drew a long,
spiritless sigh, and mumbled dismally that he must really be going back
to his ship now. I desired my mate, who had joined us, to see to the
captain's boat.

The man of whiskers gave a blast on the whistle which he used to wear
hanging round his neck, and yelled, "Sephora's away!" My double down
there in my cabin must have heard, and certainly could not feel more
relieved than I. Four fellows came running out from somewhere forward
and went over the side, while my own men, appearing on deck too, lined
the rail. I escorted my visitor to the gangway ceremoniously, and nearly
overdid it. He was a tenacious beast. On the very ladder he lingered,
and in that unique, guiltily conscientious manner of sticking to the
point:

"I say... you... you don't think that--"

I covered his voice loudly:

"Certainly not.... I am delighted. Good-by."

I had an idea of what he meant to say, and just saved myself by the
privilege of defective hearing. He was too shaken generally to insist,
but my mate, close witness of that parting, looked mystified and his
face took on a thoughtful cast. As I did not want to appear as if
I wished to avoid all communication with my officers, he had the
opportunity to address me.

"Seems a very nice man. His boat's crew told our chaps a very
extraordinary story, if what I am told by the steward is true. I suppose
you had it from the captain, sir?"

"Yes. I had a story from the captain."

"A very horrible affair--isn't it, sir?"

"It is."

"Beats all these tales we hear about murders in Yankee ships."

"I don't think it beats them. I don't think it resembles them in the
least."

"Bless my soul--you don't say so! But of course I've no acquaintance
whatever with American ships, not I, so I couldn't go against your
knowledge. It's horrible enough for me.... But the queerest part is
that those fellows seemed to have some idea the man was hidden aboard
here. They had really. Did you ever hear of such a thing?"

"Preposterous--isn't it?"

We were walking to and fro athwart the quarter-deck. No one of the crew
forward could be seen (the day was Sunday), and the mate pursued:

"There was some little dispute about it. Our chaps took offense. 'As
if we would harbor a thing like that,' they said. 'Wouldn't you like to
look for him in our coal-hole?' Quite a tiff. But they made it up in the
end. I suppose he did drown himself. Don't you, sir?"

"I don't suppose anything."

"You have no doubt in the matter, sir?"

"None whatever."

I left him suddenly. I felt I was producing a bad impression, but with
my double down there it was most trying to be on deck. And it was almost
as trying to be below. Altogether a nerve-trying situation. But on the
whole I felt less torn in two when I was with him. There was no one in
the whole ship whom I dared take into my confidence. Since the hands had
got to know his story, it would have been impossible to pass him off for
anyone else, and an accidental discovery was to be dreaded now more than
ever....

The steward being engaged in laying the table for dinner, we could talk
only with our eyes when I first went down. Later in the afternoon we
had a cautious try at whispering. The Sunday quietness of the ship was
against us; the stillness of air and water around her was against us;
the elements, the men were against us--everything was against us in our
secret partnership; time itself--for this could not go on forever. The
very trust in Providence was, I suppose, denied to his guilt. Shall I
confess that this thought cast me down very much? And as to the chapter
of accidents which counts for so much in the book of success, I could
only hope that it was closed. For what favorable accident could be
expected?

"Did you hear everything?" were my first words as soon as we took up our
position side by side, leaning over my bed place.

He had. And the proof of it was his earnest whisper, "The man told you
he hardly dared to give the order."

I understood the reference to be to that saving foresail.

"Yes. He was afraid of it being lost in the setting."

"I assure you he never gave the order. He may think he did, but he never
gave it. He stood there with me on the break of the poop after the
main topsail blew away, and whimpered about our last hope--positively
whimpered about it and nothing else--and the night coming on! To hear
one's skipper go on like that in such weather was enough to drive any
fellow out of his mind. It worked me up into a sort of desperation. I
just took it into my own hands and went away from him, boiling, and--But
what's the use telling you? _You_ know!... Do you think that if I
had not been pretty fierce with them I should have got the men to do
anything? Not I! The bo's'n perhaps? Perhaps! It wasn't a heavy sea--it
was a sea gone mad! I suppose the end of the world will be something
like that; and a man may have the heart to see it coming once and be
done with it--but to have to face it day after day--I don't blame
anybody. I was precious little better than the rest. Only--I was an
officer of that old coal wagon, anyhow--"

"I quite understand," I conveyed that sincere assurance into his ear.
He was out of breath with whispering; I could hear him pant slightly.
It was all very simple. The same strung-up force which had given
twenty-four men a chance, at least, for their lives, had, in a sort of
recoil, crushed an unworthy mutinous existence.

But I had no leisure to weigh the merits of the matter--footsteps in
the saloon, a heavy knock. "There's enough wind to get under way with,
sir." Here was the call of a new claim upon my thoughts and even upon my
feelings.

"Turn the hands up," I cried through the door. "I'll be on deck
directly."

I was going out to make the acquaintance of my ship. Before I left
the cabin our eyes met--the eyes of the only two strangers on board. I
pointed to the recessed part where the little campstool awaited him and
laid my finger on my lips. He made a gesture--somewhat vague--a little
mysterious, accompanied by a faint smile, as if of regret.

This is not the place to enlarge upon the sensations of a man who feels
for the first time a ship move under his feet to his own independent
word. In my case they were not unalloyed. I was not wholly alone with my
command; for there was that stranger in my cabin. Or rather, I was
not completely and wholly with her. Part of me was absent. That mental
feeling of being in two places at once affected me physically as if the
mood of secrecy had penetrated my very soul. Before an hour had elapsed
since the ship had begun to move, having occasion to ask the mate (he
stood by my side) to take a compass bearing of the pagoda, I caught
myself reaching up to his ear in whispers. I say I caught myself, but
enough had escaped to startle the man. I can't describe it otherwise
than by saying that he shied. A grave, preoccupied manner, as though he
were in possession of some perplexing intelligence, did not leave him
henceforth. A little later I moved away from the rail to look at the
compass with such a stealthy gait that the helmsman noticed it--and
I could not help noticing the unusual roundness of his eyes. These
are trifling instances, though it's to no commander's advantage to be
suspected of ludicrous eccentricities. But I was also more seriously
affected. There are to a seaman certain words, gestures, that should in
given conditions come as naturally, as instinctively as the winking of
a menaced eye. A certain order should spring on to his lips without
thinking; a certain sign should get itself made, so to speak, without
reflection. But all unconscious alertness had abandoned me. I had to
make an effort of will to recall myself back (from the cabin) to the
conditions of the moment. I felt that I was appearing an irresolute
commander to those people who were watching me more or less critically.

And, besides, there were the scares. On the second day out, for
instance, coming off the deck in the afternoon (I had straw slippers
on my bare feet) I stopped at the open pantry door and spoke to the
steward. He was doing something there with his back to me. At the sound
of my voice he nearly jumped out of his skin, as the saying is, and
incidentally broke a cup.

"What on earth's the matter with you?" I asked, astonished.

He was extremely confused. "Beg your pardon, sir. I made sure you were
in your cabin."

"You see I wasn't."

"No, sir. I could have sworn I had heard you moving in there not a
moment ago. It's most extraordinary... very sorry, sir."

I passed on with an inward shudder. I was so identified with my secret
double that I did not even mention the fact in those scanty, fearful
whispers we exchanged. I suppose he had made some slight noise of some
kind or other. It would have been miraculous if he hadn't at one time
or another. And yet, haggard as he appeared, he looked always perfectly
self-controlled, more than calm--almost invulnerable. On my suggestion
he remained almost entirely in the bathroom, which, upon the whole,
was the safest place. There could be really no shadow of an excuse for
anyone ever wanting to go in there, once the steward had done with it.
It was a very tiny place. Sometimes he reclined on the floor, his legs
bent, his head sustained on one elbow. At others I would find him on the
campstool, sitting in his gray sleeping suit and with his cropped dark
hair like a patient, unmoved convict. At night I would smuggle him into
my bed place, and we would whisper together, with the regular footfalls
of the officer of the watch passing and repassing over our heads. It
was an infinitely miserable time. It was lucky that some tins of fine
preserves were stowed in a locker in my stateroom; hard bread I could
always get hold of; and so he lived on stewed chicken, _Pate de Foie
Gras_, asparagus, cooked oysters, sardines--on all sorts of abominable
sham delicacies out of tins. My early-morning coffee he always drank;
and it was all I dared do for him in that respect.

Every day there was the horrible maneuvering to go through so that my
room and then the bathroom should be done in the usual way. I came to
hate the sight of the steward, to abhor the voice of that harmless man.
I felt that it was he who would bring on the disaster of discovery. It
hung like a sword over our heads.

The fourth day out, I think (we were then working down the east side of
the Gulf of Siam, tack for tack, in light winds and smooth water)--the
fourth day, I say, of this miserable juggling with the unavoidable,
as we sat at our evening meal, that man, whose slightest movement I
dreaded, after putting down the dishes ran up on deck busily. This could
not be dangerous. Presently he came down again; and then it appeared
that he had remembered a coat of mine which I had thrown over a rail to
dry after having been wetted in a shower which had passed over the ship
in the afternoon. Sitting stolidly at the head of the table I became
terrified at the sight of the garment on his arm. Of course he made for
my door. There was no time to lose.

"Steward," I thundered. My nerves were so shaken that I could not govern
my voice and conceal my agitation. This was the sort of thing that made
my terrifically whiskered mate tap his forehead with his forefinger.
I had detected him using that gesture while talking on deck with a
confidential air to the carpenter. It was too far to hear a word, but
I had no doubt that this pantomime could only refer to the strange new
captain.

"Yes, sir," the pale-faced steward turned resignedly to me. It was this
maddening course of being shouted at, checked without rhyme or reason,
arbitrarily chased out of my cabin, suddenly called into it, sent flying
out of his pantry on incomprehensible errands, that accounted for the
growing wretchedness of his expression.

"Where are you going with that coat?"

"To your room, sir."

"Is there another shower coming?"

"I'm sure I don't know, sir. Shall I go up again and see, sir?"

"No! never mind."

My object was attained, as of course my other self in there would have
heard everything that passed. During this interlude my two officers
never raised their eyes off their respective plates; but the lip of that
confounded cub, the second mate, quivered visibly.

I expected the steward to hook my coat on and come out at once. He was
very slow about it; but I dominated my nervousness sufficiently not
to shout after him. Suddenly I became aware (it could be heard plainly
enough) that the fellow for some reason or other was opening the door of
the bathroom. It was the end. The place was literally not big enough to
swing a cat in. My voice died in my throat and I went stony all over. I
expected to hear a yell of surprise and terror, and made a movement, but
had not the strength to get on my legs. Everything remained still. Had
my second self taken the poor wretch by the throat? I don't know what I
could have done next moment if I had not seen the steward come out of my
room, close the door, and then stand quietly by the sideboard.

"Saved," I thought. "But, no! Lost! Gone! He was gone!"

I laid my knife and fork down and leaned back in my chair. My head swam.
After a while, when sufficiently recovered to speak in a steady voice, I
instructed my mate to put the ship round at eight o'clock himself.

"I won't come on deck," I went on. "I think I'll turn in, and unless the
wind shifts I don't want to be disturbed before midnight. I feel a bit
seedy."

"You did look middling bad a little while ago," the chief mate remarked
without showing any great concern.

They both went out, and I stared at the steward clearing the table.
There was nothing to be read on that wretched man's face. But why did he
avoid my eyes, I asked myself. Then I thought I should like to hear the
sound of his voice.

"Steward!"

"Sir!" Startled as usual.

"Where did you hang up that coat?"

"In the bathroom, sir." The usual anxious tone. "It's not quite dry yet,
sir."

For some time longer I sat in the cuddy. Had my double vanished as
he had come? But of his coming there was an explanation, whereas his
disappearance would be inexplicable.... I went slowly into my dark
room, shut the door, lighted the lamp, and for a time dared not turn
round. When at last I did I saw him standing bolt-upright in the
narrow recessed part. It would not be true to say I had a shock, but an
irresistible doubt of his bodily existence flitted through my mind. Can
it be, I asked myself, that he is not visible to other eyes than mine?
It was like being haunted. Motionless, with a grave face, he raised his
hands slightly at me in a gesture which meant clearly, "Heavens! what
a narrow escape!" Narrow indeed. I think I had come creeping quietly as
near insanity as any man who has not actually gone over the border. That
gesture restrained me, so to speak.

The mate with the terrific whiskers was now putting the ship on the
other tack. In the moment of profound silence which follows upon the
hands going to their stations I heard on the poop his raised voice:
"Hard alee!" and the distant shout of the order repeated on the
main-deck. The sails, in that light breeze, made but a faint fluttering
noise. It ceased. The ship was coming round slowly: I held my breath
in the renewed stillness of expectation; one wouldn't have thought
that there was a single living soul on her decks. A sudden brisk shout,
"Mainsail haul!" broke the spell, and in the noisy cries and rush
overhead of the men running away with the main brace we two, down in my
cabin, came together in our usual position by the bed place.

He did not wait for my question. "I heard him fumbling here and just
managed to squat myself down in the bath," he whispered to me. "The
fellow only opened the door and put his arm in to hang the coat up. All
the same--"

"I never thought of that," I whispered back, even more appalled than
before at the closeness of the shave, and marveling at that something
unyielding in his character which was carrying him through so finely.
There was no agitation in his whisper. Whoever was being driven
distracted, it was not he. He was sane. And the proof of his sanity was
continued when he took up the whispering again.

"It would never do for me to come to life again."

It was something that a ghost might have said. But what he was alluding
to was his old captain's reluctant admission of the theory of suicide.
It would obviously serve his turn--if I had understood at all the view
which seemed to govern the unalterable purpose of his action.

"You must maroon me as soon as ever you can get amongst these islands
off the Cambodge shore," he went on.

"Maroon you! We are not living in a boy's adventure tale," I protested.
His scornful whispering took me up.

"We aren't indeed! There's nothing of a boy's tale in this. But there's
nothing else for it. I want no more. You don't suppose I am afraid of
what can be done to me? Prison or gallows or whatever they may please.
But you don't see me coming back to explain such things to an old fellow
in a wig and twelve respectable tradesmen, do you? What can they know
whether I am guilty or not--or of _what_ I am guilty, either? That's my
affair. What does the Bible say? 'Driven off the face of the earth.'
Very well, I am off the face of the earth now. As I came at night so I
shall go."

"Impossible!" I murmured. "You can't."

"Can't?... Not naked like a soul on the Day of Judgment. I shall
freeze on to this sleeping suit. The Last Day is not yet--and... you
have understood thoroughly. Didn't you?"

I felt suddenly ashamed of myself. I may say truly that I
understood--and my hesitation in letting that man swim away from my
ship's side had been a mere sham sentiment, a sort of cowardice.

"It can't be done now till next night," I breathed out. "The ship is on
the off-shore tack and the wind may fail us."

"As long as I know that you understand," he whispered. "But of course
you do. It's a great satisfaction to have got somebody to understand.
You seem to have been there on purpose." And in the same whisper, as if
we two whenever we talked had to say things to each other which were not
fit for the world to hear, he added, "It's very wonderful."

We remained side by side talking in our secret way--but sometimes
silent or just exchanging a whispered word or two at long intervals. And
as usual he stared through the port. A breath of wind came now and again
into our faces. The ship might have been moored in dock, so gently and
on an even keel she slipped through the water, that did not murmur even
at our passage, shadowy and silent like a phantom sea.

At midnight I went on deck, and to my mate's great surprise put the
ship round on the other tack. His terrible whiskers flitted round me
in silent criticism. I certainly should not have done it if it had
been only a question of getting out of that sleepy gulf as quickly as
possible. I believe he told the second mate, who relieved him, that it
was a great want of judgment. The other only yawned. That intolerable
cub shuffled about so sleepily and lolled against the rails in such a
slack, improper fashion that I came down on him sharply.

"Aren't you properly awake yet?"

"Yes, sir! I am awake."

"Well, then, be good enough to hold yourself as if you were. And keep
a lookout. If there's any current we'll be closing with some islands
before daylight."

The east side of the gulf is fringed with islands, some solitary, others
in groups. On the blue background of the high coast they seem to float
on silvery patches of calm water, arid and gray, or dark green and
rounded like clumps of evergreen bushes, with the larger ones, a mile
or two long, showing the outlines of ridges, ribs of gray rock under the
dark mantle of matted leafage. Unknown to trade, to travel, almost to
geography, the manner of life they harbor is an unsolved secret. There
must be villages--settlements of fishermen at least--on the largest
of them, and some communication with the world is probably kept up by
native craft. But all that forenoon, as we headed for them, fanned along
by the faintest of breezes, I saw no sign of man or canoe in the field
of the telescope I kept on pointing at the scattered group.

At noon I gave no orders for a change of course, and the mate's whiskers
became much concerned and seemed to be offering themselves unduly to my
notice. At last I said:

"I am going to stand right in. Quite in--as far as I can take her."

The stare of extreme surprise imparted an air of ferocity also to his
eyes, and he looked truly terrific for a moment.

"We're not doing well in the middle of the gulf," I continued, casually.
"I am going to look for the land breezes tonight."

"Bless my soul! Do you mean, sir, in the dark amongst the lot of all
them islands and reefs and shoals?"

"Well--if there are any regular land breezes at all on this coast one
must get close inshore to find them, mustn't one?"

"Bless my soul!" he exclaimed again under his breath. All that afternoon
he wore a dreamy, contemplative appearance which in him was a mark of
perplexity. After dinner I went into my stateroom as if I meant to take
some rest. There we two bent our dark heads over a half-unrolled chart
lying on my bed.

"There," I said. "It's got to be Koh-ring. I've been looking at it
ever since sunrise. It has got two hills and a low point. It must be
inhabited. And on the coast opposite there is what looks like the mouth
of a biggish river--with some towns, no doubt, not far up. It's the best
chance for you that I can see."

"Anything. Koh-ring let it be."

He looked thoughtfully at the chart as if surveying chances and
distances from a lofty height--and following with his eyes his own
figure wandering on the blank land of Cochin-China, and then passing off
that piece of paper clean out of sight into uncharted regions. And it
was as if the ship had two captains to plan her course for her. I had
been so worried and restless running up and down that I had not had the
patience to dress that day. I had remained in my sleeping suit, with
straw slippers and a soft floppy hat. The closeness of the heat in
the gulf had been most oppressive, and the crew were used to seeing me
wandering in that airy attire.

"She will clear the south point as she heads now," I whispered into his
ear. "Goodness only knows when, though, but certainly after dark. I'll
edge her in to half a mile, as far as I may be able to judge in the
dark--"

"Be careful," he murmured, warningly--and I realized suddenly that
all my future, the only future for which I was fit, would perhaps go
irretrievably to pieces in any mishap to my first command.

I could not stop a moment longer in the room. I motioned him to get out
of sight and made my way on the poop. That unplayful cub had the watch.
I walked up and down for a while thinking things out, then beckoned him
over.

"Send a couple of hands to open the two quarter-deck ports," I said,
mildly.

He actually had the impudence, or else so forgot himself in his wonder
at such an incomprehensible order, as to repeat:

"Open the quarter-deck ports! What for, sir?"

"The only reason you need concern yourself about is because I tell you
to do so. Have them open wide and fastened properly."

He reddened and went off, but I believe made some jeering remark to
the carpenter as to the sensible practice of ventilating a ship's
quarter-deck. I know he popped into the mate's cabin to impart the fact
to him because the whiskers came on deck, as it were by chance, and
stole glances at me from below--for signs of lunacy or drunkenness, I
suppose.

A little before supper, feeling more restless than ever, I rejoined,
for a moment, my second self. And to find him sitting so quietly was
surprising, like something against nature, inhuman.

I developed my plan in a hurried whisper.

"I shall stand in as close as I dare and then put her round. I will
presently find means to smuggle you out of here into the sail locker,
which communicates with the lobby. But there is an opening, a sort
of square for hauling the sails out, which gives straight on the
quarter-deck and which is never closed in fine weather, so as to give
air to the sails. When the ship's way is deadened in stays and all the
hands are aft at the main braces you will have a clear road to slip out
and get overboard through the open quarter-deck port. I've had them both
fastened up. Use a rope's end to lower yourself into the water so as
to avoid a splash--you know. It could be heard and cause some beastly
complication."

He kept silent for a while, then whispered, "I understand."

"I won't be there to see you go," I began with an effort. "The rest
... I only hope I have understood, too."

"You have. From first to last"--and for the first time there seemed to
be a faltering, something strained in his whisper. He caught hold of my
arm, but the ringing of the supper bell made me start. He didn't though;
he only released his grip.

After supper I didn't come below again till well past eight o'clock. The
faint, steady breeze was loaded with dew; and the wet, darkened sails
held all there was of propelling power in it. The night, clear and
starry, sparkled darkly, and the opaque, lightless patches shifting
slowly against the low stars were the drifting islets. On the port bow
there was a big one more distant and shadowily imposing by the great
space of sky it eclipsed.

On opening the door I had a back view of my very own self looking at a
chart. He had come out of the recess and was standing near the table.

"Quite dark enough," I whispered.

He stepped back and leaned against my bed with a level, quiet glance.
I sat on the couch. We had nothing to say to each other. Over our heads
the officer of the watch moved here and there. Then I heard him move
quickly. I knew what that meant. He was making for the companion; and
presently his voice was outside my door.

"We are drawing in pretty fast, sir. Land looks rather close."

"Very well," I answered. "I am coming on deck directly."

I waited till he was gone out of the cuddy, then rose. My double moved
too. The time had come to exchange our last whispers, for neither of us
was ever to hear each other's natural voice.

"Look here!" I opened a drawer and took out three sovereigns. "Take this
anyhow. I've got six and I'd give you the lot, only I must keep a little
money to buy some fruit and vegetables for the crew from native boats as
we go through Sunda Straits."

He shook his head.

"Take it," I urged him, whispering desperately. "No one can tell what--"

He smiled and slapped meaningly the only pocket of the sleeping jacket.
It was not safe, certainly. But I produced a large old silk handkerchief
of mine, and tying the three pieces of gold in a corner, pressed it on
him. He was touched, I supposed, because he took it at last and tied it
quickly round his waist under the jacket, on his bare skin.

Our eyes met; several seconds elapsed, till, our glances still mingled,
I extended my hand and turned the lamp out. Then I passed through the
cuddy, leaving the door of my room wide open.... "Steward!"

He was still lingering in the pantry in the greatness of his zeal,
giving a rub-up to a plated cruet stand the last thing before going to
bed. Being careful not to wake up the mate, whose room was opposite, I
spoke in an undertone.

He looked round anxiously. "Sir!"

"Can you get me a little hot water from the galley?"

"I am afraid, sir, the galley fire's been out for some time now."

"Go and see."

He flew up the stairs.

"Now," I whispered, loudly, into the saloon--too loudly, perhaps, but I
was afraid I couldn't make a sound. He was by my side in an instant--the
double captain slipped past the stairs--through a tiny dark passage
... a sliding door. We were in the sail locker, scrambling on our knees
over the sails. A sudden thought struck me. I saw myself wandering
barefooted, bareheaded, the sun beating on my dark poll. I snatched
off my floppy hat and tried hurriedly in the dark to ram it on my other
self. He dodged and fended off silently. I wonder what he thought had
come to me before he understood and suddenly desisted. Our hands met
gropingly, lingered united in a steady, motionless clasp for a second.
... No word was breathed by either of us when they separated.

I was standing quietly by the pantry door when the steward returned.

"Sorry, sir. Kettle barely warm. Shall I light the spirit lamp?"

"Never mind."

I came out on deck slowly. It was now a matter of conscience to shave
the land as close as possible--for now he must go overboard whenever the
ship was put in stays. Must! There could be no going back for him. After
a moment I walked over to leeward and my heart flew into my mouth at the
nearness of the land on the bow. Under any other circumstances I would
not have held on a minute longer. The second mate had followed me
anxiously.

I looked on till I felt I could command my voice.

"She will weather," I said then in a quiet tone.

"Are you going to try that, sir?" he stammered out incredulously.

I took no notice of him and raised my tone just enough to be heard by
the helmsman.

"Keep her good full."

"Good full, sir."

The wind fanned my cheek, the sails slept, the world was silent. The
strain of watching the dark loom of the land grow bigger and denser was
too much for me. I had shut my eyes--because the ship must go closer.
She must! The stillness was intolerable. Were we standing still?

When I opened my eyes the second view started my heart with a thump. The
black southern hill of Koh-ring seemed to hang right over the ship
like a towering fragment of everlasting night. On that enormous mass of
blackness there was not a gleam to be seen, not a sound to be heard. It
was gliding irresistibly towards us and yet seemed already within reach
of the hand. I saw the vague figures of the watch grouped in the waist,
gazing in awed silence.

"Are you going on, sir?" inquired an unsteady voice at my elbow.

I ignored it. I had to go on.

"Keep her full. Don't check her way. That won't do now," I said
warningly.

"I can't see the sails very well," the helmsman answered me, in strange,
quavering tones.

Was she close enough? Already she was, I won't say in the shadow of the
land, but in the very blackness of it, already swallowed up as it were,
gone too close to be recalled, gone from me altogether.

"Give the mate a call," I said to the young man who stood at my elbow as
still as death. "And turn all hands up."

My tone had a borrowed loudness reverberated from the height of the
land. Several voices cried out together: "We are all on deck, sir."

Then stillness again, with the great shadow gliding closer, towering
higher, without a light, without a sound. Such a hush had fallen on
the ship that she might have been a bark of the dead floating in slowly
under the very gate of Erebus.

"My God! Where are we?"

It was the mate moaning at my elbow. He was thunderstruck, and as it
were deprived of the moral support of his whiskers. He clapped his hands
and absolutely cried out, "Lost!"

"Be quiet," I said, sternly.

He lowered his tone, but I saw the shadowy gesture of his despair. "What
are we doing here?"

"Looking for the land wind."

He made as if to tear his hair, and addressed me recklessly.

"She will never get out. You have done it, sir. I knew it'd end in
something like this. She will never weather, and you are too close now
to stay. She'll drift ashore before she's round. Oh my God!"

I caught his arm as he was raising it to batter his poor devoted head,
and shook it violently.

"She's ashore already," he wailed, trying to tear himself away.

"Is she?... Keep good full there!"

"Good full, sir," cried the helmsman in a frightened, thin, childlike
voice.

I hadn't let go the mate's arm and went on shaking it. "Ready about,
do you hear? You go forward"--shake--"and stop there"--shake--"and hold
your noise"--shake--"and see these head-sheets properly
overhauled"--shake, shake--shake.

And all the time I dared not look towards the land lest my heart should
fail me. I released my grip at last and he ran forward as if fleeing for
dear life.

I wondered what my double there in the sail locker thought of this
commotion. He was able to hear everything--and perhaps he was able to
understand why, on my conscience, it had to be thus close--no less. My
first order "Hard alee!" re-echoed ominously under the towering shadow
of Koh-ring as if I had shouted in a mountain gorge. And then I watched
the land intently. In that smooth water and light wind it was impossible
to feel the ship coming-to. No! I could not feel her. And my second self
was making now ready to ship out and lower himself overboard. Perhaps he
was gone already...?

The great black mass brooding over our very mastheads began to pivot
away from the ship's side silently. And now I forgot the secret stranger
ready to depart, and remembered only that I was a total stranger to the
ship. I did not know her. Would she do it? How was she to be handled?

I swung the mainyard and waited helplessly. She was perhaps stopped, and
her very fate hung in the balance, with the black mass of Koh-ring like
the gate of the everlasting night towering over her taffrail. What would
she do now? Had she way on her yet? I stepped to the side swiftly, and
on the shadowy water I could see nothing except a faint phosphorescent
flash revealing the glassy smoothness of the sleeping surface. It was
impossible to tell--and I had not learned yet the feel of my ship. Was
she moving? What I needed was something easily seen, a piece of paper,
which I could throw overboard and watch. I had nothing on me. To run
down for it I didn't dare. There was no time. All at once my strained,
yearning stare distinguished a white object floating within a yard of
the ship's side. White on the black water. A phosphorescent flash passed
under it. What was that thing?... I recognized my own floppy hat. It
must have fallen off his head... and he didn't bother. Now I had what
I wanted--the saving mark for my eyes. But I hardly thought of my other
self, now gone from the ship, to be hidden forever from all friendly
faces, to be a fugitive and a vagabond on the earth, with no brand of
the curse on his sane forehead to stay a slaying hand... too proud to
explain.

And I watched the hat--the expression of my sudden pity for his mere
flesh. It had been meant to save his homeless head from the dangers of
the sun. And now--behold--it was saving the ship, by serving me for a
mark to help out the ignorance of my strangeness. Ha! It was drifting
forward, warning me just in time that the ship had gathered sternaway.

"Shift the helm," I said in a low voice to the seaman standing still
like a statue.

The man's eyes glistened wildly in the binnacle light as he jumped round
to the other side and spun round the wheel.

I walked to the break of the poop. On the over-shadowed deck all hands
stood by the forebraces waiting for my order. The stars ahead seemed to
be gliding from right to left. And all was so still in the world that
I heard the quiet remark, "She's round," passed in a tone of intense
relief between two seamen.

"Let go and haul."

The foreyards ran round with a great noise, amidst cheery cries. And
now the frightful whiskers made themselves heard giving various orders.
Already the ship was drawing ahead. And I was alone with her. Nothing!
no one in the world should stand now between us, throwing a shadow on
the way of silent knowledge and mute affection, the perfect communion of
a seaman with his first command.

Walking to the taffrail, I was in time to make out, on the very edge
of a darkness thrown by a towering black mass like the very gateway of
Erebus--yes, I was in time to catch an evanescent glimpse of my white
hat left behind to mark the spot where the secret sharer of my cabin and
of my thoughts, as though he were my second self, had lowered himself
into the water to take his punishment: a free man, a proud swimmer
striking out for a new destiny.





THE SHADOW-LINE

A CONFESSION

By Joseph Conrad



"Worthy of my undying regard"



To Borys And All Others Who,
Like Himself, Have Crossed In Early Youth
The Shadow-Line Of Their Generation With Love





PART ONE


--_D'autre fois, calme plat, grand miroir De mon desespoir_.
--BAUDELAIRE


I

Only the young have such moments. I don't mean the very young. No. The
very young have, properly speaking, no moments. It is the privilege
of early youth to live in advance of its days in all the beautiful
continuity of hope which knows no pauses and no introspection.

One closes behind one the little gate of mere boyishness--and enters an
enchanted garden. Its very shades glow with promise. Every turn of
the path has its seduction. And it isn't because it is an undiscovered
country. One knows well enough that all mankind had streamed that
way. It is the charm of universal experience from which one expects an
uncommon or personal sensation--a bit of one's own.

One goes on recognizing the landmarks of the predecessors, excited,
amused, taking the hard luck and the good luck together--the kicks and
the half-pence, as the saying is--the picturesque common lot that holds
so many possibilities for the deserving or perhaps for the lucky. Yes.
One goes on. And the time, too, goes on--till one perceives ahead a
shadow-line warning one that the region of early youth, too, must be
left behind.

This is the period of life in which such moments of which I have spoken
are likely to come. What moments? Why, the moments of boredom, of
weariness, of dissatisfaction. Rash moments. I mean moments when the
still young are inclined to commit rash actions, such as getting married
suddenly or else throwing up a job for no reason.

This is not a marriage story. It wasn't so bad as that with me. My
action, rash as it was, had more the character of divorce--almost of
desertion. For no reason on which a sensible person could put a finger I
threw up my job--chucked my berth--left the ship of which the worst that
could be said was that she was a steamship and therefore, perhaps, not
entitled to that blind loyalty which. . . . However, it's no use trying
to put a gloss on what even at the time I myself half suspected to be a
caprice.

It was in an Eastern port. She was an Eastern ship, inasmuch as then
she belonged to that port. She traded among dark islands on a blue
reef-scarred sea, with the Red Ensign over the taffrail and at her
masthead a house-flag, also red, but with a green border and with a
white crescent in it. For an Arab owned her, and a Syed at that. Hence
the green border on the flag. He was the head of a great House of
Straits Arabs, but as loyal a subject of the complex British Empire as
you could find east of the Suez Canal. World politics did not trouble
him at all, but he had a great occult power amongst his own people.

It was all one to us who owned the ship. He had to employ white men in
the shipping part of his business, and many of those he so employed had
never set eyes on him from the first to the last day. I myself saw him
but once, quite accidentally on a wharf--an old, dark little man blind
in one eye, in a snowy robe and yellow slippers. He was having his hand
severely kissed by a crowd of Malay pilgrims to whom he had done some
favour, in the way of food and money. His alms-giving, I have heard, was
most extensive, covering almost the whole Archipelago. For isn't it said
that "The charitable man is the friend of Allah"?

Excellent (and picturesque) Arab owner, about whom one needed not to
trouble one's head, a most excellent Scottish ship--for she was that
from the keep up--excellent sea-boat, easy to keep clean, most handy in
every way, and if it had not been for her internal propulsion, worthy of
any man's love, I cherish to this day a profound respect for her memory.
As to the kind of trade she was engaged in and the character of my
shipmates, I could not have been happier if I had had the life and the
men made to my order by a benevolent Enchanter.

And suddenly I left all this. I left it in that, to us, inconsequential
manner in which a bird flies away from a comfortable branch. It was
as though all unknowing I had heard a whisper or seen something.
Well--perhaps! One day I was perfectly right and the next everything was
gone--glamour, flavour, interest, contentment--everything. It was one
of these moments, you know. The green sickness of late youth descended
on me and carried me off. Carried me off that ship, I mean.

We were only four white men on board, with a large crew of Kalashes and
two Malay petty officers. The Captain stared hard as if wondering what
ailed me. But he was a sailor, and he, too, had been young at one time.
Presently a smile came to lurk under his thick iron-gray moustache, and
he observed that, of course, if I felt I must go he couldn't keep me
by main force. And it was arranged that I should be paid off the
next morning. As I was going out of his cabin he added suddenly, in a
peculiar wistful tone, that he hoped I would find what I was so anxious
to go and look for. A soft, cryptic utterance which seemed to reach
deeper than any diamond-hard tool could have done. I do believe he
understood my case.

But the second engineer attacked me differently. He was a sturdy young
Scot, with a smooth face and light eyes. His honest red countenance
emerged out of the engine-room companion and then the whole robust man,
with shirt sleeves turned up, wiping slowly the massive fore-arms with
a lump of cotton-waste. And his light eyes expressed bitter distaste, as
though our friendship had turned to ashes. He said weightily: "Oh! Aye!
I've been thinking it was about time for you to run away home and get
married to some silly girl."

It was tacitly understood in the port that John Nieven was a fierce
misogynist; and the absurd character of the sally convinced me that he
meant to be nasty--very nasty--had meant to say the most crushing thing
he could think of. My laugh sounded deprecatory. Nobody but a friend
could be so angry as that. I became a little crestfallen. Our chief
engineer also took a characteristic view of my action, but in a kindlier
spirit.

He was young, too, but very thin, and with a mist of fluffy brown beard
all round his haggard face. All day long, at sea or in harbour, he could
be seen walking hastily up and down the after-deck, wearing an
intense, spiritually rapt expression, which was caused by a perpetual
consciousness of unpleasant physical sensations in his internal economy.
For he was a confirmed dyspeptic. His view of my case was very simple.
He said it was nothing but deranged liver. Of course! He suggested I
should stay for another trip and meantime dose myself with a certain
patent medicine in which his own belief was absolute. "I'll tell you
what I'll do. I'll buy you two bottles, out of my own pocket. There. I
can't say fairer than that, can I?"

I believe he would have perpetrated the atrocity (or generosity) at the
merest sign of weakening on my part. By that time, however, I was more
discontented, disgusted, and dogged than ever. The past eighteen months,
so full of new and varied experience, appeared a dreary, prosaic waste
of days. I felt--how shall I express it?--that there was no truth to be
got out of them.

What truth? I should have been hard put to it to explain. Probably, if
pressed, I would have burst into tears simply. I was young enough for
that.

Next day the Captain and I transacted our business in the Harbour
Office. It was a lofty, big, cool, white room, where the screened light
of day glowed serenely. Everybody in it--the officials, the public--were
in white. Only the heavy polished desks gleamed darkly in a central
avenue, and some papers lying on them were blue. Enormous punkahs sent
from on high a gentle draught through that immaculate interior and upon
our perspiring heads.

The official behind the desk we approached grinned amiably and kept it
up till, in answer to his perfunctory question, "Sign off and on again?"
my Captain answered, "No! Signing off for good." And then his grin
vanished in sudden solemnity. He did not look at me again till he
handed me my papers with a sorrowful expression, as if they had been my
passports for Hades.

While I was putting them away he murmured some question to the Captain,
and I heard the latter answer good-humouredly:

"No. He leaves us to go home."

"Oh!" the other exclaimed, nodding mournfully over my sad condition.

I didn't know him outside the official building, but he leaned forward
the desk to shake hands with me, compassionately, as one would with some
poor devil going out to be hanged; and I am afraid I performed my part
ungraciously, in the hardened manner of an impenitent criminal.

No homeward-bound mail-boat was due for three or four days. Being now a
man without a ship, and having for a time broken my connection with the
sea--become, in fact, a mere potential passenger--it would have been
more appropriate perhaps if I had gone to stay at an hotel. There it
was, too, within a stone's throw of the Harbour Office, low, but somehow
palatial, displaying its white, pillared pavilions surrounded by trim
grass plots. I would have felt a passenger indeed in there! I gave it a
hostile glance and directed my steps toward the Officers' Sailors' Home.

I walked in the sunshine, disregarding it, and in the shade of the big
trees on the esplanade without enjoying it. The heat of the tropical
East descended through the leafy boughs, enveloping my thinly-clad body,
clinging to my rebellious discontent, as if to rob it of its freedom.

The Officers' Home was a large bungalow with a wide verandah and a
curiously suburban-looking little garden of bushes and a few trees
between it and the street. That institution partook somewhat of the
character of a residential club, but with a slightly Governmental
flavour about it, because it was administered by the Harbour Office. Its
manager was officially styled Chief Steward. He was an unhappy, wizened
little man, who if put into a jockey's rig would have looked the part to
perfection. But it was obvious that at some time or other in his life,
in some capacity or other, he had been connected with the sea. Possibly
in the comprehensive capacity of a failure.

I should have thought his employment a very easy one, but he used to
affirm for some reason or other that his job would be the death of him
some day. It was rather mysterious. Perhaps everything naturally was too
much trouble for him. He certainly seemed to hate having people in the
house.

On entering it I thought he must be feeling pleased. It was as still as
a tomb. I could see no one in the living rooms; and the verandah, too,
was empty, except for a man at the far end dozing prone in a long chair.
At the noise of my footsteps he opened one horribly fish-like eye. He
was a stranger to me. I retreated from there, and crossing the dining
room--a very bare apartment with a motionless punkah hanging over the
centre table--I knocked at a door labelled in black letters: "Chief
Steward."

The answer to my knock being a vexed and doleful plaint: "Oh, dear! Oh,
dear! What is it now?" I went in at once.

It was a strange room to find in the tropics. Twilight and stuffiness
reigned in there. The fellow had hung enormously ample, dusty, cheap
lace curtains over his windows, which were shut. Piles of cardboard
boxes, such as milliners and dressmakers use in Europe, cumbered the
corners; and by some means he had procured for himself the sort of
furniture that might have come out of a respectable parlour in the East
End of London--a horsehair sofa, arm-chairs of the same. I glimpsed
grimy antimacassars scattered over that horrid upholstery, which
was awe-inspiring, insomuch that one could not guess what mysterious
accident, need, or fancy had collected it there. Its owner had taken
off his tunic, and in white trousers and a thin, short-sleeved singlet
prowled behind the chair-backs nursing his meagre elbows.

An exclamation of dismay escaped him when he heard that I had come for a
stay; but he could not deny that there were plenty of vacant rooms.

"Very well. Can you give me the one I had before?"

He emitted a faint moan from behind a pile of cardboard boxes on the
table, which might have contained gloves or handkerchiefs or neckties. I
wonder what the fellow did keep in them? There was a smell of decaying
coral, or Oriental dust of zoological speciments in that den of his. I
could only see the top of his head and his unhappy eyes levelled at me
over the barrier.

"It's only for a couple of days," I said, intending to cheer him up.

"Perhaps you would like to pay in advance?" he suggested eagerly.

"Certainly not!" I burst out directly I could speak. "Never heard of
such a thing! This is the most infernal cheek. . . ."

He had seized his head in both hands--a gesture of despair which checked
my indignation.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Don't fly out like this. I am asking everybody."

"I don't believe it," I said bluntly.

"Well, I am going to. And if you gentlemen all agreed to pay in advance
I could make Hamilton pay up, too. He's always turning up ashore dead
broke, and even when he has some money he won't settle his bills. I
don't know what to do with him. He swears at me and tells me I can't
chuck a white man out into the street here. So if you only would. . . ."

I was amazed. Incredulous, too. I suspected the fellow of gratuitous
impertinence. I told him with marked emphasis that I would see him and
Hamilton hanged first, and requested him to conduct me to my room with
no more of his nonsense. He produced then a key from somewhere and led
the way out of his lair, giving me a vicious sidelong look in passing.

"Any one I know staying here?" I asked him before he left my room.

He had recovered his usual pained impatient tone, and said that Captain
Giles was there, back from a Solo Sea trip. Two other guests were
staying also. He paused. And, of course, Hamilton, he added.

"Oh, yes! Hamilton," I said, and the miserable creature took himself off
with a final groan.

His impudence still rankled when I came into the dining room at tiffin
time. He was there on duty overlooking the Chinamen servants. The tiffin
was laid on one end only of the long table, and the punkah was stirring
the hot air lazily--mostly above a barren waste of polished wood.

We were four around the cloth. The dozing stranger from the chair was
one. Both his eyes were partly opened now, but they did not seem to see
anything. He was supine. The dignified person next him, with short side
whiskers and a carefully scraped chin, was, of course, Hamilton. I have
never seen any one so full of dignity for the station in life Providence
had been pleased to place him in. I had been told that he regarded me as
a rank outsider. He raised not only his eyes, but his eyebrows as well,
at the sound I made pulling back my chair.

Captain Giles was at the head of the table. I exchanged a few words of
greeting with him and sat down on his left. Stout and pale, with a great
shiny dome of a bald forehead and prominent brown eyes, he might have
been anything but a seaman. You would not have been surprised to learn
that he was an architect. To me (I know how absurd it is) to me he
looked like a churchwarden. He had the appearance of a man from whom you
would expect sound advice, moral sentiments, with perhaps a platitude or
two thrown in on occasion, not from a desire to dazzle, but from honest
conviction.

Though very well known and appreciated in the shipping world, he had
no regular employment. He did not want it. He had his own peculiar
position. He was an expert. An expert in--how shall I say it?--in
intricate navigation. He was supposed to know more about remote and
imperfectly charted parts of the Archipelago than any man living. His
brain must have been a perfect warehouse of reefs, positions, bearings,
images of headlands, shapes of obscure coasts, aspects of innumerable
islands, desert and otherwise. Any ship, for instance, bound on a trip
to Palawan or somewhere that way would have Captain Giles on board,
either in temporary command or "to assist the master." It was said that
he had a retaining fee from a wealthy firm of Chinese steamship owners,
in view of such services. Besides, he was always ready to relieve any
man who wished to take a spell ashore for a time. No owner was ever
known to object to an arrangement of that sort. For it seemed to be the
established opinion at the port that Captain Giles was as good as
the best, if not a little better. But in Hamilton's view he was an
"outsider." I believe that for Hamilton the generalisation "outsider"
covered the whole lot of us; though I suppose that he made some
distinctions in his mind.

I didn't try to make conversation with Captain Giles, whom I had not
seen more than twice in my life. But, of course, he knew who I was.
After a while, inclining his big shiny head my way, he addressed me
first in his friendly fashion. He presumed from seeing me there, he
said, that I had come ashore for a couple of days' leave.

He was a low-voiced man. I spoke a little louder, saying that: No--I had
left the ship for good.

"A free man for a bit," was his comment.

"I suppose I may call myself that--since eleven o'clock," I said.

Hamilton had stopped eating at the sound of our voices. He laid down
his knife and fork gently, got up, and muttering something about "this
infernal heat cutting one's appetite," went out of the room. Almost
immediately we heard him leave the house down the verandah steps.

On this Captain Giles remarked easily that the fellow had no doubt gone
off to look after my old job. The Chief Steward, who had been leaning
against the wall, brought his face of an unhappy goat nearer to the
table and addressed us dolefully. His object was to unburden himself of
his eternal grievance against Hamilton. The man kept him in hot water
with the Harbour Office as to the state of his accounts. He wished
to goodness he would get my job, though in truth what would it be?
Temporary relief at best.

I said: "You needn't worry. He won't get my job. My successor is on
board already."

He was surprised, and I believe his face fell a little at the news.
Captain Giles gave a soft laugh. We got up and went out on the verandah,
leaving the supine stranger to be dealt with by the Chinamen. The last
thing I saw they had put a plate with a slice of pine-apple on it before
him and stood back to watch what would happen. But the experiment seemed
a failure. He sat insensible.

It was imparted to me in a low voice by Captain Giles that this was
an officer of some Rajah's yacht which had come into our port to be
dry-docked. Must have been "seeing life" last night, he added, wrinkling
his nose in an intimate, confidential way which pleased me vastly. For
Captain Giles had prestige. He was credited with wonderful adventures
and with some mysterious tragedy in his life. And no man had a word to
say against him. He continued:

"I remember him first coming ashore here some years ago. Seems only the
other day. He was a nice boy. Oh! these nice boys!"

I could not help laughing aloud. He looked startled, then joined in the
laugh. "No! No! I didn't mean that," he cried. "What I meant is that
some of them do go soft mighty quick out here."

Jocularly I suggested the beastly heat as the first cause. But Captain
Giles disclosed himself possessed of a deeper philosophy. Things out
East were made easy for white men. That was all right. The difficulty
was to go on keeping white, and some of these nice boys did not know
how. He gave me a searching look, and in a benevolent, heavy-uncle
manner asked point blank:

"Why did you throw up your berth?"

I became angry all of a sudden; for you can understand how exasperating
such a question was to a man who didn't know. I said to myself that I
ought to shut up that moralist; and to him aloud I said with challenging
politeness:

"Why . . . ? Do you disapprove?"

He was too disconcerted to do more than mutter confusedly: "I! . . . In
a general way. . ." and then gave me up. But he retired in good order,
under the cover of a heavily humorous remark that he, too, was getting
soft, and that this was his time for taking his little siesta--when he
was on shore. "Very bad habit. Very bad habit."

There was a simplicity in the man which would have disarmed a touchiness
even more youthful than mine. So when next day at tiffin he bent his
head toward me and said that he had met my late Captain last evening,
adding in an undertone: "He's very sorry you left. He had never had a
mate that suited him so well," I answered him earnestly, without any
affectation, that I certainly hadn't been so comfortable in any ship or
with any commander in all my sea-going days.

"Well--then," he murmured.

"Haven't you heard, Captain Giles, that I intend to go home?"

"Yes," he said benevolently. "I have heard that sort of thing so often
before."

"What of that?" I cried. I thought he was the most dull, unimaginative
man I had ever met. I don't know what more I would have said, but the
much-belated Hamilton came in just then and took his usual seat. So I
dropped into a mumble.

"Anyhow, you shall see it done this time."

Hamilton, beautifully shaved, gave Captain Giles a curt nod, but didn't
even condescend to raise his eyebrows at me; and when he spoke it was
only to tell the Chief Steward that the food on his plate wasn't fit
to be set before a gentleman. The individual addressed seemed much too
unhappy to groan. He cast his eyes up to the punkah and that was all.

Captain Giles and I got up from the table, and the stranger next to
Hamilton followed our example, manoeuvring himself to his feet with
difficulty. He, poor fellow, not because he was hungry but I verily
believe only to recover his self-respect, had tried to put some of that
unworthy food into his mouth. But after dropping his fork twice and
generally making a failure of it, he had sat still with an air of
intense mortification combined with a ghastly glazed stare. Both Giles
and I had avoided looking his way at table.

On the verandah he stopped short on purpose to address to us anxiously
a long remark which I failed to understand completely. It sounded like
some horrible unknown language. But when Captain Giles, after only an
instant for reflection, assured him with homely friendliness, "Aye, to
be sure. You are right there," he appeared very much gratified indeed,
and went away (pretty straight, too) to seek a distant long chair.

"What was he trying to say?" I asked with disgust.

"I don't know. Mustn't be down too much on a fellow. He's feeling pretty
wretched, you may be sure; and to-morrow he'll feel worse yet."

Judging by the man's appearance it seemed impossible. I wondered
what sort of complicated debauch had reduced him to that unspeakable
condition. Captain Giles' benevolence was spoiled by a curious air of
complacency which I disliked. I said with a little laugh:

"Well, he will have you to look after him." He made a deprecatory
gesture, sat down, and took up a paper. I did the same. The papers
were old and uninteresting, filled up mostly with dreary stereotyped
descriptions of Queen Victoria's first jubilee celebrations. Probably we
should have quickly fallen into a tropical afternoon doze if it had not
been for Hamilton's voice raised in the dining room. He was finishing
his tiffin there. The big double doors stood wide open permanently, and
he could not have had any idea how near to the doorway our chairs
were placed. He was heard in a loud, supercilious tone answering some
statement ventured by the Chief Steward.

"I am not going to be rushed into anything. They will be glad enough to
get a gentleman I imagine. There is no hurry."

A loud whispering from the Steward succeeded and then again Hamilton was
heard with even intenser scorn.

"What? That young ass who fancies himself for having been chief mate
with Kent so long? . . . Preposterous."

Giles and I looked at each other. Kent being the name of my late
commander, Captain Giles' whisper, "He's talking of you," seemed to me
sheer waste of breath. The Chief Steward must have stuck to his point,
whatever it was, because Hamilton was heard again more supercilious if
possible, and also very emphatic:

"Rubbish, my good man! One doesn't _compete_ with a rank outsider like
that. There's plenty of time."

Then there were pushing of chairs, footsteps in the next room, and
plaintive expostulations from the Steward, who was pursuing Hamilton,
even out of doors through the main entrance.

"That's a very insulting sort of man," remarked Captain
Giles--superfluously, I thought. "Very insulting. You haven't offended
him in some way, have you?"

"Never spoke to him in my life," I said grumpily. "Can't imagine what
he means by competing. He has been trying for my job after I left--and
didn't get it. But that isn't exactly competition."

Captain Giles balanced his big benevolent head thoughtfully. "He didn't
get it," he repeated very slowly. "No, not likely either, with Kent.
Kent is no end sorry you left him. He gives you the name of a good
seaman, too."

I flung away the paper I was still holding. I sat up, I slapped the
table with my open palm. I wanted to know why he would keep harping on
that, my absolutely private affair. It was exasperating, really.

Captain Giles silenced me by the perfect equanimity of his gaze.
"Nothing to be annoyed about," he murmured reasonably, with an evident
desire to soothe the childish irritation he had aroused. And he was
really a man of an appearance so inoffensive that I tried to explain
myself as much as I could. I told him that I did not want to hear
any more about what was past and gone. It had been very nice while it
lasted, but now it was done with I preferred not to talk about it or
even think about it. I had made up my mind to go home.

He listened to the whole tirade in a particular lending-the-ear
attitude, as if trying to detect a false note in it somewhere; then
straightened himself up and appeared to ponder sagaciously over the
matter.

"Yes. You told me you meant to go home. Anything in view there?"

Instead of telling him that it was none of his business I said sullenly:

"Nothing that I know of."

I had indeed considered that rather blank side of the situation I had
created for myself by leaving suddenly my very satisfactory employment.
And I was not very pleased with it. I had it on the tip of my tongue
to say that common sense had nothing to do with my action, and that
therefore it didn't deserve the interest Captain Giles seemed to be
taking in it. But he was puffing at a short wooden pipe now, and looked
so guileless, dense, and commonplace, that it seemed hardly worth while
to puzzle him either with truth or sarcasm.

He blew a cloud of smoke, then surprised me by a very abrupt: "Paid your
passage money yet?"

Overcome by the shameless pertinacity of a man to whom it was rather
difficult to be rude, I replied with exaggerated meekness that I had
not done so yet. I thought there would be plenty of time to do that
to-morrow.

And I was about to turn away, withdrawing my privacy from his fatuous,
objectless attempts to test what sort of stuff it was made of, when he
laid down his pipe in an extremely significant manner, you know, as if a
critical moment had come, and leaned sideways over the table between us.

"Oh! You haven't yet!" He dropped his voice mysteriously. "Well, then I
think you ought to know that there's something going on here."

I had never in my life felt more detached from all earthly goings on.
Freed from the sea for a time, I preserved the sailor's consciousness of
complete independence from all land affairs. How could they concern
me? I gazed at Captain Giles' animation with scorn rather than with
curiosity.

To his obviously preparatory question whether our Steward had spoken to
me that day I said he hadn't. And what's more he would have had precious
little encouragement if he had tried to. I didn't want the fellow to
speak to me at all.

Unrebuked by my petulance, Captain Giles, with an air of immense
sagacity, began to tell me a minute tale about a Harbour Office peon.
It was absolutely pointless. A peon was seen walking that morning on the
verandah with a letter in his hand. It was in an official envelope. As
the habit of these fellows is, he had shown it to the first white man
he came across. That man was our friend in the arm-chair. He, as I knew,
was not in a state to interest himself in any sublunary matters. He
could only wave the peon away. The peon then wandered on along the
verandah and came upon Captain Giles, who was there by an extraordinary
chance. . . .

At this point he stopped with a profound look. The letter, he continued,
was addressed to the Chief Steward. Now what could Captain Ellis, the
Master Attendant, want to write to the Steward for? The fellow went
every morning, anyhow, to the Harbour Office with his report, for orders
or what not. He hadn't been back more than an hour before there was an
office peon chasing him with a note. Now what was that for?

And he began to speculate. It was not for this--and it could not be for
that. As to that other thing it was unthinkable.

The fatuousness of all this made me stare. If the man had not been
somehow a sympathetic personality I would have resented it like an
insult. As it was, I felt only sorry for him. Something remarkably
earnest in his gaze prevented me from laughing in his face. Neither did
I yawn at him. I just stared.

His tone became a shade more mysterious. Directly the fellow (meaning
the Steward) got that note he rushed for his hat and bolted out of the
house. But it wasn't because the note called him to the Harbour Office.
He didn't go there. He was not absent long enough for that. He came
darting back in no time, flung his hat away, and raced about the dining
room moaning and slapping his forehead. All these exciting facts and
manifestations had been observed by Captain Giles. He had, it seems,
been meditating upon them ever since.

I began to pity him profoundly. And in a tone which I tried to make
as little sarcastic as possible I said that I was glad he had found
something to occupy his morning hours.

With his disarming simplicity he made me observe, as if it were a matter
of some consequence, how strange it was that he should have spent the
morning indoors at all. He generally was out before tiffin, visiting
various offices, seeing his friends in the harbour, and so on. He had
felt out of sorts somewhat on rising. Nothing much. Just enough to make
him feel lazy.

All this with a sustained, holding stare which, in conjunction with
the general inanity of the discourse, conveyed the impression of mild,
dreary lunacy. And when he hitched his chair a little and dropped
his voice to the low note of mystery, it flashed upon me that high
professional reputation was not necessarily a guarantee of sound mind.

It never occurred to me then that I didn't know in what soundness
of mind exactly consisted and what a delicate and, upon the whole,
unimportant matter it was. With some idea of not hurting his feelings I
blinked at him in an interested manner. But when he proceeded to ask me
mysteriously whether I remembered what had passed just now between that
Steward of ours and "that man Hamilton," I only grunted sourly assent
and turned away my head.

"Aye. But do you remember every word?" he insisted tactfully.

"I don't know. It's none of my business," I snapped out, consigning,
moreover, the Steward and Hamilton aloud to eternal perdition.

I meant to be very energetic and final, but Captain Giles continued to
gaze at me thoughtfully. Nothing could stop him. He went on to point out
that my personality was involved in that conversation. When I tried to
preserve the semblance of unconcern he became positively cruel. I heard
what the man had said? Yes? What did I think of it then?--he wanted to
know.

Captain Giles' appearance excluding the suspicion of mere sly malice,
I came to the conclusion that he was simply the most tactless idiot
on earth. I almost despised myself for the weakness of attempting to
enlighten his common understanding. I started to explain that I did not
think anything whatever. Hamilton was not worth a thought. What such an
offensive loafer . . . "Aye! that he is," interjected Captain Giles
. . . thought or said was below any decent man's contempt, and I did not
propose to take the slightest notice of it.

This attitude seemed to me so simple and obvious that I was really
astonished at Giles giving no sign of assent. Such perfect stupidity was
almost interesting.

"What would you like me to do?" I asked, laughing. "I can't start a row
with him because of the opinion he has formed of me. Of course, I've
heard of the contemptuous way he alludes to me. But he doesn't intrude
his contempt on my notice. He has never expressed it in my hearing.
For even just now he didn't know we could hear him. I should only make
myself ridiculous."

That hopeless Giles went on puffing at his pipe moodily. All at once his
face cleared, and he spoke.

"You missed my point."

"Have I? I am very glad to hear it," I said.

With increasing animation he stated again that I had missed his point.
Entirely. And in a tone of growing self-conscious complacency he told me
that few things escaped his attention, and he was rather used to think
them out, and generally from his experience of life and men arrived at
the right conclusion.

This bit of self-praise, of course, fitted excellently the laborious
inanity of the whole conversation. The whole thing strengthened in
me that obscure feeling of life being but a waste of days, which,
half-unconsciously, had driven me out of a comfortable berth, away from
men I liked, to flee from the menace of emptiness . . . and to find
inanity at the first turn. Here was a man of recognized character and
achievement disclosed as an absurd and dreary chatterer. And it was
probably like this everywhere--from east to west, from the bottom to the
top of the social scale.

A great discouragement fell on me. A spiritual drowsiness. Giles'
voice was going on complacently; the very voice of the universal hollow
conceit. And I was no longer angry with it. There was nothing original,
nothing new, startling, informing, to expect from the world; no
opportunities to find out something about oneself, no wisdom to acquire,
no fun to enjoy. Everything was stupid and overrated, even as Captain
Giles was. So be it.

The name of Hamilton suddenly caught my ear and roused me up.

"I thought we had done with him," I said, with the greatest possible
distaste.

"Yes. But considering what we happened to hear just now I think you
ought to do it."

"Ought to do it?" I sat up bewildered. "Do what?"

Captain Giles confronted me very much surprised.

"Why! Do what I have been advising you to try. You go and ask the
Steward what was there in that letter from the Harbour Office. Ask him
straight out."

I remained speechless for a time. Here was something unexpected
and original enough to be altogether incomprehensible. I murmured,
astounded:

"But I thought it was Hamilton that you . . ."

"Exactly. Don't you let him. You do what I tell you. You tackle that
Steward. You'll make him jump, I bet," insisted Captain Giles, waving
his smouldering pipe impressively at me. Then he took three rapid puffs
at it.

His aspect of triumphant acuteness was indescribable. Yet the man
remained a strangely sympathetic creature. Benevolence radiated from
him ridiculously, mildly, impressively. It was irritating, too. But I
pointed out coldly, as one who deals with the incomprehensible, that I
didn't see any reason to expose myself to a snub from the fellow. He
was a very unsatisfactory steward and a miserable wretch besides, but I
would just as soon think of tweaking his nose.

"Tweaking his nose," said Captain Giles in a scandalized tone. "Much use
it would be to you."

That remark was so irrelevant that one could make no answer to it.
But the sense of the absurdity was beginning at last to exercise its
well-known fascination. I felt I must not let the man talk to me any
more. I got up, observing curtly that he was too much for me--that I
couldn't make him out.

Before I had time to move away he spoke again in a changed tone of
obstinacy and puffing nervously at his pipe.

"Well--he's a--no account cuss--anyhow. You just--ask him. That's all."

That new manner impressed me--or rather made me pause. But sanity
asserting its sway at once I left the verandah after giving him a
mirthless smile. In a few strides I found myself in the dining room, now
cleared and empty. But during that short time various thoughts occurred
to me, such as: that Giles had been making fun of me, expecting some
amusement at my expense; that I probably looked silly and gullible; that
I knew very little of life. . . .

The door facing me across the dining room flew open to my extreme
surprise. It was the door inscribed with the word "Steward" and the
man himself ran out of his stuffy, Philistinish lair in his absurd,
hunted-animal manner, making for the garden door.

To this day I don't know what made me call after him. "I say! Wait a
minute." Perhaps it was the sidelong glance he gave me; or possibly I
was yet under the influence of Captain Giles' mysterious earnestness.
Well, it was an impulse of some sort; an effect of that force somewhere
within our lives which shapes them this way or that. For if these words
had not escaped from my lips (my will had nothing to do with that) my
existence would, to be sure, have been still a seaman's existence, but
directed on now to me utterly inconceivable lines.

No. My will had nothing to do with it. Indeed, no sooner had I made that
fateful noise than I became extremely sorry for it. Had the man stopped
and faced me I would have had to retire in disorder. For I had no notion
to carry out Captain Giles' idiotic joke, either at my own expense or at
the expense of the Steward.

But here the old human instinct of the chase came into play. He
pretended to be deaf, and I, without thinking a second about it, dashed
along my own side of the dining table and cut him off at the very door.

"Why can't you answer when you are spoken to?" I asked roughly.

He leaned against the lintel of the door. He looked extremely wretched.
Human nature is, I fear, not very nice right through. There are ugly
spots in it. I found myself growing angry, and that, I believe, only
because my quarry looked so woe-begone. Miserable beggar!

I went for him without more ado. "I understand there was an official
communication to the Home from the Harbour Office this morning. Is that
so?"

Instead of telling me to mind my own business, as he might have done,
he began to whine with an undertone of impudence. He couldn't see me
anywhere this morning. He couldn't be expected to run all over the town
after me.

"Who wants you to?" I cried. And then my eyes became opened to the
inwardness of things and speeches the triviality of which had been so
baffling and tiresome.

I told him I wanted to know what was in that letter. My sternness of
tone and behaviour was only half assumed. Curiosity can be a very fierce
sentiment--at times.

He took refuge in a silly, muttering sulkiness. It was nothing to me, he
mumbled. I had told him I was going home. And since I was going home he
didn't see why he should. . . .

That was the line of his argument, and it was irrelevant enough to be
almost insulting. Insulting to one's intelligence, I mean.

In that twilight region between youth and maturity, in which I had my
being then, one is peculiarly sensitive to that kind of insult. I am
afraid my behaviour to the Steward became very rough indeed. But it
wasn't in him to face out anything or anybody. Drug habit or solitary
tippling, perhaps. And when I forgot myself so far as to swear at him he
broke down and began to shriek.

I don't mean to say that he made a great outcry. It was a cynical
shrieking confession, only faint--piteously faint. It wasn't very
coherent either, but sufficiently so to strike me dumb at first. I
turned my eyes from him in righteous indignation, and perceived Captain
Giles in the verandah doorway surveying quietly the scene, his own
handiwork, if I may express it in that way. His smouldering black pipe
was very noticeable in his big, paternal fist. So, too, was the glitter
of his heavy gold watch-chain across the breast of his white tunic.
He exhaled an atmosphere of virtuous sagacity serene enough for any
innocent soul to fly to confidently. I flew to him.

"You would never believe it," I cried. "It was a notification that a
master is wanted for some ship. There's a command apparently going about
and this fellow puts the thing in his pocket."

The Steward screamed out in accents of loud despair: "You will be the
death of me!"

The mighty slap he gave his wretched forehead was very loud, too. But
when I turned to look at him he was no longer there. He had rushed away
somewhere out of sight. This sudden disappearance made me laugh.

This was the end of the incident--for me. Captain Giles, however,
staring at the place where the Steward had been, began to haul at his
gorgeous gold chain till at last the watch came up from the deep pocket
like solid truth from a well. Solemnly he lowered it down again and only
then said:

"Just three o'clock. You will be in time--if you don't lose any, that
is."

"In time for what?" I asked.

"Good Lord! For the Harbour Office. This must be looked into."

Strictly speaking, he was right. But I've never had much taste for
investigation, for showing people up and all that no doubt ethically
meritorious kind of work. And my view of the episode was purely ethical.
If any one had to be the death of the Steward I didn't see why it
shouldn't be Captain Giles himself, a man of age and standing, and a
permanent resident. Whereas, I in comparison, felt myself a mere bird
of passage in that port. In fact, it might have been said that I had
already broken off my connection. I muttered that I didn't think--it was
nothing to me. . . .

"Nothing!" repeated Captain Giles, giving some signs of quiet,
deliberate indignation. "Kent warned me you were a peculiar young
fellow. You will tell me next that a command is nothing to you--and
after all the trouble I've taken, too!"

"The trouble!" I murmured, uncomprehending. What trouble? All I could
remember was being mystified and bored by his conversation for a solid
hour after tiffin. And he called that taking a lot of trouble.

He was looking at me with a self-complacency which would have been
odious in any other man. All at once, as if a page of a book had been
turned over disclosing a word which made plain all that had gone before,
I perceived that this matter had also another than an ethical aspect.

And still I did not move. Captain Giles lost his patience a little. With
an angry puff at his pipe he turned his back on my hesitation.

But it was not hesitation on my part. I had been, if I may express
myself so, put out of gear mentally. But as soon as I had convinced
myself that this stale, unprofitable world of my discontent contained
such a thing as a command to be seized, I recovered my powers of
locomotion.

It's a good step from the Officers' Home to the Harbour Office; but with
the magic word "Command" in my head I found myself suddenly on the quay
as if transported there in the twinkling of an eye, before a portal of
dressed white stone above a flight of shallow white steps.

All this seemed to glide toward me swiftly. The whole great roadstead
to the right was just a mere flicker of blue, and the dim cool hall
swallowed me up out of the heat and glare of which I had not been aware
till the very moment I passed in from it.

The broad inner staircase insinuated itself under my feet somehow.
Command is a strong magic. The first human beings I perceived distinctly
since I had parted with the indignant back of Captain Giles were the
crew of the harbour steam-launch lounging on the spacious landing about
the curtained archway of the shipping office.

It was there that my buoyancy abandoned me. The atmosphere of
officialdom would kill anything that breathes the air of human
endeavour, would extinguish hope and fear alike in the supremacy of
paper and ink. I passed heavily under the curtain which the Malay
coxswain of the harbour launch raised for me. There was nobody in the
office except the clerks, writing in two industrious rows. But the head
Shipping-Master hopped down from his elevation and hurried along on the
thick mats to meet me in the broad central passage.

He had a Scottish name, but his complexion was of a rich olive hue, his
short beard was jet black, and his eyes, also black, had a languishing
expression. He asked confidentially:

"You want to see Him?"

All lightness of spirit and body having departed from me at the touch
of officialdom, I looked at the scribe without animation and asked in my
turn wearily:

"What do you think? Is it any use?"

"My goodness! He has asked for you twice today."

This emphatic He was the supreme authority, the Marine Superintendent,
the Harbour-Master--a very great person in the eyes of every single
quill-driver in the room. But that was nothing to the opinion he had of
his own greatness.

Captain Ellis looked upon himself as a sort of divine (pagan) emanation,
the deputy-Neptune for the circumambient seas. If he did not actually
rule the waves, he pretended to rule the fate of the mortals whose lives
were cast upon the waters.

This uplifting illusion made him inquisitorial and peremptory. And as
his temperament was choleric there were fellows who were actually afraid
of him. He was redoubtable, not in virtue of his office, but because of
his unwarrantable assumptions. I had never had anything to do with him
before.

I said: "Oh! He has asked for me twice. Then perhaps I had better go
in."

"You must! You must!"

The Shipping-Master led the way with a mincing gait around the whole
system of desks to a tall and important-looking door, which he opened
with a deferential action of the arm.

He stepped right in (but without letting go of the handle) and, after
gazing reverently down the room for a while, beckoned me in by a silent
jerk of the head. Then he slipped out at once and shut the door after me
most delicately.

Three lofty windows gave on the harbour. There was nothing in them but
the dark-blue sparkling sea and the paler luminous blue of the sky. My
eye caught in the depths and distances of these blue tones the white
speck of some big ship just arrived and about to anchor in the outer
roadstead. A ship from home--after perhaps ninety days at sea. There is
something touching about a ship coming in from sea and folding her white
wings for a rest.

The next thing I saw was the top-knot of silver hair surmounting Captain
Ellis' smooth red face, which would have been apoplectic if it hadn't
had such a fresh appearance.

Our deputy-Neptune had no beard on his chin, and there was no trident
to be seen standing in a corner anywhere, like an umbrella. But his
hand was holding a pen--the official pen, far mightier than the sword in
making or marring the fortune of simple toiling men. He was looking over
his shoulder at my advance.

When I had come well within range he saluted me by a nerve-shattering:
"Where have you been all this time?"

As it was no concern of his I did not take the slightest notice of the
shot. I said simply that I had heard there was a master needed for some
vessel, and being a sailing-ship man I thought I would apply. . . .

He interrupted me. "Why! Hang it! _You_ are the right man for that job--if
there had been twenty others after it. But no fear of that. They are all
afraid to catch hold. That's what's the matter."

He was very irritated. I said innocently: "Are they, sir. I wonder why?"

"Why!" he fumed. "Afraid of the sails. Afraid of a white crew. Too much
trouble. Too much work. Too long out here. Easy life and deck-chairs
more their mark. Here I sit with the Consul-General's cable before me,
and the only man fit for the job not to be found anywhere. I began to
think you were funking it, too. . . ."

"I haven't been long getting to the office," I remarked calmly.

"You have a good name out here, though," he growled savagely without
looking at me.

"I am very glad to hear it from you, sir," I said.

"Yes. But you are not on the spot when you are wanted. You know you
weren't. That steward of yours wouldn't dare to neglect a message from
this office. Where the devil did you hide yourself for the best part of
the day?"

I only smiled kindly down on him, and he seemed to recollect himself,
and asked me to take a seat. He explained that the master of a British
ship having died in Bangkok the Consul-General had cabled to him a
request for a competent man to be sent out to take command.

Apparently, in his mind, I was the man from the first, though for the
looks of the thing the notification addressed to the Sailors' Home was
general. An agreement had already been prepared. He gave it to me to
read, and when I handed it back to him with the remark that I accepted
its terms, the deputy-Neptune signed it, stamped it with his own exalted
hand, folded it in four (it was a sheet of blue foolscap) and presented
it to me--a gift of extraordinary potency, for, as I put it in my
pocket, my head swam a little.

"This is your appointment to the command," he said with a certain
gravity. "An official appointment binding the owners to conditions which
you have accepted. Now--when will you be ready to go?"

I said I would be ready that very day if necessary. He caught me at my
word with great alacrity. The steamer Melita was leaving for Bangkok
that evening about seven. He would request her captain officially to
give me a passage and wait for me till ten o'clock.

Then he rose from his office chair, and I got up, too. My head swam,
there was no doubt about it, and I felt a certain heaviness of limbs as
if they had grown bigger since I had sat down on that chair. I made my
bow.

A subtle change in Captain Ellis' manner became perceptible as though
he had laid aside the trident of deputy-Neptune. In reality, it was only
his official pen that he had dropped on getting up.




II

He shook hands with me: "Well, there you are, on your own, appointed
officially under my responsibility."

He was actually walking with me to the door. What a distance off it
seemed! I moved like a man in bonds. But we reached it at last. I opened
it with the sensation of dealing with mere dream-stuff, and then at the
last moment the fellowship of seamen asserted itself, stronger than
the difference of age and station. It asserted itself in Captain Ellis'
voice.

"Good-bye--and good luck to you," he said so heartily that I could only
give him a grateful glance. Then I turned and went out, never to see him
again in my life. I had not made three steps into the outer office when
I heard behind my back a gruff, loud, authoritative voice, the voice of
our deputy-Neptune.

It was addressing the head Shipping-Master who, having let me in, had,
apparently, remained hovering in the middle distance ever since. "Mr. R.,
let the harbour launch have steam up to take the captain here on board
the Melita at half-past nine to-night."

I was amazed at the startled alacrity of R's "Yes, sir." He ran before
me out on the landing. My new dignity sat yet so lightly on me that
I was not aware that it was I, the Captain, the object of this last
graciousness. It seemed as if all of a sudden a pair of wings had grown
on my shoulders. I merely skimmed along the polished floor.

But R. was impressed.

"I say!" he exclaimed on the landing, while the Malay crew of the
steam-launch standing by looked stonily at the man for whom they were
going to be kept on duty so late, away from their gambling, from their
girls, or their pure domestic joys. "I say! His own launch. What have
you done to him?"

His stare was full of respectful curiosity. I was quite confounded.

"Was it for me? I hadn't the slightest notion," I stammered out.

He nodded many times. "Yes. And the last person who had it before you
was a Duke. So, there!"

I think he expected me to faint on the spot. But I was in too much of a
hurry for emotional displays. My feelings were already in such a whirl
that this staggering information did not seem to make the slightest
difference. It merely fell into the seething cauldron of my brain, and
I carried it off with me after a short but effusive passage of
leave-taking with R.

The favour of the great throws an aureole round the fortunate object of
its selection. That excellent man enquired whether he could do anything
for me. He had known me only by sight, and he was well aware he would
never see me again; I was, in common with the other seamen of the port,
merely a subject for official writing, filling up of forms with all the
artificial superiority of a man of pen and ink to the men who grapple
with realities outside the consecrated walls of official buildings. What
ghosts we must have been to him! Mere symbols to juggle with in books
and heavy registers, without brains and muscles and perplexities;
something hardly useful and decidedly inferior.

And he--the office hours being over--wanted to know if he could be of
any use to me!

I ought--properly speaking--I ought to have been moved to tears. But I
did not even think of it. It was merely another miraculous manifestation
of that day of miracles. I parted from him as if he were a mere symbol.
I floated down the staircase. I floated out of the official and imposing
portal. I went on floating along.

I use that word rather than the word "flew," because I have a distinct
impression that, though uplifted by my aroused youth, my movements were
deliberate enough. To that mixed white, brown, and yellow portion of
mankind, out abroad on their own affairs, I presented the appearance
of a man walking rather sedately. And nothing in the way of abstraction
could have equalled my deep detachment from the forms and colours of
this world. It was, as it were, final.

And yet, suddenly, I recognized Hamilton. I recognized him without
effort, without a shock, without a start. There he was, strolling toward
the Harbour Office with his stiff, arrogant dignity. His red face made
him noticeable at a distance. It flamed, over there, on the shady side
of the street.

He had perceived me, too. Something (unconscious exuberance of spirits
perhaps) moved me to wave my hand to him elaborately. This lapse from
good taste happened before I was aware that I was capable of it.

The impact of my impudence stopped him short, much as a bullet might
have done. I verily believe he staggered, though as far as I could see
he didn't actually fall. I had gone past in a moment and did not turn my
head. I had forgotten his existence.

The next ten minutes might have been ten seconds or ten centuries for
all my consciousness had to do with it. People might have been falling
dead around me, houses crumbling, guns firing, I wouldn't have known.
I was thinking: "By Jove! I have got it." _It_ being the command. It had
come about in a way utterly unforeseen in my modest day-dreams.

I perceived that my imagination had been running in conventional
channels and that my hopes had always been drab stuff. I had envisaged a
command as a result of a slow course of promotion in the employ of some
highly respectable firm. The reward of faithful service. Well, faithful
service was all right. One would naturally give that for one's own sake,
for the sake of the ship, for the love of the life of one's choice; not
for the sake of the reward.

There is something distasteful in the notion of a reward.

And now here I had my command, absolutely in my pocket, in a way
undeniable indeed, but most unexpected; beyond my imaginings, outside
all reasonable expectations, and even notwithstanding the existence of
some sort of obscure intrigue to keep it away from me. It is true that
the intrigue was feeble, but it helped the feeling of wonder--as if I
had been specially destined for that ship I did not know, by some power
higher than the prosaic agencies of the commercial world.

A strange sense of exultation began to creep into me. If I had worked
for that command ten years or more there would have been nothing of the
kind. I was a little frightened.

"Let us be calm," I said to myself.

Outside the door of the Officers' Home the wretched Steward seemed to be
waiting for me. There was a broad flight of a few steps, and he ran
to and fro on the top of it as if chained there. A distressed cur. He
looked as though his throat were too dry for him to bark.

I regret to say I stopped before going in. There had been a revolution
in my moral nature. He waited open-mouthed, breathless, while I looked
at him for half a minute.

"And you thought you could keep me out of it," I said scathingly.

"You said you were going home," he squeaked miserably. "You said so. You
said so."

"I wonder what Captain Ellis will have to say to that excuse," I uttered
slowly with a sinister meaning.

His lower jaw had been trembling all the time and his voice was like the
bleating of a sick goat. "You have given me away? You have done for me?"

Neither his distress nor yet the sheer absurdity of it was able to
disarm me. It was the first instance of harm being attempted to be done
to me--at any rate, the first I had ever found out. And I was still
young enough, still too much on this side of the shadow line, not to be
surprised and indignant at such things.

I gazed at him inflexibly. Let the beggar suffer. He slapped his
forehead and I passed in, pursued, into the dining room, by his screech:
"I always said you'd be the death of me."

This clamour not only overtook me, but went ahead as it were on to the
verandah and brought out Captain Giles.

He stood before me in the doorway in all the commonplace solidity of
his wisdom. The gold chain glittered on his breast. He clutched a
smouldering pipe.

I extended my hand to him warmly and he seemed surprised, but did
respond heartily enough in the end, with a faint smile of superior
knowledge which cut my thanks short as if with a knife. I don't think
that more than one word came out. And even for that one, judging by the
temperature of my face, I had blushed as if for a bad action. Assuming a
detached tone, I wondered how on earth he had managed to spot the little
underhand game that had been going on.

He murmured complacently that there were but few things done in the town
that he could not see the inside of. And as to this house, he had been
using it off and on for nearly ten years. Nothing that went on in it
could escape his great experience. It had been no trouble to him. No
trouble at all.

Then in his quiet, thick tone he wanted to know if I had complained
formally of the Steward's action.

I said that I hadn't--though, indeed, it was not for want of
opportunity. Captain Ellis had gone for me bald-headed in a most
ridiculous fashion for being out of the way when wanted.

"Funny old gentleman," interjected Captain Giles. "What did you say to
that?"

"I said simply that I came along the very moment I heard of his message.
Nothing more. I didn't want to hurt the Steward. I would scorn to harm
such an object. No. I made no complaint, but I believe he thinks I've
done so. Let him think. He's got a fright he won't forget in a hurry,
for Captain Ellis would kick him out into the middle of Asia. . . ."

"Wait a moment," said Captain Giles, leaving me suddenly. I sat down
feeling very tired, mostly in my head. Before I could start a train of
thought he stood again before me, murmuring the excuse that he had to go
and put the fellow's mind at ease.

I looked up with surprise. But in reality I was indifferent. He
explained that he had found the Steward lying face downward on the
horsehair sofa. He was all right now.

"He would not have died of fright," I said contemptuously.

"No. But he might have taken an overdose out of one of them little
bottles he keeps in his room," Captain Giles argued seriously. "The
confounded fool has tried to poison himself once--a few years ago."

"Really," I said without emotion. "He doesn't seem very fit to live,
anyhow."

"As to that, it may be said of a good many."

"Don't exaggerate like this!" I protested, laughing irritably. "But I
wonder what this part of the world would do if you were to leave off
looking after it, Captain Giles? Here you have got me a command and
saved the Steward's life in one afternoon. Though why you should have
taken all that interest in either of us is more than I can understand."

Captain Giles remained silent for a minute. Then gravely:

"He's not a bad steward really. He can find a good cook, at any rate.
And, what's more, he can keep him when found. I remember the cooks we
had here before his time! . . ."

I must have made a movement of impatience, because he interrupted
himself with an apology for keeping me yarning there, while no doubt I
needed all my time to get ready.

What I really needed was to be alone for a bit. I seized this opening
hastily. My bedroom was a quiet refuge in an apparently uninhabited wing
of the building. Having absolutely nothing to do (for I had not unpacked
my things), I sat down on the bed and abandoned myself to the influences
of the hour. To the unexpected influences. . . .

And first I wondered at my state of mind. Why was I not more surprised?
Why? Here I was, invested with a command in the twinkling of an eye, not
in the common course of human affairs, but more as if by enchantment. I
ought to have been lost in astonishment. But I wasn't. I was very much
like people in fairy tales. Nothing ever astonishes them. When a fully
appointed gala coach is produced out of a pumpkin to take her to a ball,
Cinderella does not exclaim. She gets in quietly and drives away to her
high fortune.

Captain Ellis (a fierce sort of fairy) had produced a command out of a
drawer almost as unexpectedly as in a fairy tale. But a command is an
abstract idea, and it seemed a sort of "lesser marvel" till it flashed
upon me that it involved the concrete existence of a ship.

A ship! My ship! She was mine, more absolutely mine for possession
and care than anything in the world; an object of responsibility and
devotion. She was there waiting for me, spell-bound, unable to move,
to live, to get out into the world (till I came), like an enchanted
princess. Her call had come to me as if from the clouds. I had never
suspected her existence. I didn't know how she looked, I had barely
heard her name, and yet we were indissolubly united for a certain
portion of our future, to sink or swim together!

A sudden passion of anxious impatience rushed through my veins, gave me
such a sense of the intensity of existence as I have never felt before
or since. I discovered how much of a seaman I was, in heart, in mind,
and, as it were, physically--a man exclusively of sea and ships; the sea
the only world that counted, and the ships, the test of manliness, of
temperament, of courage and fidelity--and of love.

I had an exquisite moment. It was unique also. Jumping up from my seat,
I paced up and down my room for a long time. But when I came downstairs
I behaved with sufficient composure. Only I couldn't eat anything at
dinner.

Having declared my intention not to drive but to walk down to the quay,
I must render the wretched Steward justice that he bestirred himself
to find me some coolies for the luggage. They departed, carrying all
my worldly possessions (except a little money I had in my pocket) slung
from a long pole. Captain Giles volunteered to walk down with me.

We followed the sombre, shaded alley across the Esplanade. It was
moderately cool there under the trees. Captain Giles remarked, with a
sudden laugh: "I know who's jolly thankful at having seen the last of
you."

I guessed that he meant the Steward. The fellow had borne himself to me
in a sulkily frightened manner at the last. I expressed my wonder that
he should have tried to do me a bad turn for no reason at all.

"Don't you see that what he wanted was to get rid of our friend Hamilton
by dodging him in front of you for that job? That would have removed him
for good. See?"

"Heavens!" I exclaimed, feeling humiliated somehow. "Can it be possible?
What a fool he must be! That overbearing, impudent loafer! Why! He
couldn't. . . . And yet he's nearly done it, I believe; for the Harbour
Office was bound to send somebody."

"Aye. A fool like our Steward can be dangerous sometimes," declared
Captain Giles sententiously. "Just because he is a fool," he added,
imparting further instruction in his complacent low tones. "For," he
continued in the manner of a set demonstration, "no sensible person
would risk being kicked out of the only berth between himself and
starvation just to get rid of a simple annoyance--a small worry.
Would he now?"

"Well, no," I conceded, restraining a desire to laugh at that something
mysteriously earnest in delivering the conclusions of his wisdom as
though it were the product of prohibited operations. "But that fellow
looks as if he were rather crazy. He must be."

"As to that, I believe everybody in the world is a little mad," he
announced quietly.

"You make no exceptions?" I inquired, just to hear his manner.

"Why! Kent says that even of you."

"Does he?" I retorted, extremely embittered all at once against my
former captain. "There's nothing of that in the written character from
him which I've got in my pocket. Has he given you any instances of my
lunacy?"

Captain Giles explained in a conciliating tone that it had been only
a friendly remark in reference to my abrupt leaving the ship for no
apparent reason.

I muttered grumpily: "Oh! leaving his ship," and mended my pace. He
kept up by my side in the deep gloom of the avenue as if it were
his conscientious duty to see me out of the colony as an undesirable
character. He panted a little, which was rather pathetic in a way. But
I was not moved. On the contrary. His discomfort gave me a sort of
malicious pleasure.

Presently I relented, slowed down, and said:

"What I really wanted was to get a fresh grip. I felt it was time. Is
that so very mad?"

He made no answer. We were issuing from the avenue. On the bridge over
the canal a dark, irresolute figure seemed to be awaiting something or
somebody.

It was a Malay policeman, barefooted, in his blue uniform. The silver
band on his little round cap shone dimly in the light of the street
lamp. He peered in our direction timidly.

Before we could come up to him he turned about and walked in front of us
in the direction of the jetty. The distance was some hundred yards; and
then I found my coolies squatting on their heels. They had kept the pole
on their shoulders, and all my worldly goods, still tied to the pole,
were resting on the ground between them. As far as the eye could reach
along the quay there was not another soul abroad except the police peon,
who saluted us.

It seems he had detained the coolies as suspicious characters, and had
forbidden them the jetty. But at a sign from me he took off the embargo
with alacrity. The two patient fellows, rising together with a faint
grunt, trotted off along the planks, and I prepared to take my leave of
Captain Giles, who stood there with an air as though his mission were
drawing to a close. It could not be denied that he had done it all. And
while I hesitated about an appropriate sentence he made himself heard:

"I expect you'll have your hands pretty full of tangled-up business."

I asked him what made him think so; and he answered that it was his
general experience of the world. Ship a long time away from her port,
owners inaccessible by cable, and the only man who could explain matters
dead and buried.

"And you yourself new to the business in a way," he concluded in a sort
of unanswerable tone.

"Don't insist," I said. "I know it only too well. I only wish you could
impart to me some small portion of your experience before I go. As it
can't be done in ten minutes I had better not begin to ask you. There's
that harbour launch waiting for me, too. But I won't feel really at
peace till I have that ship of mine out in the Indian Ocean."

He remarked casually that from Bangkok to the Indian Ocean was a pretty
long step. And this murmur, like a dim flash from a dark lantern, showed
me for a moment the broad belt of islands and reefs between that unknown
ship, which was mine, and the freedom of the great waters of the globe.

But I felt no apprehension. I was familiar enough with the Archipelago
by that time. Extreme patience and extreme care would see me through the
region of broken land, of faint airs, and of dead water to where I would
feel at last my command swing on the great swell and list over to the
great breath of regular winds, that would give her the feeling of a
large, more intense life. The road would be long. All roads are long
that lead toward one's heart's desire. But this road my mind's eye
could see on a chart, professionally, with all its complications and
difficulties, yet simple enough in a way. One is a seaman or one is not.
And I had no doubt of being one.

The only part I was a stranger to was the Gulf of Siam. And I mentioned
this to Captain Giles. Not that I was concerned very much. It belonged
to the same region the nature of which I knew, into whose very soul
I seemed to have looked during the last months of that existence with
which I had broken now, suddenly, as one parts with some enchanting
company.

"The gulf . . . Ay! A funny piece of water--that," said Captain Giles.

Funny, in this connection, was a vague word. The whole thing sounded
like an opinion uttered by a cautious person mindful of actions for
slander.

I didn't inquire as to the nature of that funniness. There was really no
time. But at the very last he volunteered a warning.

"Whatever you do keep to the east side of it. The west side is dangerous
at this time of the year. Don't let anything tempt you over. You'll find
nothing but trouble there."

Though I could hardly imagine what could tempt me to involve my ship
amongst the currents and reefs of the Malay shore, I thanked him for the
advice.

He gripped my extended arm warmly, and the end of our acquaintance came
suddenly in the words: "Good-night."

That was all he said: "Good-night." Nothing more. I don't know what I
intended to say, but surprise made me swallow it, whatever it was. I
choked slightly, and then exclaimed with a sort of nervous haste: "Oh!
Good-night, Captain Giles, good-night."

His movements were always deliberate, but his back had receded some
distance along the deserted quay before I collected myself enough to
follow his example and made a half turn in the direction of the jetty.

Only my movements were not deliberate. I hurried down to the steps, and
leaped into the launch. Before I had fairly landed in her sternsheets
the slim little craft darted away from the jetty with a sudden swirl of
her propeller and the hard, rapid puffing of the exhaust in her vaguely
gleaming brass funnel amidships.

The misty churning at her stern was the only sound in the world. The
shore lay plunged in the silence of the deeper slumber. I watched the
town recede still and soundless in the hot night, till the abrupt hail,
"Steam-launch, ahoy!" made me spin round face forward. We were close to
a white ghostly steamer. Lights shone on her decks, in her portholes.
And the same voice shouted from her:

"Is that our passenger?"

"It is," I yelled.

Her crew had been obviously on the jump. I could hear them running
about. The modern spirit of haste was loudly vocal in the orders to
"Heave away on the cable"--to "Lower the sideladder," and in urgent
requests to me to "Come along, sir! We have been delayed three hours for
you. . . . Our time is seven o'clock, you know!"

I stepped on the deck. I said "No! I don't know." The spirit of modern
hurry was embodied in a thin, long-armed, long-legged man, with a
closely clipped gray beard. His meagre hand was hot and dry. He declared
feverishly:

"I am hanged if I would have waited another five minutes Harbour-Master
or no Harbour-Master."

"That's your own business," I said. "I didn't ask you to wait for me."

"I hope you don't expect any supper," he burst out. "This isn't a
boarding-house afloat. You are the first passenger I ever had in my life
and I hope to goodness you will be the last."

I made no answer to this hospitable communication; and, indeed, he
didn't wait for any, bolting away on to his bridge to get his ship under
way.

The three days he had me on board he did not depart from that
half-hostile attitude. His ship having been delayed three hours on
my account he couldn't forgive me for not being a more distinguished
person. He was not exactly outspoken about it, but that feeling of
annoyed wonder was peeping out perpetually in his talk.

He was absurd.

He was also a man of much experience, which he liked to trot out; but no
greater contrast with Captain Giles could have been imagined. He would
have amused me if I had wanted to be amused. But I did not want to be
amused. I was like a lover looking forward to a meeting. Human hostility
was nothing to me. I thought of my unknown ship. It was amusement
enough, torment enough, occupation enough.

He perceived my state, for his wits were sufficiently sharp for that,
and he poked sly fun at my preoccupation in the manner some nasty,
cynical old men assume toward the dreams and illusions of youth. I, on
my side, refrained from questioning him as to the appearance of my ship,
though I knew that being in Bangkok every fortnight or so he must have
known her by sight. I was not going to expose the ship, my ship! to some
slighting reference.

He was the first really unsympathetic man I had ever come in contact
with. My education was far from being finished, though I didn't know it.
No! I didn't know it.

All I knew was that he disliked me and had some contempt for my person.
Why? Apparently because his ship had been delayed three hours on my
account. Who was I to have such a thing done for me? Such a thing had
never been done for him. It was a sort of jealous indignation.

My expectation, mingled with fear, was wrought to its highest pitch. How
slow had been the days of the passage and how soon they were over.
One morning, early, we crossed the bar, and while the sun was
rising splendidly over the flat spaces of the land we steamed up the
innumerable bends, passed under the shadow of the great gilt pagoda, and
reached the outskirts of the town.

There it was, spread largely on both banks, the Oriental capital which
had as yet suffered no white conqueror; an expanse of brown houses of
bamboo, of mats, of leaves, of a vegetable-matter style of architecture,
sprung out of the brown soil on the banks of the muddy river. It was
amazing to think that in those miles of human habitations there was not
probably half a dozen pounds of nails. Some of those houses of sticks
and grass, like the nests of an aquatic race, clung to the low shores.
Others seemed to grow out of the water; others again floated in long
anchored rows in the very middle of the stream. Here and there in the
distance, above the crowded mob of low, brown roof ridges, towered great
piles of masonry, King's Palace, temples, gorgeous and dilapidated,
crumbling under the vertical sunlight, tremendous, overpowering, almost
palpable, which seemed to enter one's breast with the breath of one's
nostrils and soak into one's limbs through every pore of one's skin.

The ridiculous victim of jealousy had for some reason or other to stop
his engines just then. The steamer drifted slowly up with the tide.
Oblivious of my new surroundings I walked the deck, in anxious, deadened
abstraction, a commingling of romantic reverie with a very practical
survey of my qualifications. For the time was approaching for me to
behold my command and to prove my worth in the ultimate test of my
profession.

Suddenly I heard myself called by that imbecile. He was beckoning me to
come up on his bridge.

I didn't care very much for that, but as it seemed that he had something
particular to say I went up the ladder.

He laid his hand on my shoulder and gave me a slight turn, pointing with
his other arm at the same time.

"There! That's your ship, Captain," he said.

I felt a thump in my breast--only one, as if my heart had then ceased to
beat. There were ten or more ships moored along the bank, and the one he
meant was partly hidden away from my sight by her next astern. He said:
"We'll drift abreast her in a moment."

What was his tone? Mocking? Threatening? Or only indifferent? I could
not tell. I suspected some malice in this unexpected manifestation of
interest.

He left me, and I leaned over the rail of the bridge looking over the
side. I dared not raise my eyes. Yet it had to be done--and, indeed, I
could not have helped myself. I believe I trembled.

But directly my eyes had rested on my ship all my fear vanished. It went
off swiftly, like a bad dream. Only that a dream leaves no shame behind
it, and that I felt a momentary shame at my unworthy suspicions.

Yes, there she was. Her hull, her rigging filled my eye with a great
content. That feeling of life-emptiness which had made me so restless for
the last few months lost its bitter plausibility, its evil influence,
dissolved in a flow of joyous emotion.

At first glance I saw that she was a high-class vessel, a harmonious
creature in the lines of her fine body, in the proportioned tallness of
her spars. Whatever her age and her history, she had preserved the
stamp of her origin. She was one of those craft that, in virtue of their
design and complete finish, will never look old. Amongst her companions
moored to the bank, and all bigger than herself, she looked like a
creature of high breed--an Arab steed in a string of cart-horses.

A voice behind me said in a nasty equivocal tone: "I hope you are
satisfied with her, Captain." I did not even turn my head. It was the
master of the steamer, and whatever he meant, whatever he thought of
her, I knew that, like some rare women, she was one of those creatures
whose mere existence is enough to awaken an unselfish delight. One feels
that it is good to be in the world in which she has her being.

That illusion of life and character which charms one in men's finest
handiwork radiated from her. An enormous bulk of teak-wood timber swung
over her hatchway; lifeless matter, looking heavier and bigger than
anything aboard of her. When they started lowering it the surge of the
tackle sent a quiver through her from water-line to the trucks up the
fine nerves of her rigging, as though she had shuddered at the weight.
It seemed cruel to load her so. . . .

Half an hour later, putting my foot on her deck for the first time, I
received the feeling of deep physical satisfaction. Nothing could equal
the fullness of that moment, the ideal completeness of that emotional
experience which had come to me without the preliminary toil and
disenchantments of an obscure career.

My rapid glance ran over her, enveloped, appropriated the form
concreting the abstract sentiment of my command. A lot of details
perceptible to a seaman struck my eye, vividly in that instant. For the
rest, I saw her disengaged from the material conditions of her being.
The shore to which she was moored was as if it did not exist. What were
to me all the countries of the globe? In all the parts of the world
washed by navigable waters our relation to each other would be the
same--and more intimate than there are words to express in the language.
Apart from that, every scene and episode would be a mere passing show.
The very gang of yellow coolies busy about the main hatch was less
substantial than the stuff dreams are made of. For who on earth would
dream of Chinamen? . . .

I went aft, ascended the poop, where, under the awning, gleamed the
brasses of the yacht-like fittings, the polished surfaces of the rails,
the glass of the skylights. Right aft two seamen, busy cleaning the
steering gear, with the reflected ripples of light running playfully
up their bent backs, went on with their work, unaware of me and of
the almost affectionate glance I threw at them in passing toward the
companion-way of the cabin.

The doors stood wide open, the slide was pushed right back. The
half-turn of the staircase cut off the view of the lobby. A low
humming ascended from below, but it stopped abruptly at the sound of my
descending footsteps.




III

The first thing I saw down there was the upper part of a man's body
projecting backward, as it were, from one of the doors at the foot of
the stairs. His eyes looked at me very wide and still. In one hand he
held a dinner plate, in the other a cloth.

"I am your new Captain," I said quietly.

In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, he had got rid of the plate and
the cloth and jumped to open the cabin door. As soon as I passed into
the saloon he vanished, but only to reappear instantly, buttoning up a
jacket he had put on with the swiftness of a "quick-change" artist.

"Where's the chief mate?" I asked.

"In the hold, I think, sir. I saw him go down the after-hatch ten
minutes ago."

"Tell him I am on board."

The mahogany table under the skylight shone in the twilight like a dark
pool of water. The sideboard, surmounted by a wide looking-glass in an
ormulu frame, had a marble top. It bore a pair of silver-plated lamps
and some other pieces--obviously a harbour display. The saloon itself was
panelled in two kinds of wood in the excellent simple taste prevailing
when the ship was built.

I sat down in the armchair at the head of the table--the captain's
chair, with a small tell-tale compass swung above it--a mute reminder of
unremitting vigilance.

A succession of men had sat in that chair. I became aware of that
thought suddenly, vividly, as though each had left a little of himself
between the four walls of these ornate bulkheads; as if a sort of
composite soul, the soul of command, had whispered suddenly to mine of
long days at sea and of anxious moments.

"You, too!" it seemed to say, "you, too, shall taste of that peace and
that unrest in a searching intimacy with your own self--obscure as we
were and as supreme in the face of all the winds and all the seas, in an
immensity that receives no impress, preserves no memories, and keeps no
reckoning of lives."

Deep within the tarnished ormulu frame, in the hot half-light sifted
through the awning, I saw my own face propped between my hands. And I
stared back at myself with the perfect detachment of distance, rather
with curiosity than with any other feeling, except of some sympathy for
this latest representative of what for all intents and purposes was a
dynasty, continuous not in blood indeed, but in its experience, in its
training, in its conception of duty, and in the blessed simplicity of
its traditional point of view on life.

It struck me that this quietly staring man whom I was watching, both as
if he were myself and somebody else, was not exactly a lonely figure.
He had his place in a line of men whom he did not know, of whom he had
never heard; but who were fashioned by the same influences, whose souls
in relation to their humble life's work had no secrets for him.

Suddenly I perceived that there was another man in the saloon, standing
a little on one side and looking intently at me. The chief mate. His
long, red moustache determined the character of his physiognomy, which
struck me as pugnacious in (strange to say) a ghastly sort of way.

How long had he been there looking at me, appraising me in my unguarded
day-dreaming state? I would have been more disconcerted if, having the
clock set in the top of the mirror-frame right in front of me, I had not
noticed that its long hand had hardly moved at all.

I could not have been in that cabin more than two minutes altogether.
Say three. . . . So he could not have been watching me more than a mere
fraction of a minute, luckily. Still, I regretted the occurrence.

But I showed nothing of it as I rose leisurely (it had to be leisurely)
and greeted him with perfect friendliness.

There was something reluctant and at the same time attentive in his
bearing. His name was Burns. We left the cabin and went round the ship
together. His face in the full light of day appeared very pale, meagre,
even haggard. Somehow I had a delicacy as to looking too often at him;
his eyes, on the contrary, remained fairly glued on my face. They were
greenish and had an expectant expression.

He answered all my questions readily enough, but my ear seemed to catch
a tone of unwillingness. The second officer, with three or four hands,
was busy forward. The mate mentioned his name and I nodded to him in
passing. He was very young. He struck me as rather a cub.

When we returned below, I sat down on one end of a deep, semi-circular,
or, rather, semi-oval settee, upholstered in red plush. It extended
right across the whole after-end of the cabin. Mr. Burns motioned to sit
down, dropped into one of the swivel-chairs round the table, and kept
his eyes on me as persistently as ever, and with that strange air as if
all this were make-believe and he expected me to get up, burst into a
laugh, slap him on the back, and vanish from the cabin.

There was an odd stress in the situation which began to make me
uncomfortable. I tried to react against this vague feeling.

"It's only my inexperience," I thought.

In the face of that man, several years, I judged, older than myself, I
became aware of what I had left already behind me--my youth. And that
was indeed poor comfort. Youth is a fine thing, a mighty power--as
long as one does not think of it. I felt I was becoming self-conscious.
Almost against my will I assumed a moody gravity. I said: "I see you
have kept her in very good order, Mr. Burns."

Directly I had uttered these words I asked myself angrily why the deuce
did I want to say that? Mr. Burns in answer had only blinked at me. What
on earth did he mean?

I fell back on a question which had been in my thoughts for a long
time--the most natural question on the lips of any seaman whatever
joining a ship. I voiced it (confound this self-consciousness) in a
degaged cheerful tone: "I suppose she can travel--what?"

Now a question like this might have been answered normally, either in
accents of apologetic sorrow or with a visibly suppressed pride, in a
"I don't want to boast, but you shall see," sort of tone. There are
sailors, too, who would have been roughly outspoken: "Lazy brute," or
openly delighted: "She's a flyer." Two ways, if four manners.

But Mr. Burns found another way, a way of his own which had, at all
events, the merit of saving his breath, if no other.

Again he did not say anything. He only frowned. And it was an angry
frown. I waited. Nothing more came.

"What's the matter? . . . Can't you tell after being nearly two years in
the ship?" I addressed him sharply.

He looked as startled for a moment as though he had discovered my
presence only that very moment. But this passed off almost at once. He
put on an air of indifference. But I suppose he thought it better to say
something. He said that a ship needed, just like a man, the chance to
show the best she could do, and that this ship had never had a chance
since he had been on board of her. Not that he could remember. The last
captain. . . . He paused.

"Has he been so very unlucky?" I asked with frank incredulity. Mr. Burns
turned his eyes away from me. No, the late captain was not an unlucky
man. One couldn't say that. But he had not seemed to want to make use of
his luck.

Mr. Burns--man of enigmatic moods--made this statement with an inanimate
face and staring wilfully at the rudder casing. The statement itself was
obscurely suggestive. I asked quietly:

"Where did he die?"

"In this saloon. Just where you are sitting now," answered Mr. Burns.

I repressed a silly impulse to jump up; but upon the whole I was
relieved to hear that he had not died in the bed which was now to be
mine. I pointed out to the chief mate that what I really wanted to know
was where he had buried his late captain.

Mr. Burns said that it was at the entrance to the gulf. A roomy grave; a
sufficient answer. But the mate, overcoming visibly something within
him--something like a curious reluctance to believe in my advent (as an
irrevocable fact, at any rate), did not stop at that--though, indeed, he
may have wished to do so.

As a compromise with his feelings, I believe, he addressed himself
persistently to the rudder-casing, so that to me he had the appearance
of a man talking in solitude, a little unconsciously, however.

His tale was that at seven bells in the forenoon watch he had all hands
mustered on the quarterdeck and told them they had better go down to say
good-bye to the captain.

Those words, as if grudged to an intruding personage, were enough for
me to evoke vividly that strange ceremony: The bare-footed, bare-headed
seamen crowding shyly into that cabin, a small mob pressed against that
sideboard, uncomfortable rather than moved, shirts open on sunburnt
chests, weather-beaten faces, and all staring at the dying man with the
same grave and expectant expression.

"Was he conscious?" I asked.

"He didn't speak, but he moved his eyes to look at them," said the mate.

After waiting a moment, Mr. Burns motioned the crew to leave the cabin,
but he detained the two eldest men to stay with the captain while he
went on deck with his sextant to "take the sun." It was getting toward
noon and he was anxious to obtain a good observation for latitude. When
he returned below to put his sextant away he found that the two men had
retreated out into the lobby. Through the open door he had a view of the
captain lying easy against the pillows. He had "passed away" while Mr.
Burns was taking this observation. As near noon as possible. He had
hardly changed his position.

Mr. Burns sighed, glanced at me inquisitively, as much as to say,
"Aren't you going yet?" and then turned his thoughts from his new
captain back to the old, who, being dead, had no authority, was not in
anybody's way, and was much easier to deal with.

Mr. Burns dealt with him at some length. He was a peculiar man--of
sixty-five about--iron gray, hard-faced, obstinate, and uncommunicative.
He used to keep the ship loafing at sea for inscrutable reasons. Would
come on deck at night sometimes, take some sail off her, God only knows
why or wherefore, then go below, shut himself up in his cabin, and play
on the violin for hours--till daybreak perhaps. In fact, he spent most
of his time day or night playing the violin. That was when the fit took
him. Very loud, too.

It came to this, that Mr. Burns mustered his courage one day and
remonstrated earnestly with the captain. Neither he nor the second mate
could get a wink of sleep in their watches below for the noise. . . .
And how could they be expected to keep awake while on duty? He pleaded.
The answer of that stern man was that if he and the second mate didn't
like the noise, they were welcome to pack up their traps and walk over
the side. When this alternative was offered the ship happened to be 600
miles from the nearest land.

Mr. Burns at this point looked at me with an air of curiosity. I began
to think that my predecessor was a remarkably peculiar old man.

But I had to hear stranger things yet. It came out that this stern,
grim, wind-tanned, rough, sea-salted, taciturn sailor of sixty-five was
not only an artist, but a lover as well. In Haiphong, when they got
there after a course of most unprofitable peregrinations (during which
the ship was nearly lost twice), he got himself, in Mr. Burns' own
words, "mixed up" with some woman. Mr. Burns had had no personal
knowledge of that affair, but positive evidence of it existed in the
shape of a photograph taken in Haiphong. Mr. Burns found it in one of
the drawers in the captain's room.

In due course I, too, saw that amazing human document (I even threw it
overboard later). There he sat, with his hands reposing on his knees,
bald, squat, gray, bristly, recalling a wild boar somehow; and by his
side towered an awful mature, white female with rapacious nostrils and a
cheaply ill-omened stare in her enormous eyes. She was disguised in some
semi-oriental, vulgar, fancy costume. She resembled a low-class medium
or one of those women who tell fortunes by cards for half a crown. And
yet she was striking. A professional sorceress from the slums. It was
incomprehensible. There was something awful in the thought that she was
the last reflection of the world of passion for the fierce soul which
seemed to look at one out of the sardonically savage face of that
old seaman. However, I noticed that she was holding some musical
instrument--guitar or mandoline--in her hand. Perhaps that was the secret
of her sortilege.

For Mr. Burns that photograph explained why the unloaded ship had kept
sweltering at anchor for three weeks in a pestilential hot harbour
without air. They lay there and gasped. The captain, appearing now and
then on short visits, mumbled to Mr. Burns unlikely tales about some
letters he was waiting for.

Suddenly, after vanishing for a week, he came on board in the middle
of the night and took the ship out to sea with the first break of dawn.
Daylight showed him looking wild and ill. The mere getting clear of the
land took two days, and somehow or other they bumped slightly on a
reef. However, no leak developed, and the captain, growling "no matter,"
informed Mr. Burns that he had made up his mind to take the ship to
Hong-Kong and drydock her there.

At this Mr. Burns was plunged into despair. For indeed, to beat up
to Hong-Kong against a fierce monsoon, with a ship not sufficiently
ballasted and with her supply of water not completed, was an insane
project.

But the captain growled peremptorily, "Stick her at it," and Mr. Burns,
dismayed and enraged, stuck her at it, and kept her at it, blowing away
sails, straining the spars, exhausting the crew--nearly maddened by the
absolute conviction that the attempt was impossible and was bound to end
in some catastrophe.

Meantime the captain, shut up in his cabin and wedged in a corner of his
settee against the crazy bounding of the ship, played the violin--or, at
any rate, made continuous noise on it.

When he appeared on deck he would not speak and not always answer when
spoken to. It was obvious that he was ill in some mysterious manner, and
beginning to break up.

As the days went by the sounds of the violin became less and less loud,
till at last only a feeble scratching would meet Mr. Burns' ear as
he stood in the saloon listening outside the door of the captain's
state-room.

One afternoon in perfect desperation he burst into that room and made
such a scene, tearing his hair and shouting such horrid imprecations
that he cowed the contemptuous spirit of the sick man. The water-tanks
were low, they had not gained fifty miles in a fortnight. She would
never reach Hong-Kong.

It was like fighting desperately toward destruction for the ship and the
men. This was evident without argument. Mr. Burns, losing all restraint,
put his face close to his captain's and fairly yelled: "You, sir, are
going out of the world. But I can't wait till you are dead before I put
the helm up. You must do it yourself. You must do it now!"

The man on the couch snarled in contempt. "So I am going out of the
world--am I?"

"Yes, sir--you haven't many days left in it," said Mr. Burns calming
down. "One can see it by your face."

"My face, eh? . . . Well, put up the helm and be damned to you."

Burns flew on deck, got the ship before the wind, then came down again
composed, but resolute.

"I've shaped a course for Pulo Condor, sir," he said. "When we make it,
if you are still with us, you'll tell me into what port you wish me to
take the ship and I'll do it."

The old man gave him a look of savage spite, and said those atrocious
words in deadly, slow tones.

"If I had my wish, neither the ship nor any of you would ever reach a
port. And I hope you won't."

Mr. Burns was profoundly shocked. I believe he was positively frightened
at the time. It seems, however, that he managed to produce such an
effective laugh that it was the old man's turn to be frightened. He
shrank within himself and turned his back on him.

"And his head was not gone then," Mr. Burns assured me excitedly. "He
meant every word of it."

"Such was practically the late captain's last speech. No connected
sentence passed his lips afterward. That night he used the last of his
strength to throw his fiddle over the side. No one had actually seen
him in the act, but after his death Mr. Burns couldn't find the thing
anywhere. The empty case was very much in evidence, but the fiddle
was clearly not in the ship. And where else could it have gone to but
overboard?"

"Threw his violin overboard!" I exclaimed.

"He did," cried Mr. Burns excitedly. "And it's my belief he would have
tried to take the ship down with him if it had been in human power. He
never meant her to see home again. He wouldn't write to his owners, he
never wrote to his old wife, either--he wasn't going to. He had made up
his mind to cut adrift from everything. That's what it was. He didn't
care for business, or freights, or for making a passage--or anything. He
meant to have gone wandering about the world till he lost her with all
hands."

Mr. Burns looked like a man who had escaped great danger. For a little
he would have exclaimed: "If it hadn't been for me!" And the transparent
innocence of his indignant eyes was underlined quaintly by the arrogant
pair of moustaches which he proceeded to twist, and as if extend,
horizontally.

I might have smiled if I had not been busy with my own sensations,
which were not those of Mr. Burns. I was already the man in command. My
sensations could not be like those of any other man on board. In that
community I stood, like a king in his country, in a class all by myself.
I mean an hereditary king, not a mere elected head of a state. I was
brought there to rule by an agency as remote from the people and as
inscrutable almost to them as the Grace of God.

And like a member of a dynasty, feeling a semimystical bond with the
dead, I was profoundly shocked by my immediate predecessor.

That man had been in all essentials but his age just such another man
as myself. Yet the end of his life was a complete act of treason, the
betrayal of a tradition which seemed to me as imperative as any guide
on earth could be. It appeared that even at sea a man could become the
victim of evil spirits. I felt on my face the breath of unknown powers
that shape our destinies.

Not to let the silence last too long I asked Mr. Burns if he had written
to his captain's wife. He shook his head. He had written to nobody.

In a moment he became sombre. He never thought of writing. It took him
all his time to watch incessantly the loading of the ship by a rascally
Chinese stevedore. In this Mr. Burns gave me the first glimpse of the
real chief mate's soul which dwelt uneasily in his body.

He mused, then hastened on with gloomy force.

"Yes! The captain died as near noon as possible. I looked through his
papers in the afternoon. I read the service over him at sunset and
then I stuck the ship's head north and brought her in here.
I--brought--her--in."

He struck the table with his fist.

"She would hardly have come in by herself," I observed. "But why didn't
you make for Singapore instead?"

His eyes wavered. "The nearest port," he muttered sullenly.

I had framed the question in perfect innocence, but his answer (the
difference in distance was insignificant) and his manner offered me a
clue to the simple truth. He took the ship to a port where he expected
to be confirmed in his temporary command from lack of a qualified master
to put over his head. Whereas Singapore, he surmised justly, would
be full of qualified men. But his naive reasoning forgot to take into
account the telegraph cable reposing on the bottom of the very Gulf up
which he had turned that ship which he imagined himself to have saved
from destruction. Hence the bitter flavour of our interview. I tasted it
more and more distinctly--and it was less and less to my taste.

"Look here, Mr. Burns," I began very firmly. "You may as well understand
that I did not run after this command. It was pushed in my way. I've
accepted it. I am here to take the ship home first of all, and you may
be sure that I shall see to it that every one of you on board here does
his duty to that end. This is all I have to say--for the present."

He was on his feet by this time, but instead of taking his dismissal
he remained with trembling, indignant lips, and looking at me hard as
though, really, after this, there was nothing for me to do in common
decency but to vanish from his outraged sight. Like all very simple
emotional states this was moving. I felt sorry for him--almost
sympathetic, till (seeing that I did not vanish) he spoke in a tone of
forced restraint.

"If I hadn't a wife and a child at home you may be sure, sir, I would
have asked you to let me go the very minute you came on board."

I answered him with a matter-of-course calmness as though some remote
third person were in question.

"And I, Mr. Burns, would not have let you go. You have signed the ship's
articles as chief officer, and till they are terminated at the final
port of discharge I shall expect you to attend to your duty and give me
the benefit of your experience to the best of your ability."

Stony incredulity lingered in his eyes: but it broke down before my
friendly attitude. With a slight upward toss of his arms (I got to know
that gesture well afterward) he bolted out of the cabin.

We might have saved ourselves that little passage of harmless sparring.
Before many days had elapsed it was Mr. Burns who was pleading with me
anxiously not to leave him behind; while I could only return him but
doubtful answers. The whole thing took on a somewhat tragic complexion.

And this horrible problem was only an extraneous episode, a mere
complication in the general problem of how to get that ship--which was
mine with her appurtenances and her men, with her body and her spirit
now slumbering in that pestilential river--how to get her out to sea.

Mr. Burns, while still acting captain, had hastened to sign a
charter-party which in an ideal world without guile would have been
an excellent document. Directly I ran my eye over it I foresaw trouble
ahead unless the people of the other part were quite exceptionally
fair-minded and open to argument.

Mr. Burns, to whom I imparted my fears, chose to take great umbrage
at them. He looked at me with that usual incredulous stare, and said
bitterly:

"I suppose, sir, you want to make out I've acted like a fool?"

I told him, with my systematic kindliness which always seemed to augment
his surprise, that I did not want to make out anything. I would leave
that to the future.

And, sure enough, the future brought in a lot of trouble. There were
days when I used to remember Captain Giles with nothing short of
abhorrence. His confounded acuteness had let me in for this job; while
his prophecy that I "would have my hands full" coming true, made it
appear as if done on purpose to play an evil joke on my young innocence.

Yes. I had my hands full of complications which were most valuable
as "experience." People have a great opinion of the advantages of
experience. But in this connection experience means always something
disagreeable as opposed to the charm and innocence of illusions.

I must say I was losing mine rapidly. But on these instructive
complications I must not enlarge more than to say that they could all be
resumed in the one word: Delay.

A mankind which has invented the proverb, "Time is money," will
understand my vexation. The word "Delay" entered the secret chamber of
my brain, resounded there like a tolling bell which maddens the ear,
affected all my senses, took on a black colouring, a bitter taste, a
deadly meaning.

"I am really sorry to see you worried like this. Indeed, I am. . . ."

It was the only humane speech I used to hear at that time. And it came
from a doctor, appropriately enough.

A doctor is humane by definition. But that man was so in reality. His
speech was not professional. I was not ill. But other people were, and
that was the reason of his visiting the ship.

He was the doctor of our Legation and, of course, of the Consulate,
too. He looked after the ship's health, which generally was poor, and
trembling, as it were, on the verge of a break-up. Yes. The men ailed.
And thus time was not only money, but life as well.

I had never seen such a steady ship's company. As the doctor remarked to
me: "You seem to have a most respectable lot of seamen." Not only were
they consistently sober, but they did not even want to go ashore. Care
was taken to expose them as little as possible to the sun. They
were employed on light work under the awnings. And the humane doctor
commended me.

"Your arrangements appear to me to be very judicious, my dear Captain."

It is difficult to express how much that pronouncement comforted me.
The doctor's round, full face framed in a light-coloured whisker was the
perfection of a dignified amenity. He was the only human being in
the world who seemed to take the slightest interest in me. He would
generally sit in the cabin for half an hour or so at every visit.

I said to him one day:

"I suppose the only thing now is to take care of them as you are doing
till I can get the ship to sea?"

He inclined his head, shutting his eyes under the large spectacles, and
murmured:

"The sea . . . undoubtedly."

The first member of the crew fairly knocked over was the steward--the
first man to whom I had spoken on board. He was taken ashore (with
choleric symptoms) and died there at the end of a week. Then, while I
was still under the startling impression of this first home-thrust of
the climate, Mr. Burns gave up and went to bed in a raging fever without
saying a word to anybody.

I believe he had partly fretted himself into that illness; the climate
did the rest with the swiftness of an invisible monster ambushed in
the air, in the water, in the mud of the river-bank. Mr. Burns was a
predestined victim.

I discovered him lying on his back, glaring sullenly and radiating heat
on one like a small furnace. He would hardly answer my questions, and
only grumbled. Couldn't a man take an afternoon off duty with a bad
headache--for once?

That evening, as I sat in the saloon after dinner, I could hear him
muttering continuously in his room. Ransome, who was clearing the table,
said to me:

"I am afraid, sir, I won't be able to give the mate all the attention
he's likely to need. I will have to be forward in the galley a great
part of my time."

Ransome was the cook. The mate had pointed him out to me the first day,
standing on the deck, his arms crossed on his broad chest, gazing on the
river.

Even at a distance his well-proportioned figure, something thoroughly
sailor-like in his poise, made him noticeable. On nearer view the
intelligent, quiet eyes, a well-bred face, the disciplined independence
of his manner made up an attractive personality. When, in addition, Mr.
Burns told me that he was the best seaman in the ship, I expressed my
surprise that in his earliest prime and of such appearance he should
sign on as cook on board a ship.

"It's his heart," Mr. Burns had said. "There's something wrong with it.
He mustn't exert himself too much or he may drop dead suddenly."

And he was the only one the climate had not touched--perhaps because,
carrying a deadly enemy in his breast, he had schooled himself into a
systematic control of feelings and movements. When one was in the secret
this was apparent in his manner. After the poor steward died, and as he
could not be replaced by a white man in this Oriental port, Ransome had
volunteered to do the double work.

"I can do it all right, sir, as long as I go about it quietly," he had
assured me.

But obviously he couldn't be expected to take up sick-nursing in
addition. Moreover, the doctor peremptorily ordered Mr. Burns ashore.

With a seaman on each side holding him up under the arms, the mate went
over the gangway more sullen than ever. We built him up with pillows in
the gharry, and he made an effort to say brokenly:

"Now--you've got--what you wanted--got me out of--the ship."

"You were never more mistaken in your life, Mr. Burns," I said quietly,
duly smiling at him; and the trap drove off to a sort of sanatorium, a
pavilion of bricks which the doctor had in the grounds of his residence.

I visited Mr. Burns regularly. After the first few days, when he didn't
know anybody, he received me as if I had come either to gloat over
an enemy or else to curry favour with a deeply wronged person. It was
either one or the other, just as it happened according to his fantastic
sickroom moods. Whichever it was, he managed to convey it to me even
during the period when he appeared almost too weak to talk. I treated
him to my invariable kindliness.

Then one day, suddenly, a surge of downright panic burst through all
this craziness.

If I left him behind in this deadly place he would die. He felt it, he
was certain of it. But I wouldn't have the heart to leave him ashore. He
had a wife and child in Sydney.

He produced his wasted forearms from under the sheet which covered him
and clasped his fleshless claws. He would die! He would die here. . . .

He absolutely managed to sit up, but only for a moment, and when he fell
back I really thought that he would die there and then. I called to the
Bengali dispenser, and hastened away from the room.

Next day he upset me thoroughly by renewing his entreaties. I returned
an evasive answer, and left him the picture of ghastly despair. The day
after I went in with reluctance, and he attacked me at once in a
much stronger voice and with an abundance of argument which was quite
startling. He presented his case with a sort of crazy vigour, and asked
me finally how would I like to have a man's death on my conscience? He
wanted me to promise that I would not sail without him.

I said that I really must consult the doctor first. He cried out at
that. The doctor! Never! That would be a death sentence.

The effort had exhausted him. He closed his eyes, but went on rambling
in a low voice. I had hated him from the start. The late captain had
hated him, too. Had wished him dead. Had wished all hands dead. . . .

"What do you want to stand in with that wicked corpse for, sir? He'll
have you, too," he ended, blinking his glazed eyes vacantly.

"Mr. Burns," I cried, very much discomposed, "what on earth are you
talking about?"

He seemed to come to himself, though he was too weak to start.

"I don't know," he said languidly. "But don't ask that doctor, sir. You
and I are sailors. Don't ask him, sir. Some day perhaps you will have a
wife and child yourself."

And again he pleaded for the promise that I would not leave him behind.
I had the firmness of mind not to give it to him. Afterward this
sternness seemed criminal; for my mind was made up. That prostrated man,
with hardly strength enough to breathe and ravaged by a passion of fear,
was irresistible. And, besides, he had happened to hit on the right
words. He and I were sailors. That was a claim, for I had no other
family. As to the wife and child (some day) argument, it had no force.
It sounded merely bizarre.

I could imagine no claim that would be stronger and more absorbing
than the claim of that ship, of these men snared in the river by silly
commercial complications, as if in some poisonous trap.

However, I had nearly fought my way out. Out to sea. The sea--which was
pure, safe, and friendly. Three days more.

That thought sustained and carried me on my way back to the ship. In the
saloon the doctor's voice greeted me, and his large form followed
his voice, issuing out of the starboard spare cabin where the ship's
medicine chest was kept securely lashed in the bed-place.

Finding that I was not on board he had gone in there, he said, to
inspect the supply of drugs, bandages, and so on. Everything was
completed and in order.

I thanked him; I had just been thinking of asking him to do that very
thing, as in a couple of days, as he knew, we were going to sea, where
all our troubles of every sort would be over at last.

He listened gravely and made no answer. But when I opened to him my mind
as to Mr. Burns he sat down by my side, and, laying his hand on my knee
amicably, begged me to think what it was I was exposing myself to.

The man was just strong enough to bear being moved and no more. But he
couldn't stand a return of the fever. I had before me a passage of sixty
days perhaps, beginning with intricate navigation and ending probably
with a lot of bad weather. Could I run the risk of having to go through
it single-handed, with no chief officer and with a second quite a youth?
. . .

He might have added that it was my first command, too. He did probably
think of that fact, for he checked himself. It was very present to my
mind.

He advised me earnestly to cable to Singapore for a chief officer, even
if I had to delay my sailing for a week.

"Never," I said. The very thought gave me the shivers. The hands seemed
fairly fit, all of them, and this was the time to get them away. Once at
sea I was not afraid of facing anything. The sea was now the only remedy
for all my troubles.

The doctor's glasses were directed at me like two lamps searching the
genuineness of my resolution. He opened his lips as if to argue further,
but shut them again without saying anything. I had a vision so vivid of
poor Burns in his exhaustion, helplessness, and anguish, that it moved
me more than the reality I had come away from only an hour before. It
was purged from the drawbacks of his personality, and I could not resist
it.

"Look here," I said. "Unless you tell me officially that the man
must not be moved I'll make arrangements to have him brought on board
tomorrow, and shall take the ship out of the river next morning, even if
I have to anchor outside the bar for a couple of days to get her ready
for sea."

"Oh! I'll make all the arrangements myself," said the doctor at once.
"I spoke as I did only as a friend--as a well-wisher, and that sort of
thing."

He rose in his dignified simplicity and gave me a warm handshake, rather
solemnly, I thought. But he was as good as his word. When Mr. Burns
appeared at the gangway carried on a stretcher, the doctor himself
walked by its side. The programme had been altered in so far that this
transportation had been left to the last moment, on the very morning of
our departure.

It was barely an hour after sunrise. The doctor waved his big arm to me
from the shore and walked back at once to his trap, which had followed
him empty to the river-side. Mr. Burns, carried across the quarter-deck,
had the appearance of being absolutely lifeless. Ransome went down to
settle him in his cabin. I had to remain on deck to look after the ship,
for the tug had got hold of our towrope already.

The splash of our shore-fasts falling in the water produced a complete
change of feeling in me. It was like the imperfect relief of awakening
from a nightmare. But when the ship's head swung down the river away
from that town, Oriental and squalid, I missed the expected elation of
that striven-for moment. What there was, undoubtedly, was a relaxation
of tension which translated itself into a sense of weariness after an
inglorious fight.

About midday we anchored a mile outside the bar. The afternoon was busy
for all hands. Watching the work from the poop, where I remained all the
time, I detected in it some of the languor of the six weeks spent in the
steaming heat of the river. The first breeze would blow that away. Now
the calm was complete. I judged that the second officer--a callow youth
with an unpromising face--was not, to put it mildly, of that invaluable
stuff from which a commander's right hand is made. But I was glad to
catch along the main deck a few smiles on those seamen's faces at which
I had hardly had time to have a good look as yet. Having thrown off the
mortal coil of shore affairs, I felt myself familiar with them and yet a
little strange, like a long-lost wanderer among his kin.

Ransome flitted continually to and fro between the galley and the cabin.
It was a pleasure to look at him. The man positively had grace. He
alone of all the crew had not had a day's illness in port. But with
the knowledge of that uneasy heart within his breast I could detect the
restraint he put on the natural sailor-like agility of his movements. It
was as though he had something very fragile or very explosive to carry
about his person and was all the time aware of it.

I had occasion to address him once or twice. He answered me in his
pleasant, quiet voice and with a faint, slightly wistful smile. Mr.
Burns appeared to be resting. He seemed fairly comfortable.

After sunset I came out on deck again to meet only a still void. The
thin, featureless crust of the coast could not be distinguished. The
darkness had risen around the ship like a mysterious emanation from the
dumb and lonely waters. I leaned on the rail and turned my ear to the
shadows of the night. Not a sound. My command might have been a planet
flying vertiginously on its appointed path in a space of infinite
silence. I clung to the rail as if my sense of balance were leaving me
for good. How absurd. I failed nervously.

"On deck there!"

The immediate answer, "Yes, sir," broke the spell. The anchor-watch
man ran up the poop ladder smartly. I told him to report at once the
slightest sign of a breeze coming.

Going below I looked in on Mr. Burns. In fact, I could not avoid seeing
him, for his door stood open. The man was so wasted that, in this white
cabin, under a white sheet, and with his diminished head sunk in the
white pillow, his red moustaches captured their eyes exclusively, like
something artificial--a pair of moustaches from a shop exhibited there
in the harsh light of the bulkhead-lamp without a shade.

While I stared with a sort of wonder he asserted himself by opening his
eyes and even moving them in my direction. A minute stir.

"Dead calm, Mr. Burns," I said resignedly.

In an unexpectedly distinct voice Mr. Burns began a rambling speech. Its
tone was very strange, not as if affected by his illness, but as if of
a different nature. It sounded unearthly. As to the matter, I seemed
to make out that it was the fault of the "old man"--the late
captain--ambushed down there under the sea with some evil intention. It
was a weird story.

I listened to the end; then stepping into the cabin I laid my hand on
the mate's forehead. It was cool. He was light-headed only from extreme
weakness. Suddenly he seemed to become aware of me, and in his own
voice--of course, very feeble--he asked regretfully:

"Is there no chance at all to get under way, sir?"

"What's the good of letting go our hold of the ground only to drift, Mr.
Burns?" I answered.

He sighed and I left him to his immobility. His hold on life was
as slender as his hold on sanity. I was oppressed by my lonely
responsibilities. I went into my cabin to seek relief in a few hours'
sleep, but almost before I closed my eyes the man on deck came down
reporting a light breeze. Enough to get under way with, he said.

And it was no more than just enough. I ordered the windlass manned, the
sails loosed, and the topsails set. But by the time I had cast the ship
I could hardly feel any breath of wind. Nevertheless, I trimmed the
yards and put everything on her. I was not going to give up the attempt.





PART TWO


IV

With her anchor at the bow and clothed in canvas to her very trucks, my
command seemed to stand as motionless as a model ship set on the gleams
and shadows of polished marble. It was impossible to distinguish land
from water in the enigmatical tranquillity of the immense forces of the
world. A sudden impatience possessed me.

"Won't she answer the helm at all?" I said irritably to the man whose
strong brown hands grasping the spokes of the wheel stood out lighted on
the darkness; like a symbol of mankind's claim to the direction of its
own fate.

He answered me.

"Yes, sir. She's coming-to slowly."

"Let her head come up to south."

"Aye, aye, sir."

I paced the poop. There was not a sound but that of my footsteps, till
the man spoke again.

"She is at south now, sir."

I felt a slight tightness of the chest before I gave out the first
course of my first command to the silent night, heavy with dew and
sparkling with stars. There was a finality in the act committing me to
the endless vigilance of my lonely task.

"Steady her head at that," I said at last. "The course is south."

"South, sir," echoed the man.

I sent below the second mate and his watch and remained in charge,
walking the deck through the chill, somnolent hours that precede the
dawn.

Slight puffs came and went, and whenever they were strong enough to wake
up the black water the murmur alongside ran through my very heart in
a delicate crescendo of delight and died away swiftly. I was bitterly
tired. The very stars seemed weary of waiting for daybreak. It came at
last with a mother-of-pearl sheen at the zenith, such as I had never
seen before in the tropics, unglowing, almost gray, with a strange
reminder of high latitudes.

The voice of the look-out man hailed from forward:

"Land on the port bow, sir."

"All right."

Leaning on the rail I never even raised my eyes.

The motion of the ship was imperceptible. Presently Ransome brought me
the cup of morning coffee. After I had drunk it I looked ahead, and
in the still streak of very bright pale orange light I saw the land
profiled flatly as if cut out of black paper and seeming to float on
the water as light as cork. But the rising sun turned it into mere dark
vapour, a doubtful, massive shadow trembling in the hot glare.

The watch finished washing decks. I went below and stopped at Mr. Burns'
door (he could not bear to have it shut), but hesitated to speak to him
till he moved his eyes. I gave him the news.

"Sighted Cape Liant at daylight. About fifteen miles."

He moved his lips then, but I heard no sound till I put my ear down, and
caught the peevish comment: "This is crawling. . . . No luck."

"Better luck than standing still, anyhow," I pointed out resignedly, and
left him to whatever thoughts or fancies haunted his awful immobility.

Later that morning, when relieved by my second officer, I threw myself
on my couch and for some three hours or so I really found oblivion. It
was so perfect that on waking up I wondered where I was. Then came the
immense relief of the thought: on board my ship! At sea! At sea!

Through the port-holes I beheld an unruffled, sun-smitten horizon. The
horizon of a windless day. But its spaciousness alone was enough to give
me a sense of a fortunate escape, a momentary exultation of freedom.

I stepped out into the saloon with my heart lighter than it had been for
days. Ransome was at the sideboard preparing to lay the table for the
first sea dinner of the passage. He turned his head, and something in
his eyes checked my modest elation.

Instinctively I asked: "What is it now?" not expecting in the least the
answer I got. It was given with that sort of contained serenity which
was characteristic of the man.

"I am afraid we haven't left all sickness behind us, sir."

"We haven't! What's the matter?"

He told me then that two of our men had been taken bad with fever in
the night. One of them was burning and the other was shivering, but he
thought that it was pretty much the same thing. I thought so, too. I
felt shocked by the news. "One burning, the other shivering, you say?
No. We haven't left the sickness behind. Do they look very ill?"

"Middling bad, sir." Ransome's eyes gazed steadily into mine. We
exchanged smiles. Ransome's a little wistful, as usual, mine no doubt
grim enough, to correspond with my secret exasperation.

I asked:

"Was there any wind at all this morning?"

"Can hardly say that, sir. We've moved all the time though. The land
ahead seems a little nearer."

That was it. A little nearer. Whereas if we had only had a little more
wind, only a very little more, we might, we should, have been abreast
of Liant by this time and increasing our distance from that contaminated
shore. And it was not only the distance. It seemed to me that a stronger
breeze would have blown away the contamination which clung to the ship.
It obviously did cling to the ship. Two men. One burning, one shivering.
I felt a distinct reluctance to go and look at them. What was the good?
Poison is poison. Tropical fever is tropical fever. But that it
should have stretched its claw after us over the sea seemed to me an
extraordinary and unfair license. I could hardly believe that it could
be anything worse than the last desperate pluck of the evil from which
we were escaping into the clean breath of the sea. If only that breath
had been a little stronger. However, there was the quinine against the
fever. I went into the spare cabin where the medicine chest was kept to
prepare two doses. I opened it full of faith as a man opens a miraculous
shrine. The upper part was inhabited by a collection of bottles, all
square-shouldered and as like each other as peas. Under that orderly
array there were two drawers, stuffed as full of things as one could
imagine--paper packages, bandages, cardboard boxes officially labelled.
The lower of the two, in one of its compartments, contained our
provision of quinine.

There were five bottles, all round and all of a size. One was about
a third full. The other four remained still wrapped up in paper and
sealed. But I did not expect to see an envelope lying on top of them. A
square envelope, belonging, in fact, to the ship's stationery.

It lay so that I could see it was not closed down, and on picking it
up and turning it over I perceived that it was addressed to myself. It
contained a half-sheet of notepaper, which I unfolded with a queer sense
of dealing with the uncanny, but without any excitement as people meet
and do extraordinary things in a dream.

"My dear Captain," it began, but I ran to the signature. The writer was
the doctor. The date was that of the day on which, returning from my
visit to Mr. Burns in the hospital, I had found the excellent doctor
waiting for me in the cabin; and when he told me that he had been
putting in time inspecting the medicine chest for me. How bizarre! While
expecting me to come in at any moment he had been amusing himself by
writing me a letter, and then as I came in had hastened to stuff it into
the medicine-chest drawer. A rather incredible proceeding. I turned to
the text in wonder.

In a large, hurried, but legible hand the good, sympathetic man for some
reason, either of kindness or more likely impelled by the irresistible
desire to express his opinion, with which he didn't want to damp my
hopes before, was warning me not to put my trust in the beneficial
effects of a change from land to sea. "I didn't want to add to your
worries by discouraging your hopes," he wrote. "I am afraid that,
medically speaking, the end of your troubles is not yet." In short,
he expected me to have to fight a probable return of tropical illness.
Fortunately I had a good provision of quinine. I should put my trust in
that, and administer it steadily, when the ship's health would certainly
improve.

I crumpled up the letter and rammed it into my pocket. Ransome carried
off two big doses to the men forward. As to myself, I did not go on deck
as yet. I went instead to the door of Mr. Burns' room, and gave him that
news, too.

It was impossible to say the effect it had on him. At first I thought
that he was speechless. His head lay sunk in the pillow. He moved his
lips enough, however, to assure me that he was getting much stronger; a
statement shockingly untrue on the face of it.

That afternoon I took my watch as a matter of course. A great
over-heated stillness enveloped the ship and seemed to hold her
motionless in a flaming ambience composed in two shades of blue. Faint,
hot puffs eddied nervelessly from her sails. And yet she moved. She must
have. For, as the sun was setting, we had drawn abreast of Cape Liant
and dropped it behind us: an ominous retreating shadow in the last
gleams of twilight.

In the evening, under the crude glare of his lamp, Mr. Burns seemed to
have come more to the surface of his bedding. It was as if a
depressing hand had been lifted off him. He answered my few words by a
comparatively long, connected speech. He asserted himself strongly.
If he escaped being smothered by this stagnant heat, he said, he was
confident that in a very few days he would be able to come up on deck
and help me.

While he was speaking I trembled lest this effort of energy should leave
him lifeless before my eyes. But I cannot deny that there was something
comforting in his willingness. I made a suitable reply, but pointed out
to him that the only thing that could really help us was wind--a fair
wind.

He rolled his head impatiently on the pillow. And it was not comforting
in the least to hear him begin to mutter crazily about the late captain,
that old man buried in latitude 8 d 20', right in our way--ambushed at
the entrance of the Gulf.

"Are you still thinking of your late captain, Mr. Burns?" I said. "I
imagine the dead feel no animosity against the living. They care nothing
for them."

"You don't know that one," he breathed out feebly.

"No. I didn't know him, and he didn't know me. And so he can't have any
grievance against me, anyway."

"Yes. But there's all the rest of us on board," he insisted.

I felt the inexpugnable strength of common sense being insidiously
menaced by this gruesome, by this insane, delusion. And I said:

"You mustn't talk so much. You will tire yourself."

"And there is the ship herself," he persisted in a whisper.

"Now, not a word more," I said, stepping in and laying my hand on his
cool forehead. It proved to me that this atrocious absurdity was rooted
in the man himself and not in the disease, which, apparently, had
emptied him of every power, mental and physical, except that one fixed
idea.

I avoided giving Mr. Burns any opening for conversation for the next few
days. I merely used to throw him a hasty, cheery word when passing his
door. I believe that if he had had the strength he would have called out
after me more than once. But he hadn't the strength. Ransome, however,
observed to me one afternoon that the mate "seemed to be picking up
wonderfully."

"Did he talk any nonsense to you of late?" I asked casually.

"No, sir." Ransome was startled by the direct question; but, after a
pause, he added equably: "He told me this morning, sir, that he was
sorry he had to bury our late captain right in the ship's way, as one
may say, out of the Gulf."

"Isn't this nonsense enough for you?" I asked, looking confidently at
the intelligent, quiet face on which the secret uneasiness in the man's
breast had thrown a transparent veil of care.

Ransome didn't know. He had not given a thought to the matter. And with
a faint smile he flitted away from me on his never-ending duties, with
his usual guarded activity.

Two more days passed. We had advanced a little way--a very little
way--into the larger space of the Gulf of Siam. Seizing eagerly upon
the elation of the first command thrown into my lap, by the agency of
Captain Giles, I had yet an uneasy feeling that such luck as this has
got perhaps to be paid for in some way. I had held, professionally,
a review of my chances. I was competent enough for that. At least, I
thought so. I had a general sense of my preparedness which only a man
pursuing a calling he loves can know. That feeling seemed to me the most
natural thing in the world. As natural as breathing. I imagined I could
not have lived without it.

I don't know what I expected. Perhaps nothing else than that
special intensity of existence which is the quintessence of youthful
aspirations. Whatever I expected I did not expect to be beset by
hurricanes. I knew better than that. In the Gulf of Siam there are no
hurricanes. But neither did I expect to find myself bound hand and foot
to the hopeless extent which was revealed to me as the days went on.

Not that the evil spell held us always motionless. Mysterious currents
drifted us here and there, with a stealthy power made manifest only by
the changing vistas of the islands fringing the east shore of the Gulf.
And there were winds, too, fitful and deceitful. They raised hopes only
to dash them into the bitterest disappointment, promises of advance
ending in lost ground, expiring in sighs, dying into dumb stillness in
which the currents had it all their own way--their own inimical way.

The island of Koh-ring, a great, black, upheaved ridge amongst a lot of
tiny islets, lying upon the glassy water like a triton amongst minnows,
seemed to be the centre of the fatal circle. It seemed impossible to get
away from it. Day after day it remained in sight. More than once, in
a favourable breeze, I would take its bearings in the fast-ebbing
twilight, thinking that it was for the last time. Vain hope. A night of
fitful airs would undo the gains of temporary favour, and the rising
sun would throw out the black relief of Koh-ring looking more barren,
inhospitable, and grim than ever.

"It's like being bewitched, upon my word," I said once to Mr. Burns,
from my usual position in the doorway.

He was sitting up in his bed-place. He was progressing toward the world
of living men; if he could hardly have been said to have rejoined it
yet. He nodded to me his frail and bony head in a wisely mysterious
assent.

"Oh, yes, I know what you mean," I said. "But you cannot expect me
to believe that a dead man has the power to put out of joint the
meteorology of this part of the world. Though indeed it seems to have
gone utterly wrong. The land and sea breezes have got broken up into
small pieces. We cannot depend upon them for five minutes together."

"It won't be very long now before I can come up on deck," muttered Mr.
Burns, "and then we shall see."

Whether he meant this for a promise to grapple with supernatural evil I
couldn't tell. At any rate, it wasn't the kind of assistance I needed.
On the other hand, I had been living on deck practically night and day
so as to take advantage of every chance to get my ship a little more to
the southward. The mate, I could see, was extremely weak yet, and not
quite rid of his delusion, which to me appeared but a symptom of his
disease. At all events, the hopefulness of an invalid was not to be
discouraged. I said:

"You will be most welcome there, I am sure, Mr. Burns. If you go on
improving at this rate you'll be presently one of the healthiest men in
the ship."

This pleased him, but his extreme emaciation converted his
self-satisfied smile into a ghastly exhibition of long teeth under the
red moustache.

"Aren't the fellows improving, sir?" he asked soberly, with an extremely
sensible expression of anxiety on his face.

I answered him only with a vague gesture and went away from the door.
The fact was that disease played with us capriciously very much as the
winds did. It would go from one man to another with a lighter or heavier
touch, which always left its mark behind, staggering some, knocking
others over for a time, leaving this one, returning to another, so that
all of them had now an invalidish aspect and a hunted, apprehensive look
in their eyes; while Ransome and I, the only two completely untouched,
went amongst them assiduously distributing quinine. It was a double
fight. The adverse weather held us in front and the disease pressed on
our rear. I must say that the men were very good. The constant toil of
trimming yards they faced willingly. But all spring was out of their
limbs, and as I looked at them from the poop I could not keep from my
mind the dreadful impression that they were moving in poisoned air.

Down below, in his cabin, Mr. Burns had advanced so far as not only to
be able to sit up, but even to draw up his legs. Clasping them with bony
arms, like an animated skeleton, he emitted deep, impatient sighs.

"The great thing to do, sir," he would tell me on every occasion, when I
gave him the chance, "the great thing is to get the ship past 8 d 20' of
latitude. Once she's past that we're all right."

At first I used only to smile at him, though, God knows, I had not much
heart left for smiles. But at last I lost my patience.

"Oh, yes. The latitude 8 d 20'. That's where you buried your late
captain, isn't it?" Then with severity: "Don't you think, Mr. Burns,
it's about time you dropped all that nonsense?"

He rolled at me his deep-sunken eyes in a glance of invincible
obstinacy. But for the rest he only muttered, just loud enough for me
to hear, something about "Not surprised . . . find . . . play us some
beastly trick yet. . . ."

Such passages as this were not exactly wholesome for my resolution. The
stress of adversity was beginning to tell on me. At the same time, I
felt a contempt for that obscure weakness of my soul. I said to myself
disdainfully that it should take much more than that to affect in the
smallest degree my fortitude.

I didn't know then how soon and from what unexpected direction it would
be attacked.

It was the very next day. The sun had risen clear of the southern
shoulder of Koh-ring, which still hung, like an evil attendant, on our
port quarter. It was intensely hateful to my sight. During the night
we had been heading all round the compass, trimming the yards again and
again, to what I fear must have been for the most part imaginary puffs
of air. Then just about sunrise we got for an hour an inexplicable,
steady breeze, right in our teeth. There was no sense in it. It fitted
neither with the season of the year nor with the secular experience
of seamen as recorded in books, nor with the aspect of the sky. Only
purposeful malevolence could account for it. It sent us travelling at
a great pace away from our proper course; and if we had been out on
pleasure sailing bent it would have been a delightful breeze, with the
awakened sparkle of the sea, with the sense of motion and a feeling of
unwonted freshness. Then, all at once, as if disdaining to carry farther
the sorry jest, it dropped and died out completely in less than five
minutes. The ship's head swung where it listed; the stilled sea took on
the polish of a steel plate in the calm.

I went below, not because I meant to take some rest, but simply because
I couldn't bear to look at it just then. The indefatigable Ransome was
busy in the saloon. It had become a regular practice with him to give
me an informal health report in the morning. He turned away from the
sideboard with his usual pleasant, quiet gaze. No shadow rested on his
intelligent forehead.

"There are a good many of them middling bad this morning, sir," he said
in a calm tone.

"What? All knocked out?"

"Only two actually in their bunks, sir, but--"

"It's the last night that has done for them. We have had to pull and
haul all the blessed time."

"I heard, sir. I had a mind to come out and help only, you know. . . ."

"Certainly not. You mustn't. . . . The fellows lie at night about the
decks, too. It isn't good for them."

Ransome assented. But men couldn't be looked after like children.
Moreover, one could hardly blame them for trying for such coolness and
such air as there was to be found on deck. He himself, of course, knew
better.

He was, indeed, a reasonable man. Yet it would have been hard to say
that the others were not. The last few days had been for us like the
ordeal of the fiery furnace. One really couldn't quarrel with their
common, imprudent humanity making the best of the moments of relief,
when the night brought in the illusion of coolness and the starlight
twinkled through the heavy, dew-laden air. Moreover, most of them were
so weakened that hardly anything could be done without everybody that
could totter mustering on the braces. No, it was no use remonstrating
with them. But I fully believed that quinine was of very great use
indeed.

I believed in it. I pinned my faith to it. It would save the men, the
ship, break the spell by its medicinal virtue, make time of no account,
the weather but a passing worry and, like a magic powder working against
mysterious malefices, secure the first passage of my first command
against the evil powers of calms and pestilence. I looked upon it as
more precious than gold, and unlike gold, of which there ever hardly
seems to be enough anywhere, the ship had a sufficient store of it. I
went in to get it with the purpose of weighing out doses. I stretched my
hand with the feeling of a man reaching for an unfailing panacea, took
up a fresh bottle and unrolled the wrapper, noticing as I did so that
the ends, both top and bottom, had come unsealed. . . .

But why record all the swift steps of the appalling discovery? You have
guessed the truth already. There was the wrapper, the bottle, and the
white powder inside, some sort of powder! But it wasn't quinine. One
look at it was quite enough. I remember that at the very moment of
picking up the bottle, before I even dealt with the wrapper, the weight
of the object I had in my hand gave me an instant premonition. Quinine
is as light as feathers; and my nerves must have been exasperated into
an extraordinary sensibility. I let the bottle smash itself on the
floor. The stuff, whatever it was, felt gritty under the sole of my
shoe. I snatched up the next bottle and then the next. The weight alone
told the tale. One after another they fell, breaking at my feet, not
because I threw them down in my dismay, but slipping through my fingers
as if this disclosure were too much for my strength.

It is a fact that the very greatness of a mental shock helps one to bear
up against it by producing a sort of temporary insensibility. I came out
of the state-room stunned, as if something heavy had dropped on my head.
From the other side of the saloon, across the table, Ransome, with a
duster in his hand, stared open-mouthed. I don't think that I looked
wild. It is quite possible that I appeared to be in a hurry because
I was instinctively hastening up on deck. An example this of training
become instinct. The difficulties, the dangers, the problems of a ship
at sea must be met on deck.

To this fact, as it were of nature, I responded instinctively; which
may be taken as a proof that for a moment I must have been robbed of my
reason.

I was certainly off my balance, a prey to impulse, for at the bottom of
the stairs I turned and flung myself at the doorway of Mr. Burns' cabin.
The wildness of his aspect checked my mental disorder. He was sitting up
in his bunk, his body looking immensely long, his head drooping a little
sideways, with affected complacency. He flourished, in his trembling
hand, on the end of a forearm no thicker than a walking-stick, a shining
pair of scissors which he tried before my very eyes to jab at his
throat.

I was to a certain extent horrified; but it was rather a secondary sort
of effect, not really strong enough to make me yell at him in some such
manner as: "Stop!" . . . "Heavens!" . . . "What are you doing?"

In reality he was simply overtaxing his returning strength in a shaky
attempt to clip off the thick growth of his red beard. A large towel was
spread over his lap, and a shower of stiff hairs, like bits of copper
wire, was descending on it at every snip of the scissors.

He turned to me his face grotesque beyond the fantasies of mad dreams,
one cheek all bushy as if with a swollen flame, the other denuded and
sunken, with the untouched long moustache on that side asserting itself,
lonely and fierce. And while he stared thunderstruck, with the gaping
scissors on his fingers, I shouted my discovery at him fiendishly, in
six words, without comment.




V

I heard the clatter of the scissors escaping from his hand, noted the
perilous heave of his whole person over the edge of the bunk after them,
and then, returning to my first purpose, pursued my course on the deck.
The sparkle of the sea filled my eyes. It was gorgeous and barren,
monotonous and without hope under the empty curve of the sky. The sails
hung motionless and slack, the very folds of their sagging surfaces
moved no more than carved granite. The impetuosity of my advent made the
man at the helm start slightly. A block aloft squeaked incomprehensibly,
for what on earth could have made it do so? It was a whistling note like
a bird's. For a long, long time I faced an empty world, steeped in an
infinity of silence, through which the sunshine poured and flowed for
some mysterious purpose. Then I heard Ransome's voice at my elbow.

"I have put Mr. Burns back to bed, sir."

"You have."

"Well, sir, he got out, all of a sudden, but when he let go the edge of
his bunk he fell down. He isn't light-headed, though, it seems to me."

"No," I said dully, without looking at Ransome. He waited for a moment,
then cautiously, as if not to give offence: "I don't think we need lose
much of that stuff, sir," he said, "I can sweep it up, every bit of
it almost, and then we could sift the glass out. I will go about it at
once. It will not make the breakfast late, not ten minutes."

"Oh, yes," I said bitterly. "Let the breakfast wait, sweep up every bit
of it, and then throw the damned lot overboard!"

The profound silence returned, and when I looked over my shoulder,
Ransome--the intelligent, serene Ransome--had vanished from my side.
The intense loneliness of the sea acted like poison on my brain. When I
turned my eyes to the ship, I had a morbid vision of her as a floating
grave. Who hasn't heard of ships found floating, haphazard, with their
crews all dead? I looked at the seaman at the helm, I had an impulse to
speak to him, and, indeed, his face took on an expectant cast as if he
had guessed my intention. But in the end I went below, thinking I
would be alone with the greatness of my trouble for a little while.
But through his open door Mr. Burns saw me come down, and addressed me
grumpily: "Well, sir?"

I went in. "It isn't well at all," I said.

Mr. Burns, reestablished in his bed-place, was concealing his hirsute
cheek in the palm of his hand.

"That confounded fellow has taken away the scissors from me," were the
next words he said.

The tension I was suffering from was so great that it was perhaps just
as well that Mr. Burns had started on his grievance. He seemed very sore
about it and grumbled, "Does he think I am mad, or what?"

"I don't think so, Mr. Burns," I said. I looked upon him at that moment
as a model of self-possession. I even conceived on that account a sort of
admiration for that man, who had (apart from the intense materiality of
what was left of his beard) come as near to being a disembodied spirit
as any man can do and live. I noticed the preternatural sharpness of the
ridge of his nose, the deep cavities of his temples, and I envied him.
He was so reduced that he would probably die very soon. Enviable man!
So near extinction--while I had to bear within me a tumult of suffering
vitality, doubt, confusion, self-reproach, and an indefinite reluctance
to meet the horrid logic of the situation. I could not help muttering:
"I feel as if I were going mad myself."

Mr. Burns glared spectrally, but otherwise was wonderfully composed.

"I always thought he would play us some deadly trick," he said, with a
peculiar emphasis on the _he_.

It gave me a mental shock, but I had neither the mind, nor the heart,
nor the spirit to argue with him. My form of sickness was indifference.
The creeping paralysis of a hopeless outlook. So I only gazed at him.
Mr. Burns broke into further speech.

"Eh! What! No! You won't believe it? Well, how do you account for this?
How do you think it could have happened?"

"Happened?" I repeated dully. "Why, yes, how in the name of the infernal
powers did this thing happen?"

Indeed, on thinking it out, it seemed incomprehensible that it should
just be like this: the bottles emptied, refilled, rewrapped, and
replaced. A sort of plot, a sinister attempt to deceive, a thing
resembling sly vengeance, but for what? Or else a fiendish joke. But Mr.
Burns was in possession of a theory. It was simple, and he uttered it
solemnly in a hollow voice.

"I suppose they have given him about fifteen pounds in Haiphong for that
little lot."

"Mr. Burns!" I cried.

He nodded grotesquely over his raised legs, like two broomsticks in the
pyjamas, with enormous bare feet at the end.

"Why not? The stuff is pretty expensive in this part of the world, and
they were very short of it in Tonkin. And what did he care? You have
not known him. I have, and I have defied him. He feared neither God, nor
devil, nor man, nor wind, nor sea, nor his own conscience. And I believe
he hated everybody and everything. But I think he was afraid to die. I
believe I am the only man who ever stood up to him. I faced him in that
cabin where you live now, when he was sick, and I cowed him then. He
thought I was going to twist his neck for him. If he had had his way we
would have been beating up against the Nord-East monsoon, as long as he
lived and afterward, too, for ages and ages. Acting the Flying Dutchman
in the China Sea! Ha! Ha!"

"But why should he replace the bottles like this?" . . . I began.

"Why shouldn't he? Why should he want to throw the bottles away? They
fit the drawer. They belong to the medicine chest."

"And they were wrapped up," I cried.

"Well, the wrappers were there. Did it from habit, I suppose, and as
to refilling, there is always a lot of stuff they send in paper parcels
that burst after a time. And then, who can tell? I suppose you didn't
taste it, sir? But, of course, you are sure. . . ."

"No," I said. "I didn't taste it. It is all overboard now."

Behind me, a soft, cultivated voice said: "I have tasted it. It seemed a
mixture of all sorts, sweetish, saltish, very horrible."

Ransome, stepping out of the pantry, had been listening for some time,
as it was very excusable in him to do.

"A dirty trick," said Mr. Burns. "I always said he would."

The magnitude of my indignation was unbounded. And the kind, sympathetic
doctor, too. The only sympathetic man I ever knew . . . instead of
writing that warning letter, the very refinement of sympathy, why didn't
the man make a proper inspection? But, as a matter of fact, it was
hardly fair to blame the doctor. The fittings were in order and the
medicine chest is an officially arranged affair. There was nothing
really to arouse the slightest suspicion. The person I could never
forgive was myself. Nothing should ever be taken for granted. The seed
of everlasting remorse was sown in my breast.

"I feel it's all my fault," I exclaimed, "mine and nobody else's. That's
how I feel. I shall never forgive myself."

"That's very foolish, sir," said Mr. Burns fiercely.

And after this effort he fell back exhausted on his bed. He closed his
eyes, he panted; this affair, this abominable surprise had shaken him
up, too. As I turned away I perceived Ransome looking at me blankly. He
appreciated what it meant, but managed to produce his pleasant, wistful
smile. Then he stepped back into his pantry, and I rushed up on deck
again to see whether there was any wind, any breath under the sky, any
stir of the air, any sign of hope. The deadly stillness met me again.
Nothing was changed except that there was a different man at the wheel.
He looked ill. His whole figure drooped, and he seemed rather to cling
to the spokes than hold them with a controlling grip. I said to him:

"You are not fit to be here."

"I can manage, sir," he said feebly.

As a matter of fact, there was nothing for him to do. The ship had no
steerage way. She lay with her head to the westward, the everlasting
Koh-ring visible over the stern, with a few small islets, black spots
in the great blaze, swimming before my troubled eyes. And but for those
bits of land there was no speck on the sky, no speck on the water,
no shape of vapour, no wisp of smoke, no sail, no boat, no stir of
humanity, no sign of life, nothing!

The first question was, what to do? What could one do? The first thing
to do obviously was to tell the men. I did it that very day. I wasn't
going to let the knowledge simply get about. I would face them. They
were assembled on the quarterdeck for the purpose. Just before I stepped
out to speak to them I discovered that life could hold terrible moments.
No confessed criminal had ever been so oppressed by his sense of
guilt. This is why, perhaps, my face was set hard and my voice curt and
unemotional while I made my declaration that I could do nothing more
for the sick in the way of drugs. As to such care as could be given them
they knew they had had it.

I would have held them justified in tearing me limb from limb. The
silence which followed upon my words was almost harder to bear than the
angriest uproar. I was crushed by the infinite depth of its reproach.
But, as a matter of fact, I was mistaken. In a voice which I had
great difficulty in keeping firm, I went on: "I suppose, men, you have
understood what I said, and you know what it means."

A voice or two were heard: "Yes, sir. . . . We understand."

They had kept silent simply because they thought that they were not
called to say anything; and when I told them that I intended to run into
Singapore and that the best chance for the ship and the men was in the
efforts all of us, sick and well, must make to get her along out of
this, I received the encouragement of a low assenting murmur and of
a louder voice exclaiming: "Surely there is a way out of this blamed
hole."

*****

Here is an extract from the notes I wrote at the time.

"We have lost Koh-ring at last. For many days now I don't think I have
been two hours below altogether. I remain on deck, of course, night and
day, and the nights and the days wheel over us in succession, whether
long or short, who can say? All sense of time is lost in the monotony of
expectation, of hope, and of desire--which is only one: Get the ship to
the southward! Get the ship to the southward! The effect is curiously
mechanical; the sun climbs and descends, the night swings over our
heads as if somebody below the horizon were turning a crank. It is
the prettiest, the most aimless! . . . and all through that miserable
performance I go on, tramping, tramping the deck. How many miles have
I walked on the poop of that ship! A stubborn pilgrimage of sheer
restlessness, diversified by short excursions below to look upon Mr.
Burns. I don't know whether it is an illusion, but he seems to become
more substantial from day to day. He doesn't say much, for, indeed, the
situation doesn't lend itself to idle remarks. I notice this even with
the men as I watch them moving or sitting about the decks. They don't
talk to each other. It strikes me that if there exists an invisible
ear catching the whispers of the earth, it will find this ship the most
silent spot on it. . . .

"No, Mr. Burns has not much to say to me. He sits in his bunk with
his beard gone, his moustaches flaming, and with an air of silent
determination on his chalky physiognomy. Ransome tells me he devours all
the food that is given him to the last scrap, but that, apparently, he
sleeps very little. Even at night, when I go below to fill my pipe,
I notice that, though dozing flat on his back, he still looks very
determined. From the side glance he gives me when awake it seems as
though he were annoyed at being interrupted in some arduous mental
operation; and as I emerge on deck the ordered arrangement of the stars
meets my eye, unclouded, infinitely wearisome. There they are: stars,
sun, sea, light, darkness, space, great waters; the formidable Work of
the Seven Days, into which mankind seems to have blundered unbidden.
Or else decoyed. Even as I have been decoyed into this awful, this
death-haunted command. . . ."

*****

The only spot of light in the ship at night was that of the
compass-lamps, lighting up the faces of the succeeding helmsmen; for the
rest we were lost in the darkness, I walking the poop and the men lying
about the decks. They were all so reduced by sickness that no watches
could be kept. Those who were able to walk remained all the time on
duty, lying about in the shadows of the main deck, till my voice raised
for an order would bring them to their enfeebled feet, a tottering
little group, moving patiently about the ship, with hardly a murmur, a
whisper amongst them all. And every time I had to raise my voice it was
with a pang of remorse and pity.

Then about four o'clock in the morning a light would gleam forward in
the galley. The unfailing Ransome with the uneasy heart, immune,
serene, and active, was getting ready for the early coffee for the men.
Presently he would bring me a cup up on the poop, and it was then that I
allowed myself to drop into my deck chair for a couple of hours of real
sleep. No doubt I must have been snatching short dozes when leaning
against the rail for a moment in sheer exhaustion; but, honestly, I was
not aware of them, except in the painful form of convulsive starts that
seemed to come on me even while I walked. From about five, however,
until after seven I would sleep openly under the fading stars.

I would say to the helmsman: "Call me at need," and drop into that chair
and close my eyes, feeling that there was no more sleep for me on earth.
And then I would know nothing till, some time between seven and eight,
I would feel a touch on my shoulder and look up at Ransome's face, with
its faint, wistful smile and friendly, gray eyes, as though he were
tenderly amused at my slumbers. Occasionally the second mate would come
up and relieve me at early coffee time. But it didn't really matter.
Generally it was a dead calm, or else faint airs so changing and
fugitive that it really wasn't worth while to touch a brace for them.
If the air steadied at all the seaman at the helm could be trusted for
a warning shout: "Ship's all aback, sir!" which like a trumpet-call would
make me spring a foot above the deck. Those were the words which it
seemed to me would have made me spring up from eternal sleep. But this
was not often. I have never met since such breathless sunrises. And if
the second mate happened to be there (he had generally one day in three
free of fever) I would find him sitting on the skylight half senseless,
as it were, and with an idiotic gaze fastened on some object near by--a
rope, a cleat, a belaying pin, a ringbolt.

That young man was rather troublesome. He remained cubbish in his
sufferings. He seemed to have become completely imbecile; and when the
return of fever drove him to his cabin below, the next thing would be
that we would miss him from there. The first time it happened Ransome
and I were very much alarmed. We started a quiet search and ultimately
Ransome discovered him curled up in the sail-locker, which opened
into the lobby by a sliding door. When remonstrated with, he muttered
sulkily, "It's cool in there." That wasn't true. It was only dark there.

The fundamental defects of his face were not improved by its uniform
livid hue. The disease disclosed its low type in a startling way. It was
not so with many of the men. The wastage of ill-health seemed to idealise
the general character of the features, bringing out the unsuspected
nobility of some, the strength of others, and in one case revealing an
essentially comic aspect. He was a short, gingery, active man with
a nose and chin of the Punch type, and whom his shipmates called
"Frenchy." I don't know why. He may have been a Frenchman, but I have
never heard him utter a single word in French.

To see him coming aft to the wheel comforted one. The blue dungaree
trousers turned up the calf, one leg a little higher than the other, the
clean check shirt, the white canvas cap, evidently made by himself, made
up a whole of peculiar smartness, and the persistent jauntiness of his
gait, even, poor fellow, when he couldn't help tottering, told of his
invincible spirit. There was also a man called Gambril. He was the only
grizzled person in the ship. His face was of an austere type. But if
I remember all their faces, wasting tragically before my eyes, most of
their names have vanished from my memory.

The words that passed between us were few and puerile in regard of the
situation. I had to force myself to look them in the face. I expected to
meet reproachful glances. There were none. The expression of suffering
in their eyes was indeed hard enough to bear. But that they couldn't
help. For the rest, I ask myself whether it was the temper of their
souls or the sympathy of their imagination that made them so wonderful,
so worthy of my undying regard.

For myself, neither my soul was highly tempered, nor my imagination
properly under control. There were moments when I felt, not only that I
would go mad, but that I had gone mad already; so that I dared not open
my lips for fear of betraying myself by some insane shriek. Luckily I
had only orders to give, and an order has a steadying influence upon him
who has to give it. Moreover, the seaman, the officer of the watch, in
me was sufficiently sane. I was like a mad carpenter making a box. Were
he ever so convinced that he was King of Jerusalem, the box he would
make would be a sane box. What I feared was a shrill note escaping me
involuntarily and upsetting my balance. Luckily, again, there was no
necessity to raise one's voice. The brooding stillness of the world
seemed sensitive to the slightest sound, like a whispering gallery. The
conversational tone would almost carry a word from one end of the ship
to the other. The terrible thing was that the only voice that I ever
heard was my own. At night especially it reverberated very lonely
amongst the planes of the unstirring sails.

Mr. Burns, still keeping to his bed with that air of secret
determination, was moved to grumble at many things. Our interviews
were short five-minute affairs, but fairly frequent. I was everlastingly
diving down below to get a light, though I did not consume much tobacco
at that time. The pipe was always going out; for in truth my mind was
not composed enough to enable me to get a decent smoke. Likewise,
for most of the time during the twenty-four hours I could have struck
matches on deck and held them aloft till the flame burnt my fingers. But
I always used to run below. It was a change. It was the only break in
the incessant strain; and, of course, Mr. Burns through the open door
could see me come in and go out every time.

With his knees gathered up under his chin and staring with his greenish
eyes over them, he was a weird figure, and with my knowledge of the
crazy notion in his head, not a very attractive one for me. Still, I had
to speak to him now and then, and one day he complained that the ship
was very silent. For hours and hours, he said, he was lying there, not
hearing a sound, till he did not know what to do with himself.

"When Ransome happens to be forward in his galley everything's so still
that one might think everybody in the ship was dead," he grumbled. "The
only voice I do hear sometimes is yours, sir, and that isn't enough to
cheer me up. What's the matter with the men? Isn't there one left that
can sing out at the ropes?"

"Not one, Mr. Burns," I said. "There is no breath to spare on board this
ship for that. Are you aware that there are times when I can't muster
more than three hands to do anything?"

He asked swiftly but fearfully:

"Nobody dead yet, sir?"

"No."

"It wouldn't do," Mr. Burns declared forcibly. "Mustn't let him. If he
gets hold of one he will get them all."

I cried out angrily at this. I believe I even swore at the disturbing
effect of these words. They attacked all the self-possession that was
left to me. In my endless vigil in the face of the enemy I had been
haunted by gruesome images enough. I had had visions of a ship drifting
in calms and swinging in light airs, with all her crew dying slowly
about her decks. Such things had been known to happen.

Mr. Burns met my outburst by a mysterious silence.

"Look here," I said. "You don't believe yourself what you say. You
can't. It's impossible. It isn't the sort of thing I have a right to
expect from you. My position's bad enough without being worried with
your silly fancies."

He remained unmoved. On account of the way in which the light fell on
his head I could not be sure whether he had smiled faintly or not. I
changed my tone.

"Listen," I said. "It's getting so desperate that I had thought for a
moment, since we can't make our way south, whether I wouldn't try to
steer west and make an attempt to reach the mailboat track. We could
always get some quinine from her, at least. What do you think?"

He cried out: "No, no, no. Don't do that, sir. You mustn't for a moment
give up facing that old ruffian. If you do he will get the upper hand of
us."

I left him. He was impossible. It was like a case of possession. His
protest, however, was essentially quite sound. As a matter of fact, my
notion of heading out west on the chance of sighting a problematical
steamer could not bear calm examination. On the side where we were we
had enough wind, at least from time to time, to struggle on toward the
south. Enough, at least, to keep hope alive. But suppose that I had used
those capricious gusts of wind to sail away to the westward, into some
region where there was not a breath of air for days on end, what then?
Perhaps my appalling vision of a ship floating with a dead crew
would become a reality for the discovery weeks afterward by some
horror-stricken mariners.

That afternoon Ransome brought me up a cup of tea, and while waiting
there, tray in hand, he remarked in the exactly right tone of sympathy:

"You are holding out well, sir."

"Yes," I said. "You and I seem to have been forgotten."

"Forgotten, sir?"

"Yes, by the fever-devil who has got on board this ship," I said.

Ransome gave me one of his attractive, intelligent, quick glances and
went away with the tray. It occurred to me that I had been talking
somewhat in Mr. Burns' manner. It annoyed me. Yet often in darker
moments I forgot myself into an attitude toward our troubles more fit
for a contest against a living enemy.

Yes. The fever-devil had not laid his hand yet either on Ransome or on
me. But he might at any time. It was one of those thoughts one had
to fight down, keep at arm's length at any cost. It was unbearable to
contemplate the possibility of Ransome, the housekeeper of the ship,
being laid low. And what would happen to my command if I got knocked
over, with Mr. Burns too weak to stand without holding on to his
bed-place and the second mate reduced to a state of permanent
imbecility? It was impossible to imagine, or rather, it was only too
easy to imagine.

I was alone on the poop. The ship having no steerage way, I had sent the
helmsman away to sit down or lie down somewhere in the shade. The men's
strength was so reduced that all unnecessary calls on it had to be
avoided. It was the austere Gambril with the grizzly beard. He went away
readily enough, but he was so weakened by repeated bouts of fever,
poor fellow, that in order to get down the poop ladder he had to turn
sideways and hang on with both hands to the brass rail. It was just
simply heart-breaking to watch. Yet he was neither very much worse nor
much better than most of the half-dozen miserable victims I could muster
up on deck.

It was a terribly lifeless afternoon. For several days in succession low
clouds had appeared in the distance, white masses with dark convolutions
resting on the water, motionless, almost solid, and yet all the time
changing their aspects subtly. Toward evening they vanished as a rule.
But this day they awaited the setting sun, which glowed and smouldered
sulkily amongst them before it sank down. The punctual and wearisome
stars reappeared over our mastheads, but the air remained stagnant and
oppressive.

The unfailing Ransome lighted the binnaclelamps and glided, all shadowy,
up to me.

"Will you go down and try to eat something, sir?" he suggested.

His low voice startled me. I had been standing looking out over the
rail, saying nothing, feeling nothing, not even the weariness of my
limbs, overcome by the evil spell.

"Ransome," I asked abruptly, "how long have I been on deck? I am losing
the notion of time."

"Twelve days, sir," he said, "and it's just a fortnight since we left
the anchorage."

His equable voice sounded mournful somehow. He waited a bit, then added:
"It's the first time that it looks as if we were to have some rain."

I noticed then the broad shadow on the horizon, extinguishing the low
stars completely, while those overhead, when I looked up, seemed to
shine down on us through a veil of smoke.

How it got there, how it had crept up so high, I couldn't say. It had an
ominous appearance. The air did not stir. At a renewed invitation from
Ransome I did go down into the cabin to--in his own words--"try and eat
something." I don't know that the trial was very successful. I suppose
at that period I did exist on food in the usual way; but the memory is
now that in those days life was sustained on invincible anguish, as a
sort of infernal stimulant exciting and consuming at the same time.

It's the only period of my life in which I attempted to keep a diary.
No, not the only one. Years later, in conditions of moral isolation, I
did put down on paper the thoughts and events of a score of days. But
this was the first time. I don't remember how it came about or how the
pocketbook and the pencil came into my hands. It's inconceivable that I
should have looked for them on purpose. I suppose they saved me from the
crazy trick of talking to myself.

Strangely enough, in both cases I took to that sort of thing in
circumstances in which I did not expect, in colloquial phrase, "to come
out of it." Neither could I expect the record to outlast me. This shows
that it was purely a personal need for intimate relief and not a call of
egotism.

Here I must give another sample of it, a few detached lines, now
looking very ghostly to my own eyes, out of the part scribbled that very
evening:

*****

"There is something going on in the sky like a decomposition; like a
corruption of the air, which remains as still as ever. After all, mere
clouds, which may or may not hold wind or rain. Strange that it should
trouble me so. I feel as if all my sins had found me out. But I suppose
the trouble is that the ship is still lying motionless, not under
command; and that I have nothing to do to keep my imagination from
running wild amongst the disastrous images of the worst that may befall
us. What's going to happen? Probably nothing. Or anything. It may be a
furious squall coming, butt end foremost. And on deck there are five
men with the vitality and the strength of, say, two. We may have all our
sails blown away. Every stitch of canvas has been on her since we broke
ground at the mouth of the Mei-nam, fifteen days ago . . . or fifteen
centuries. It seems to me that all my life before that momentous day is
infinitely remote, a fading memory of light-hearted youth, something on
the other side of a shadow. Yes, sails may very well be blown away.
And that would be like a death sentence on the men. We haven't strength
enough on board to bend another suit; incredible thought, but it is
true. Or we may even get dismasted. Ships have been dismasted in squalls
simply because they weren't handled quick enough, and we have no
power to whirl the yards around. It's like being bound hand and foot
preparatory to having one's throat cut. And what appals me most of all
is that I shrink from going on deck to face it. It's due to the ship,
it's due to the men who are there on deck--some of them, ready to put
out the last remnant of their strength at a word from me. And I am
shrinking from it. From the mere vision. My first command. Now I
understand that strange sense of insecurity in my past. I always
suspected that I might be no good. And here is proof positive. I am
shirking it. I am no good."

*****

At that moment, or, perhaps, the moment after, I became aware of Ransome
standing in the cabin. Something in his expression startled me. It had a
meaning which I could not make out. I exclaimed: "Somebody's dead."

It was his turn then to look startled.

"Dead? Not that I know of, sir. I have been in the forecastle only ten
minutes ago and there was no dead man there then."

"You did give me a scare," I said.

His voice was extremely pleasant to listen to. He explained that he had
come down below to close Mr. Burns' port in case it should come on to
rain. "He did not know that I was in the cabin," he added.

"How does it look outside?" I asked him.

"Very black, indeed, sir. There is something in it for certain."

"In what quarter?"

"All round, sir."

I repeated idly: "All round. For certain," with my elbows on the table.

Ransome lingered in the cabin as if he had something to do there, but
hesitated about doing it. I said suddenly:

"You think I ought to be on deck?"

He answered at once but without any particular emphasis or accent: "I
do, sir."

I got to my feet briskly, and he made way for me to go out. As I passed
through the lobby I heard Mr. Burns' voice saying:

"Shut the door of my room, will you, steward?" And Ransome's rather
surprised: "Certainly, sir."

I thought that all my feelings had been dulled into complete
indifference. But I found it as trying as ever to be on deck. The
impenetrable blackness beset the ship so close that it seemed that
by thrusting one's hand over the side one could touch some unearthly
substance. There was in it an effect of inconceivable terror and of
inexpressible mystery. The few stars overhead shed a dim light upon
the ship alone, with no gleams of any kind upon the water, in detached
shafts piercing an atmosphere which had turned to soot. It was something
I had never seen before, giving no hint of the direction from which any
change would come, the closing in of a menace from all sides.

There was still no man at the helm. The immobility of all things was
perfect. If the air had turned black, the sea, for all I knew, might
have turned solid. It was no good looking in any direction, watching
for any sign, speculating upon the nearness of the moment. When the time
came the blackness would overwhelm silently the bit of starlight falling
upon the ship, and the end of all things would come without a sigh,
stir, or murmur of any kind, and all our hearts would cease to beat like
run-down clocks.

It was impossible to shake off that sense of finality. The quietness
that came over me was like a foretaste of annihilation. It gave me a
sort of comfort, as though my soul had become suddenly reconciled to an
eternity of blind stillness.

The seaman's instinct alone survived whole in my moral dissolution. I
descended the ladder to the quarter-deck. The starlight seemed to die
out before reaching that spot, but when I asked quietly: "Are you there,
men?" my eyes made out shadow forms starting up around me, very few,
very indistinct; and a voice spoke: "All here, sir." Another amended
anxiously:

"All that are any good for anything, sir."

Both voices were very quiet and unringing; without any special character
of readiness or discouragement. Very matter-of-fact voices.

"We must try to haul this mainsail close up," I said.

The shadows swayed away from me without a word. Those men were the
ghosts of themselves, and their weight on a rope could be no more than
the weight of a bunch of ghosts. Indeed, if ever a sail was hauled up
by sheer spiritual strength it must have been that sail, for, properly
speaking, there was not muscle enough for the task in the whole ship let
alone the miserable lot of us on deck. Of course, I took the lead in the
work myself. They wandered feebly after me from rope to rope, stumbling
and panting. They toiled like Titans. We were half-an-hour at it at
least, and all the time the black universe made no sound. When the last
leech-line was made fast, my eyes, accustomed to the darkness, made
out the shapes of exhausted men drooping over the rails, collapsed on
hatches. One hung over the after-capstan, sobbing for breath, and I
stood amongst them like a tower of strength, impervious to disease and
feeling only the sickness of my soul. I waited for some time fighting
against the weight of my sins, against my sense of unworthiness, and
then I said:

"Now, men, we'll go aft and square the mainyard. That's about all we can
do for the ship; and for the rest she must take her chance."




VI

As we all went up it occurred to me that there ought to be a man at the
helm. I raised my voice not much above a whisper, and, noiselessly, an
uncomplaining spirit in a fever-wasted body appeared in the light aft,
the head with hollow eyes illuminated against the blackness which had
swallowed up our world--and the universe. The bared forearm extended
over the upper spokes seemed to shine with a light of its own.

I murmured to that luminous appearance:

"Keep the helm right amidships."

It answered in a tone of patient suffering:

"Right amidships, sir."

Then I descended to the quarter-deck. It was impossible to tell
whence the blow would come. To look round the ship was to look into a
bottomless, black pit. The eye lost itself in inconceivable depths.

I wanted to ascertain whether the ropes had been picked up off the
deck. One could only do that by feeling with one's feet. In my cautious
progress I came against a man in whom I recognized Ransome. He possessed
an unimpaired physical solidity which was manifest to me at the contact.
He was leaning against the quarter-deck capstan and kept silent. It was
like a revelation. He was the collapsed figure sobbing for breath I had
noticed before we went on the poop.

"You have been helping with the mainsail!" I exclaimed in a low tone.

"Yes, sir," sounded his quiet voice.

"Man! What were you thinking of? You mustn't do that sort of thing."

After a pause he assented: "I suppose I mustn't." Then after another
short silence he added: "I am all right now," quickly, between the
tell-tale gasps.

I could neither hear nor see anybody else; but when I spoke up,
answering sad murmurs filled the quarter-deck, and its shadows seemed to
shift here and there. I ordered all the halyards laid down on deck clear
for running.

"I'll see to that, sir," volunteered Ransome in his natural, pleasant
tone, which comforted one and aroused one's compassion, too, somehow.

That man ought to have been in his bed, resting, and my plain duty was
to send him there. But perhaps he would not have obeyed me; I had not
the strength of mind to try. All I said was:

"Go about it quietly, Ransome."

Returning on the poop I approached Gambril. His face, set with hollow
shadows in the light, looked awful, finally silenced. I asked him how he
felt, but hardly expected an answer. Therefore, I was astonished at his
comparative loquacity.

"Them shakes leaves me as weak as a kitten, sir," he said, preserving
finely that air of unconsciousness as to anything but his business a
helmsman should never lose. "And before I can pick up my strength that
there hot fit comes along and knocks me over again."

He sighed. There was no reproach in his tone, but the bare words were
enough to give me a horrible pang of self-reproach. It held me dumb for
a time. When the tormenting sensation had passed off I asked:

"Do you feel strong enough to prevent the rudder taking charge if she
gets sternway on her? It wouldn't do to get something smashed about the
steering-gear now. We've enough difficulties to cope with as it is."

He answered with just a shade of weariness that he was strong enough to
hang on. He could promise me that she shouldn't take the wheel out of
his hands. More he couldn't say.

At that moment Ransome appeared quite close to me, stepping out of the
darkness into visibility suddenly, as if just created with his composed
face and pleasant voice.

Every rope on deck, he said, was laid down clear for running, as far as
one could make certain by feeling. It was impossible to see anything.
Frenchy had stationed himself forward. He said he had a jump or two left
in him yet.

Here a faint smile altered for an instant the clear, firm design
of Ransome's lips. With his serious clear, gray eyes, his serene
temperament--he was a priceless man altogether. Soul as firm as the
muscles of his body.

He was the only man on board (except me, but I had to preserve my
liberty of movement) who had a sufficiency of muscular strength to trust
to. For a moment I thought I had better ask him to take the wheel. But
the dreadful knowledge of the enemy he had to carry about him made me
hesitate. In my ignorance of physiology it occurred to me that he might
die suddenly, from excitement, at a critical moment.

While this gruesome fear restrained the ready words on the tip of my
tongue, Ransome stepped back two paces and vanished from my sight.

At once an uneasiness possessed me, as if some support had been
withdrawn. I moved forward, too, outside the circle of light, into
the darkness that stood in front of me like a wall. In one stride I
penetrated it. Such must have been the darkness before creation. It had
closed behind me. I knew I was invisible to the man at the helm. Neither
could I see anything. He was alone, I was alone, every man was alone
where he stood. And every form was gone too, spar, sail, fittings,
rails; everything was blotted out in the dreadful smoothness of that
absolute night.

A flash of lightning would have been a relief--I mean physically. I
would have prayed for it if it hadn't been for my shrinking apprehension
of the thunder. In the tension of silence I was suffering from it seemed
to me that the first crash must turn me into dust.

And thunder was, most likely, what would happen next. Stiff all over and
hardly breathing, I waited with a horribly strained expectation. Nothing
happened. It was maddening, but a dull, growing ache in the lower part
of my face made me aware that I had been grinding my teeth madly enough,
for God knows how long.

It's extraordinary I should not have heard myself doing it; but I
hadn't. By an effort which absorbed all my faculties I managed to keep
my jaw still. It required much attention, and while thus engaged I
became bothered by curious, irregular sounds of faint tapping on the
deck. They could be heard single, in pairs, in groups. While I wondered
at this mysterious devilry, I received a slight blow under the left
eye and felt an enormous tear run down my cheek. Raindrops. Enormous.
Forerunners of something. Tap. Tap. Tap. . . .

I turned about, and, addressing Gambrel earnestly, entreated him to
"hang on to the wheel." But I could hardly speak from emotion. The
fatal moment had come. I held my breath. The tapping had stopped
as unexpectedly as it had begun, and there was a renewed moment of
intolerable suspense; something like an additional turn of the racking
screw. I don't suppose I would have ever screamed, but I remember my
conviction that there was nothing else for it but to scream.

Suddenly--how am I to convey it? Well, suddenly the darkness turned into
water. This is the only suitable figure. A heavy shower, a downpour,
comes along, making a noise. You hear its approach on the sea, in the
air, too, I verily believe. But this was different. With no preliminary
whisper or rustle, without a splash, and even without the ghost
of impact, I became instantaneously soaked to the skin. Not a very
difficult matter, since I was wearing only my sleeping suit. My hair
got full of water in an instant, water streamed on my skin, it filled
my nose, my ears, my eyes. In a fraction of a second I swallowed quite a
lot of it.

As to Gambril, he was fairly choked. He coughed pitifully, the broken
cough of a sick man; and I beheld him as one sees a fish in an aquarium
by the light of an electric bulb, an elusive, phosphorescent shape. Only
he did not glide away. But something else happened. Both binnaclelamps
went out. I suppose the water forced itself into them, though I wouldn't
have thought that possible, for they fitted into the cowl perfectly.

The last gleam of light in the universe had gone, pursued by a low
exclamation of dismay from Gambril. I groped for him and seized his arm.
How startlingly wasted it was.

"Never mind," I said. "You don't want the light. All you need to do
is to keep the wind, when it comes, at the back of your head. You
understand?"

"Aye, aye, sir. . . . But I should like to have a light," he added
nervously.

All that time the ship lay as steady as a rock. The noise of the water
pouring off the sails and spars, flowing over the break of the poop, had
stopped short. The poop scuppers gurgled and sobbed for a little
while longer, and then perfect silence, joined to perfect immobility,
proclaimed the yet unbroken spell of our helplessness, poised on the
edge of some violent issue, lurking in the dark.

I started forward restlessly. I did not need my sight to pace the poop
of my ill-starred first command with perfect assurance. Every square
foot of her decks was impressed indelibly on my brain, to the very
grain and knots of the planks. Yet, all of a sudden, I fell clean over
something, landing full length on my hands and face.

It was something big and alive. Not a dog--more like a sheep, rather. But
there were no animals in the ship. How could an animal. . . . It was an
added and fantastic horror which I could not resist. The hair of my
head stirred even as I picked myself up, awfully scared; not as a man
is scared while his judgment, his reason still try to resist, but
completely, boundlessly, and, as it were, innocently scared--like a
little child.

I could see It--that Thing! The darkness, of which so much had just
turned into water, had thinned down a little. There It was! But I did
not hit upon the notion of Mr. Burns issuing out of the companion on all
fours till he attempted to stand up, and even then the idea of a bear
crossed my mind first.

He growled like one when I seized him round the body. He had buttoned
himself up into an enormous winter overcoat of some woolly material, the
weight of which was too much for his reduced state. I could hardly feel
the incredibly thin lath of his body, lost within the thick stuff, but
his growl had depth and substance: Confounded dump ship with a craven,
tiptoeing crowd. Why couldn't they stamp and go with a brace? Wasn't
there one Godforsaken lubber in the lot fit to raise a yell on a rope?

"Skulking's no good, sir," he attacked me directly. "You can't slink
past the old murderous ruffian. It isn't the way. You must go for him
boldly--as I did. Boldness is what you want. Show him that you don't
care for any of his damned tricks. Kick up a jolly old row."

"Good God, Mr. Burns," I said angrily. "What on earth are you up to?
What do you mean by coming up on deck in this state?"

"Just that! Boldness. The only way to scare the old bullying rascal."

I pushed him, still growling, against the rail. "Hold on to it," I said
roughly. I did not know what to do with him. I left him in a hurry, to
go to Gambril, who had called faintly that he believed there was some
wind aloft. Indeed, my own ears had caught a feeble flutter of wet
canvas, high up overhead, the jingle of a slack chain sheet. . . .

These were eerie, disturbing, alarming sounds in the dead stillness
of the air around me. All the instances I had heard of topmasts being
whipped out of a ship while there was not wind enough on her deck to
blow out a match rushed into my memory.

"I can't see the upper sails, sir," declared Gambril shakily.

"Don't move the helm. You'll be all right," I said confidently.

The poor man's nerves were gone. Mine were not in much better case.
It was the moment of breaking strain and was relieved by the abrupt
sensation of the ship moving forward as if of herself under my feet.
I heard plainly the soughing of the wind aloft, the low cracks of
the upper spars taking the strain, long before I could feel the least
draught on my face turned aft, anxious and sightless like the face of a
blind man.

Suddenly a louder-sounding note filled our ears, the darkness started
streaming against our bodies, chilling them exceedingly. Both of us,
Gambril and I, shivered violently in our clinging, soaked garments of
thin cotton. I said to him:

"You are all right now, my man. All you've got to do is to keep the wind
at the back of your head. Surely you are up to that. A child could steer
this ship in smooth water."

He muttered: "Aye! A healthy child." And I felt ashamed of having been
passed over by the fever which had been preying on every man's strength
but mine, in order that my remorse might be the more bitter, the feeling
of unworthiness more poignant, and the sense of responsibility heavier
to bear.

The ship had gathered great way on her almost at once on the calm water.
I felt her slipping through it with no other noise but a mysterious
rustle alongside. Otherwise, she had no motion at all, neither lift nor
roll. It was a disheartening steadiness which had lasted for eighteen
days now; for never, never had we had wind enough in that time to raise
the slightest run of the sea. The breeze freshened suddenly. I thought
it was high time to get Mr. Burns off the deck. He worried me. I looked
upon him as a lunatic who would be very likely to start roaming over the
ship and break a limb or fall overboard.

I was truly glad to find he had remained holding on where I had left
him, sensibly enough. He was, however, muttering to himself ominously.

This was discouraging. I remarked in a matter-of-fact tone:

"We have never had so much wind as this since we left the roads."

"There's some heart in it, too," he growled judiciously. It was a remark
of a perfectly sane seaman. But he added immediately: "It was about time
I should come on deck. I've been nursing my strength for this--just for
this. Do you see it, sir?"

I said I did, and proceeded to hint that it would be advisable for him
to go below now and take a rest.

His answer was an indignant "Go below! Not if I know it, sir."

Very cheerful! He was a horrible nuisance. And all at once he started to
argue. I could feel his crazy excitement in the dark.

"You don't know how to go about it, sir. How could you? All this
whispering and tiptoeing is no good. You can't hope to slink past a
cunning, wide-awake, evil brute like he was. You never heard him talk.
Enough to make your hair stand on end. No! No! He wasn't mad. He was
no more mad than I am. He was just downright wicked. Wicked so as to
frighten most people. I will tell you what he was. He was nothing
less than a thief and a murderer at heart. And do you think he's any
different now because he's dead? Not he! His carcass lies a hundred
fathom under, but he's just the same . . . in latitude 8 d 20' north."

He snorted defiantly. I noted with weary resignation that the breeze had
got lighter while he raved. He was at it again.

"I ought to have thrown the beggar out of the ship over the rail like a
dog. It was only on account of the men. . . . Fancy having to read the
Burial Service over a brute like that! . . . 'Our departed brother' . . .
I could have laughed. That was what he couldn't bear. I suppose I am
the only man that ever stood up to laugh at him. When he got sick it
used to scare that . . . brother. . . . Brother. . . . Departed. . . .
Sooner call a shark brother."

The breeze had let go so suddenly that the way of the ship brought the
wet sails heavily against the mast. The spell of deadly stillness had
caught us up again. There seemed to be no escape.

"Hallo!" exclaimed Mr. Burns in a startled voice. "Calm again!"

I addressed him as though he had been sane.

"This is the sort of thing we've been having for seventeen days, Mr.
Burns," I said with intense bitterness. "A puff, then a calm, and in a
moment, you'll see, she'll be swinging on her heel with her head away
from her course to the devil somewhere."

He caught at the word. "The old dodging Devil," he screamed piercingly
and burst into such a loud laugh as I had never heard before. It was a
provoking, mocking peal, with a hair-raising, screeching over-note of
defiance. I stepped back, utterly confounded.

Instantly there was a stir on the quarter-deck; murmurs of dismay. A
distressed voice cried out in the dark below us: "Who's that gone crazy,
now?"

Perhaps they thought it was their captain? Rush is not the word that
could be applied to the utmost speed the poor fellows were up to; but
in an amazing short time every man in the ship able to walk upright had
found his way on to that poop.

I shouted to them: "It's the mate. Lay hold of him a couple of
you. . . ."

I expected this performance to end in a ghastly sort of fight. But
Mr. Burns cut his derisive screeching dead short and turned upon them
fiercely, yelling:

"Aha! Dog-gone ye! You've found your tongues--have ye? I thought
you were dumb. Well, then--laugh! Laugh--I tell you. Now then--all
together. One, two, three--laugh!"

A moment of silence ensued, of silence so profound that you could have
heard a pin drop on the deck. Then Ransome's unperturbed voice uttered
pleasantly the words:

"I think he has fainted, sir--" The little motionless knot of men
stirred, with low murmurs of relief. "I've got him under the arms. Get
hold of his legs, some one."

Yes. It was a relief. He was silenced for a time--for a time. I could
not have stood another peal of that insane screeching. I was sure of it;
and just then Gambril, the austere Gambril, treated us to another vocal
performance. He began to sing out for relief. His voice wailed pitifully
in the darkness: "Come aft somebody! I can't stand this. Here she'll be
off again directly and I can't. . . ."

I dashed aft myself meeting on my way a hard gust of wind whose approach
Gambril's ear had detected from afar and which filled the sails on the
main in a series of muffled reports mingled with the low plaint of
the spars. I was just in time to seize the wheel while Frenchy who had
followed me caught up the collapsing Gambril. He hauled him out of the
way, admonished him to lie still where he was, and then stepped up to
relieve me, asking calmly:

"How am I to steer her, sir?"

"Dead before it for the present. I'll get you a light in a moment."

But going forward I met Ransome bringing up the spare binnacle lamp.
That man noticed everything, attended to everything, shed comfort around
him as he moved. As he passed me he remarked in a soothing tone that
the stars were coming out. They were. The breeze was sweeping clear the
sooty sky, breaking through the indolent silence of the sea.

The barrier of awful stillness which had encompassed us for so many days
as though we had been accursed, was broken. I felt that. I let myself
fall on to the skylight seat. A faint white ridge of foam, thin, very
thin, broke alongside. The first for ages--for ages. I could have
cheered, if it hadn't been for the sense of guilt which clung to all my
thoughts secretly. Ransome stood before me.

"What about the mate," I asked anxiously. "Still unconscious?"

"Well, sir--it's funny," Ransome was evidently puzzled. "He hasn't
spoken a word, and his eyes are shut. But it looks to me more like sound
sleep than anything else."

I accepted this view as the least troublesome of any, or at any rate,
least disturbing. Dead faint or deep slumber, Mr. Burns had to be left
to himself for the present. Ransome remarked suddenly:

"I believe you want a coat, sir."

"I believe I do," I sighed out.

But I did not move. What I felt I wanted were new limbs. My arms and
legs seemed utterly useless, fairly worn out. They didn't even ache. But
I stood up all the same to put on the coat when Ransome brought it up.
And when he suggested that he had better now "take Gambril forward," I
said:

"All right. I'll help you to get him down on the main deck."

I found that I was quite able to help, too. We raised Gambril up between
us. He tried to help himself along like a man but all the time he was
inquiring piteously:

"You won't let me go when we come to the ladder? You won't let me go
when we come to the ladder?"


The breeze kept on freshening and blew true, true to a hair. At daylight
by careful manipulation of the helm we got the foreyards to run square
by themselves (the water keeping smooth) and then went about hauling
the ropes tight. Of the four men I had with me at night, I could see now
only two. I didn't inquire as to the others. They had given in. For a
time only I hoped.

Our various tasks forward occupied us for hours, the two men with me
moved so slow and had to rest so often. One of them remarked that "every
blamed thing in the ship felt about a hundred times heavier than its
proper weight." This was the only complaint uttered. I don't know what
we should have done without Ransome. He worked with us, silent, too,
with a little smile frozen on his lips. From time to time I murmured to
him: "Go steady"--"Take it easy, Ransome"--and received a quick glance
in reply.

When we had done all we could do to make things safe, he disappeared
into his galley. Some time afterward, going forward for a look round, I
caught sight of him through the open door. He sat upright on the locker
in front of the stove, with his head leaning back against the bulkhead.
His eyes were closed; his capable hands held open the front of his
thin cotton shirt baring tragically his powerful chest, which heaved in
painful and laboured gasps. He didn't hear me.

I retreated quietly and went straight on to the poop to relieve Frenchy,
who by that time was beginning to look very sick. He gave me the course
with great formality and tried to go off with a jaunty step, but reeled
widely twice before getting out of my sight.

And then I remained all alone aft, steering my ship, which ran before
the wind with a buoyant lift now and then, and even rolling a little.
Presently Ransome appeared before me with a tray. The sight of food made
me ravenous all at once. He took the wheel while I sat down of the after
grating to eat my breakfast.

"This breeze seems to have done for our crowd," he murmured. "It just
laid them low--all hands."

"Yes," I said. "I suppose you and I are the only two fit men in the
ship."

"Frenchy says there's still a jump left in him. I don't know. It can't
be much," continued Ransome with his wistful smile. "Good little man
that. But suppose, sir, that this wind flies round when we are close to
the land--what are we going to do with her?"

"If the wind shifts round heavily after we close in with the land she
will either run ashore or get dismasted or both. We won't be able to do
anything with her. She's running away with us now. All we can do is to
steer her. She's a ship without a crew."

"Yes. All laid low," repeated Ransome quietly. "I do give them a look-in
forward every now and then, but it's precious little I can do for them."

"I, and the ship, and every one on board of her, are very much indebted
to you, Ransome," I said warmly.

He made as though he had not heard me, and steered in silence till I was
ready to relieve him. He surrendered the wheel, picked up the tray, and
for a parting shot informed me that Mr. Burns was awake and seemed to
have a mind to come up on deck.

"I don't know how to prevent him, sir. I can't very well stop down below
all the time."

It was clear that he couldn't. And sure enough Mr. Burns came on deck
dragging himself painfully aft in his enormous overcoat. I beheld him
with a natural dread. To have him around and raving about the wiles of
a dead man while I had to steer a wildly rushing ship full of dying men
was a rather dreadful prospect.

But his first remarks were quite sensible in meaning and tone.
Apparently he had no recollection of the night scene. And if he had he
didn't betray himself once. Neither did he talk very much. He sat on
the skylight looking desperately ill at first, but that strong breeze,
before which the last remnant of my crew had wilted down, seemed to blow
a fresh stock of vigour into his frame with every gust. One could almost
see the process.

By way of sanity test I alluded on purpose to the late captain. I was
delighted to find that Mr. Burns did not display undue interest in the
subject. He ran over the old tale of that savage ruffian's iniquities
with a certain vindictive gusto and then concluded unexpectedly:

"I do believe, sir, that his brain began to go a year or more before he
died."

A wonderful recovery. I could hardly spare it as much admiration as it
deserved, for I had to give all my mind to the steering.

In comparison with the hopeless languour of the preceding days this was
dizzy speed. Two ridges of foam streamed from the ship's bows; the wind
sang in a strenuous note which under other circumstances would have
expressed to me all the joy of life. Whenever the hauled-up mainsail
started trying to slat and bang itself to pieces in its gear, Mr. Burns
would look at me apprehensively.

"What would you have me to do, Mr. Burns? We can neither furl it nor set
it. I only wish the old thing would thrash itself to pieces and be done
with it. That beastly racket confuses me."

Mr. Burns wrung his hands, and cried out suddenly:

"How will you get the ship into harbour, sir, without men to handle
her?"

And I couldn't tell him.

Well--it did get done about forty hours afterward. By the exorcising
virtue of Mr. Burns' awful laugh, the malicious spectre had been laid,
the evil spell broken, the curse removed. We were now in the hands of a
kind and energetic Providence. It was rushing us on. . . .

I shall never forget the last night, dark, windy, and starry. I steered.
Mr. Burns, after having obtained from me a solemn promise to give him
a kick if anything happened, went frankly to sleep on the deck close
to the binnacle. Convalescents need sleep. Ransome, his back propped
against the mizzen-mast and a blanket over his legs, remained perfectly
still, but I don't suppose he closed his eyes for a moment. That
embodiment of jauntiness, Frenchy, still under the delusion that there
was a "jump" left in him, had insisted on joining us; but mindful of
discipline, had laid himself down as far on the forepart of the poop as
he could get, alongside the bucket-rack.

And I steered, too tired for anxiety, too tired for connected thought.
I had moments of grim exultation and then my heart would sink awfully at
the thought of that forecastle at the other end of the dark deck, full
of fever-stricken men--some of them dying. By my fault. But never mind.
Remorse must wait. I had to steer.

In the small hours the breeze weakened, then failed altogether. About
five it returned, gentle enough, enabling us to head for the roadstead.
Daybreak found Mr. Burns sitting wedged up with coils of rope on the
stern-grating, and from the depths of his overcoat steering the ship
with very white bony hands; while Ransome and I rushed along the decks
letting go all the sheets and halliards by the run. We dashed next up on
to the forecastle head. The perspiration of labour and sheer nervousness
simply poured off our heads as we toiled to get the anchors cock-billed.
I dared not look at Ransome as we worked side by side. We exchanged curt
words; I could hear him panting close to me and I avoided turning my
eyes his way for fear of seeing him fall down and expire in the act of
putting forth his strength--for what? Indeed for some distinct ideal.

The consummate seaman in him was aroused. He needed no directions. He
knew what to do. Every effort, every movement was an act of consistent
heroism. It was not for me to look at a man thus inspired.

At last all was ready and I heard him say:

"Hadn't I better go down and open the compressors now, sir?"

"Yes. Do," I said.

And even then I did not glance his way. After a time his voice came up
from the main deck.

"When you like, sir. All clear on the windlass here."

I made a sign to Mr. Burns to put the helm down and let both anchors go
one after another, leaving the ship to take as much cable as she wanted.
She took the best part of them both before she brought up. The loose
sails coming aback ceased their maddening racket above my head. A
perfect stillness reigned in the ship. And while I stood forward feeling
a little giddy in that sudden peace, I caught faintly a moan or two and
the incoherent mutterings of the sick in the forecastle.

As we had a signal for medical assistance flying on the mizzen it is a
fact that before the ship was fairly at rest three steam launches from
various men-of-war were alongside; and at least five naval surgeons had
clambered on board. They stood in a knot gazing up and down the empty
main deck, then looked aloft--where not a man could be seen, either.

I went toward them--a solitary figure, in a blue and gray striped
sleeping suit and a pipe-clayed cork helmet on its head. Their disgust
was extreme. They had expected surgical cases. Each one had brought
his carving tools with him. But they soon got over their little
disappointment. In less than five minutes one of the steam launches was
rushing shoreward to order a big boat and some hospital people for the
removal of the crew. The big steam pinnace went off to her ship to bring
over a few bluejackets to furl my sails for me.

One of the surgeons had remained on board. He came out of the forecastle
looking impenetrable, and noticed my inquiring gaze.

"There's nobody dead in there, if that's what you want to know," he said
deliberately. Then added in a tone of wonder: "The whole crew!"

"And very bad?"

"And very bad," he repeated. His eyes were roaming all over the ship.
"Heavens! What's that?"

"That," I said, glancing aft, "is Mr. Burns, my chief officer."

Mr. Burns with his moribund head nodding on the stalk of his lean neck
was a sight for any one to exclaim at. The surgeon asked:

"Is he going to the hospital, too?"

"Oh, no," I said jocosely. "Mr. Burns can't go on shore till the
mainmast goes. I am very proud of him. He's my only convalescent."

"You look--" began the doctor staring at me. But I interrupted him
angrily:

"I am not ill."

"No. . . . You look queer."

"Well, you see, I have been seventeen days on deck."

"Seventeen! . . . But you must have slept."

"I suppose I must have. I don't know. But I'm certain that I didn't
sleep for the last forty hours."

"Phew! . . . You will be going ashore presently I suppose?"

"As soon as ever I can. There's no end of business waiting for me
there."

The surgeon released my hand, which he had taken while we talked, pulled
out his pocket-book, wrote in it rapidly, tore out the page and offered
it to me.

"I strongly advise you to get this prescription made up for yourself
ashore. Unless I am much mistaken you will need it this evening."

"What is it, then?" I asked with suspicion.

"Sleeping draught," answered the surgeon curtly; and moving with an air
of interest toward Mr. Burns he engaged him in conversation.

As I went below to dress to go ashore, Ransome followed me. He begged my
pardon; he wished, too, to be sent ashore and paid off.

I looked at him in surprise. He was waiting for my answer with an air of
anxiety.

"You don't mean to leave the ship!" I cried out.

"I do really, sir. I want to go and be quiet somewhere. Anywhere. The
hospital will do."

"But, Ransome," I said. "I hate the idea of parting with you."

"I must go," he broke in. "I have a right!" . . . He gasped and a look
of almost savage determination passed over his face. For an instant he
was another being. And I saw under the worth and the comeliness of
the man the humble reality of things. Life was a boon to him--this
precarious hard life, and he was thoroughly alarmed about himself.

"Of course I shall pay you off if you wish it," I hastened to say. "Only
I must ask you to remain on board till this afternoon. I can't leave Mr.
Burns absolutely by himself in the ship for hours."

He softened at once and assured me with a smile and in his natural
pleasant voice that he understood that very well.

When I returned on deck everything was ready for the removal of the
men. It was the last ordeal of that episode which had been maturing and
tempering my character--though I did not know it.

It was awful. They passed under my eyes one after another--each of them
an embodied reproach of the bitterest kind, till I felt a sort of revolt
wake up in me. Poor Frenchy had gone suddenly under. He was carried
past me insensible, his comic face horribly flushed and as if swollen,
breathing stertorously. He looked more like Mr. Punch than ever; a
disgracefully intoxicated Mr. Punch.

The austere Gambril, on the contrary, had improved temporarily.
He insisted on walking on his own feet to the rail--of course with
assistance on each side of him. But he gave way to a sudden panic at the
moment of being swung over the side and began to wail pitifully:

"Don't let them drop me, sir. Don't let them drop me, sir!" While I kept
on shouting to him in most soothing accents: "All right, Gambril. They
won't! They won't!"

It was no doubt very ridiculous. The bluejackets on our deck were
grinning quietly, while even Ransome himself (much to the fore in
lending a hand) had to enlarge his wistful smile for a fleeting moment.

I left for the shore in the steam pinnace, and on looking back beheld
Mr. Burns actually standing up by the taffrail, still in his enormous
woolly overcoat. The bright sunlight brought out his weirdness
amazingly. He looked like a frightful and elaborate scarecrow set up on
the poop of a death-stricken ship, set up to keep the seabirds from the
corpses.

Our story had got about already in town and everybody on shore was most
kind. The Marine Office let me off the port dues, and as there happened
to be a shipwrecked crew staying in the Home I had no difficulty in
obtaining as many men as I wanted. But when I inquired if I could
see Captain Ellis for a moment I was told in accents of pity for my
ignorance that our deputy-Neptune had retired and gone home on a
pension about three weeks after I left the port. So I suppose that my
appointment was the last act, outside the daily routine, of his official
life.

It is strange how on coming ashore I was struck by the springy step,
the lively eyes, the strong vitality of every one I met. It impressed me
enormously. And amongst those I met there was Captain Giles, of course.
It would have been very extraordinary if I had not met him. A prolonged
stroll in the business part of the town was the regular employment of
all his mornings when he was ashore.

I caught the glitter of the gold watch-chain across his chest ever so
far away. He radiated benevolence.

"What is it I hear?" he queried with a "kind uncle" smile, after shaking
hands. "Twenty-one days from Bangkok?"

"Is this all you've heard?" I said. "You must come to tiffin with me. I
want you to know exactly what you have let me in for."

He hesitated for almost a minute.

"Well--I will," he said condescendingly at last.

We turned into the hotel. I found to my surprise that I could eat quite
a lot. Then over the cleared table-cloth I unfolded to Captain Giles
the history of these twenty days in all its professional and emotional
aspects, while he smoked patiently the big cigar I had given him.

Then he observed sagely:

"You must feel jolly well tired by this time."

"No," I said. "Not tired. But I'll tell you, Captain Giles, how I feel.
I feel old. And I must be. All of you on shore look to me just a lot of
skittish youngsters that have never known a care in the world."

He didn't smile. He looked insufferably exemplary. He declared:

"That will pass. But you do look older--it's a fact."

"Aha!" I said.

"No! No! The truth is that one must not make too much of anything in
life, good or bad."

"Live at half-speed," I murmured perversely. "Not everybody can do
that."

"You'll be glad enough presently if you can keep going even at that
rate," he retorted with his air of conscious virtue. "And there's
another thing: a man should stand up to his bad luck, to his mistakes,
to his conscience and all that sort of thing. Why--what else would you
have to fight against."

I kept silent. I don't know what he saw in my face but he asked
abruptly:

"Why--you aren't faint-hearted?"

"God only knows, Captain Giles," was my sincere answer.

"That's all right," he said calmly. "You will learn soon how not to be
faint-hearted. A man has got to learn everything--and that's what so
many of them youngsters don't understand."

"Well, I am no longer a youngster."

"No," he conceded. "Are you leaving soon?"

"I am going on board directly," I said. "I shall pick up one of my
anchors and heave in to half-cable on the other directly my new crew
comes on board and I shall be off at daylight to-morrow!"

"You will," grunted Captain Giles approvingly, "that's the way. You'll
do."

"What did you think? That I would want to take a week ashore for a
rest?" I said, irritated by his tone. "There's no rest for me till she's
out in the Indian Ocean and not much of it even then."

He puffed at his cigar moodily, as if transformed.

"Yes. That's what it amounts to," he said in a musing tone. It was as
if a ponderous curtain had rolled up disclosing an unexpected Captain
Giles. But it was only for a moment, just the time to let him add,
"Precious little rest in life for anybody. Better not think of it."

We rose, left the hotel, and parted from each other in the street with
a warm handshake, just as he began to interest me for the first time in
our intercourse.

The first thing I saw when I got back to the ship was Ransome on the
quarter-deck sitting quietly on his neatly lashed sea-chest.

I beckoned him to follow me into the saloon where I sat down to write a
letter of recommendation for him to a man I knew on shore.

When finished I pushed it across the table. "It may be of some good to
you when you leave the hospital."

He took it, put it in his pocket. His eyes were looking away from
me--nowhere. His face was anxiously set.

"How are you feeling now?" I asked.

"I don't feel bad now, sir," he answered stiffly. "But I am afraid of
its coming on. . . ." The wistful smile came back on his lips for a
moment. "I--I am in a blue funk about my heart, sir."

I approached him with extended hand. His eyes not looking at me had a
strained expression. He was like a man listening for a warning call.

"Won't you shake hands, Ransome?" I said gently.

He exclaimed, flushed up dusky red, gave my hand a hard wrench--and
next moment, left alone in the cabin, I listened to him going up the
companion stairs cautiously, step by step, in mortal fear of starting
into sudden anger our common enemy it was his hard fate to carry
consciously within his faithful breast.



TO-MORROW


By Joseph Conrad


What was known of Captain Hagberd in the little seaport of Colebrook was
not exactly in his favour. He did not belong to the place. He had come
to settle there under circumstances not at all mysterious--he used to
be very communicative about them at the time--but extremely morbid and
unreasonable. He was possessed of some little money evidently, because
he bought a plot of ground, and had a pair of ugly yellow brick cottages
run up very cheaply. He occupied one of them himself and let the other
to Josiah Carvil--blind Carvil, the retired boat-builder--a man of evil
repute as a domestic tyrant.

These cottages had one wall in common, shared in a line of iron railing
dividing their front gardens; a wooden fence separated their back
gardens. Miss Bessie Carvil was allowed, as it were of right, to throw
over it the tea-cloths, blue rags, or an apron that wanted drying.

"It rots the wood, Bessie my girl," the captain would remark mildly,
from his side of the fence, each time he saw her exercising that
privilege.

She was a tall girl; the fence was low, and she could spread her elbows
on the top. Her hands would be red with the bit of washing she had
done, but her forearms were white and shapely, and she would look at her
father's landlord in silence--in an informed silence which had an air of
knowledge, expectation and desire.

"It rots the wood," repeated Captain Hagberd. "It is the only unthrifty,
careless habit I know in you. Why don't you have a clothes line out in
your back yard?"

Miss Carvil would say nothing to this--she only shook her head
negatively. The tiny back yard on her side had a few stone-bordered
little beds of black earth, in which the simple flowers she found time
to cultivate appeared somehow extravagantly overgrown, as if belonging
to an exotic clime; and Captain Hagberd's upright, hale person, clad in
No. 1 sail-cloth from head to foot, would be emerging knee-deep out of
rank grass and the tall weeks on his side of the fence. He appeared,
with the colour and uncouth stiffness of the extraordinary material in
which he chose to clothe himself--"for the time being," would be his
mumbled remark to any observation on the subject--like a man roughened
out of granite, standing in a wilderness not big enough for a decent
billiard-room. A heavy figure of a man of stone, with a red handsome
face, a blue wandering eye, and a great white beard flowing to his waist
and never trimmed as far as Colebrook knew.

Seven years before, he had seriously answered, "Next month, I think,"
to the chaffing attempt to secure his custom made by that distinguished
local wit, the Colebrook barber, who happened to be sitting insolently
in the tap-room of the New Inn near the harbour, where the captain had
entered to buy an ounce of tobacco. After paying for his purchase with
three half-pence extracted from the corner of a handkerchief which he
carried in the cuff of his sleeve, Captain Hagberd went out. As soon
as the door was shut the barber laughed. "The old one and the young one
will be strolling arm in arm to get shaved in my place presently. The
tailor shall be set to work, and the barber, and the candlestick maker;
high old times are coming for Colebrook, they are coming, to be sure. It
used to be 'next week,' now it has come to 'next month,' and so on--soon
it will be next spring, for all I know."

Noticing a stranger listening to him with a vacant grin, he explained,
stretching out his legs cynically, that this queer old Hagberd, a
retired coasting-skipper, was waiting for the return of a son of his.
The boy had been driven away from home, he shouldn't wonder; had run
away to sea and had never been heard of since. Put to rest in Davy
Jones's locker this many a day, as likely as not. That old man came
flying to Colebrook three years ago all in black broadcloth (had lost
his wife lately then), getting out of a third-class smoker as if the
devil had been at his heels; and the only thing that brought him down
was a letter--a hoax probably. Some joker had written to him about a
seafaring man with some such name who was supposed to be hanging about
some girl or other, either in Colebrook or in the neighbourhood. "Funny,
ain't it?" The old chap had been advertising in the London papers for
Harry Hagberd, and offering rewards for any sort of likely information.
And the barber would go on to describe with sardonic gusto, how that
stranger in mourning had been seen exploring the country, in carts, on
foot, taking everybody into his confidence, visiting all the inns
and alehouses for miles around, stopping people on the road with his
questions, looking into the very ditches almost; first in the greatest
excitement, then with a plodding sort of perseverance, growing slower
and slower; and he could not even tell you plainly how his son looked.
The sailor was supposed to be one of two that had left a timber
ship, and to have been seen dangling after some girl; but the old man
described a boy of fourteen or so--"a clever-looking, high-spirited
boy." And when people only smiled at this he would rub his forehead in
a confused sort of way before he slunk off, looking offended. He found
nobody, of course; not a trace of anybody--never heard of anything worth
belief, at any rate; but he had not been able somehow to tear himself
away from Colebrook.

"It was the shock of this disappointment, perhaps, coming soon after the
loss of his wife, that had driven him crazy on that point," the barber
suggested, with an air of great psychological insight. After a time the
old man abandoned the active search. His son had evidently gone away;
but he settled himself to wait. His son had been once at least in
Colebrook in preference to his native place. There must have been some
reason for it, he seemed to think, some very powerful inducement, that
would bring him back to Colebrook again.

"Ha, ha, ha! Why, of course, Colebrook. Where else? That's the only
place in the United Kingdom for your long-lost sons. So he sold up his
old home in Colchester, and down he comes here. Well, it's a craze,
like any other. Wouldn't catch me going crazy over any of my youngsters
clearing out. I've got eight of them at home." The barber was showing
off his strength of mind in the midst of a laughter that shook the
tap-room.

Strange, though, that sort of thing, he would confess, with the
frankness of a superior intelligence, seemed to be catching. His
establishment, for instance, was near the harbour, and whenever a
sailor-man came in for a hair-cut or a shave--if it was a strange face he
couldn't help thinking directly, "Suppose he's the son of old Hagberd!"
He laughed at himself for it. It was a strong craze. He could remember
the time when the whole town was full of it. But he had his hopes of the
old chap yet. He would cure him by a course of judicious chaffing. He
was watching the progress of the treatment. Next week--next month--next
year! When the old skipper had put off the date of that return till next
year, he would be well on his way to not saying any more about it. In
other matters he was quite rational, so this, too, was bound to come.
Such was the barber's firm opinion.

Nobody had ever contradicted him; his own hair had gone grey since
that time, and Captain Hagberd's beard had turned quite white, and had
acquired a majestic flow over the No. 1 canvas suit, which he had made
for himself secretly with tarred twine, and had assumed suddenly, coming
out in it one fine morning, whereas the evening before he had been seen
going home in his mourning of broadcloth. It caused a sensation in the
High Street--shopkeepers coming to their doors, people in the houses
snatching up their hats to run out--a stir at which he seemed strangely
surprised at first, and then scared; but his only answer to the
wondering questions was that startled and evasive, "For the present."

That sensation had been forgotten, long ago; and Captain Hagberd
himself, if not forgotten, had come to be disregarded--the penalty of
dailiness--as the sun itself is disregarded unless it makes its power
felt heavily. Captain Hagberd's movements showed no infirmity: he walked
stiffly in his suit of canvas, a quaint and remarkable figure; only his
eyes wandered more furtively perhaps than of yore. His manner abroad had
lost its excitable watchfulness; it had become puzzled and diffident,
as though he had suspected that there was somewhere about him something
slightly compromising, some embarrassing oddity; and yet had remained
unable to discover what on earth this something wrong could be.

He was unwilling now to talk with the townsfolk. He had earned for
himself the reputation of an awful skinflint, of a miser in the matter
of living. He mumbled regretfully in the shops, bought inferior scraps
of meat after long hesitations; and discouraged all allusions to his
costume. It was as the barber had foretold. For all one could tell, he
had recovered already from the disease of hope; and only Miss Bessie
Carvil knew that he said nothing about his son's return because with him
it was no longer "next week," "next month," or even "next year." It was
"to-morrow."

In their intimacy of back yard and front garden he talked with her
paternally, reasonably, and dogmatically, with a touch of arbitrariness.
They met on the ground of unreserved confidence, which was authenticated
by an affectionate wink now and then. Miss Carvil had come to look
forward rather to these winks. At first they had discomposed her: the
poor fellow was mad. Afterwards she had learned to laugh at them: there
was no harm in him. Now she was aware of an unacknowledged, pleasurable,
incredulous emotion, expressed by a faint blush. He winked not in the
least vulgarly; his thin red face with a well-modelled curved nose, had
a sort of distinction--the more so that when he talked to her he looked
with a steadier and more intelligent glance. A handsome, hale, upright,
capable man, with a white beard. You did not think of his age. His son,
he affirmed, had resembled him amazingly from his earliest babyhood.

Harry would be one-and-thirty next July, he declared. Proper age to get
married with a nice, sensible girl that could appreciate a good home. He
was a very high-spirited boy. High-spirited husbands were the easiest
to manage. These mean, soft chaps, that you would think butter
wouldn't melt in their mouths, were the ones to make a woman thoroughly
miserable. And there was nothing like a home--a fireside--a good roof:
no turning out of your warm bed in all sorts of weather. "Eh, my dear?"

Captain Hagberd had been one of those sailors that pursue their calling
within sight of land. One of the many children of a bankrupt farmer, he
had been apprenticed hurriedly to a coasting skipper, and had remained
on the coast all his sea life. It must have been a hard one at first:
he had never taken to it; his affection turned to the land, with its
innumerable houses, with its quiet lives gathered round its firesides.
Many sailors feel and profess a rational dislike for the sea, but his
was a profound and emotional animosity--as if the love of the stabler
element had been bred into him through many generations.

"People did not know what they let their boys in for when they let them
go to sea," he expounded to Bessie. "As soon make convicts of them at
once." He did not believe you ever got used to it. The weariness of such
a life got worse as you got older. What sort of trade was it in which
more than half your time you did not put your foot inside your house?
Directly you got out to sea you had no means of knowing what went on
at home. One might have thought him weary of distant voyages; and the
longest he had ever made had lasted a fortnight, of which the most part
had been spent at anchor, sheltering from the weather. As soon as his
wife had inherited a house and enough to live on (from a bachelor uncle
who had made some money in the coal business) he threw up his command of
an East-coast collier with a feeling as though he had escaped from the
galleys. After all these years he might have counted on the fingers of
his two hands all the days he had been out of sight of England. He
had never known what it was to be out of soundings. "I have never been
further than eighty fathoms from the land," was one of his boasts.

Bessie Carvil heard all these things. In front of their cottage grew an
under-sized ash; and on summer afternoons she would bring out a chair
on the grass-plot and sit down with her sewing. Captain Hagberd, in his
canvas suit, leaned on a spade. He dug every day in his front plot. He
turned it over and over several times every year, but was not going to
plant anything "just at present."

To Bessie Carvil he would state more explicitly: "Not till our Harry
comes home to-morrow." And she had heard this formula of hope so often
that it only awakened the vaguest pity in her heart for that hopeful old
man.

Everything was put off in that way, and everything was being prepared
likewise for to-morrow. There was a boxful of packets of various
flower-seeds to choose from, for the front garden. "He will doubtless let
you have your say about that, my dear," Captain Hagberd intimated to her
across the railing.

Miss Bessie's head remained bowed over her work. She had heard all this
so many times. But now and then she would rise, lay down her sewing, and
come slowly to the fence. There was a charm in these gentle ravings. He
was determined that his son should not go away again for the want of a
home all ready for him. He had been filling the other cottage with all
sorts of furniture. She imagined it all new, fresh with varnish, piled
up as in a warehouse. There would be tables wrapped up in sacking; rolls
of carpets thick and vertical like fragments of columns, the gleam of
white marble tops in the dimness of the drawn blinds. Captain Hagberd
always described his purchases to her, carefully, as to a person having
a legitimate interest in them. The overgrown yard of his cottage could
be laid over with concrete... after to-morrow.

"We may just as well do away with the fence. You could have your
drying-line out, quite clear of your flowers." He winked, and she would
blush faintly.

This madness that had entered her life through the kind impulses of her
heart had reasonable details. What if some day his son returned? But she
could not even be quite sure that he ever had a son; and if he existed
anywhere he had been too long away. When Captain Hagberd got excited in
his talk she would steady him by a pretence of belief, laughing a little
to salve her conscience.

Only once she had tried pityingly to throw some doubt on that hope
doomed to disappointment, but the effect of her attempt had scared her
very much. All at once over that man's face there came an expression of
horror and incredulity, as though he had seen a crack open out in the
firmament.

"You--you--you don't think he's drowned!"

For a moment he seemed to her ready to go out of his mind, for in his
ordinary state she thought him more sane than people gave him credit
for. On that occasion the violence of the emotion was followed by a most
paternal and complacent recovery.

"Don't alarm yourself, my dear," he said a little cunningly: "the sea
can't keep him. He does not belong to it. None of us Hagberds ever did
belong to it. Look at me; I didn't get drowned. Moreover, he isn't
a sailor at all; and if he is not a sailor he's bound to come back.
There's nothing to prevent him coming back...."

His eyes began to wander.

"To-morrow."

She never tried again, for fear the man should go out of his mind on
the spot. He depended on her. She seemed the only sensible person in
the town; and he would congratulate himself frankly before her face
on having secured such a levelheaded wife for his son. The rest of the
town, he confided to her once, in a fit of temper, was certainly queer.
The way they looked at you--the way they talked to you! He had never got
on with any one in the place. Didn't like the people. He would not have
left his own country if it had not been clear that his son had taken a
fancy to Colebrook.

She humoured him in silence, listening patiently by the fence;
crocheting with downcast eyes. Blushes came with difficulty on her
dead-white complexion, under the negligently twisted opulence of
mahogany-coloured hair. Her father was frankly carroty.

She had a full figure; a tired, unrefreshed face. When Captain Hagberd
vaunted the necessity and propriety of a home and the delights of one's
own fireside, she smiled a little, with her lips only. Her home delights
had been confined to the nursing of her father during the ten best years
of her life.

A bestial roaring coming out of an upstairs window would interrupt their
talk. She would begin at once to roll up her crochet-work or fold her
sewing, without the slightest sign of haste. Meanwhile the howls and
roars of her name would go on, making the fishermen strolling upon the
sea-wall on the other side of the road turn their heads towards the
cottages. She would go in slowly at the front door, and a moment
afterwards there would fall a profound silence. Presently she would
reappear, leading by the hand a man, gross and unwieldy like a
hippopotamus, with a bad-tempered, surly face.

He was a widowed boat-builder, whom blindness had overtaken years before
in the full flush of business. He behaved to his daughter as if she
had been responsible for its incurable character. He had been heard to
bellow at the top of his voice, as if to defy Heaven, that he did not
care: he had made enough money to have ham and eggs for his breakfast
every morning. He thanked God for it, in a fiendish tone as though he
were cursing.

Captain Hagberd had been so unfavourably impressed by his tenant, that
once he told Miss Bessie, "He is a very extravagant fellow, my dear."

She was knitting that day, finishing a pair of socks for her father, who
expected her to keep up the supply dutifully. She hated knitting,
and, as she was just at the heel part, she had to keep her eyes on her
needles.

"Of course it isn't as if he had a son to provide for," Captain
Hagberd went on a little vacantly. "Girls, of course, don't require so
much--h'm-h'm. They don't run away from home, my dear."

"No," said Miss Bessie, quietly.

Captain Hagberd, amongst the mounds of turned-up earth, chuckled. With
his maritime rig, his weather-beaten face, his beard of Father Neptune,
he resembled a deposed sea-god who had exchanged the trident for the
spade.

"And he must look upon you as already provided for, in a manner. That's
the best of it with the girls. The husbands..." He winked. Miss
Bessie, absorbed in her knitting, coloured faintly.

"Bessie! my hat!" old Carvil bellowed out suddenly. He had been sitting
under the tree mute and motionless, like an idol of some remarkably
monstrous superstition. He never opened his mouth but to howl for her,
at her, sometimes about her; and then he did not moderate the terms of
his abuse. Her system was never to answer him at all; and he kept up
his shouting till he got attended to--till she shook him by the arm, or
thrust the mouthpiece of his pipe between his teeth. He was one of the
few blind people who smoke. When he felt the hat being put on his head
he stopped his noise at once. Then he rose, and they passed together
through the gate.

He weighed heavily on her arm. During their slow, toilful walks she
appeared to be dragging with her for a penance the burden of that infirm
bulk. Usually they crossed the road at once (the cottages stood in the
fields near the harbour, two hundred yards away from the end of the
street), and for a long, long time they would remain in view, ascending
imperceptibly the flight of wooden steps that led to the top of the
sea-wall. It ran on from east to west, shutting out the Channel like a
neglected railway embankment, on which no train had ever rolled within
memory of man. Groups of sturdy fishermen would emerge upon the sky,
walk along for a bit, and sink without haste. Their brown nets, like the
cobwebs of gigantic spiders, lay on the shabby grass of the slope; and,
looking up from the end of the street, the people of the town would
recognise the two Carvils by the creeping slowness of their gait.
Captain Hagberd, pottering aimlessly about his cottages, would raise his
head to see how they got on in their promenade.

He advertised still in the Sunday papers for Harry Hagberd. These sheets
were read in foreign parts to the end of the world, he informed Bessie.
At the same time he seemed to think that his son was in England--so
near to Colebrook that he would of course turn up "to-morrow." Bessie,
without committing herself to that opinion in so many words, argued that
in that case the expense of advertising was unnecessary; Captain Hagberd
had better spend that weekly half-crown on himself. She declared she did
not know what he lived on. Her argumentation would puzzle him and cast
him down for a time. "They all do it," he pointed out. There was a whole
column devoted to appeals after missing relatives. He would bring the
newspaper to show her. He and his wife had advertised for years; only
she was an impatient woman. The news from Colebrook had arrived the very
day after her funeral; if she had not been so impatient she might have
been here now, with no more than one day more to wait. "You are not an
impatient woman, my dear."

"I've no patience with you sometimes," she would say.

If he still advertised for his son he did not offer rewards for
information any more; for, with the muddled lucidity of a mental
derangement he had reasoned himself into a conviction as clear as
daylight that he had already attained all that could be expected in that
way. What more could he want? Colebrook was the place, and there was no
need to ask for more. Miss Carvil praised him for his good sense, and
he was soothed by the part she took in his hope, which had become his
delusion; in that idea which blinded his mind to truth and probability,
just as the other old man in the other cottage had been made blind, by
another disease, to the light and beauty of the world.

But anything he could interpret as a doubt--any coldness of assent, or
even a simple inattention to the development of his projects of a home
with his returned son and his son's wife--would irritate him into flings
and jerks and wicked side glances. He would dash his spade into
the ground and walk to and fro before it. Miss Bessie called it his
tantrums. She shook her finger at him. Then, when she came out again,
after he had parted with her in anger, he would watch out of the corner
of his eyes for the least sign of encouragement to approach the iron
railings and resume his fatherly and patronising relations.

For all their intimacy, which had lasted some years now, they had never
talked without a fence or a railing between them. He described to her
all the splendours accumulated for the setting-up of their housekeeping,
but had never invited her to an inspection. No human eye was to behold
them till Harry had his first look. In fact, nobody had ever been
inside his cottage; he did his own housework, and he guarded his son's
privilege so jealously that the small objects of domestic use he bought
sometimes in the town were smuggled rapidly across the front garden
under his canvas coat. Then, coming out, he would remark apologetically,
"It was only a small kettle, my dear."

And, if not too tired with her drudgery, or worried beyond endurance by
her father, she would laugh at him with a blush, and say: "That's all
right, Captain Hagberd; I am not impatient."

"Well, my dear, you haven't long to wait now," he would answer with a
sudden bashfulness, and looking uneasily, as though he had suspected
that there was something wrong somewhere.

Every Monday she paid him his rent over the railings. He clutched
the shillings greedily. He grudged every penny he had to spend on his
maintenance, and when he left her to make his purchases his bearing
changed as soon as he got into the street. Away from the sanction of her
pity, he felt himself exposed without defence. He brushed the walls with
his shoulder. He mistrusted the queerness of the people; yet, by then,
even the town children had left off calling after him, and the tradesmen
served him without a word. The slightest allusion to his clothing had
the power to puzzle and frighten especially, as if it were something
utterly unwarranted and incomprehensible.

In the autumn, the driving rain drummed on his sailcloth suit saturated
almost to the stiffness of sheet-iron, with its surface flowing with
water. When the weather was too bad, he retreated under the tiny porch,
and, standing close against the door, looked at his spade left planted
in the middle of the yard. The ground was so much dug up all over, that
as the season advanced it turned to a quagmire. When it froze hard, he
was disconsolate. What would Harry say? And as he could not have so much
of Bessie's company at that time of the year, the roars of old Carvil,
that came muffled through the closed windows, calling her indoors,
exasperated him greatly.

"Why don't that extravagant fellow get you a servant?" he asked
impatiently one mild afternoon. She had thrown something over her head
to run out for a while.

"I don't know," said the pale Bessie, wearily, staring away with her
heavy-lidded, grey, and unexpectant glance. There were always smudgy
shadows under her eyes, and she did not seem able to see any change or
any end to her life.

"You wait till you get married, my dear," said her only friend, drawing
closer to the fence. "Harry will get you one."

His hopeful craze seemed to mock her own want of hope with so bitter an
aptness that in her nervous irritation she could have screamed at him
outright. But she only said in self-mockery, and speaking to him as
though he had been sane, "Why, Captain Hagberd, your son may not even
want to look at me."

He flung his head back and laughed his throaty affected cackle of anger.

"What! That boy? Not want to look at the only sensible girl for miles
around? What do you think I am here for, my dear--my dear--my dear?...
What? You wait. You just wait. You'll see to-morrow. I'll soon--"

"Bessie! Bessie! Bessie!" howled old Carvil inside. "Bessie!--my pipe!"
That fat blind man had given himself up to a very lust of laziness. He
would not lift his hand to reach for the things she took care to leave
at his very elbow. He would not move a limb; he would not rise from his
chair, he would not put one foot before another, in that parlour (where
he knew his way as well as if he had his sight), without calling her to
his side and hanging all his atrocious weight on her shoulder. He would
not eat one single mouthful of food without her close attendance. He had
made himself helpless beyond his affliction, to enslave her better. She
stood still for a moment, setting her teeth in the dusk, then turned and
walked slowly indoors.

Captain Hagberd went back to his spade. The shouting in Carvil's cottage
stopped, and after a while the window of the parlour downstairs was lit
up. A man coming from the end of the street with a firm leisurely step
passed on, but seemed to have caught sight of Captain Hagberd, because
he turned back a pace or two. A cold white light lingered in the western
sky. The man leaned over the gate in an interested manner.

"You must be Captain Hagberd," he said, with easy assurance.

The old man spun round, pulling out his spade, startled by the strange
voice.

"Yes, I am," he answered nervously.

The other, smiling straight at him, uttered very slowly: "You've been
advertising for your son, I believe?"

"My son Harry," mumbled Captain Hagberd, off his guard for once. "He's
coming home tomorrow."

"The devil he is!" The stranger marvelled greatly, and then went on,
with only a slight change of tone: "You've grown a beard like Father
Christmas himself."

Captain Hagberd drew a little nearer, and leaned forward over his
spade. "Go your way," he said, resentfully and timidly at the same time,
because he was always afraid of being laughed at. Every mental
state, even madness, has its equilibrium based upon self-esteem. Its
disturbance causes unhappiness; and Captain Hagberd lived amongst a
scheme of settled notions which it pained him to feel disturbed by
people's grins. Yes, people's grins were awful. They hinted at something
wrong: but what? He could not tell; and that stranger was obviously
grinning--had come on purpose to grin. It was bad enough on the streets,
but he had never before been outraged like this.

The stranger, unaware how near he was of having his head laid open with
a spade, said seriously: "I am not trespassing where I stand, am I? I
fancy there's something wrong about your news. Suppose you let me come
in."

"_You_ come in!" murmured old Hagberd, with inexpressible horror.

"I could give you some real information about your son--the very latest
tip, if you care to hear."

"No," shouted Hagberd. He began to pace wildly to and fro, he shouldered
his spade, he gesticulated with his other arm. "Here's a fellow--a
grinning fellow, who says there's something wrong. I've got more
information than you're aware of. I've all the information I want.
I've had it for years--for years--for years--enough to last me till
to-morrow. Let you come in, indeed! What would Harry say?"

Bessie Carvil's figure appeared in black silhouette on the parlour
window; then, with the sound of an opening door, flitted out before the
other cottage, all black, but with something white over her head.
These two voices beginning to talk suddenly outside (she had heard them
indoors) had given her such an emotion that she could not utter a sound.

Captain Hagberd seemed to be trying to find his way out of a cage. His
feet squelched in the puddles left by his industry. He stumbled in the
holes of the ruined grass-plot. He ran blindly against the fence.

"Here, steady a bit!" said the man at the gate, gravely stretching his
arm over and catching him by the sleeve. "Somebody's been trying to get
at you. Hallo! what's this rig you've got on? Storm canvas, by George!"
He had a big laugh. "Well, you _are_ a character!"

Captain Hagberd jerked himself free, and began to back away shrinkingly.
"For the present," he muttered, in a crestfallen tone.

"What's the matter with him?" The stranger addressed Bessie with the
utmost familiarity, in a deliberate, explanatory tone. "I didn't want
to startle the old man." He lowered his voice as though he had known
her for years. "I dropped into a barber's on my way, to get a twopenny
shave, and they told me there he was something of a character. The old
man has been a character all his life."

Captain Hagberd, daunted by the allusion to his clothing, had retreated
inside, taking his spade with him; and the two at the gate, startled
by the unexpected slamming of the door, heard the bolts being shot, the
snapping of the lock, and the echo of an affected gurgling laugh within.

"I didn't want to upset him," the man said, after a short silence.
"What's the meaning of all this? He isn't quite crazy."

"He has been worrying a long time about his lost son," said Bessie, in a
low, apologetic tone.

"Well, I am his son."

"Harry!" she cried--and was profoundly silent.

"Know my name? Friends with the old man, eh?"

"He's our landlord," Bessie faltered out, catching hold of the iron
railing.

"Owns both them rabbit-hutches, does he?" commented young Hagberd,
scornfully; "just the thing he would be proud of. Can you tell me who's
that chap coming to-morrow? You must know something of it. I tell you,
it's a swindle on the old man--nothing else."

She did not answer, helpless before an insurmountable difficulty,
appalled before the necessity, the impossibility and the dread of an
explanation in which she and madness seemed involved together.

"Oh--I am so sorry," she murmured.

"What's the matter?" he said, with serenity. "You needn't be afraid
of upsetting me. It's the other fellow that'll be upset when he least
expects it. I don't care a hang; but there will be some fun when he
shows his mug to-morrow. I don't care _that_ for the old man's pieces,
but right is right. You shall see me put a head on that coon--whoever he
is!"

He had come nearer, and towered above her on the other side of the
railings. He glanced at her hands. He fancied she was trembling, and it
occurred to him that she had her part perhaps in that little game that
was to be sprung on his old man to-morrow. He had come just in time
to spoil their sport. He was entertained by the idea--scornful of the
baffled plot. But all his life he had been full of indulgence for all
sorts of women's tricks. She really was trembling very much; her wrap
had slipped off her head. "Poor devil!" he thought. "Never mind about
that chap. I daresay he'll change his mind before to-morrow. But what
about me? I can't loaf about the gate til the morning."

She burst out: "It is _you_--you yourself that he's waiting for. It is
_you_ who come to-morrow."

He murmured. "Oh! It's me!" blankly, and they seemed to become
breathless together. Apparently he was pondering over what he had heard;
then, without irritation, but evidently perplexed, he said: "I don't
understand. I hadn't written or anything. It's my chum who saw the paper
and told me--this very morning.... Eh? what?"

He bent his ear; she whispered rapidly, and he listened for a while,
muttering the words "yes" and "I see" at times. Then, "But why won't
today do?" he queried at last.

"You didn't understand me!" she exclaimed, impatiently. The clear
streak of light under the clouds died out in the west. Again he stooped
slightly to hear better; and the deep night buried everything of the
whispering woman and the attentive man, except the familiar contiguity
of their faces, with its air of secrecy and caress.

He squared his shoulders; the broad-brimmed shadow of a hat sat
cavalierly on his head. "Awkward this, eh?" he appealed to her.
"To-morrow? Well, well! Never heard tell of anything like this. It's all
to-morrow, then, without any sort of to-day, as far as I can see."

She remained still and mute.

"And you have been encouraging this funny notion," he said.

"I never contradicted him."

"Why didn't you?"

"What for should I?" she defended herself. "It would only have made him
miserable. He would have gone out of his mind."

"His mind!" he muttered, and heard a short nervous laugh from her.

"Where was the harm? Was I to quarrel with the poor old man? It was
easier to half believe it myself."

"Aye, aye," he meditated, intelligently. "I suppose the old chap got
around you somehow with his soft talk. You are good-hearted."

Her hands moved up in the dark nervously. "And it might have been true.
It was true. It has come. Here it is. This is the to-morrow we have been
waiting for."

She drew a breath, and he said, good-humouredly: "Aye, with the door
shut. I wouldn't care if... And you think he could be brought round
to recognise me... Eh? What?... You could do it? In a week you
say? H'm, I daresay you could--but do you think I could hold out a
week in this dead-alive place? Not me! I want either hard work, or an
all-fired racket, or more space than there is in the whole of England. I
have been in this place, though, once before, and for more than a week.
The old man was advertising for me then, and a chum I had with me had
a notion of getting a couple quid out of him by writing a lot of silly
nonsense in a letter. That lark did not come off, though. We had to
clear out--and none too soon. But this time I've a chum waiting for me
in London, and besides..."

Bessie Carvil was breathing quickly.

"What if I tried a knock at the door?" he suggested.

"Try," she said.

Captain Hagberd's gate squeaked, and the shadow of the son moved on,
then stopped with another deep laugh in the throat, like the father's,
only soft and gentle, thrilling to the woman's heart, awakening to her
ears.

"He isn't frisky--is he? I would be afraid to lay hold of him. The chaps
are always telling me I don't know my own strength."

"He's the most harmless creature that ever lived," she interrupted.

"You wouldn't say so if you had seen him chasing me upstairs with a hard
leather strap," he said; "I haven't forgotten it in sixteen years."

She got warm from head to foot under another soft, subdued laugh. At the
rat-tat-tat of the knocker her heart flew into her mouth.

"Hey, dad! Let me in. I am Harry, I am. Straight! Come back home a day
too soon."

One of the windows upstairs ran up.

"A grinning, information fellow," said the voice of old Hagberd, up in
the darkness. "Don't you have anything to do with him. It will spoil
everything."

She heard Harry Hagberd say, "Hallo, dad," then a clanging clatter. The
window rumbled down, and he stood before her again.

"It's just like old times. Nearly walloped the life out of me to stop me
going away, and now I come back he throws a confounded shovel at my head
to keep me out. It grazed my shoulder."

She shuddered.

"I wouldn't care," he began, "only I spent my last shillings on the
railway fare and my last twopence on a shave--out of respect for the old
man."

"Are you really Harry Hagberd?" she asked. "Can you prove it?"

"Can I prove it? Can any one else prove it?" he said jovially. "Prove
with what? What do I want to prove? There isn't a single corner in the
world, barring England, perhaps, where you could not find some man, or
more likely woman, that would remember me for Harry Hagberd. I am more
like Harry Hagberd than any man alive; and I can prove it to you in a
minute, if you will let me step inside your gate."

"Come in," she said.

He entered then the front garden of the Carvils. His tall shadow strode
with a swagger; she turned her back on the window and waited, watching
the shape, of which the footfalls seemed the most material part. The
light fell on a tilted hat; a powerful shoulder, that seemed to cleave
the darkness; on a leg stepping out. He swung about and stood still,
facing the illuminated parlour window at her back, turning his head from
side to side, laughing softly to himself.

"Just fancy, for a minute, the old man's beard stuck on to my chin. Hey?
Now say. I was the very spit of him from a boy."

"It's true," she murmured to herself.

"And that's about as far as it goes. He was always one of your domestic
characters. Why, I remember how he used to go about looking very sick
for three days before he had to leave home on one of his trips to South
Shields for coal. He had a standing charter from the gas-works. You
would think he was off on a whaling cruise--three years and a tail. Ha,
ha! Not a bit of it. Ten days on the outside. The Skimmer of the Seas
was a smart craft. Fine name, wasn't it? Mother's uncle owned her...."

He interrupted himself, and in a lowered voice, "Did he ever tell you
what mother died of?" he asked.

"Yes," said Miss Bessie, bitterly; "from impatience."

He made no sound for a while; then brusquely: "They were so afraid I
would turn out badly that they fairly drove me away. Mother nagged at me
for being idle, and the old man said he would cut my soul out of my
body rather than let me go to sea. Well, it looked as if he would do it
too--so I went. It looks to me sometimes as if I had been born to them
by a mistake--in that other hutch of a house."

"Where ought you to have been born by rights?" Bessie Carvil interrupted
him, defiantly.

"In the open, upon a beach, on a windy night," he said, quick as
lightning. Then he mused slowly. "They were characters, both of them, by
George; and the old man keeps it up well--don't he? A damned shovel on
the--Hark! who's that making that row? 'Bessie, Bessie.' It's in your
house."

"It's for me," she said, with indifference.

He stepped aside, out of the streak of light. "Your husband?" he
inquired, with the tone of a man accustomed to unlawful trysts. "Fine
voice for a ship's deck in a thundering squall."

"No; my father. I am not married."

"You seem a fine girl, Miss Bessie, dear," he said at once.

She turned her face away.

"Oh, I say,--what's up? Who's murdering him?"

"He wants his tea." She faced him, still and tall, with averted head,
with her hands hanging clasped before her.

"Hadn't you better go in?" he suggested, after watching for a while the
nape of her neck, a patch of dazzling white skin and soft shadow above
the sombre line of her shoulders. Her wrap had slipped down to her
elbows. "You'll have all the town coming out presently. I'll wait here a
bit."

Her wrap fell to the ground, and he stooped to pick it up; she had
vanished. He threw it over his arm, and approaching the window squarely
he saw a monstrous form of a fat man in an armchair, an unshaded lamp,
the yawning of an enormous mouth in a big flat face encircled by a
ragged halo of hair--Miss Bessie's head and bust. The shouting stopped;
the blind ran down. He lost himself in thinking how awkward it was.
Father mad; no getting into the house. No money to get back; a hungry
chum in London who would begin to think he had been given the go-by.
"Damn!" he muttered. He could break the door in, certainly; but
they would perhaps bundle him into chokey for that without asking
questions--no great matter, only he was confoundedly afraid of being
locked up, even in mistake. He turned cold at the thought. He stamped
his feet on the sodden grass.

"What are you?--a sailor?" said an agitated voice.

She had flitted out, a shadow herself, attracted by the reckless shadow
waiting under the wall of her home.

"Anything. Enough of a sailor to be worth my salt before the mast. Came
home that way this time."

"Where do you come from?" she asked.

"Right away from a jolly good spree," he said, "by the London
train--see? Ough! I hate being shut up in a train. I don't mind a house
so much."

"Ah," she said; "that's lucky."

"Because in a house you can at any time open the blamed door and walk
away straight before you."

"And never come back?"

"Not for sixteen years at least," he laughed. "To a rabbit hutch, and
get a confounded old shovel..."

"A ship is not so very big," she taunted.

"No, but the sea is great."

She dropped her head, and as if her ears had been opened to the voices
of the world, she heard, beyond the rampart of sea-wall, the swell
of yesterday's gale breaking on the beach with monotonous and solemn
vibrations, as if all the earth had been a tolling bell.

"And then, why, a ship's a ship. You love her and leave her; and a
voyage isn't a marriage." He quoted the sailor's saying lightly.

"It is not a marriage," she whispered.

"I never took a false name, and I've never yet told a lie to a woman.
What lie? Why, _the_ lie--. Take me or leave me, I say: and if you take
me, then it is..." He hummed a snatch very low, leaning against the
wall.

    "Oh, ho, ho Rio!
     And fare thee well,
     My bonnie young girl,
     We're bound to Rio Grande."

"Capstan song," he explained. Her teeth chattered.

"You are cold," he said. "Here's that affair of yours I picked up." She
felt his hands about her, wrapping her closely. "Hold the ends together
in front," he commanded.

"What did you come here for?" she asked, repressing a shudder.

"Five quid," he answered, promptly. "We let our spree go on a little too
long and got hard up."

"You've been drinking?" she said.

"Blind three days; on purpose. I am not given that way--don't you think.
There's nothing and nobody that can get over me unless I like. I can be
as steady as a rock. My chum sees the paper this morning, and says he to
me: 'Go on, Harry: loving parent. That's five quid sure.' So we scraped
all our pockets for the fare. Devil of a lark!"

"You have a hard heart, I am afraid," she sighed.

"What for? For running away? Why! he wanted to make a lawyer's clerk of
me--just to please himself. Master in his own house; and my poor mother
egged him on--for my good, I suppose. Well, then--so long; and I went.
No, I tell you: the day I cleared out, I was all black and blue from his
great fondness for me. Ah! he was always a bit of a character. Look at
that shovel now. Off his chump? Not much. That's just exactly like my
dad. He wants me here just to have somebody to order about. However,
we two were hard up; and what's five quid to him--once in sixteen hard
years?"

"Oh, but I am sorry for you. Did you never want to come back home?"

"Be a lawyer's clerk and rot here--in some such place as this?" he cried
in contempt. "What! if the old man set me up in a home to-day, I would
kick it down about my ears--or else die there before the third day was
out."

"And where else is it that you hope to die?"

"In the bush somewhere; in the sea; on a blamed mountain-top for choice.
At home? Yes! the world's my home; but I expect I'll die in a hospital
some day. What of that? Any place is good enough, as long as I've lived;
and I've been everything you can think of almost but a tailor or a
soldier. I've been a boundary rider; I've sheared sheep; and humped my
swag; and harpooned a whale. I've rigged ships, and prospected for gold,
and skinned dead bullocks,--and turned my back on more money than the
old man would have scraped in his whole life. Ha, ha!"

He overwhelmed her. She pulled herself together and managed to utter,
"Time to rest now."

He straightened himself up, away from the wall, and in a severe voice
said, "Time to go."

But he did not move. He leaned back again, and hummed thoughtfully a bar
or two of an outlandish tune.

She felt as if she were about to cry. "That's another of your cruel
songs," she said.

"Learned it in Mexico--in Sonora." He talked easily. "It is the song of
the Gambucinos. You don't know? The song of restless men. Nothing could
hold them in one place--not even a woman. You used to meet one of them
now and again, in the old days, on the edge of the gold country, away
north there beyond the Rio Gila. I've seen it. A prospecting engineer
in Mazatlan took me along with him to help look after the waggons.
A sailor's a handy chap to have about you anyhow. It's all a
desert: cracks in the earth that you can't see the bottom of; and
mountains--sheer rocks standing up high like walls and church spires,
only a hundred times bigger. The valleys are full of boulders and black
stones. There's not a blade of grass to see; and the sun sets more red
over that country than I have seen it anywhere--blood-red and angry. It
_is_ fine."

"You do not want to go back there again?" she stammered out.

He laughed a little. "No. That's the blamed gold country. It gave me the
shivers sometimes to look at it--and we were a big lot of men together,
mind; but these Gambucinos wandered alone. They knew that country before
anybody had ever heard of it. They had a sort of gift for prospecting,
and the fever of it was on them too; and they did not seem to want the
gold very much. They would find some rich spot, and then turn their
backs on it; pick up perhaps a little--enough for a spree--and then be
off again, looking for more. They never stopped long where there were
houses; they had no wife, no chick, no home, never a chum. You couldn't
be friends with a Gambucino; they were too restless--here to-day, and
gone, God knows where, to-morrow. They told no one of their finds, and
there has never been a Gambucino well off. It was not for the gold they
cared; it was the wandering about looking for it in the stony country
that got into them and wouldn't let them rest; so that no woman yet born
could hold a Gambucino for more than a week. That's what the song says.
It's all about a pretty girl that tried hard to keep hold of a Gambucino
lover, so that he should bring her lots of gold. No fear! Off he went,
and she never saw him again."

"What became of her?" she breathed out.

"The song don't tell. Cried a bit, I daresay. They were the fellows:
kiss and go. But it's the looking for a thing--a something...
Sometimes I think I am a sort of Gambucino myself."

"No woman can hold you, then," she began in a brazen voice, which
quavered suddenly before the end.

"No longer than a week," he joked, playing upon her very heartstrings
with the gay, tender note of his laugh; "and yet I am fond of them all.
Anything for a woman of the right sort. The scrapes they got me into,
and the scrapes they got me out of! I love them at first sight. I've
fallen in love with you already, Miss--Bessie's your name--eh?"

She backed away a little, and with a trembling laugh:

"You haven't seen my face yet."

He bent forward gallantly. "A little pale: it suits some. But you are a
fine figure of a girl, Miss Bessie."

She was all in a flutter. Nobody had ever said so much to her before.

His tone changed. "I am getting middling hungry, though. Had no
breakfast to-day. Couldn't you scare up some bread from that tea for me,
or--"

She was gone already. He had been on the point of asking her to let him
come inside. No matter. Anywhere would do. Devil of a fix! What would
his chum think?

"I didn't ask you as a beggar," he said, jestingly, taking a piece
of bread-and-butter from the plate she held before him. "I asked as a
friend. My dad is rich, you know."

"He starves himself for your sake."

"And I have starved for his whim," he said, taking up another piece.

"All he has in the world is for you," she pleaded.

"Yes, if I come here to sit on it like a dam' toad in a hole. Thank you;
and what about the shovel, eh? He always had a queer way of showing his
love."

"I could bring him round in a week," she suggested, timidly.

He was too hungry to answer her; and, holding the plate submissively to
his hand, she began to whisper up to him in a quick, panting voice.
He listened, amazed, eating slower and slower, till at last his jaws
stopped altogether. "That's his game, is it?" he said, in a rising tone
of scathing contempt. An ungovernable movement of his arm sent the plate
flying out of her fingers. He shot out a violent curse.

She shrank from him, putting her hand against the wall.

"No!" he raged. "He expects! Expects _me_--for his rotten money!...
Who wants his home? Mad--not he! Don't you think. He wants his own way.
He wanted to turn me into a miserable lawyer's clerk, and now he wants
to make of me a blamed tame rabbit in a cage. Of me! Of me!" His subdued
angry laugh frightened her now.

"The whole world ain't a bit too big for me to spread my elbows in, I
can tell you--what's your name--Bessie--let alone a dam' parlour in a
hutch. Marry! He wants me to marry and settle! And as likely as not he
has looked out the girl too--dash my soul! And do you know the Judy, may
I ask?"

She shook all over with noiseless dry sobs; but he was fuming and
fretting too much to notice her distress. He bit his thumb with rage at
the mere idea. A window rattled up.

"A grinning, information fellow," pronounced old Hagberd dogmatically,
in measured tones. And the sound of his voice seemed to Bessie to make
the night itself mad--to pour insanity and disaster on the earth. "Now
I know what's wrong with the people here, my dear. Why, of course!
With this mad chap going about. Don't you have anything to do with him,
Bessie. Bessie, I say!"

They stood as if dumb. The old man fidgeted and mumbled to himself at
the window. Suddenly he cried, piercingly: "Bessie--I see you. I'll tell
Harry."

She made a movement as if to run away, but stopped and raised her hands
to her temples. Young Hagberd, shadowy and big, stirred no more than a
man of bronze. Over their heads the crazy night whimpered and scolded in
an old man's voice.

"Send him away, my dear. He's only a vagabond. What you want is a good
home of your own. That chap has no home--he's not like Harry. He can't
be Harry. Harry is coming to-morrow. Do you hear? One day more," he
babbled more excitedly; "never you fear--Harry shall marry you."

His voice rose very shrill and mad against the regular deep soughing of
the swell coiling heavily about the outer face of the sea-wall.

"He will have to. I shall make him, or if not"--he swore a great
oath--"I'll cut him off with a shilling to-morrow, and leave everything
to you. I shall. To you. Let him starve."

The window rattled down.

Harry drew a deep breath, and took one step toward Bessie. "So it's
you--the girl," he said, in a lowered voice. She had not moved, and she
remained half turned away from him, pressing her head in the palms of
her hands. "My word!" he continued, with an invisible half-smile on his
lips. "I have a great mind to stop...."

Her elbows were trembling violently.

"For a week," he finished without a pause.

She clapped her hands to her face.

He came up quite close, and took hold of her wrists gently. She felt his
breath on her ear.

"It's a scrape I am in--this, and it is you that must see me through."
He was trying to uncover her face. She resisted. He let her go then, and
stepping back a little, "Have you got any money?" he asked. "I must be
off now."

She nodded quickly her shamefaced head, and he waited, looking away from
her, while, trembling all over and bowing her neck, she tried to find
the pocket of her dress.

"Here it is!" she whispered. "Oh, go away! go away for God's sake! If I
had more--more--I would give it all to forget--to make you forget."

He extended his hand. "No fear! I haven't forgotten a single one of you
in the world. Some gave me more than money--but I am a beggar now--and
you women always had to get me out of my scrapes."

He swaggered up to the parlour window, and in the dim light filtering
through the blind, looked at the coin lying in his palm. It was a
half-sovereign. He slipped it into his pocket. She stood a little on
one side, with her head drooping, as if wounded; with her arms hanging
passive by her side, as if dead.

"You can't buy me in," he said, "and you can't buy yourself out."

He set his hat firmly with a little tap, and next moment she felt
herself lifted up in the powerful embrace of his arms. Her feet lost the
ground; her head hung back; he showered kisses on her face with a silent
and over-mastering ardour, as if in haste to get at her very soul. He
kissed her pale cheeks, her hard forehead, her heavy eyelids, her faded
lips; and the measured blows and sighs of the rising tide accompanied
the enfolding power of his arms, the overwhelming might of his caresses.
It was as if the sea, breaking down the wall protecting all the homes
of the town, had sent a wave over her head. It passed on; she staggered
backwards, with her shoulders against the wall, exhausted, as if she had
been stranded there after a storm and a shipwreck.

She opened her eyes after awhile; and listening to the firm, leisurely
footsteps going away with their conquest, began to gather her skirts,
staring all the time before her. Suddenly she darted through the open
gate into the dark and deserted street.

"Stop!" she shouted. "Don't go!"

And listening with an attentive poise of the head, she could not tell
whether it was the beat of the swell or his fateful tread that seemed
to fall cruelly upon her heart. Presently every sound grew fainter, as
though she were slowly turning into stone. A fear of this awful silence
came to her--worse than the fear of death. She called upon her ebbing
strength for the final appeal:

"Harry!"

Not even the dying echo of a footstep. Nothing. The thundering of the
surf, the voice of the restless sea itself, seemed stopped. There was
not a sound--no whisper of life, as though she were alone and lost in
that stony country of which she had heard, where madmen go looking for
gold and spurn the find.

Captain Hagberd, inside his dark house, had kept on the alert. A window
ran up; and in the silence of the stony country a voice spoke above
her head, high up in the black air--the voice of madness, lies and
despair--the voice of inextinguishable hope. "Is he gone yet--that
information fellow? Do you hear him about, my dear?"

She burst into tears. "No! no! no! I don't hear him any more," she
sobbed.

He began to chuckle up there triumphantly. "You frightened him away.
Good girl. Now we shall be all right. Don't you be impatient, my dear.
One day more."

In the other house old Carvil, wallowing regally in his arm-chair, with
a globe lamp burning by his side on the table, yelled for her, in a
fiendish voice: "Bessie! Bessie! you Bessie!"

She heard him at last, and, as if overcome by fate, began to totter
silently back toward her stuffy little inferno of a cottage. It had no
lofty portal, no terrific inscription of forfeited hopes--she did not
understand wherein she had sinned.

Captain Hagberd had gradually worked himself into a state of noisy
happiness up there.

"Go in! Keep quiet!" she turned upon him tearfully, from the doorstep
below.

He rebelled against her authority in his great joy at having got rid at
last of that "something wrong." It was as if all the hopeful madness of
the world had broken out to bring terror upon her heart, with the voice
of that old man shouting of his trust in an everlasting to-morrow.



'Twixt Land & Sea Tales




Contents


A Smile of Fortune
The Secret Sharer
Freya of the Seven Isles




A SMILE OF FORTUNE--HARBOUR STORY




Ever since the sun rose I had been looking ahead.  The ship glided
gently in smooth water.  After a sixty days' passage I was anxious
to make my landfall, a fertile and beautiful island of the tropics.
The more enthusiastic of its inhabitants delight in describing it
as the "Pearl of the Ocean."  Well, let us call it the "Pearl."
It's a good name.  A pearl distilling much sweetness upon the
world.

This is only a way of telling you that first-rate sugar-cane is
grown there.  All the population of the Pearl lives for it and by
it.  Sugar is their daily bread, as it were.  And I was coming to
them for a cargo of sugar in the hope of the crop having been good
and of the freights being high.

Mr. Burns, my chief mate, made out the land first; and very soon I
became entranced by this blue, pinnacled apparition, almost
transparent against the light of the sky, a mere emanation, the
astral body of an island risen to greet me from afar.  It is a rare
phenomenon, such a sight of the Pearl at sixty miles off.  And I
wondered half seriously whether it was a good omen, whether what
would meet me in that island would be as luckily exceptional as
this beautiful, dreamlike vision so very few seamen have been
privileged to behold.

But horrid thoughts of business interfered with my enjoyment of an
accomplished passage.  I was anxious for success and I wished, too,
to do justice to the flattering latitude of my owners' instructions
contained in one noble phrase:  "We leave it to you to do the best
you can with the ship." . . . All the world being thus given me for
a stage, my abilities appeared to me no bigger than a pinhead.

Meantime the wind dropped, and Mr. Burns began to make disagreeable
remarks about my usual bad luck.  I believe it was his devotion for
me which made him critically outspoken on every occasion.  All the
same, I would not have put up with his humours if it had not been
my lot at one time to nurse him through a desperate illness at sea.
After snatching him out of the jaws of death, so to speak, it would
have been absurd to throw away such an efficient officer.  But
sometimes I wished he would dismiss himself.

We were late in closing in with the land, and had to anchor outside
the harbour till next day.  An unpleasant and unrestful night
followed.  In this roadstead, strange to us both, Burns and I
remained on deck almost all the time.  Clouds swirled down the
porphyry crags under which we lay.  The rising wind made a great
bullying noise amongst the naked spars, with interludes of sad
moaning.  I remarked that we had been in luck to fetch the
anchorage before dark.  It would have been a nasty, anxious night
to hang off a harbour under canvas.  But my chief mate was
uncompromising in his attitude.

"Luck, you call it, sir!  Ay--our usual luck.  The sort of luck to
thank God it's no worse!"

And so he fretted through the dark hours, while I drew on my fund
of philosophy.  Ah, but it was an exasperating, weary, endless
night, to be lying at anchor close under that black coast!  The
agitated water made snarling sounds all round the ship.  At times a
wild gust of wind out of a gully high up on the cliffs struck on
our rigging a harsh and plaintive note like the wail of a forsaken
soul.



CHAPTER I



By half-past seven in the morning, the ship being then inside the
harbour at last and moored within a long stone's-throw from the
quay, my stock of philosophy was nearly exhausted.  I was dressing
hurriedly in my cabin when the steward came tripping in with a
morning suit over his arm.

Hungry, tired, and depressed, with my head engaged inside a white
shirt irritatingly stuck together by too much starch, I desired him
peevishly to "heave round with that breakfast."  I wanted to get
ashore as soon as possible.

"Yes, sir.  Ready at eight, sir.  There's a gentleman from the
shore waiting to speak to you, sir."

This statement was curiously slurred over.  I dragged the shirt
violently over my head and emerged staring.

"So early!" I cried.  "Who's he?  What does he want?"

On coming in from sea one has to pick up the conditions of an
utterly unrelated existence.  Every little event at first has the
peculiar emphasis of novelty.  I was greatly surprised by that
early caller; but there was no reason for my steward to look so
particularly foolish.

"Didn't you ask for the name?" I inquired in a stern tone.

"His name's Jacobus, I believe," he mumbled shamefacedly.

"Mr. Jacobus!" I exclaimed loudly, more surprised than ever, but
with a total change of feeling.  "Why couldn't you say so at once?"

But the fellow had scuttled out of my room.  Through the
momentarily opened door I had a glimpse of a tall, stout man
standing in the cuddy by the table on which the cloth was already
laid; a "harbour" table-cloth, stainless and dazzlingly white.  So
far good.

I shouted courteously through the closed door, that I was dressing
and would be with him in a moment.  In return the assurance that
there was no hurry reached me in the visitor's deep, quiet
undertone.  His time was my own.  He dared say I would give him a
cup of coffee presently.

"I am afraid you will have a poor breakfast," I cried
apologetically.  "We have been sixty-one days at sea, you know."

A quiet little laugh, with a "That'll be all right, Captain," was
his answer.  All this, words, intonation, the glimpsed attitude of
the man in the cuddy, had an unexpected character, a something
friendly in it--propitiatory.  And my surprise was not diminished
thereby.  What did this call mean?  Was it the sign of some dark
design against my commercial innocence?

Ah!  These commercial interests--spoiling the finest life under the
sun.  Why must the sea be used for trade--and for war as well?  Why
kill and traffic on it, pursuing selfish aims of no great
importance after all?  It would have been so much nicer just to
sail about with here and there a port and a bit of land to stretch
one's legs on, buy a few books and get a change of cooking for a
while.  But, living in a world more or less homicidal and
desperately mercantile, it was plainly my duty to make the best of
its opportunities.

My owners' letter had left it to me, as I have said before, to do
my best for the ship, according to my own judgment.  But it
contained also a postscript worded somewhat as follows:

"Without meaning to interfere with your liberty of action we are
writing by the outgoing mail to some of our business friends there
who may be of assistance to you.  We desire you particularly to
call on Mr. Jacobus, a prominent merchant and charterer.  Should
you hit it off with him he may be able to put you in the way of
profitable employment for the ship."

Hit it off!  Here was the prominent creature absolutely on board
asking for the favour of a cup of coffee!  And life not being a
fairy-tale the improbability of the event almost shocked me.  Had I
discovered an enchanted nook of the earth where wealthy merchants
rush fasting on board ships before they are fairly moored?  Was
this white magic or merely some black trick of trade?  I came in
the end (while making the bow of my tie) to suspect that perhaps I
did not get the name right.  I had been thinking of the prominent
Mr. Jacobus pretty frequently during the passage and my hearing
might have been deceived by some remote similarity of sound. . .
The steward might have said Antrobus--or maybe Jackson.

But coming out of my stateroom with an interrogative "Mr. Jacobus?"
I was met by a quiet "Yes," uttered with a gentle smile.  The "yes"
was rather perfunctory.  He did not seem to make much of the fact
that he was Mr. Jacobus.  I took stock of a big, pale face, hair
thin on the top, whiskers also thin, of a faded nondescript colour,
heavy eyelids.  The thick, smooth lips in repose looked as if glued
together.  The smile was faint.  A heavy, tranquil man.  I named my
two officers, who just then came down to breakfast; but why Mr.
Burns's silent demeanour should suggest suppressed indignation I
could not understand.

While we were taking our seats round the table some disconnected
words of an altercation going on in the companionway reached my
ear.  A stranger apparently wanted to come down to interview me,
and the steward was opposing him.

"You can't see him."

"Why can't I?"

"The Captain is at breakfast, I tell you.  He'll be going on shore
presently, and you can speak to him on deck."

"That's not fair.  You let--"

"I've had nothing to do with that."

"Oh, yes, you have.  Everybody ought to have the same chance.  You
let that fellow--"

The rest I lost.  The person having been repulsed successfully, the
steward came down.  I can't say he looked flushed--he was a
mulatto--but he looked flustered.  After putting the dishes on the
table he remained by the sideboard with that lackadaisical air of
indifference he used to assume when he had done something too
clever by half and was afraid of getting into a scrape over it.
The contemptuous expression of Mr. Burns's face as he looked from
him to me was really extraordinary.  I couldn't imagine what new
bee had stung the mate now.

The Captain being silent, nobody else cared to speak, as is the way
in ships.  And I was saying nothing simply because I had been made
dumb by the splendour of the entertainment.  I had expected the
usual sea-breakfast, whereas I beheld spread before us a veritable
feast of shore provisions:  eggs, sausages, butter which plainly
did not come from a Danish tin, cutlets, and even a dish of
potatoes.  It was three weeks since I had seen a real, live potato.
I contemplated them with interest, and Mr. Jacobus disclosed
himself as a man of human, homely sympathies, and something of a
thought-reader.

"Try them, Captain," he encouraged me in a friendly undertone.
"They are excellent."

"They look that," I admitted.  "Grown on the island, I suppose."

"Oh, no, imported.  Those grown here would be more expensive."

I was grieved at the ineptitude of the conversation.  Were these
the topics for a prominent and wealthy merchant to discuss?  I
thought the simplicity with which he made himself at home rather
attractive; but what is one to talk about to a man who comes on one
suddenly, after sixty-one days at sea, out of a totally unknown
little town in an island one has never seen before?  What were
(besides sugar) the interests of that crumb of the earth, its
gossip, its topics of conversation?  To draw him on business at
once would have been almost indecent--or even worse:  impolitic.
All I could do at the moment was to keep on in the old groove.

"Are the provisions generally dear here?" I asked, fretting
inwardly at my inanity.

"I wouldn't say that," he answered placidly, with that appearance
of saving his breath his restrained manner of speaking suggested.

He would not be more explicit, yet he did not evade the subject.
Eyeing the table in a spirit of complete abstemiousness (he
wouldn't let me help him to any eatables) he went into details of
supply.  The beef was for the most part imported from Madagascar;
mutton of course was rare and somewhat expensive, but good goat's
flesh--

"Are these goat's cutlets?" I exclaimed hastily, pointing at one of
the dishes.

Posed sentimentally by the sideboard, the steward gave a start.

"Lor', no, sir!  It's real mutton!"

Mr. Burns got through his breakfast impatiently, as if exasperated
by being made a party to some monstrous foolishness, muttered a
curt excuse, and went on deck.  Shortly afterwards the second mate
took his smooth red countenance out of the cabin.  With the
appetite of a schoolboy, and after two months of sea-fare, he
appreciated the generous spread.  But I did not.  It smacked of
extravagance.  All the same, it was a remarkable feat to have
produced it so quickly, and I congratulated the steward on his
smartness in a somewhat ominous tone.  He gave me a deprecatory
smile and, in a way I didn't know what to make of, blinked his fine
dark eyes in the direction of the guest.

The latter asked under his breath for another cup of coffee, and
nibbled ascetically at a piece of very hard ship's biscuit.  I
don't think he consumed a square inch in the end; but meantime he
gave me, casually as it were, a complete account of the sugar crop,
of the local business houses, of the state of the freight market.
All that talk was interspersed with hints as to personalities,
amounting to veiled warnings, but his pale, fleshy face remained
equable, without a gleam, as if ignorant of his voice.  As you may
imagine I opened my ears very wide.  Every word was precious.  My
ideas as to the value of business friendship were being favourably
modified.  He gave me the names of all the disponible ships
together with their tonnage and the names of their commanders.
From that, which was still commercial information, he condescended
to mere harbour gossip.  The Hilda had unaccountably lost her
figurehead in the Bay of Bengal, and her captain was greatly
affected by this.  He and the ship had been getting on in years
together and the old gentleman imagined this strange event to be
the forerunner of his own early dissolution.  The Stella had
experienced awful weather off the Cape--had her decks swept, and
the chief officer washed overboard.  And only a few hours before
reaching port the baby died.

Poor Captain H- and his wife were terribly cut up.  If they had
only been able to bring it into port alive it could have been
probably saved; but the wind failed them for the last week or so,
light breezes, and . . . the baby was going to be buried this
afternoon.  He supposed I would attend--

"Do you think I ought to?" I asked, shrinkingly.

He thought so, decidedly.  It would be greatly appreciated.  All
the captains in the harbour were going to attend.  Poor Mrs. H- was
quite prostrated.  Pretty hard on H- altogether.

"And you, Captain--you are not married I suppose?"

"No, I am not married," I said.  "Neither married nor even
engaged."

Mentally I thanked my stars; and while he smiled in a musing,
dreamy fashion, I expressed my acknowledgments for his visit and
for the interesting business information he had been good enough to
impart to me.  But I said nothing of my wonder thereat.

"Of course, I would have made a point of calling on you in a day or
two," I concluded.

He raised his eyelids distinctly at me, and somehow managed to look
rather more sleepy than before.

"In accordance with my owners' instructions," I explained.  "You
have had their letter, of course?"

By that time he had raised his eyebrows too but without any
particular emotion.  On the contrary he struck me then as
absolutely imperturbable.

"Oh!  You must be thinking of my brother."

It was for me, then, to say "Oh!"  But I hope that no more than
civil surprise appeared in my voice when I asked him to what, then,
I owed the pleasure. . . . He was reaching for an inside pocket
leisurely.

"My brother's a very different person.  But I am well known in this
part of the world.  You've probably heard--"

I took a card he extended to me.  A thick business card, as I
lived!  Alfred Jacobus--the other was Ernest--dealer in every
description of ship's stores!  Provisions salt and fresh, oils,
paints, rope, canvas, etc., etc.  Ships in harbour victualled by
contract on moderate terms--

"I've never heard of you," I said brusquely.

His low-pitched assurance did not abandon him.

"You will be very well satisfied," he breathed out quietly.

I was not placated.  I had the sense of having been circumvented
somehow.  Yet I had deceived myself--if there was any deception.
But the confounded cheek of inviting himself to breakfast was
enough to deceive any one.  And the thought struck me:  Why!  The
fellow had provided all these eatables himself in the way of
business.  I said:

"You must have got up mighty early this morning."

He admitted with simplicity that he was on the quay before six
o'clock waiting for my ship to come in.  He gave me the impression
that it would be impossible to get rid of him now.

"If you think we are going to live on that scale," I said, looking
at the table with an irritated eye, "you are jolly well mistaken."

"You'll find it all right, Captain.  I quite understand."

Nothing could disturb his equanimity.  I felt dissatisfied, but I
could not very well fly out at him.  He had told me many useful
things--and besides he was the brother of that wealthy merchant.
That seemed queer enough.

I rose and told him curtly that I must now go ashore.  At once he
offered the use of his boat for all the time of my stay in port.

"I only make a nominal charge," he continued equably.  "My man
remains all day at the landing-steps.  You have only to blow a
whistle when you want the boat."

And, standing aside at every doorway to let me go through first, he
carried me off in his custody after all.  As we crossed the
quarter-deck two shabby individuals stepped forward and in mournful
silence offered me business cards which I took from them without a
word under his heavy eye.  It was a useless and gloomy ceremony.
They were the touts of the other ship-chandlers, and he placid at
my back, ignored their existence.

We parted on the quay, after he had expressed quietly the hope of
seeing me often "at the store."  He had a smoking-room for captains
there, with newspapers and a box of "rather decent cigars."  I left
him very unceremoniously.

My consignees received me with the usual business heartiness, but
their account of the state of the freight-market was by no means so
favourable as the talk of the wrong Jacobus had led me to expect.
Naturally I became inclined now to put my trust in his version,
rather.  As I closed the door of the private office behind me I
thought to myself:  "H'm.  A lot of lies.  Commercial diplomacy.
That's the sort of thing a man coming from sea has got to expect.
They would try to charter the ship under the market rate."

In the big, outer room, full of desks, the chief clerk, a tall,
lean, shaved person in immaculate white clothes and with a shiny,
closely-cropped black head on which silvery gleams came and went,
rose from his place and detained me affably.  Anything they could
do for me, they would be most happy.  Was I likely to call again in
the afternoon?  What?  Going to a funeral?  Oh, yes, poor Captain
H-.

He pulled a long, sympathetic face for a moment, then, dismissing
from this workaday world the baby, which had got ill in a tempest
and had died from too much calm at sea, he asked me with a dental,
shark-like smile--if sharks had false teeth--whether I had yet made
my little arrangements for the ship's stay in port.

"Yes, with Jacobus," I answered carelessly.  "I understand he's the
brother of Mr. Ernest Jacobus to whom I have an introduction from
my owners."

I was not sorry to let him know I was not altogether helpless in
the hands of his firm.  He screwed his thin lips dubiously.

"Why," I cried, "isn't he the brother?"

"Oh, yes. . . . They haven't spoken to each other for eighteen
years," he added impressively after a pause.

"Indeed!  What's the quarrel about?"

"Oh, nothing!  Nothing that one would care to mention," he
protested primly.  "He's got quite a large business.  The best
ship-chandler here, without a doubt.  Business is all very well,
but there is such a thing as personal character, too, isn't there?
Good-morning, Captain."

He went away mincingly to his desk.  He amused me.  He resembled an
old maid, a commercial old maid, shocked by some impropriety.  Was
it a commercial impropriety?  Commercial impropriety is a serious
matter, for it aims at one's pocket.  Or was he only a purist in
conduct who disapproved of Jacobus doing his own touting?  It was
certainly undignified.  I wondered how the merchant brother liked
it.  But then different countries, different customs.  In a
community so isolated and so exclusively "trading" social standards
have their own scale.



CHAPTER II



I would have gladly dispensed with the mournful opportunity of
becoming acquainted by sight with all my fellow-captains at once.
However I found my way to the cemetery.  We made a considerable
group of bareheaded men in sombre garments.  I noticed that those
of our company most approaching to the now obsolete sea-dog type
were the most moved--perhaps because they had less "manner" than
the new generation.  The old sea-dog, away from his natural
element, was a simple and sentimental animal.  I noticed one--he
was facing me across the grave--who was dropping tears.  They
trickled down his weather-beaten face like drops of rain on an old
rugged wall.  I learned afterwards that he was looked upon as the
terror of sailors, a hard man; that he had never had wife or chick
of his own, and that, engaged from his tenderest years in deep-sea
voyages, he knew women and children merely by sight.

Perhaps he was dropping those tears over his lost opportunities,
from sheer envy of paternity and in strange jealousy of a sorrow
which he could never know.  Man, and even the sea-man, is a
capricious animal, the creature and the victim of lost
opportunities.  But he made me feel ashamed of my callousness.  I
had no tears.

I listened with horribly critical detachment to that service I had
had to read myself, once or twice, over childlike men who had died
at sea.  The words of hope and defiance, the winged words so
inspiring in the free immensity of water and sky, seemed to fall
wearily into the little grave.  What was the use of asking Death
where her sting was, before that small, dark hole in the ground?
And then my thoughts escaped me altogether--away into matters of
life--and no very high matters at that--ships, freights, business.
In the instability of his emotions man resembles deplorably a
monkey.  I was disgusted with my thoughts--and I thought:  Shall I
be able to get a charter soon?  Time's money. . . . Will that
Jacobus really put good business in my way?  I must go and see him
in a day or two.

Don't imagine that I pursued these thoughts with any precision.
They pursued me rather:  vague, shadowy, restless, shamefaced.
Theirs was a callous, abominable, almost revolting, pertinacity.
And it was the presence of that pertinacious ship-chandler which
had started them.  He stood mournfully amongst our little band of
men from the sea, and I was angry at his presence, which,
suggesting his brother the merchant, had caused me to become
outrageous to myself.  For indeed I had preserved some decency of
feeling.  It was only the mind which--

It was over at last.  The poor father--a man of forty with black,
bushy side-whiskers and a pathetic gash on his freshly-shaved chin-
-thanked us all, swallowing his tears.  But for some reason, either
because I lingered at the gate of the cemetery being somewhat hazy
as to my way back, or because I was the youngest, or ascribing my
moodiness caused by remorse to some more worthy and appropriate
sentiment, or simply because I was even more of a stranger to him
than the others--he singled me out.  Keeping at my side, he renewed
his thanks, which I listened to in a gloomy, conscience-stricken
silence.  Suddenly he slipped one hand under my arm and waved the
other after a tall, stout figure walking away by itself down a
street in a flutter of thin, grey garments:

"That's a good fellow--a real good fellow"--he swallowed down a
belated sob--"this Jacobus."

And he told me in a low voice that Jacobus was the first man to
board his ship on arrival, and, learning of their misfortune, had
taken charge of everything, volunteered to attend to all routine
business, carried off the ship's papers on shore, arranged for the
funeral--

"A good fellow.  I was knocked over.  I had been looking at my wife
for ten days.  And helpless.  Just you think of that!  The dear
little chap died the very day we made the land.  How I managed to
take the ship in God alone knows!  I couldn't see anything; I
couldn't speak; I couldn't. . . . You've heard, perhaps, that we
lost our mate overboard on the passage?  There was no one to do it
for me.  And the poor woman nearly crazy down below there all alone
with the . . . By the Lord!  It isn't fair."

We walked in silence together.  I did not know how to part from
him.  On the quay he let go my arm and struck fiercely his fist
into the palm of his other hand.

"By God, it isn't fair!" he cried again.  "Don't you ever marry
unless you can chuck the sea first. . . . It isn't fair."

I had no intention to "chuck the sea," and when he left me to go
aboard his ship I felt convinced that I would never marry.  While I
was waiting at the steps for Jacobus's boatman, who had gone off
somewhere, the captain of the Hilda joined me, a slender silk
umbrella in his hand and the sharp points of his archaic,
Gladstonian shirt-collar framing a small, clean-shaved, ruddy face.
It was wonderfully fresh for his age, beautifully modelled and lit
up by remarkably clear blue eyes.  A lot of white hair, glossy like
spun glass, curled upwards slightly under the brim of his valuable,
ancient, panama hat with a broad black ribbon.  In the aspect of
that vivacious, neat, little old man there was something quaintly
angelic and also boyish.

He accosted me, as though he had been in the habit of seeing me
every day of his life from my earliest childhood, with a whimsical
remark on the appearance of a stout negro woman who was sitting
upon a stool near the edge of the quay.  Presently he observed
amiably that I had a very pretty little barque.

I returned this civil speech by saying readily:

"Not so pretty as the Hilda."

At once the corners of his clear-cut, sensitive mouth dropped
dismally.

"Oh, dear!  I can hardly bear to look at her now."

Did I know, he asked anxiously, that he had lost the figurehead of
his ship; a woman in a blue tunic edged with gold, the face perhaps
not so very, very pretty, but her bare white arms beautifully
shaped and extended as if she were swimming?  Did I?  Who would
have expected such a things . . . After twenty years too!

Nobody could have guessed from his tone that the woman was made of
wood; his trembling voice, his agitated manner gave to his
lamentations a ludicrously scandalous flavour. . . . Disappeared at
night--a clear fine night with just a slight swell--in the gulf of
Bengal.  Went off without a splash; no one in the ship could tell
why, how, at what hour--after twenty years last October. . . . Did
I ever hear! . . .

I assured him sympathetically that I had never heard--and he became
very doleful.  This meant no good he was sure.  There was something
in it which looked like a warning.  But when I remarked that surely
another figure of a woman could be procured I found myself being
soundly rated for my levity.  The old boy flushed pink under his
clear tan as if I had proposed something improper.  One could
replace masts, I was told, or a lost rudder--any working part of a
ship; but where was the use of sticking up a new figurehead?  What
satisfaction?  How could one care for it?  It was easy to see that
I had never been shipmates with a figurehead for over twenty years.

"A new figurehead!" he scolded in unquenchable indignation.  "Why!
I've been a widower now for eight-and-twenty years come next May
and I would just as soon think of getting a new wife.  You're as
bad as that fellow Jacobus."

I was highly amused.

"What has Jacobus done?  Did he want you to marry again, Captain?"
I inquired in a deferential tone.  But he was launched now and only
grinned fiercely.

"Procure--indeed!  He's the sort of chap to procure you anything
you like for a price.  I hadn't been moored here for an hour when
he got on board and at once offered to sell me a figurehead he
happens to have in his yard somewhere.  He got Smith, my mate, to
talk to me about it.  'Mr. Smith,' says I, 'don't you know me
better than that?  Am I the sort that would pick up with another
man's cast-off figurehead?'  And after all these years too!  The
way some of you young fellows talk--"

I affected great compunction, and as I stepped into the boat I said
soberly:

"Then I see nothing for it but to fit in a neat fiddlehead--
perhaps.  You know, carved scrollwork, nicely gilt."

He became very dejected after his outburst.

"Yes.  Scrollwork.  Maybe.  Jacobus hinted at that too.  He's never
at a loss when there's any money to be extracted from a sailorman.
He would make me pay through the nose for that carving.  A gilt
fiddlehead did you say--eh?  I dare say it would do for you.  You
young fellows don't seem to have any feeling for what's proper."

He made a convulsive gesture with his right arm.

"Never mind.  Nothing can make much difference.  I would just as
soon let the old thing go about the world with a bare cutwater," he
cried sadly.  Then as the boat got away from the steps he raised
his voice on the edge of the quay with comical animosity:

"I would!  If only to spite that figurehead-procuring bloodsucker.
I am an old bird here and don't you forget it.  Come and see me on
board some day!"

I spent my first evening in port quietly in my ship's cuddy; and
glad enough was I to think that the shore life which strikes one as
so pettily complex, discordant, and so full of new faces on first
coming from sea, could be kept off for a few hours longer.  I was
however fated to hear the Jacobus note once more before I slept.

Mr. Burns had gone ashore after the evening meal to have, as he
said, "a look round."  As it was quite dark when he announced his
intention I didn't ask him what it was he expected to see.  Some
time about midnight, while sitting with a book in the saloon, I
heard cautious movements in the lobby and hailed him by name.

Burns came in, stick and hat in hand, incredibly vulgarised by his
smart shore togs, with a jaunty air and an odious twinkle in his
eye.  Being asked to sit down he laid his hat and stick on the
table and after we had talked of ship affairs for a little while:

"I've been hearing pretty tales on shore about that ship-chandler
fellow who snatched the job from you so neatly, sir."

I remonstrated with my late patient for his manner of expressing
himself.  But he only tossed his head disdainfully.  A pretty dodge
indeed:  boarding a strange ship with breakfast in two baskets for
all hands and calmly inviting himself to the captain's table!
Never heard of anything so crafty and so impudent in his life.

I found myself defending Jacobus's unusual methods.

"He's the brother of one of the wealthiest merchants in the port."
The mate's eyes fairly snapped green sparks.

"His grand brother hasn't spoken to him for eighteen or twenty
years," he declared triumphantly.  "So there!"

"I know all about that," I interrupted loftily.

"Do you sir?  H'm!"  His mind was still running on the ethics of
commercial competition.  "I don't like to see your good nature
taken advantage of.  He's bribed that steward of ours with a five-
rupee note to let him come down--or ten for that matter.  He don't
care.  He will shove that and more into the bill presently."

"Is that one of the tales you have heard ashore?" I asked.

He assured me that his own sense could tell him that much.  No;
what he had heard on shore was that no respectable person in the
whole town would come near Jacobus.  He lived in a large old-
fashioned house in one of the quiet streets with a big garden.
After telling me this Burns put on a mysterious air.  "He keeps a
girl shut up there who, they say--"

"I suppose you've heard all this gossip in some eminently
respectable place?" I snapped at him in a most sarcastic tone.

The shaft told, because Mr. Burns, like many other disagreeable
people, was very sensitive himself.  He remained as if
thunderstruck, with his mouth open for some further communication,
but I did not give him the chance.  "And, anyhow, what the deuce do
I care?" I added, retiring into my room.

And this was a natural thing to say.  Yet somehow I was not
indifferent.  I admit it is absurd to be concerned with the morals
of one's ship-chandler, if ever so well connected; but his
personality had stamped itself upon my first day in harbour, in the
way you know.

After this initial exploit Jacobus showed himself anything but
intrusive.  He was out in a boat early every morning going round
the ships he served, and occasionally remaining on board one of
them for breakfast with the captain.

As I discovered that this practice was generally accepted, I just
nodded to him familiarly when one morning, on coming out of my
room, I found him in the cabin.  Glancing over the table I saw that
his place was already laid.  He stood awaiting my appearance, very
bulky and placid, holding a beautiful bunch of flowers in his thick
hand.  He offered them to my notice with a faint, sleepy smile.
From his own garden; had a very fine old garden; picked them
himself that morning before going out to business; thought I would
like. . . . He turned away.  "Steward, can you oblige me with some
water in a large jar, please."

I assured him jocularly, as I took my place at the table, that he
made me feel as if I were a pretty girl, and that he mustn't be
surprised if I blushed.  But he was busy arranging his floral
tribute at the sideboard.  "Stand it before the Captain's plate,
steward, please."  He made this request in his usual undertone.

The offering was so pointed that I could do no less than to raise
it to my nose, and as he sat down noiselessly he breathed out the
opinion that a few flowers improved notably the appearance of a
ship's saloon.  He wondered why I did not have a shelf fitted all
round the skylight for flowers in pots to take with me to sea.  He
had a skilled workman able to fit up shelves in a day, and he could
procure me two or three dozen good plants--

The tips of his thick, round fingers rested composedly on the edge
of the table on each side of his cup of coffee.  His face remained
immovable.  Mr. Burns was smiling maliciously to himself.  I
declared that I hadn't the slightest intention of turning my
skylight into a conservatory only to keep the cabin-table in a
perpetual mess of mould and dead vegetable matter.

"Rear most beautiful flowers," he insisted with an upward glance.
"It's no trouble really."

"Oh, yes, it is.  Lots of trouble," I contradicted.  "And in the
end some fool leaves the skylight open in a fresh breeze, a flick
of salt water gets at them and the whole lot is dead in a week."

Mr. Burns snorted a contemptuous approval.  Jacobus gave up the
subject passively.  After a time he unglued his thick lips to ask
me if I had seen his brother yet.  I was very curt in my answer.

"No, not yet."

"A very different person," he remarked dreamily and got up.  His
movements were particularly noiseless.  "Well--thank you, Captain.
If anything is not to your liking please mention it to your
steward.  I suppose you will be giving a dinner to the office-
clerks presently."

"What for?" I cried with some warmth.  "If I were a steady trader
to the port I could understand it.  But a complete stranger! . . .
I may not turn up again here for years.  I don't see why! . . . Do
you mean to say it is customary?"

"It will be expected from a man like you," he breathed out
placidly.  "Eight of the principal clerks, the manager, that's
nine, you three gentlemen, that's twelve.  It needn't be very
expensive.  If you tell your steward to give me a day's notice--"

"It will be expected of me!  Why should it be expected of me?  Is
it because I look particularly soft--or what?

His immobility struck me as dignified suddenly, his imperturbable
quality as dangerous.  "There's plenty of time to think about
that," I concluded weakly with a gesture that tried to wave him
away.  But before he departed he took time to mention regretfully
that he had not yet had the pleasure of seeing me at his "store" to
sample those cigars.  He had a parcel of six thousand to dispose
of, very cheap.

"I think it would be worth your while to secure some," he added
with a fat, melancholy smile and left the cabin.

Mr. Burns struck his fist on the table excitedly.

"Did you ever see such impudence!  He's made up his mind to get
something out of you one way or another, sir."

At once feeling inclined to defend Jacobus, I observed
philosophically that all this was business, I supposed.  But my
absurd mate, muttering broken disjointed sentences, such as:  "I
cannot bear! . . . Mark my words! . . ." and so on, flung out of
the cabin.  If I hadn't nursed him through that deadly fever I
wouldn't have suffered such manners for a single day.



CHAPTER III



Jacobus having put me in mind of his wealthy brother I concluded I
would pay that business call at once.  I had by that time heard a
little more of him.  He was a member of the Council, where he made
himself objectionable to the authorities.  He exercised a
considerable influence on public opinion.  Lots of people owed him
money.  He was an importer on a great scale of all sorts of goods.
For instance, the whole supply of bags for sugar was practically in
his hands.  This last fact I did not learn till afterwards.  The
general impression conveyed to me was that of a local personage.
He was a bachelor and gave weekly card-parties in his house out of
town, which were attended by the best people in the colony.

The greater, then, was my surprise to discover his office in shabby
surroundings, quite away from the business quarter, amongst a lot
of hovels.  Guided by a black board with white lettering, I climbed
a narrow wooden staircase and entered a room with a bare floor of
planks littered with bits of brown paper and wisps of packing
straw.  A great number of what looked like wine-cases were piled up
against one of the walls.  A lanky, inky, light-yellow, mulatto
youth, miserably long-necked and generally recalling a sick
chicken, got off a three-legged stool behind a cheap deal desk and
faced me as if gone dumb with fright.  I had some difficulty in
persuading him to take in my name, though I could not get from him
the nature of his objection.  He did it at last with an almost
agonised reluctance which ceased to be mysterious to me when I
heard him being sworn at menacingly with savage, suppressed growls,
then audibly cuffed and finally kicked out without any concealment
whatever; because he came back flying head foremost through the
door with a stifled shriek.

To say I was startled would not express it.  I remained still, like
a man lost in a dream.  Clapping both his hands to that part of his
frail anatomy which had received the shock, the poor wretch said to
me simply:

"Will you go in, please."  His lamentable self-possession was
wonderful; but it did not do away with the incredibility of the
experience.  A preposterous notion that I had seen this boy
somewhere before, a thing obviously impossible, was like a delicate
finishing touch of weirdness added to a scene fit to raise doubts
as to one's sanity.  I stared anxiously about me like an awakened
somnambulist.

"I say," I cried loudly, "there isn't a mistake, is there?  This is
Mr. Jacobus's office."

The boy gazed at me with a pained expression--and somehow so
familiar!  A voice within growled offensively:

"Come in, come in, since you are there. . . . I didn't know."

I crossed the outer room as one approaches the den of some unknown
wild beast; with intrepidity but in some excitement.  Only no wild
beast that ever lived would rouse one's indignation; the power to
do that belongs to the odiousness of the human brute.  And I was
very indignant, which did not prevent me from being at once struck
by the extraordinary resemblance of the two brothers.

This one was dark instead of being fair like the other; but he was
as big.  He was without his coat and waistcoat; he had been
doubtless snoozing in the rocking-chair which stood in a corner
furthest from the window.  Above the great bulk of his crumpled
white shirt, buttoned with three diamond studs, his round face
looked swarthy.  It was moist; his brown moustache hung limp and
ragged.  He pushed a common, cane-bottomed chair towards me with
his foot.

"Sit down."

I glanced at it casually, then, turning my indignant eyes full upon
him, I declared in precise and incisive tones that I had called in
obedience to my owners' instructions.

"Oh!  Yes.  H'm!  I didn't understand what that fool was saying. .
. . But never mind!  It will teach the scoundrel to disturb me at
this time of the day," he added, grinning at me with savage
cynicism.

I looked at my watch.  It was past three o'clock--quite the full
swing of afternoon office work in the port.  He snarled
imperiously:  "Sit down, Captain."

I acknowledged the gracious invitation by saying deliberately:

"I can listen to all you may have to say without sitting down."

Emitting a loud and vehement "Pshaw!" he glared for a moment, very
round-eyed and fierce.  It was like a gigantic tomcat spitting at
one suddenly.  "Look at him! . . . What do you fancy yourself to
be?  What did you come here for?  If you won't sit down and talk
business you had better go to the devil."

"I don't know him personally," I said.  "But after this I wouldn't
mind calling on him.  It would be refreshing to meet a gentleman."

He followed me, growling behind my back:

"The impudence!  I've a good mind to write to your owners what I
think of you."

I turned on him for a moment:

"As it happens I don't care.  For my part I assure you I won't even
take the trouble to mention you to them."

He stopped at the door of his office while I traversed the littered
anteroom.  I think he was somewhat taken aback.

"I will break every bone in your body," he roared suddenly at the
miserable mulatto lad, "if you ever dare to disturb me before half-
past three for anybody.  D'ye hear?  For anybody! . . . Let alone
any damned skipper," he added, in a lower growl.

The frail youngster, swaying like a reed, made a low moaning sound.
I stopped short and addressed this sufferer with advice.  It was
prompted by the sight of a hammer (used for opening the wine-cases,
I suppose) which was lying on the floor.

"If I were you, my boy, I would have that thing up my sleeve when I
went in next and at the first occasion I would--"

What was there so familiar in that lad's yellow face?  Entrenched
and quaking behind the flimsy desk, he never looked up.  His heavy,
lowered eyelids gave me suddenly the clue of the puzzle.  He
resembled--yes, those thick glued lips--he resembled the brothers
Jacobus.  He resembled both, the wealthy merchant and the pushing
shopkeeper (who resembled each other); he resembled them as much as
a thin, light-yellow mulatto lad may resemble a big, stout, middle-
aged white man.  It was the exotic complexion and the slightness of
his build which had put me off so completely.  Now I saw in him
unmistakably the Jacobus strain, weakened, attenuated, diluted as
it were in a bucket of water--and I refrained from finishing my
speech.  I had intended to say:  "Crack this brute's head for him."
I still felt the conclusion to be sound.  But it is no trifling
responsibility to counsel parricide to any one, however deeply
injured.

"Beggarly--cheeky--skippers."

I despised the emphatic growl at my back; only, being much vexed
and upset, I regret to say that I slammed the door behind me in a
most undignified manner.

It may not appear altogether absurd if I say that I brought out
from that interview a kindlier view of the other Jacobus.  It was
with a feeling resembling partisanship that, a few days later, I
called at his "store."  That long, cavern-like place of business,
very dim at the back and stuffed full of all sorts of goods, was
entered from the street by a lofty archway.  At the far end I saw
my Jacobus exerting himself in his shirt-sleeves among his
assistants.  The captains' room was a small, vaulted apartment with
a stone floor and heavy iron bars in its windows like a dungeon
converted to hospitable purposes.  A couple of cheerful bottles and
several gleaming glasses made a brilliant cluster round a tall,
cool red earthenware pitcher on the centre table which was littered
with newspapers from all parts of the world.  A well-groomed
stranger in a smart grey check suit, sitting with one leg flung
over his knee, put down one of these sheets briskly and nodded to
me.

I guessed him to be a steamer-captain.  It was impossible to get to
know these men.  They came and went too quickly and their ships lay
moored far out, at the very entrance of the harbour.  Theirs was
another life altogether.  He yawned slightly.

"Dull hole, isn't it?"

I understood this to allude to the town.

"Do you find it so?" I murmured.

"Don't you?  But I'm off to-morrow, thank goodness."

He was a very gentlemanly person, good-natured and superior.  I
watched him draw the open box of cigars to his side of the table,
take a big cigar-case out of his pocket and begin to fill it very
methodically.  Presently, on our eyes meeting, he winked like a
common mortal and invited me to follow his example.  "They are
really decent smokes."  I shook my head.

"I am not off to-morrow."

"What of that?  Think I am abusing old Jacobus's hospitality?
Heavens!  It goes into the bill, of course.  He spreads such little
matters all over his account.  He can take care of himself!  Why,
it's business--"

I noted a shadow fall over his well-satisfied expression, a
momentary hesitation in closing his cigar-case.  But he ended by
putting it in his pocket jauntily.  A placid voice uttered in the
doorway:  "That's quite correct, Captain."

The large noiseless Jacobus advanced into the room.  His quietness,
in the circumstances, amounted to cordiality.  He had put on his
jacket before joining us, and he sat down in the chair vacated by
the steamer-man, who nodded again to me and went out with a short,
jarring laugh.  A profound silence reigned.  With his drowsy stare
Jacobus seemed to be slumbering open-eyed.  Yet, somehow, I was
aware of being profoundly scrutinised by those heavy eyes.  In the
enormous cavern of the store somebody began to nail down a case,
expertly:  tap-tap . . . tap-tap-tap.

Two other experts, one slow and nasal, the other shrill and snappy,
started checking an invoice.

"A half-coil of three-inch manilla rope."

"Right!"

"Six assorted shackles."

"Right!"

"Six tins assorted soups, three of pate, two asparagus, fourteen
pounds tobacco, cabin."

"Right!"

"It's for the captain who was here just now," breathed out the
immovable Jacobus.  "These steamer orders are very small.  They
pick up what they want as they go along.  That man will be in
Samarang in less than a fortnight.  Very small orders indeed."

The calling over of the items went on in the shop; an extraordinary
jumble of varied articles, paint-brushes, Yorkshire Relish, etc.,
etc. . . . "Three sacks of best potatoes," read out the nasal
voice.

At this Jacobus blinked like a sleeping man roused by a shake, and
displayed some animation.  At his order, shouted into the shop, a
smirking half-caste clerk with his ringlets much oiled and with a
pen stuck behind his ear, brought in a sample of six potatoes which
he paraded in a row on the table.

Being urged to look at their beauty I gave them a cold and hostile
glance.  Calmly, Jacobus proposed that I should order ten or
fifteen tons--tons!  I couldn't believe my ears.  My crew could not
have eaten such a lot in a year; and potatoes (excuse these
practical remarks) are a highly perishable commodity.  I thought he
was joking--or else trying to find out whether I was an unutterable
idiot.  But his purpose was not so simple.  I discovered that he
meant me to buy them on my own account.

"I am proposing you a bit of business, Captain.  I wouldn't charge
you a great price."

I told him that I did not go in for trade.  I even added grimly
that I knew only too well how that sort of spec. generally ended.

He sighed and clasped his hands on his stomach with exemplary
resignation.  I admired the placidity of his impudence.  Then
waking up somewhat:

"Won't you try a cigar, Captain?"

"No, thanks.  I don't smoke cigars."

"For once!" he exclaimed, in a patient whisper.  A melancholy
silence ensued.  You know how sometimes a person discloses a
certain unsuspected depth and acuteness of thought; that is, in
other words, utters something unexpected.  It was unexpected enough
to hear Jacobus say:

"The man who just went out was right enough.  You might take one,
Captain.  Here everything is bound to be in the way of business."

I felt a little ashamed of myself.  The remembrance of his horrid
brother made him appear quite a decent sort of fellow.  It was with
some compunction that I said a few words to the effect that I could
have no possible objection to his hospitality.

Before I was a minute older I saw where this admission was leading
me.  As if changing the subject, Jacobus mentioned that his private
house was about ten minutes' walk away.  It had a beautiful old
walled garden.  Something really remarkable.  I ought to come round
some day and have a look at it.

He seemed to be a lover of gardens.  I too take extreme delight in
them; but I did not mean my compunction to carry me as far as
Jacobus's flower-beds, however beautiful and old.  He added, with a
certain homeliness of tone:

"There's only my girl there."

It is difficult to set everything down in due order; so I must
revert here to what happened a week or two before.  The medical
officer of the port had come on board my ship to have a look at one
of my crew who was ailing, and naturally enough he was asked to
step into the cabin.  A fellow-shipmaster of mine was there too;
and in the conversation, somehow or other, the name of Jacobus came
to be mentioned.  It was pronounced with no particular reverence by
the other man, I believe.  I don't remember now what I was going to
say.  The doctor--a pleasant, cultivated fellow, with an assured
manner--prevented me by striking in, in a sour tone:

"Ah!  You're talking about my respected papa-in-law."

Of course, that sally silenced us at the time.  But I remembered
the episode, and at this juncture, pushed for something
noncommittal to say, I inquired with polite surprise:

"You have your married daughter living with you, Mr. Jacobus?"

He moved his big hand from right to left quietly.  No!  That was
another of his girls, he stated, ponderously and under his breath
as usual.  She . . . He seemed in a pause to be ransacking his mind
for some kind of descriptive phrase.  But my hopes were
disappointed.  He merely produced his stereotyped definition.

"She's a very different sort of person."

"Indeed. . . . And by the by, Jacobus, I called on your brother the
other day.  It's no great compliment if I say that I found him a
very different sort of person from you."

He had an air of profound reflection, then remarked quaintly:

"He's a man of regular habits."

He might have been alluding to the habit of late siesta; but I
mumbled something about "beastly habits anyhow"--and left the store
abruptly.



CHAPTER IV



My little passage with Jacobus the merchant became known generally.
One or two of my acquaintances made distant allusions to it.
Perhaps the mulatto boy had talked.  I must confess that people
appeared rather scandalised, but not with Jacobus's brutality.  A
man I knew remonstrated with me for my hastiness.

I gave him the whole story of my visit, not forgetting the tell-
tale resemblance of the wretched mulatto boy to his tormentor.  He
was not surprised.  No doubt, no doubt.  What of that?  In a jovial
tone he assured me that there must be many of that sort.  The elder
Jacobus had been a bachelor all his life.  A highly respectable
bachelor.  But there had never been open scandal in that
connection.  His life had been quite regular.  It could cause no
offence to any one.

I said that I had been offended considerably.  My interlocutor
opened very wide eyes.  Why?  Because a mulatto lad got a few
knocks?  That was not a great affair, surely.  I had no idea how
insolent and untruthful these half-castes were.  In fact he seemed
to think Mr. Jacobus rather kind than otherwise to employ that
youth at all; a sort of amiable weakness which could be forgiven.

This acquaintance of mine belonged to one of the old French
families, descendants of the old colonists; all noble, all
impoverished, and living a narrow domestic life in dull, dignified
decay.  The men, as a rule, occupy inferior posts in Government
offices or in business houses.  The girls are almost always pretty,
ignorant of the world, kind and agreeable and generally bilingual;
they prattle innocently both in French and English.  The emptiness
of their existence passes belief.

I obtained my entry into a couple of such households because some
years before, in Bombay, I had occasion to be of use to a pleasant,
ineffectual young man who was rather stranded there, not knowing
what to do with himself or even how to get home to his island
again.  It was a matter of two hundred rupees or so, but, when I
turned up, the family made a point of showing their gratitude by
admitting me to their intimacy.  My knowledge of the French
language made me specially acceptable.  They had meantime managed
to marry the fellow to a woman nearly twice his age, comparatively
well off:  the only profession he was really fit for.  But it was
not all cakes and ale.  The first time I called on the couple she
spied a little spot of grease on the poor devil's pantaloons and
made him a screaming scene of reproaches so full of sincere passion
that I sat terrified as at a tragedy of Racine.

Of course there was never question of the money I had advanced him;
but his sisters, Miss Angele and Miss Mary, and the aunts of both
families, who spoke quaint archaic French of pre-Revolution period,
and a host of distant relations adopted me for a friend outright in
a manner which was almost embarrassing.

It was with the eldest brother (he was employed at a desk in my
consignee's office) that I was having this talk about the merchant
Jacobus.  He regretted my attitude and nodded his head sagely.  An
influential man.  One never knew when one would need him.  I
expressed my immense preference for the shopkeeper of the two.  At
that my friend looked grave.

"What on earth are you pulling that long face about?" I cried
impatiently.  "He asked me to see his garden and I have a good mind
to go some day."

"Don't do that," he said, so earnestly that I burst into a fit of
laughter; but he looked at me without a smile.

This was another matter altogether.  At one time the public
conscience of the island had been mightily troubled by my Jacobus.
The two brothers had been partners for years in great harmony, when
a wandering circus came to the island and my Jacobus became
suddenly infatuated with one of the lady-riders.  What made it
worse was that he was married.  He had not even the grace to
conceal his passion.  It must have been strong indeed to carry away
such a large placid creature.  His behaviour was perfectly
scandalous.  He followed that woman to the Cape, and apparently
travelled at the tail of that beastly circus to other parts of the
world, in a most degrading position.  The woman soon ceased to care
for him, and treated him worse than a dog.  Most extraordinary
stories of moral degradation were reaching the island at that time.
He had not the strength of mind to shake himself free. . . .

The grotesque image of a fat, pushing ship-chandler, enslaved by an
unholy love-spell, fascinated me; and I listened rather open-
mouthed to the tale as old as the world, a tale which had been the
subject of legend, of moral fables, of poems, but which so
ludicrously failed to fit the personality.  What a strange victim
for the gods!

Meantime his deserted wife had died.  His daughter was taken care
of by his brother, who married her as advantageously as was
possible in the circumstances.

"Oh!  The Mrs. Doctor!" I exclaimed.

"You know that?  Yes.  A very able man.  He wanted a lift in the
world, and there was a good bit of money from her mother, besides
the expectations. . . Of course, they don't know him," he added.
"The doctor nods in the street, I believe, but he avoids speaking
to him when they meet on board a ship, as must happen sometimes."

I remarked that this surely was an old story by now.

My friend assented.  But it was Jacobus's own fault that it was
neither forgiven nor forgotten.  He came back ultimately.  But how?
Not in a spirit of contrition, in a way to propitiate his
scandalised fellow-citizens.  He must needs drag along with him a
child--a girl. . . .

"He spoke to me of a daughter who lives with him," I observed, very
much interested.

"She's certainly the daughter of the circus-woman," said my friend.
"She may be his daughter too; I am willing to admit that she is.
In fact I have no doubt--"

But he did not see why she should have been brought into a
respectable community to perpetuate the memory of the scandal.  And
that was not the worst.  Presently something much more distressing
happened.  That abandoned woman turned up.  Landed from a mail-
boat. . . .

"What!  Here?  To claim the child perhaps," I suggested.

"Not she!"  My friendly informant was very scornful.  "Imagine a
painted, haggard, agitated, desperate hag.  Been cast off in
Mozambique by somebody who paid her passage here.  She had been
injured internally by a kick from a horse; she hadn't a cent on her
when she got ashore; I don't think she even asked to see the child.
At any rate, not till the last day of her life.  Jacobus hired for
her a bungalow to die in.  He got a couple of Sisters from the
hospital to nurse her through these few months.  If he didn't marry
her in extremis as the good Sisters tried to bring about, it's
because she wouldn't even hear of it.  As the nuns said:  'The
woman died impenitent.'  It was reported that she ordered Jacobus
out of the room with her last breath.  This may be the real reason
why he didn't go into mourning himself; he only put the child into
black.  While she was little she was to be seen sometimes about the
streets attended by a negro woman, but since she became of age to
put her hair up I don't think she has set foot outside that garden
once.  She must be over eighteen now."

Thus my friend, with some added details; such as, that he didn't
think the girl had spoken to three people of any position in the
island; that an elderly female relative of the brothers Jacobus had
been induced by extreme poverty to accept the position of
gouvernante to the girl.  As to Jacobus's business (which certainly
annoyed his brother) it was a wise choice on his part.  It brought
him in contact only with strangers of passage; whereas any other
would have given rise to all sorts of awkwardness with his social
equals.  The man was not wanting in a certain tact--only he was
naturally shameless.  For why did he want to keep that girl with
him?  It was most painful for everybody.

I thought suddenly (and with profound disgust) of the other
Jacobus, and I could not refrain from saying slily:

"I suppose if he employed her, say, as a scullion in his household
and occasionally pulled her hair or boxed her ears, the position
would have been more regular--less shocking to the respectable
class to which he belongs."

He was not so stupid as to miss my intention, and shrugged his
shoulders impatiently.

"You don't understand.  To begin with, she's not a mulatto.  And a
scandal is a scandal.  People should be given a chance to forget.
I dare say it would have been better for her if she had been turned
into a scullion or something of that kind.  Of course he's trying
to make money in every sort of petty way, but in such a business
there'll never be enough for anybody to come forward."

When my friend left me I had a conception of Jacobus and his
daughter existing, a lonely pair of castaways, on a desert island;
the girl sheltering in the house as if it were a cavern in a cliff,
and Jacobus going out to pick up a living for both on the beach--
exactly like two shipwrecked people who always hope for some
rescuer to bring them back at last into touch with the rest of
mankind.

But Jacobus's bodily reality did not fit in with this romantic
view.  When he turned up on board in the usual course, he sipped
the cup of coffee placidly, asked me if I was satisfied--and I
hardly listened to the harbour gossip he dropped slowly in his low,
voice-saving enunciation.  I had then troubles of my own.  My ship
chartered, my thoughts dwelling on the success of a quick round
voyage, I had been suddenly confronted by a shortage of bags.  A
catastrophe!  The stock of one especial kind, called pockets,
seemed to be totally exhausted.  A consignment was shortly
expected--it was afloat, on its way, but, meantime, the loading of
my ship dead stopped, I had enough to worry about.  My consignees,
who had received me with such heartiness on my arrival, now, in the
character of my charterers, listened to my complaints with polite
helplessness.  Their manager, the old-maidish, thin man, who so
prudishly didn't even like to speak about the impure Jacobus, gave
me the correct commercial view of the position.

"My dear Captain"--he was retracting his leathery cheeks into a
condescending, shark-like smile--"we were not morally obliged to
tell you of a possible shortage before you signed the charter-
party.  It was for you to guard against the contingency of a delay-
-strictly speaking.  But of course we shouldn't have taken any
advantage.  This is no one's fault really.  We ourselves have been
taken unawares," he concluded primly, with an obvious lie.

This lecture I confess had made me thirsty.  Suppressed rage
generally produces that effect; and as I strolled on aimlessly I
bethought myself of the tall earthenware pitcher in the captains'
room of the Jacobus "store."

With no more than a nod to the men I found assembled there, I
poured down a deep, cool draught on my indignation, then another,
and then, becoming dejected, I sat plunged in cheerless
reflections.  The others read, talked, smoked, bandied over my head
some unsubtle chaff.  But my abstraction was respected.  And it was
without a word to any one that I rose and went out, only to be
quite unexpectedly accosted in the bustle of the store by Jacobus
the outcast.

"Glad to see you, Captain.  What?  Going away?  You haven't been
looking so well these last few days, I notice.  Run down, eh?"

He was in his shirt-sleeves, and his words were in the usual course
of business, but they had a human note.  It was commercial amenity,
but I had been a stranger to amenity in that connection.  I do
verily believe (from the direction of his heavy glance towards a
certain shelf) that he was going to suggest the purchase of
Clarkson's Nerve Tonic, which he kept in stock, when I said
impulsively:

"I am rather in trouble with my loading."

Wide awake under his sleepy, broad mask with glued lips, he
understood at once, had a movement of the head so appreciative that
I relieved my exasperation by exclaiming:

"Surely there must be eleven hundred quarter-bags to be found in
the colony.  It's only a matter of looking for them."

Again that slight movement of the big head, and in the noise and
activity of the store that tranquil murmur:

"To be sure.  But then people likely to have a reserve of quarter-
bags wouldn't want to sell.  They'd need that size themselves."

"That's exactly what my consignees are telling me.  Impossible to
buy.  Bosh!  They don't want to.  It suits them to have the ship
hung up.  But if I were to discover the lot they would have to--
Look here, Jacobus!  You are the man to have such a thing up your
sleeve."

He protested with a ponderous swing of his big head.  I stood
before him helplessly, being looked at by those heavy eyes with a
veiled expression as of a man after some soul-shaking crisis.
Then, suddenly:

"It's impossible to talk quietly here," he whispered.  "I am very
busy.  But if you could go and wait for me in my house.  It's less
than ten minutes' walk.  Oh, yes, you don't know the way."

He called for his coat and offered to take me there himself.  He
would have to return to the store at once for an hour or so to
finish his business, and then he would be at liberty to talk over
with me that matter of quarter-bags.  This programme was breathed
out at me through slightly parted, still lips; his heavy,
motionless glance rested upon me, placid as ever, the glance of a
tired man--but I felt that it was searching, too.  I could not
imagine what he was looking for in me and kept silent, wondering.

"I am asking you to wait for me in my house till I am at liberty to
talk this matter over.  You will?"

"Why, of course!" I cried.

"But I cannot promise--"

"I dare say not," I said.  "I don't expect a promise."

"I mean I can't even promise to try the move I've in my mind.  One
must see first . . . h'm!"

"All right.  I'll take the chance.  I'll wait for you as long as
you like.  What else have I to do in this infernal hole of a port!"

Before I had uttered my last words we had set off at a swinging
pace.  We turned a couple of corners and entered a street
completely empty of traffic, of semi-rural aspect, paved with
cobblestones nestling in grass tufts.  The house came to the line
of the roadway; a single story on an elevated basement of rough-
stones, so that our heads were below the level of the windows as we
went along.  All the jalousies were tightly shut, like eyes, and
the house seemed fast asleep in the afternoon sunshine.  The
entrance was at the side, in an alley even more grass-grown than
the street:  a small door, simply on the latch.

With a word of apology as to showing me the way, Jacobus preceded
me up a dark passage and led me across the naked parquet floor of
what I supposed to be the dining-room.  It was lighted by three
glass doors which stood wide open on to a verandah or rather loggia
running its brick arches along the garden side of the house.  It
was really a magnificent garden:  smooth green lawns and a gorgeous
maze of flower-beds in the foreground, displayed around a basin of
dark water framed in a marble rim, and in the distance the massed
foliage of varied trees concealing the roofs of other houses.  The
town might have been miles away.  It was a brilliantly coloured
solitude, drowsing in a warm, voluptuous silence.  Where the long,
still shadows fell across the beds, and in shady nooks, the massed
colours of the flowers had an extraordinary magnificence of effect.
I stood entranced.  Jacobus grasped me delicately above the elbow,
impelling me to a half-turn to the left.

I had not noticed the girl before.  She occupied a low, deep,
wickerwork arm-chair, and I saw her in exact profile like a figure
in a tapestry, and as motionless.  Jacobus released my arm.

"This is Alice," he announced tranquilly; and his subdued manner of
speaking made it sound so much like a confidential communication
that I fancied myself nodding understandingly and whispering:  "I
see, I see." . . . Of course, I did nothing of the kind.  Neither
of us did anything; we stood side by side looking down at the girl.
For quite a time she did not stir, staring straight before her as
if watching the vision of some pageant passing through the garden
in the deep, rich glow of light and the splendour of flowers.

Then, coming to the end of her reverie, she looked round and up.
If I had not at first noticed her, I am certain that she too had
been unaware of my presence till she actually perceived me by her
father's side.  The quickened upward movement of the heavy eyelids,
the widening of the languid glance, passing into a fixed stare, put
that beyond doubt.

Under her amazement there was a hint of fear, and then came a flash
as of anger.  Jacobus, after uttering my name fairly loud, said:
"Make yourself at home, Captain--I won't be gone long," and went
away rapidly.  Before I had time to make a bow I was left alone
with the girl--who, I remembered suddenly, had not been seen by any
man or woman of that town since she had found it necessary to put
up her hair.  It looked as though it had not been touched again
since that distant time of first putting up; it was a mass of
black, lustrous locks, twisted anyhow high on her head, with long,
untidy wisps hanging down on each side of the clear sallow face; a
mass so thick and strong and abundant that, nothing but to look at,
it gave you a sensation of heavy pressure on the top of your head
and an impression of magnificently cynical untidiness.  She leaned
forward, hugging herself with crossed legs; a dingy, amber-
coloured, flounced wrapper of some thin stuff revealed the young
supple body drawn together tensely in the deep low seat as if
crouching for a spring.  I detected a slight, quivering start or
two, which looked uncommonly like bounding away.  They were
followed by the most absolute immobility.

The absurd impulse to run out after Jacobus (for I had been
startled, too) once repressed, I took a chair, placed it not very
far from her, sat down deliberately, and began to talk about the
garden, caring not what I said, but using a gentle caressing
intonation as one talks to soothe a startled wild animal.  I could
not even be certain that she understood me.  She never raised her
face nor attempted to look my way.  I kept on talking only to
prevent her from taking flight.  She had another of those
quivering, repressed starts which made me catch my breath with
apprehension.

Ultimately I formed a notion that what prevented her perhaps from
going off in one great, nervous leap, was the scantiness of her
attire.  The wicker armchair was the most substantial thing about
her person.  What she had on under that dingy, loose, amber wrapper
must have been of the most flimsy and airy character.  One could
not help being aware of it.  It was obvious.  I felt it actually
embarrassing at first; but that sort of embarrassment is got over
easily by a mind not enslaved by narrow prejudices.  I did not
avert my gaze from Alice.  I went on talking with ingratiating
softness, the recollection that, most likely, she had never before
been spoken to by a strange man adding to my assurance.  I don't
know why an emotional tenseness should have crept into the
situation.  But it did.  And just as I was becoming aware of it a
slight scream cut short my flow of urbane speech.

The scream did not proceed from the girl.  It was emitted behind
me, and caused me to turn my head sharply.  I understood at once
that the apparition in the doorway was the elderly relation of
Jacobus, the companion, the gouvernante.  While she remained
thunderstruck, I got up and made her a low bow.

The ladies of Jacobus's household evidently spent their days in
light attire.  This stumpy old woman with a face like a large
wrinkled lemon, beady eyes, and a shock of iron-grey hair, was
dressed in a garment of some ash-coloured, silky, light stuff.  It
fell from her thick neck down to her toes with the simplicity of an
unadorned nightgown.  It made her appear truly cylindrical.  She
exclaimed:  "How did you get here?"

Before I could say a word she vanished and presently I heard a
confusion of shrill protestations in a distant part of the house.
Obviously no one could tell her how I got there.  In a moment, with
great outcries from two negro women following her, she waddled back
to the doorway, infuriated.

"What do you want here?"

I turned to the girl.  She was sitting straight up now, her hands
posed on the arms of the chair.  I appealed to her.

"Surely, Miss Alice, you will not let them drive me out into the
street?"

Her magnificent black eyes, narrowed, long in shape, swept over me
with an indefinable expression, then in a harsh, contemptuous voice
she let fall in French a sort of explanation:

"C'est papa."

I made another low bow to the old woman.

She turned her back on me in order to drive away her black
henchwomen, then surveying my person in a peculiar manner with one
small eye nearly closed and her face all drawn up on that side as
if with a twinge of toothache, she stepped out on the verandah, sat
down in a rocking-chair some distance away, and took up her
knitting from a little table.  Before she started at it she plunged
one of the needles into the mop of her grey hair and stirred it
vigorously.

Her elementary nightgown-sort of frock clung to her ancient,
stumpy, and floating form.  She wore white cotton stockings and
flat brown velvet slippers.  Her feet and ankles were obtrusively
visible on the foot-rest.  She began to rock herself slightly,
while she knitted.  I had resumed my seat and kept quiet, for I
mistrusted that old woman.  What if she ordered me to depart?  She
seemed capable of any outrage.  She had snorted once or twice; she
was knitting violently.  Suddenly she piped at the young girl in
French a question which I translate colloquially:

"What's your father up to, now?"

The young creature shrugged her shoulders so comprehensively that
her whole body swayed within the loose wrapper; and in that
unexpectedly harsh voice which yet had a seductive quality to the
senses, like certain kinds of natural rough wines one drinks with
pleasure:

"It's some captain.  Leave me alone--will you!"

The chair rocked quicker, the old, thin voice was like a whistle.

"You and your father make a pair.  He would stick at nothing--
that's well known.  But I didn't expect this."

I thought it high time to air some of my own French.  I remarked
modestly, but firmly, that this was business.  I had some matters
to talk over with Mr. Jacobus.

At once she piped out a derisive "Poor innocent!"  Then, with a
change of tone:  "The shop's for business.  Why don't you go to the
shop to talk with him?"

The furious speed of her fingers and knitting-needles made one
dizzy; and with squeaky indignation:

"Sitting here staring at that girl--is that what you call
business?"

"No," I said suavely.  "I call this pleasure--an unexpected
pleasure.  And unless Miss Alice objects--"

I half turned to her.  She flung at me an angry and contemptuous
"Don't care!" and leaning her elbow on her knees took her chin in
her hand--a Jacobus chin undoubtedly.  And those heavy eyelids,
this black irritated stare reminded me of Jacobus, too--the wealthy
merchant, the respected one.  The design of her eyebrows also was
the same, rigid and ill-omened.  Yes!  I traced in her a
resemblance to both of them.  It came to me as a sort of surprising
remote inference that both these Jacobuses were rather handsome men
after all.  I said:

"Oh!  Then I shall stare at you till you smile."

She favoured me again with an even more viciously scornful "Don't
care!"

The old woman broke in blunt and shrill:

"Hear his impudence!  And you too!  Don't care!  Go at least and
put some more clothes on.  Sitting there like this before this
sailor riff-raff."

The sun was about to leave the Pearl of the Ocean for other seas,
for other lands.  The walled garden full of shadows blazed with
colour as if the flowers were giving up the light absorbed during
the day.  The amazing old woman became very explicit.  She
suggested to the girl a corset and a petticoat with a cynical
unreserve which humiliated me.  Was I of no more account than a
wooden dummy?  The girl snapped out:  "Shan't!"

It was not the naughty retort of a vulgar child; it had a note of
desperation.  Clearly my intrusion had somehow upset the balance of
their established relations.  The old woman knitted with furious
accuracy, her eyes fastened down on her work.

"Oh, you are the true child of your father!  And THAT talks of
entering a convent!  Letting herself be stared at by a fellow."

"Leave off."

"Shameless thing!"

"Old sorceress," the girl uttered distinctly, preserving her
meditative pose, chin in hand, and a far-away stare over the
garden.

It was like the quarrel of the kettle and the pot.  The old woman
flew out of the chair, banged down her work, and with a great play
of thick limb perfectly visible in that weird, clinging garment of
hers, strode at the girl--who never stirred.  I was experiencing a
sort of trepidation when, as if awed by that unconscious attitude,
the aged relative of Jacobus turned short upon me.

She was, I perceived, armed with a knitting-needle; and as she
raised her hand her intention seemed to be to throw it at me like a
dart.  But she only used it to scratch her head with, examining me
the while at close range, one eye nearly shut and her face
distorted by a whimsical, one-sided grimace.

"My dear man," she asked abruptly, "do you expect any good to come
of this?"

 "I do hope so indeed, Miss Jacobus."  I tried to speak in the easy
tone of an afternoon caller.  "You see, I am here after some bags."

"Bags!  Look at that now!  Didn't I hear you holding forth to that
graceless wretch?"

"You would like to see me in my grave," uttered the motionless girl
hoarsely.

"Grave!  What about me?  Buried alive before I am dead for the sake
of a thing blessed with such a pretty father!" she cried; and
turning to me:  "You're one of these men he does business with.
Well--why don't you leave us in peace, my good fellow?"

It was said in a tone--this "leave us in peace!"  There was a sort
of ruffianly familiarity, a superiority, a scorn in it.  I was to
hear it more than once, for you would show an imperfect knowledge
of human nature if you thought that this was my last visit to that
house--where no respectable person had put foot for ever so many
years.  No, you would be very much mistaken if you imagined that
this reception had scared me away.  First of all I was not going to
run before a grotesque and ruffianly old woman.

And then you mustn't forget these necessary bags.  That first
evening Jacobus made me stay to dinner; after, however, telling me
loyally that he didn't know whether he could do anything at all for
me.  He had been thinking it over.  It was too difficult, he
feared. . . . But he did not give it up in so many words.

We were only three at table; the girl by means of repeated "Won't!"
"Shan't!" and "Don't care!" having conveyed and affirmed her
intention not to come to the table, not to have any dinner, not to
move from the verandah.  The old relative hopped about in her flat
slippers and piped indignantly, Jacobus towered over her and
murmured placidly in his throat; I joined jocularly from a
distance, throwing in a few words, for which under the cover of the
night I received secretly a most vicious poke in the ribs from the
old woman's elbow or perhaps her fist.  I restrained a cry.  And
all the time the girl didn't even condescend to raise her head to
look at any of us.  All this may sound childish--and yet that
stony, petulant sullenness had an obscurely tragic flavour.

And so we sat down to the food around the light of a good many
candles while she remained crouching out there, staring in the dark
as if feeding her bad temper on the heavily scented air of the
admirable garden.

Before leaving I said to Jacobus that I would come next day to hear
if the bag affair had made any progress.  He shook his head
slightly at that.

"I'll haunt your house daily till you pull it off.  You'll be
always finding me here."

His faint, melancholy smile did not part his thick lips.

"That will be all right, Captain."

Then seeing me to the door, very tranquil, he murmured earnestly
the recommendation:  "Make yourself at home," and also the
hospitable hint about there being always "a plate of soup."  It was
only on my way to the quay, down the ill-lighted streets, that I
remembered I had been engaged to dine that very evening with the S-
family.  Though vexed with my forgetfulness (it would be rather
awkward to explain) I couldn't help thinking that it had procured
me a more amusing evening.  And besides--business.  The sacred
business--.

In a barefooted negro who overtook me at a run and bolted down the
landing-steps I recognised Jacobus's boatman, who must have been
feeding in the kitchen.  His usual "Good-night, sah!" as I went up
my ship's ladder had a more cordial sound than on previous
occasions.



CHAPTER V



I kept my word to Jacobus.  I haunted his home.  He was perpetually
finding me there of an afternoon when he popped in for a moment
from the "store."  The sound of my voice talking to his Alice
greeted him on his doorstep; and when he returned for good in the
evening, ten to one he would hear it still going on in the
verandah.  I just nodded to him; he would sit down heavily and
gently, and watch with a sort of approving anxiety my efforts to
make his daughter smile.

I called her often "Alice," right before him; sometimes I would
address her as Miss "Don't Care," and I exhausted myself in
nonsensical chatter without succeeding once in taking her out of
her peevish and tragic self.  There were moments when I felt I must
break out and start swearing at her till all was blue.  And I
fancied that had I done so Jacobus would not have moved a muscle.
A sort of shady, intimate understanding seemed to have been
established between us.

I must say the girl treated her father exactly in the same way she
treated me.

And how could it have been otherwise?  She treated me as she
treated her father.  She had never seen a visitor.  She did not
know how men behaved.  I belonged to the low lot with whom her
father did business at the port.  I was of no account.  So was her
father.  The only decent people in the world were the people of the
island, who would have nothing to do with him because of something
wicked he had done.  This was apparently the explanation Miss
Jacobus had given her of the household's isolated position.  For
she had to be told something!  And I feel convinced that this
version had been assented to by Jacobus.  I must say the old woman
was putting it forward with considerable gusto.  It was on her lips
the universal explanation, the universal allusion, the universal
taunt.

One day Jacobus came in early and, beckoning me into the dining-
room, wiped his brow with a weary gesture and told me that he had
managed to unearth a supply of quarter-bags.

"It's fourteen hundred your ship wanted, did you say, Captain?"

"Yes, yes!" I replied eagerly; but he remained calm.  He looked
more tired than I had ever seen him before.

"Well, Captain, you may go and tell your people that they can get
that lot from my brother."

As I remained open-mouthed at this, he added his usual placid
formula of assurance:

"You'll find it correct, Captain."

"You spoke to your brother about it?"  I was distinctly awed.  "And
for me?  Because he must have known that my ship's the only one
hung up for bags.  How on earth--"

He wiped his brow again.  I noticed that he was dressed with
unusual care, in clothes in which I had never seen him before.  He
avoided my eye.

"You've heard people talk, of course. . . . That's true enough.  He
. . . I . . . We certainly. . . for several years . . ."  His voice
declined to a mere sleepy murmur.  "You see I had something to tell
him of, something which--"

His murmur stopped.  He was not going to tell me what this
something was.  And I didn't care.  Anxious to carry the news to my
charterers, I ran back on the verandah to get my hat.

At the bustle I made the girl turned her eyes slowly in my
direction, and even the old woman was checked in her knitting.  I
stopped a moment to exclaim excitedly:

"Your father's a brick, Miss Don't Care.  That's what he is."

She beheld my elation in scornful surprise.  Jacobus with unwonted
familiarity seized my arm as I flew through the dining-room, and
breathed heavily at me a proposal about "A plate of soup" that
evening.  I answered distractedly:  "Eh?  What?  Oh, thanks!
Certainly.  With pleasure," and tore myself away.  Dine with him?
Of course.  The merest gratitude

But some three hours afterwards, in the dusky, silent street, paved
with cobble-stones, I became aware that it was not mere gratitude
which was guiding my steps towards the house with the old garden,
where for years no guest other than myself had ever dined.  Mere
gratitude does not gnaw at one's interior economy in that
particular way.  Hunger might; but I was not feeling particularly
hungry for Jacobus's food.

On that occasion, too, the girl refused to come to the table.

My exasperation grew.  The old woman cast malicious glances at me.
I said suddenly to Jacobus:  "Here!  Put some chicken and salad on
that plate."  He obeyed without raising his eyes.  I carried it
with a knife and fork and a serviette out on the verandah.  The
garden was one mass of gloom, like a cemetery of flowers buried in
the darkness, and she, in the chair, seemed to muse mournfully over
the extinction of light and colour.  Only whiffs of heavy scent
passed like wandering, fragrant souls of that departed multitude of
blossoms.  I talked volubly, jocularly, persuasively, tenderly; I
talked in a subdued tone.  To a listener it would have sounded like
the murmur of a pleading lover.  Whenever I paused expectantly
there was only a deep silence.  It was like offering food to a
seated statue.

"I haven't been able to swallow a single morsel thinking of you out
here starving yourself in the dark.  It's positively cruel to be so
obstinate.  Think of my sufferings."

"Don't care."

I felt as if I could have done her some violence--shaken her,
beaten her maybe.  I said:

"Your absurd behaviour will prevent me coming here any more."

"What's that to me?"

"You like it."

"It's false," she snarled.

My hand fell on her shoulder; and if she had flinched I verily
believe I would have shaken her.  But there was no movement and
this immobility disarmed my anger.

"You do.  Or you wouldn't be found on the verandah every day.  Why
are you here, then?  There are plenty of rooms in the house.  You
have your own room to stay in--if you did not want to see me.  But
you do.  You know you do."

I felt a slight shudder under my hand and released my grip as if
frightened by that sign of animation in her body.  The scented air
of the garden came to us in a warm wave like a voluptuous and
perfumed sigh.

"Go back to them," she whispered, almost pitifully.

As I re-entered the dining-room I saw Jacobus cast down his eyes.
I banged the plate on the table.  At this demonstration of ill-
humour he murmured something in an apologetic tone, and I turned on
him viciously as if he were accountable to me for these "abominable
eccentricities," I believe I called them.

"But I dare say Miss Jacobus here is responsible for most of this
offensive manner," I added loftily.

She piped out at once in her brazen, ruffianly manner:

"Eh?  Why don't you leave us in peace, my good fellow?"

I was astonished that she should dare before Jacobus.  Yet what
could he have done to repress her?  He needed her too much.  He
raised a heavy, drowsy glance for an instant, then looked down
again.  She insisted with shrill finality:

"Haven't you done your business, you two?  Well, then--"

She had the true Jacobus impudence, that old woman.  Her mop of
iron-grey hair was parted, on the side like a man's, raffishly, and
she made as if to plunge her fork into it, as she used to do with
the knitting-needle, but refrained.  Her little black eyes sparkled
venomously.  I turned to my host at the head of the table--
menacingly as it were.

"Well, and what do you say to that, Jacobus?  Am I to take it that
we have done with each other?"

I had to wait a little.  The answer when it came was rather
unexpected, and in quite another spirit than the question.

"I certainly think we might do some business yet with those
potatoes of mine, Captain.  You will find that--"

I cut him short.

"I've told you before that I don't trade."

His broad chest heaved without a sound in a noiseless sigh.

"Think it over, Captain," he murmured, tenacious and tranquil; and
I burst into a jarring laugh, remembering how he had stuck to the
circus-rider woman--the depth of passion under that placid surface,
which even cuts with a riding-whip (so the legend had it) could
never raffle into the semblance of a storm; something like the
passion of a fish would be if one could imagine such a thing as a
passionate fish.

That evening I experienced more distinctly than ever the sense of
moral discomfort which always attended me in that house lying under
the ban of all "decent" people.  I refused to stay on and smoke
after dinner; and when I put my hand into the thickly-cushioned
palm of Jacobus, I said to myself that it would be for the last
time under his roof.  I pressed his bulky paw heartily
nevertheless.  Hadn't he got me out of a serious difficulty?  To
the few words of acknowledgment I was bound, and indeed quite
willing, to utter, he answered by stretching his closed lips in his
melancholy, glued-together smile.

"That will be all right, I hope, Captain," he breathed out
weightily.

"What do you mean?" I asked, alarmed.  "That your brother might
yet--"

"Oh, no," he reassured me.  "He . . . he's a man of his word,
Captain."

My self-communion as I walked away from his door, trying to believe
that this was for the last time, was not satisfactory.  I was aware
myself that I was not sincere in my reflections as to Jacobus's
motives, and, of course, the very next day I went back again.

How weak, irrational, and absurd we are!  How easily carried away
whenever our awakened imagination brings us the irritating hint of
a desire!  I cared for the girl in a particular way, seduced by the
moody expression of her face, by her obstinate silences, her rare,
scornful words; by the perpetual pout of her closed lips, the black
depths of her fixed gaze turned slowly upon me as if in
contemptuous provocation, only to be averted next moment with an
exasperating indifference.

Of course the news of my assiduity had spread all over the little
town.  I noticed a change in the manner of my acquaintances and
even something different in the nods of the other captains, when
meeting them at the landing-steps or in the offices where business
called me.  The old-maidish head clerk treated me with distant
punctiliousness and, as it were, gathered his skirts round him for
fear of contamination.  It seemed to me that the very niggers on
the quays turned to look after me as I passed; and as to Jacobus's
boatman his "Good-night, sah!" when he put me on board was no
longer merely cordial--it had a familiar, confidential sound as
though we had been partners in some villainy.

My friend S- the elder passed me on the other side of the street
with a wave of the hand and an ironic smile.  The younger brother,
the one they had married to an elderly shrew, he, on the strength
of an older friendship and as if paying a debt of gratitude, took
the liberty to utter a word of warning.

"You're doing yourself no good by your choice of friends, my dear
chap," he said with infantile gravity.

As I knew that the meeting of the brothers Jacobus was the subject
of excited comment in the whole of the sugary Pearl of the Ocean I
wanted to know why I was blamed.

"I have been the occasion of a move which may end in a
reconciliation surely desirable from the point of view of the
proprieties--don't you know?"

"Of course, if that girl were disposed of it would certainly
facilitate--" he mused sagely, then, inconsequential creature, gave
me a light tap on the lower part of my waistcoat.  "You old
sinner," he cried jovially, "much you care for proprieties.  But
you had better look out for yourself, you know, with a personage
like Jacobus who has no sort of reputation to lose."

He had recovered his gravity of a respectable citizen by that time
and added regretfully:

"All the women of our family are perfectly scandalised."

But by that time I had given up visiting the S- family and the D-
family.  The elder ladies pulled such faces when I showed myself,
and the multitude of related young ladies received me with such a
variety of looks:  wondering, awed, mocking (except Miss Mary, who
spoke to me and looked at me with hushed, pained compassion as
though I had been ill), that I had no difficulty in giving them all
up.  I would have given up the society of the whole town, for the
sake of sitting near that girl, snarling and superb and barely clad
in that flimsy, dingy, amber wrapper, open low at the throat.  She
looked, with the wild wisps of hair hanging down her tense face, as
though she had just jumped out of bed in the panic of a fire.

She sat leaning on her elbow, looking at nothing.  Why did she stay
listening to my absurd chatter?  And not only that; but why did she
powder her face in preparation for my arrival?  It seemed to be her
idea of making a toilette, and in her untidy negligence a sign of
great effort towards personal adornment.

But I might have been mistaken.  The powdering might have been her
daily practice and her presence in the verandah a sign of an
indifference so complete as to take no account of my existence.
Well, it was all one to me.

I loved to watch her slow changes of pose, to look at her long
immobilities composed in the graceful lines of her body, to observe
the mysterious narrow stare of her splendid black eyes, somewhat
long in shape, half closed, contemplating the void.  She was like a
spellbound creature with the forehead of a goddess crowned by the
dishevelled magnificent hair of a gipsy tramp.  Even her
indifference was seductive.  I felt myself growing attached to her
by the bond of an irrealisable desire, for I kept my head--quite.
And I put up with the moral discomfort of Jacobus's sleepy
watchfulness, tranquil, and yet so expressive; as if there had been
a tacit pact between us two.  I put up with the insolence of the
old woman's:  "Aren't you ever going to leave us in peace, my good
fellow?" with her taunts; with her brazen and sinister scolding.
She was of the true Jacobus stock, and no mistake.

Directly I got away from the girl I called myself many hard names.
What folly was this?  I would ask myself.  It was like being the
slave of some depraved habit.  And I returned to her with my head
clear, my heart certainly free, not even moved by pity for that
castaway (she was as much of a castaway as any one ever wrecked on
a desert island), but as if beguiled by some extraordinary promise.
Nothing more unworthy could be imagined.  The recollection of that
tremulous whisper when I gripped her shoulder with one hand and
held a plate of chicken with the other was enough to make me break
all my good resolutions.

Her insulting taciturnity was enough sometimes to make one gnash
one's teeth with rage.  When she opened her mouth it was only to be
abominably rude in harsh tones to the associate of her reprobate
father; and the full approval of her aged relative was conveyed to
her by offensive chuckles.  If not that, then her remarks, always
uttered in the tone of scathing contempt, were of the most
appalling inanity.

How could it have been otherwise?  That plump, ruffianly Jacobus
old maid in the tight grey frock had never taught her any manners.
Manners I suppose are not necessary for born castaways.  No
educational establishment could ever be induced to accept her as a
pupil--on account of the proprieties, I imagine.  And Jacobus had
not been able to send her away anywhere.  How could he have done
it?  Who with?  Where to?  He himself was not enough of an
adventurer to think of settling down anywhere else.  His passion
had tossed him at the tail of a circus up and down strange coasts,
but, the storm over, he had drifted back shamelessly where, social
outcast as he was, he remained still a Jacobus--one of the oldest
families on the island, older than the French even.  There must
have been a Jacobus in at the death of the last Dodo. . . . The
girl had learned nothing, she had never listened to a general
conversation, she knew nothing, she had heard of nothing.  She
could read certainly; but all the reading matter that ever came in
her way were the newspapers provided for the captains' room of the
"store."  Jacobus had the habit of taking these sheets home now and
then in a very stained and ragged condition.

As her mind could not grasp the meaning of any matters treated
there except police-court reports and accounts of crimes, she had
formed for herself a notion of the civilised world as a scene of
murders, abductions, burglaries, stabbing affrays, and every sort
of desperate violence.  England and France, Paris and London (the
only two towns of which she seemed to have heard), appeared to her
sinks of abomination, reeking with blood, in contrast to her little
island where petty larceny was about the standard of current
misdeeds, with, now and then, some more pronounced crime--and that
only amongst the imported coolie labourers on sugar estates or the
negroes of the town.  But in Europe these things were being done
daily by a wicked population of white men amongst whom, as that
ruffianly, aristocratic old Miss Jacobus pointed out, the wandering
sailors, the associates of her precious papa, were the lowest of
the low.

It was impossible to give her a sense of proportion.  I suppose she
figured England to herself as about the size of the Pearl of the
Ocean; in which case it would certainly have been reeking with gore
and a mere wreck of burgled houses from end to end.  One could not
make her understand that these horrors on which she fed her
imagination were lost in the mass of orderly life like a few drops
of blood in the ocean.  She directed upon me for a moment the
uncomprehending glance of her narrowed eyes and then would turn her
scornful powdered face away without a word.  She would not even
take the trouble to shrug her shoulders.

At that time the batches of papers brought by the last mail
reported a series of crimes in the East End of London, there was a
sensational case of abduction in France and a fine display of armed
robbery in Australia.  One afternoon crossing the dining-room I
heard Miss Jacobus piping in the verandah with venomous animosity:
"I don't know what your precious papa is plotting with that fellow.
But he's just the sort of man who's capable of carrying you off far
away somewhere and then cutting your throat some day for your
money."

There was a good half of the length of the verandah between their
chairs.  I came out and sat down fiercely midway between them.

"Yes, that's what we do with girls in Europe," I began in a grimly
matter-of-fact tone.  I think Miss Jacobus was disconcerted by my
sudden appearance.  I turned upon her with cold ferocity:

"As to objectionable old women, they are first strangled quietly,
then cut up into small pieces and thrown away, a bit here and a bit
there.  They vanish--"

I cannot go so far as to say I had terrified her.  But she was
troubled by my truculence, the more so because I had been always
addressing her with a politeness she did not deserve.  Her plump,
knitting hands fell slowly on her knees.  She said not a word while
I fixed her with severe determination.  Then as I turned away from
her at last, she laid down her work gently and, with noiseless
movements, retreated from the verandah.  In fact, she vanished.

But I was not thinking of her.  I was looking at the girl.  It was
what I was coming for daily; troubled, ashamed, eager; finding in
my nearness to her a unique sensation which I indulged with dread,
self-contempt, and deep pleasure, as if it were a secret vice bound
to end in my undoing, like the habit of some drug or other which
ruins and degrades its slave.

I looked her over, from the top of her dishevelled head, down the
lovely line of the shoulder, following the curve of the hip, the
draped form of the long limb, right down to her fine ankle below a
torn, soiled flounce; and as far as the point of the shabby, high-
heeled, blue slipper, dangling from her well-shaped foot, which she
moved slightly, with quick, nervous jerks, as if impatient of my
presence.  And in the scent of the massed flowers I seemed to
breathe her special and inexplicable charm, the heady perfume of
the everlastingly irritated captive of the garden.

I looked at her rounded chin, the Jacobus chin; at the full, red
lips pouting in the powdered, sallow face; at the firm modelling of
the cheek, the grains of white in the hairs of the straight sombre
eyebrows; at the long eyes, a narrowed gleam of liquid white and
intense motionless black, with their gaze so empty of thought, and
so absorbed in their fixity that she seemed to be staring at her
own lonely image, in some far-off mirror hidden from my sight
amongst the trees.

And suddenly, without looking at me, with the appearance of a
person speaking to herself, she asked, in that voice slightly harsh
yet mellow and always irritated:

"Why do you keep on coming here?"

"Why do I keep on coming here?" I repeated, taken by surprise.  I
could not have told her.  I could not even tell myself with
sincerity why I was coming there.  "What's the good of you asking a
question like that?"

"Nothing is any good," she observed scornfully to the empty air,
her chin propped on her hand, that hand never extended to any man,
that no one had ever grasped--for I had only grasped her shoulder
once--that generous, fine, somewhat masculine hand.  I knew well
the peculiarly efficient shape--broad at the base, tapering at the
fingers--of that hand, for which there was nothing in the world to
lay hold of.  I pretended to be playful.

"No!  But do you really care to know?"

She shrugged indolently her magnificent shoulders, from which the
dingy thin wrapper was slipping a little.

"Oh--never mind--never mind!"

There was something smouldering under those airs of lassitude.  She
exasperated me by the provocation of her nonchalance, by something
elusive and defiant in her very form which I wanted to seize.  I
said roughly:

"Why?  Don't you think I should tell you the truth?"

Her eyes glided my way for a sidelong look, and she murmured,
moving only her full, pouting lips:

"I think you would not dare."

"Do you imagine I am afraid of you?  What on earth. . . . Well,
it's possible, after all, that I don't know exactly why I am coming
here.  Let us say, with Miss Jacobus, that it is for no good.  You
seem to believe the outrageous things she says, if you do have a
row with her now and then."

She snapped out viciously:

"Who else am I to believe?

"I don't know," I had to own, seeing her suddenly very helpless and
condemned to moral solitude by the verdict of a respectable
community.  "You might believe me, if you chose."

She made a slight movement and asked me at once, with an effort as
if making an experiment:

"What is the business between you and papa?"

"Don't you know the nature of your father's business?  Come!  He
sells provisions to ships."

She became rigid again in her crouching pose.

"Not that.  What brings you here--to this house?"

"And suppose it's you?  You would not call that business?  Would
you?  And now let us drop the subject.  It's no use.  My ship will
be ready for sea the day after to-morrow."

She murmured a distinctly scared "So soon," and getting up quickly,
went to the little table and poured herself a glass of water.  She
walked with rapid steps and with an indolent swaying of her whole
young figure above the hips; when she passed near me I felt with
tenfold force the charm of the peculiar, promising sensation I had
formed the habit to seek near her.  I thought with sudden dismay
that this was the end of it; that after one more day I would be no
longer able to come into this verandah, sit on this chair, and
taste perversely the flavour of contempt in her indolent poses,
drink in the provocation of her scornful looks, and listen to the
curt, insolent remarks uttered in that harsh and seductive voice.
As if my innermost nature had been altered by the action of some
moral poison, I felt an abject dread of going to sea.

I had to exercise a sudden self-control, as one puts on a brake, to
prevent myself jumping up to stride about, shout, gesticulate, make
her a scene.  What for?  What about?  I had no idea.  It was just
the relief of violence that I wanted; and I lolled back in my
chair, trying to keep my lips formed in a smile; that half-
indulgent, half-mocking smile which was my shield against the
shafts of her contempt and the insulting sallies flung at me by the
old woman.

She drank the water at a draught, with the avidity of raging
thirst, and let herself fall on the nearest chair, as if utterly
overcome.  Her attitude, like certain tones of her voice, had in it
something masculine:  the knees apart in the ample wrapper, the
clasped hands hanging between them, her body leaning forward, with
drooping head.  I stared at the heavy black coil of twisted hair.
It was enormous, crowning the bowed head with a crushing and
disdained glory.  The escaped wisps hung straight down.  And
suddenly I perceived that the girl was trembling from head to foot,
as though that glass of iced water had chilled her to the bone.

"What's the matter now?" I said, startled, but in no very
sympathetic mood.

She shook her bowed, overweighted head and cried in a stifled voice
but with a rising inflection:

"Go away!  Go away!  Go away!"

I got up then and approached her, with a strange sort of anxiety.
I looked down at her round, strong neck, then stooped low enough to
peep at her face.  And I began to tremble a little myself.

"What on earth are you gone wild about, Miss Don't Care?"

She flung herself backwards violently, her head going over the back
of the chair.  And now it was her smooth, full, palpitating throat
that lay exposed to my bewildered stare.  Her eyes were nearly
closed, with only a horrible white gleam under the lids as if she
were dead.

"What has come to you?" I asked in awe.  "What are you terrifying
yourself with?"

She pulled herself together, her eyes open frightfully wide now.
The tropical afternoon was lengthening the shadows on the hot,
weary earth, the abode of obscure desires, of extravagant hopes, of
unimaginable terrors.

"Never mind!  Don't care!"  Then, after a gasp, she spoke with such
frightful rapidity that I could hardly make out the amazing words:
"For if you were to shut me up in an empty place as smooth all
round as the palm of my hand, I could always strangle myself with
my hair."

For a moment, doubting my ears, I let this inconceivable
declaration sink into me.  It is ever impossible to guess at the
wild thoughts that pass through the heads of our fellow-creatures.
What monstrous imaginings of violence could have dwelt under the
low forehead of that girl who had been taught to regard her father
as "capable of anything" more in the light of a misfortune than
that of a disgrace; as, evidently, something to be resented and
feared rather than to be ashamed of?  She seemed, indeed, as
unaware of shame as of anything else in the world; but in her
ignorance, her resentment and fear took a childish and violent
shape.

Of course she spoke without knowing the value of words.  What could
she know of death--she who knew nothing of life?  It was merely as
the proof of her being beside herself with some odious
apprehension, that this extraordinary speech had moved me, not to
pity, but to a fascinated, horrified wonder.  I had no idea what
notion she had of her danger.  Some sort of abduction.  It was
quite possible with the talk of that atrocious old woman.  Perhaps
she thought she could be carried off, bound hand and foot and even
gagged.  At that surmise I felt as if the door of a furnace had
been opened in front of me.

"Upon my honour!" I cried.  "You shall end by going crazy if you
listen to that abominable old aunt of yours--"

I studied her haggard expression, her trembling lips.  Her cheeks
even seemed sunk a little.  But how I, the associate of her
disreputable father, the "lowest of the low" from the criminal
Europe, could manage to reassure her I had no conception.  She was
exasperating.

"Heavens and earth!  What do you think I can do?"

"I don't know."

Her chin certainly trembled.  And she was looking at me with
extreme attention.  I made a step nearer to her chair.

"I shall do nothing.  I promise you that.  Will that do?  Do you
understand?  I shall do nothing whatever, of any kind; and the day
after to-morrow I shall be gone."

What else could I have said?  She seemed to drink in my words with
the thirsty avidity with which she had emptied the glass of water.
She whispered tremulously, in that touching tone I had heard once
before on her lips, and which thrilled me again with the same
emotion:

"I would believe you.  But what about papa--"

"He be hanged!"  My emotion betrayed itself by the brutality of my
tone.  "I've had enough of your papa.  Are you so stupid as to
imagine that I am frightened of him?  He can't make me do
anything."

All that sounded feeble to me in the face of her ignorance.  But I
must conclude that the "accent of sincerity" has, as some people
say, a really irresistible power.  The effect was far beyond my
hopes,--and even beyond my conception.  To watch the change in the
girl was like watching a miracle--the gradual but swift relaxation
of her tense glance, of her stiffened muscles, of every fibre of
her body.  That black, fixed stare into which I had read a tragic
meaning more than once, in which I had found a sombre seduction,
was perfectly empty now, void of all consciousness whatever, and
not even aware any longer of my presence; it had become a little
sleepy, in the Jacobus fashion.

But, man being a perverse animal, instead of rejoicing at my
complete success, I beheld it with astounded and indignant eyes.
There was something cynical in that unconcealed alteration, the
true Jacobus shamelessness.  I felt as though I had been cheated in
some rather complicated deal into which I had entered against my
better judgment.  Yes, cheated without any regard for, at least,
the forms of decency.

With an easy, indolent, and in its indolence supple, feline
movement, she rose from the chair, so provokingly ignoring me now,
that for very rage I held my ground within less than a foot of her.
Leisurely and tranquil, behaving right before me with the ease of a
person alone in a room, she extended her beautiful arms, with her
hands clenched, her body swaying, her head thrown back a little,
revelling contemptuously in a sense of relief, easing her limbs in
freedom after all these days of crouching, motionless poses when
she had been so furious and so afraid.

All this with supreme indifference, incredible, offensive,
exasperating, like ingratitude doubled with treachery.

I ought to have been flattered, perhaps, but, on the contrary, my
anger grew; her movement to pass by me as if I were a wooden post
or a piece of furniture, that unconcerned movement brought it to a
head.

I won't say I did not know what I was doing, but, certainly, cool
reflection had nothing to do with the circumstance that next moment
both my arms were round her waist.  It was an impulsive action, as
one snatches at something falling or escaping; and it had no
hypocritical gentleness about it either.  She had no time to make a
sound, and the first kiss I planted on her closed lips was vicious
enough to have been a bite.

She did not resist, and of course I did not stop at one.  She let
me go on, not as if she were inanimate--I felt her there, close
against me, young, full of vigour, of life, a strong desirable
creature, but as if she did not care in the least, in the absolute
assurance of her safety, what I did or left undone.  Our faces
brought close together in this storm of haphazard caresses, her
big, black, wide-open eyes looked into mine without the girl
appearing either angry or pleased or moved in any way.  In that
steady gaze which seemed impersonally to watch my madness I could
detect a slight surprise, perhaps--nothing more.  I showered kisses
upon her face and there did not seem to be any reason why this
should not go on for ever.

That thought flashed through my head, and I was on the point of
desisting, when, all at once, she began to struggle with a sudden
violence which all but freed her instantly, which revived my
exasperation with her, indeed a fierce desire never to let her go
any more.  I tightened my embrace in time, gasping out:  "No--you
don't!" as if she were my mortal enemy.  On her part not a word was
said.  Putting her hands against my chest, she pushed with all her
might without succeeding to break the circle of my arms.  Except
that she seemed thoroughly awake now, her eyes gave me no clue
whatever.  To meet her black stare was like looking into a deep
well, and I was totally unprepared for her change of tactics.
Instead of trying to tear my hands apart, she flung herself upon my
breast and with a downward, undulating, serpentine motion, a quick
sliding dive, she got away from me smoothly.  It was all very
swift; I saw her pick up the tail of her wrapper and run for the
door at the end of the verandah not very gracefully.  She appeared
to be limping a little--and then she vanished; the door swung
behind her so noiselessly that I could not believe it was
completely closed.  I had a distinct suspicion of her black eye
being at the crack to watch what I would do.  I could not make up
my mind whether to shake my fist in that direction or blow a kiss.



CHAPTER VI



Either would have been perfectly consistent with my feelings.  I
gazed at the door, hesitating, but in the end I did neither.  The
monition of some sixth sense--the sense of guilt, maybe, that sense
which always acts too late, alas!--warned me to look round; and at
once I became aware that the conclusion of this tumultuous episode
was likely to be a matter of lively anxiety.  Jacobus was standing
in the doorway of the dining-room.  How long he had been there it
was impossible to guess; and remembering my struggle with the girl
I thought he must have been its mute witness from beginning to end.
But this supposition seemed almost incredible.  Perhaps that
impenetrable girl had heard him come in and had got away in time.

He stepped on to the verandah in his usual manner, heavy-eyed, with
glued lips.  I marvelled at the girl's resemblance to this man.
Those long, Egyptian eyes, that low forehead of a stupid goddess,
she had found in the sawdust of the circus; but all the rest of the
face, the design and the modelling, the rounded chin, the very
lips--all that was Jacobus, fined down, more finished, more
expressive.

His thick hand fell on and grasped with force the back of a light
chair (there were several standing about) and I perceived the
chance of a broken head at the end of all this--most likely.  My
mortification was extreme.  The scandal would be horrible; that was
unavoidable.  But how to act so as to satisfy myself I did not
know.  I stood on my guard and at any rate faced him.  There was
nothing else for it.  Of one thing I was certain, that, however
brazen my attitude, it could never equal the characteristic Jacobus
impudence.

He gave me his melancholy, glued smile and sat down.  I own I was
relieved.  The perspective of passing from kisses to blows had
nothing particularly attractive in it.  Perhaps--perhaps he had
seen nothing?  He behaved as usual, but he had never before found
me alone on the verandah.  If he had alluded to it, if he had
asked:  "Where's Alice?" or something of the sort, I would have
been able to judge from the tone.  He would give me no opportunity.
The striking peculiarity was that he had never looked up at me yet.
"He knows," I said to myself confidently.  And my contempt for him
relieved my disgust with myself.

"You are early home," I remarked.

"Things are very quiet; nothing doing at the store to-day," he
explained with a cast-down air.

"Oh, well, you know, I am off," I said, feeling that this, perhaps,
was the best thing to do.

"Yes," he breathed out.  "Day after to-morrow."

This was not what I had meant; but as he gazed persistently on the
floor, I followed the direction of his glance.  In the absolute
stillness of the house we stared at the high-heeled slipper the
girl had lost in her flight.  We stared.  It lay overturned.

After what seemed a very long time to me, Jacobus hitched his chair
forward, stooped with extended arm and picked it up.  It looked a
slender thing in his big, thick hands.  It was not really a
slipper, but a low shoe of blue, glazed kid, rubbed and shabby.  It
had straps to go over the instep, but the girl only thrust her feet
in, after her slovenly manner.  Jacobus raised his eyes from the
shoe to look at me.

"Sit down, Captain," he said at last, in his subdued tone.

As if the sight of that shoe had renewed the spell, I gave up
suddenly the idea of leaving the house there and then.  It had
become impossible.  I sat down, keeping my eyes on the fascinating
object.  Jacobus turned his daughter's shoe over and over in his
cushioned paws as if studying the way the thing was made.  He
contemplated the thin sole for a time; then glancing inside with an
absorbed air:

"I am glad I found you here, Captain."

I answered this by some sort of grunt, watching him covertly.  Then
I added:  "You won't have much more of me now."

He was still deep in the interior of that shoe on which my eyes too
were resting.

"Have you thought any more of this deal in potatoes I spoke to you
about the other day?"

"No, I haven't," I answered curtly.  He checked my movement to rise
by an austere, commanding gesture of the hand holding that fatal
shoe.  I remained seated and glared at him.  "You know I don't
trade."

"You ought to, Captain.  You ought to."

I reflected.  If I left that house now I would never see the girl
again.  And I felt I must see her once more, if only for an
instant.  It was a need, not to be reasoned with, not to be
disregarded.  No, I did not want to go away.  I wanted to stay for
one more experience of that strange provoking sensation and of
indefinite desire, the habit of which had made me--me of all
people!--dread the prospect of going to sea.

"Mr. Jacobus," I pronounced slowly.  "Do you really think that upon
the whole and taking various' matters into consideration--I mean
everything, do you understand?--it would be a good thing for me to
trade, let us say, with you?"

I waited for a while.  He went on looking at the shoe which he held
now crushed in the middle, the worn point of the toe and the high
heel protruding on each side of his heavy fist.

"That will be all right," he said, facing me squarely at last.

"Are you sure?"

"You'll find it quite correct, Captain."  He had uttered his
habitual phrases in his usual placid, breath-saving voice and stood
my hard, inquisitive stare sleepily without as much as a wink.

"Then let us trade," I said, turning my shoulder to him.  "I see
you are bent on it."

I did not want an open scandal, but I thought that outward decency
may be bought too dearly at times.  I included Jacobus, myself, the
whole population of the island, in the same contemptuous disgust as
though we had been partners in an ignoble transaction.  And the
remembered vision at sea, diaphanous and blue, of the Pearl of the
Ocean at sixty miles off; the unsubstantial, clear marvel of it as
if evoked by the art of a beautiful and pure magic, turned into a
thing of horrors too.  Was this the fortune this vaporous and rare
apparition had held for me in its hard heart, hidden within the
shape as of fair dreams and mist?  Was this my luck?

"I think"--Jacobus became suddenly audible after what seemed the
silence of vile meditation--"that you might conveniently take some
thirty tons.  That would be about the lot, Captain."

"Would it?  The lot!  I dare say it would be convenient, but I
haven't got enough money for that."

I had never seen him so animated.

"No!" he exclaimed with what I took for the accent of grim menace.
"That's a pity."  He paused, then, unrelenting:  "How much money
have you got, Captain?" he inquired with awful directness.

It was my turn to face him squarely.  I did so and mentioned the
amount I could dispose of.  And I perceived that he was
disappointed.  He thought it over, his calculating gaze lost in
mine, for quite a long time before he came out in a thoughtful tone
with the rapacious suggestion:

"You could draw some more from your charterers.  That would be
quite easy, Captain."

"No, I couldn't," I retorted brusquely.  "I've drawn my salary up
to date, and besides, the ship's accounts are closed."

I was growing furious.  I pursued:  "And I'll tell you what:  if I
could do it I wouldn't."  Then throwing off all restraint, I added:
"You are a bit too much of a Jacobus, Mr. Jacobus."

The tone alone was insulting enough, but he remained tranquil, only
a little puzzled, till something seemed to dawn upon him; but the
unwonted light in his eyes died out instantly.  As a Jacobus on his
native heath, what a mere skipper chose to say could not touch him,
outcast as he was.  As a ship-chandler he could stand anything.
All I caught of his mumble was a vague--"quite correct," than which
nothing could have been more egregiously false at bottom--to my
view, at least.  But I remembered--I had never forgotten--that I
must see the girl.  I did not mean to go.  I meant to stay in the
house till I had seen her once more.

"Look here!" I said finally.  "I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'll
take as many of your confounded potatoes as my money will buy, on
condition that you go off at once down to the wharf to see them
loaded in the lighter and sent alongside the ship straight away.
Take the invoice and a signed receipt with you.  Here's the key of
my desk.  Give it to Burns.  He will pay you.

He got up from his chair before I had finished speaking, but he
refused to take the key.  Burns would never do it.  He wouldn't
like to ask him even.

"Well, then," I said, eyeing him slightingly, "there's nothing for
it, Mr. Jacobus, but you must wait on board till I come off to
settle with you."

"That will be all right, Captain.  I will go at once."

He seemed at a loss what to do with the girl's shoe he was still
holding in his fist.  Finally, looking dully at me, he put it down
on the chair from which he had risen.

"And you, Captain?  Won't you come along, too, just to see--"

"Don't bother about me.  I'll take care of myself."

He remained perplexed for a moment, as if trying to understand; and
then his weighty:  "Certainly, certainly, Captain," seemed to be
the outcome of some sudden thought.  His big chest heaved.  Was it
a sigh?  As he went out to hurry off those potatoes he never looked
back at me.

I waited till the noise of his footsteps had died out of the
dining-room, and I waited a little longer.  Then turning towards
the distant door I raised my voice along the verandah:

"Alice!"

Nothing answered me, not even a stir behind the door.  Jacobus's
house might have been made empty for me to make myself at home in.
I did not call again.  I had become aware of a great
discouragement.  I was mentally jaded, morally dejected.  I turned
to the garden again, sitting down with my elbows spread on the low
balustrade, and took my head in my hands.

The evening closed upon me.  The shadows lengthened, deepened,
mingled together into a pool of twilight in which the flower-beds
glowed like coloured embers; whiffs of heavy scent came to me as if
the dusk of this hemisphere were but the dimness of a temple and
the garden an enormous censer swinging before the altar of the
stars.  The colours of the blossoms deepened, losing their glow one
by one.

The girl, when I turned my head at a slight noise, appeared to me
very tall and slender, advancing with a swaying limp, a floating
and uneven motion which ended in the sinking of her shadowy form
into the deep low chair.  And I don't know why or whence I received
the impression that she had come too late.  She ought to have
appeared at my call.  She ought to have . . . It was as if a
supreme opportunity had been missed.

I rose and took a seat close to her, nearly opposite her arm-chair.
Her ever discontented voice addressed me at once, contemptuously:

"You are still here."

I pitched mine low.

"You have come out at last."

"I came to look for my shoe--before they bring in the lights."

It was her harsh, enticing whisper, subdued, not very steady, but
its low tremulousness gave me no thrill now.  I could only make out
the oval of her face, her uncovered throat, the long, white gleam
of her eyes.  She was mysterious enough.  Her hands were resting on
the arms of the chair.  But where was the mysterious and provoking
sensation which was like the perfume of her flower-like youth?  I
said quietly:

"I have got your shoe here."  She made no sound and I continued:
"You had better give me your foot and I will put it on for you."

She made no movement.  I bent low down and groped for her foot
under the flounces of the wrapper.  She did not withdraw it and I
put on the shoe, buttoning the instep-strap.  It was an inanimate
foot.  I lowered it gently to the floor.

"If you buttoned the strap you would not be losing your shoe, Miss
Don't Care," I said, trying to be playful without conviction.  I
felt more like wailing over the lost illusion of vague desire, over
the sudden conviction that I would never find again near her the
strange, half-evil, half-tender sensation which had given its acrid
flavour to so many days, which had made her appear tragic and
promising, pitiful and provoking.  That was all over.

"Your father picked it up," I said, thinking she may just as well
be told of the fact.

"I am not afraid of papa--by himself," she declared scornfully.

"Oh!  It's only in conjunction with his disreputable associates,
strangers, the 'riff-raff of Europe' as your charming aunt or
great-aunt says--men like me, for instance--that you--"

"I am not afraid of you," she snapped out.

"That's because you don't know that I am now doing business with
your father.  Yes, I am in fact doing exactly what he wants me to
do.  I've broken my promise to you.  That's the sort of man I am.
And now--aren't you afraid?  If you believe what that dear, kind,
truthful old lady says you ought to be."

It was with unexpected modulated softness that the affirmed:

"No.  I am not afraid."  She hesitated. . . . "Not now."

"Quite right.  You needn't be.  I shall not see you again before I
go to sea."  I rose and stood near her chair.  "But I shall often
think of you in this old garden, passing under the trees over
there, walking between these gorgeous flower-beds.  You must love
this garden--"

"I love nothing."

I heard in her sullen tone the faint echo of that resentfully
tragic note which I had found once so provoking.  But it left me
unmoved except for a sudden and weary conviction of the emptiness
of all things under Heaven.

"Good-bye, Alice," I said.

She did not answer, she did not move.  To merely take her hand,
shake it, and go away seemed impossible, almost improper.  I
stooped without haste and pressed my lips to her smooth forehead.
This was the moment when I realised clearly with a sort of terror
my complete detachment from that unfortunate creature.  And as I
lingered in that cruel self-knowledge I felt the light touch of her
arms falling languidly on my neck and received a hasty, awkward,
haphazard kiss which missed my lips.  No!  She was not afraid; but
I was no longer moved.  Her arms slipped off my neck slowly, she
made no sound, the deep wicker arm-chair creaked slightly; only a
sense of my dignity prevented me fleeing headlong from that
catastrophic revelation.

I traversed the dining-room slowly.  I thought:  She's listening to
my footsteps; she can't help it; she'll hear me open and shut that
door.  And I closed it as gently behind me as if I had been a thief
retreating with his ill-gotten booty.  During that stealthy act I
experienced the last touch of emotion in that house, at the thought
of the girl I had left sitting there in the obscurity, with her
heavy hair and empty eyes as black as the night itself, staring
into the walled garden, silent, warm, odorous with the perfume of
imprisoned flowers, which, like herself, were lost to sight in a
world buried in darkness.

The narrow, ill-lighted, rustic streets I knew so well on my way to
the harbour were extremely quiet.  I felt in my heart that the
further one ventures the better one understands how everything in
our life is common, short, and empty; that it is in seeking the
unknown in our sensations that we discover how mediocre are our
attempts and how soon defeated!  Jacobus's boatman was waiting at
the steps with an unusual air of readiness.  He put me alongside
the ship, but did not give me his confidential "Good-evening, sah,"
and, instead of shoving off at once, remained holding by the
ladder.

I was a thousand miles from commercial affairs, when on the dark
quarter-deck Mr. Burns positively rushed at me, stammering with
excitement.  He had been pacing the deck distractedly for hours
awaiting my arrival.  Just before sunset a lighter loaded with
potatoes had come alongside with that fat ship-chandler himself
sitting on the pile of sacks.  He was now stuck immovable in the
cabin.  What was the meaning of it all?  Surely I did not--

"Yes, Mr. Burns, I did," I cut him short.  He was beginning to make
gestures of despair when I stopped that, too, by giving him the key
of my desk and desiring him, in a tone which admitted of no
argument, to go below at once, pay Mr. Jacobus's bill, and send him
out of the ship.

"I don't want to see him," I confessed frankly, climbing the poop-
ladder.  I felt extremely tired.  Dropping on the seat of the
skylight, I gave myself up to idle gazing at the lights about the
quay and at the black mass of the mountain on the south side of the
harbour.  I never heard Jacobus leave the ship with every single
sovereign of my ready cash in his pocket.  I never heard anything
till, a long time afterwards, Mr. Burns, unable to contain himself
any longer, intruded upon me with his ridiculously angry
lamentations at my weakness and good nature.

"Of course, there's plenty of room in the after-hatch.  But they
are sure to go rotten down there.  Well!  I never heard . . .
seventeen tons!  I suppose I must hoist in that lot first thing to-
morrow morning."

"I suppose you must.  Unless you drop them overboard.  But I'm
afraid you can't do that.  I wouldn't mind myself, but it's
forbidden to throw rubbish into the harbour, you know."

"That is the truest word you have said for many a day, sir--
rubbish.  That's just what I expect they are.  Nearly eighty good
gold sovereigns gone; a perfectly clean sweep of your drawer, sir.
Bless me if I understand!"

As it was impossible to throw the right light on this commercial
transaction I left him to his lamentations and under the impression
that I was a hopeless fool.  Next day I did not go ashore.  For one
thing, I had no money to go ashore with--no, not enough to buy a
cigarette.  Jacobus had made a clean sweep.  But that was not the
only reason.  The Pearl of the Ocean had in a few short hours grown
odious to me.  And I did not want to meet any one.  My reputation
had suffered.  I knew I was the object of unkind and sarcastic
comments.

The following morning at sunrise, just as our stern-fasts had been
let go and the tug plucked us out from between the buoys, I saw
Jacobus standing up in his boat.  The nigger was pulling hard;
several baskets of provisions for ships were stowed between the
thwarts.  The father of Alice was going his morning round.  His
countenance was tranquil and friendly.  He raised his arm and
shouted something with great heartiness.  But his voice was of the
sort that doesn't carry any distance; all I could catch faintly, or
rather guess at, were the words "next time" and "quite correct."
And it was only of these last that I was certain.  Raising my arm
perfunctorily for all response, I turned away.  I rather resented
the familiarity of the thing.  Hadn't I settled accounts finally
with him by means of that potato bargain?

This being a harbour story it is not my purpose to speak of our
passage.  I was glad enough to be at sea, but not with the gladness
of old days.  Formerly I had no memories to take away with me.  I
shared in the blessed forgetfulness of sailors, that forgetfulness
natural and invincible, which resembles innocence in so far that it
prevents self-examination.  Now however I remembered the girl.
During the first few days I was for ever questioning myself as to
the nature of facts and sensations connected with her person and
with my conduct.

And I must say also that Mr. Burns' intolerable fussing with those
potatoes was not calculated to make me forget the part which I had
played.  He looked upon it as a purely commercial transaction of a
particularly foolish kind, and his devotion--if it was devotion and
not mere cussedness as I came to regard it before long--inspired
him with a zeal to minimise my loss as much as possible.  Oh, yes!
He took care of those infamous potatoes with a vengeance, as the
saying goes.

Everlastingly, there was a tackle over the after-hatch and
everlastingly the watch on deck were pulling up, spreading out,
picking over, rebagging, and lowering down again, some part of that
lot of potatoes.  My bargain with all its remotest associations,
mental and visual--the garden of flowers and scents, the girl with
her provoking contempt and her tragic loneliness of a hopeless
castaway--was everlastingly dangled before my eyes, for thousands
of miles along the open sea.  And as if by a satanic refinement of
irony it was accompanied by a most awful smell.  Whiffs from
decaying potatoes pursued me on the poop, they mingled with my
thoughts, with my food, poisoned my very dreams.  They made an
atmosphere of corruption for the ship.

I remonstrated with Mr. Burns about this excessive care.  I would
have been well content to batten the hatch down and let them perish
under the deck.

That perhaps would have been unsafe.  The horrid emanations might
have flavoured the cargo of sugar.  They seemed strong enough to
taint the very ironwork.  In addition Mr. Burns made it a personal
matter.  He assured me he knew how to treat a cargo of potatoes at
sea--had been in the trade as a boy, he said.  He meant to make my
loss as small as possible.  What between his devotion--it must have
been devotion--and his vanity, I positively dared not give him the
order to throw my commercial-venture overboard.  I believe he would
have refused point blank to obey my lawful command.  An
unprecedented and comical situation would have been created with
which I did not feel equal to deal.

I welcomed the coming of bad weather as no sailor had ever done.
When at last I hove the ship to, to pick up the pilot outside Port
Philip Heads, the after-hatch had not been opened for more than a
week and I might have believed that no such thing as a potato had
ever been on board.

It was an abominable day, raw, blustering, with great squalls of
wind and rain; the pilot, a cheery person, looked after the ship
and chatted to me, streaming from head to foot; and the heavier the
lash of the downpour the more pleased with himself and everything
around him he seemed to be.  He rubbed his wet hands with a
satisfaction, which to me, who had stood that kind of thing for
several days and nights, seemed inconceivable in any non-aquatic
creature.

"You seem to enjoy getting wet, Pilot," I remarked.

He had a bit of land round his house in the suburbs and it was of
his garden he was thinking.  At the sound of the word garden,
unheard, unspoken for so many days, I had a vision of gorgeous
colour, of sweet scents, of a girlish figure crouching in a chair.
Yes.  That was a distinct emotion breaking into the peace I had
found in the sleepless anxieties of my responsibility during a week
of dangerous bad weather.  The Colony, the pilot explained, had
suffered from unparalleled drought.  This was the first decent drop
of water they had had for seven months.  The root crops were lost.
And, trying to be casual, but with visible interest, he asked me if
I had perchance any potatoes to spare.

Potatoes!  I had managed to forget them.  In a moment I felt
plunged into corruption up to my neck.  Mr. Burns was making eyes
at me behind the pilot's back.

Finally, he obtained a ton, and paid ten pounds for it.  This was
twice the price of my bargain with Jacobus.  The spirit of
covetousness woke up in me.  That night, in harbour, before I
slept, the Custom House galley came alongside.  While his
underlings were putting seals on the storerooms, the officer in
charge took me aside confidentially.  "I say, Captain, you don't
happen to have any potatoes to sell."

Clearly there was a potato famine in the land.  I let him have a
ton for twelve pounds and he went away joyfully.  That night I
dreamt of a pile of gold in the form of a grave in which a girl was
buried, and woke up callous with greed.  On calling at my ship-
broker's office, that man, after the usual business had been
transacted, pushed his spectacles up on his forehead.

"I was thinking, Captain, that coming from the Pearl of the Ocean
you may have some potatoes to sell."

I said negligently:  "Oh, yes, I could spare you a ton.  Fifteen
pounds."

He exclaimed:  "I say!"  But after studying my face for a while
accepted my terms with a faint grimace.  It seems that these people
could not exist without potatoes.  I could.  I didn't want to see a
potato as long as I lived; but the demon of lucre had taken
possession of me.  How the news got about I don't know, but,
returning on board rather late, I found a small group of men of the
coster type hanging about the waist, while Mr. Burns walked to and
fro the quarterdeck loftily, keeping a triumphant eye on them.
They had come to buy potatoes.

"These chaps have been waiting here in the sun for hours," Burns
whispered to me excitedly.  "They have drank the water-cask dry.
Don't you throw away your chances, sir.  You are too good-natured."

I selected a man with thick legs and a man with a cast in his eye
to negotiate with; simply because they were easily distinguishable
from the rest.  "You have the money on you?" I inquired, before
taking them down into the cabin.

"Yes, sir," they answered in one voice, slapping their pockets.  I
liked their air of quiet determination.  Long before the end of the
day all the potatoes were sold at about three times the price I had
paid for them.  Mr. Burns, feverish and exulting, congratulated
himself on his skilful care of my commercial venture, but hinted
plainly that I ought to have made more of it.

That night I did not sleep very well.  I thought of Jacobus by fits
and starts, between snatches of dreams concerned with castaways
starving on a desert island covered with flowers.  It was extremely
unpleasant.  In the morning, tired and unrefreshed, I sat down and
wrote a long letter to my owners, giving them a carefully-thought-
out scheme for the ship's employment in the East and about the
China Seas for the next two years.  I spent the day at that task
and felt somewhat more at peace when it was done.

Their reply came in due course.  They were greatly struck with my
project; but considering that, notwithstanding the unfortunate
difficulty with the bags (which they trusted I would know how to
guard against in the future), the voyage showed a very fair profit,
they thought it would be better to keep the ship in the sugar
trade--at least for the present.

I turned over the page and read on:

"We have had a letter from our good friend Mr. Jacobus.  We are
pleased to see how well you have hit it off with him; for, not to
speak of his assistance in the unfortunate matter of the bags, he
writes us that should you, by using all possible dispatch, manage
to bring the ship back early in the season he would be able to give
us a good rate of freight.  We have no doubt that your best
endeavours . . . etc. . . etc."

I dropped the letter and sat motionless for a long time.  Then I
wrote my answer (it was a short one) and went ashore myself to post
it.  But I passed one letter-box, then another, and in the end
found myself going up Collins Street with the letter still in my
pocket--against my heart.  Collins Street at four o'clock in the
afternoon is not exactly a desert solitude; but I had never felt
more isolated from the rest of mankind as when I walked that day
its crowded pavement, battling desperately with my thoughts and
feeling already vanquished.

There came a moment when the awful tenacity of Jacobus, the man of
one passion and of one idea, appeared to me almost heroic.  He had
not given me up.  He had gone again to his odious brother.  And
then he appeared to me odious himself.  Was it for his own sake or
for the sake of the poor girl?  And on that last supposition the
memory of the kiss which missed my lips appalled me; for whatever
he had seen, or guessed at, or risked, he knew nothing of that.
Unless the girl had told him.  How could I go back to fan that
fatal spark with my cold breath?  No, no, that unexpected kiss had
to be paid for at its full price.

At the first letter-box I came to I stopped and reaching into my
breast-pocket I took out the letter--it was as if I were plucking
out my very heart--and dropped it through the slit.  Then I went
straight on board.

I wondered what dreams I would have that night; but as it turned
out I did not sleep at all.  At breakfast I informed Mr. Burns that
I had resigned my command.

He dropped his knife and fork and looked at me with indignation.

"You have, sir!  I thought you loved the ship."

"So I do, Burns," I said.  "But the fact is that the Indian Ocean
and everything that is in it has lost its charm for me.  I am going
home as passenger by the Suez Canal."

"Everything that is in it," he repeated angrily.  "I've never heard
anybody talk like this.  And to tell you the truth, sir, all the
time we have been together I've never quite made you out.  What's
one ocean more than another?  Charm, indeed!"

He was really devoted to me, I believe.  But he cheered up when I
told him that I had recommended him for my successor.

"Anyhow," he remarked, "let people say what they like, this Jacobus
has served your turn.  I must admit that this potato business has
paid extremely well.  Of course, if only you had--"

"Yes, Mr. Burns," I interrupted.  "Quite a smile of fortune."

But I could not tell him that it was driving me out of the ship I
had learned to love.  And as I sat heavy-hearted at that parting,
seeing all my plans destroyed, my modest future endangered--for
this command was like a foot in the stirrup for a young man--he
gave up completely for the first time his critical attitude.

"A wonderful piece of luck!" he said.




THE SECRET SHARER--AN EPISODE FROM THE COAST




CHAPTER I



On my right hand there were lines of fishing-stakes resembling a
mysterious system of half-submerged bamboo fences, incomprehensible
in its division of the domain of tropical fishes, and crazy of
aspect as if abandoned forever by some nomad tribe of fishermen now
gone to the other end of the ocean; for there was no sign of human
habitation as far as the eye could reach.  To the left a group of
barren islets, suggesting ruins of stone walls, towers, and
blockhouses, had its foundations set in a blue sea that itself
looked solid, so still and stable did it lie below my feet; even
the track of light from the westering sun shone smoothly, without
that animated glitter which tells of an imperceptible ripple.  And
when I turned my head to take a parting glance at the tug which had
just left us anchored outside the bar, I saw the straight line of
the flat shore joined to the stable sea, edge to edge, with a
perfect and unmarked closeness, in one levelled floor half brown,
half blue under the enormous dome of the sky.  Corresponding in
their insignificance to the islets of the sea, two small clumps of
trees, one on each side of the only fault in the impeccable joint,
marked the mouth of the river Meinam we had just left on the first
preparatory stage of our homeward journey; and, far back on the
inland level, a larger and loftier mass, the grove surrounding the
great Paknam pagoda, was the only thing on which the eye could rest
from the vain task of exploring the monotonous sweep of the
horizon.  Here and there gleams as of a few scattered pieces of
silver marked the windings of the great river; and on the nearest
of them, just within the bar, the tug steaming right into the land
became lost to my sight, hull and funnel and masts, as though the
impassive earth had swallowed her up without an effort, without a
tremor.  My eye followed the light cloud of her smoke, now here,
now there, above the plain, according to the devious curves of the
stream, but always fainter and farther away, till I lost it at last
behind the mitre-shaped hill of the great pagoda.  And then I was
left alone with my ship, anchored at the head of the Gulf of Siam.

She floated at the starting-point of a long journey, very still in
an immense stillness, the shadows of her spars flung far to the
eastward by the setting sun.  At that moment I was alone on her
decks.  There was not a sound in her--and around us nothing moved,
nothing lived, not a canoe on the water, not a bird in the air, not
a cloud in the sky.  In this breathless pause at the threshold of a
long passage we seemed to be measuring our fitness for a long and
arduous enterprise, the appointed task of both our existences to be
carried out, far from all human eyes, with only sky and sea for
spectators and for judges.

There must have been some glare in the air to interfere with one's
sight, because it was only just before the sun left us that my
roaming eyes made out beyond the highest ridge of the principal
islet of the group something which did away with the solemnity of
perfect solitude.  The tide of darkness flowed on swiftly; and with
tropical suddenness a swarm of stars came out above the shadowy
earth, while I lingered yet, my hand resting lightly on my ship's
rail as if on the shoulder of a trusted friend.  But, with all that
multitude of celestial bodies staring down at one, the comfort of
quiet communion with her was gone for good.  And there were also
disturbing sounds by this time--voices, footsteps forward; the
steward flitted along the maindeck, a busily ministering spirit; a
hand-bell tinkled urgently under the poop-deck. . . .

I found my two officers waiting for me near the supper table, in
the lighted cuddy.  We sat down at once, and as I helped the chief
mate, I said:

"Are you aware that there is a ship anchored inside the islands?  I
saw her mastheads above the ridge as the sun went down."

He raised sharply his simple face, overcharged by a terrible growth
of whisker, and emitted his usual ejaculations:  "Bless my soul,
sir!  You don't say so!"

My second mate was a round-cheeked, silent young man, grave beyond
his years, I thought; but as our eyes happened to meet I detected a
slight quiver on his lips.  I looked down at once.  It was not my
part to encourage sneering on board my ship.  It must be said, too,
that I knew very little of my officers.  In consequence of certain
events of no particular significance, except to myself, I had been
appointed to the command only a fortnight before.  Neither did I
know much of the hands forward.  All these people had been together
for eighteen months or so, and my position was that of the only
stranger on board.  I mention this because it has some bearing on
what is to follow.  But what I felt most was my being a stranger to
the ship; and if all the truth must be told, I was somewhat of a
stranger to myself.  The youngest man on board (barring the second
mate), and untried as yet by a position of the fullest
responsibility, I was willing to take the adequacy of the others
for granted.  They had simply to be equal to their tasks; but I
wondered how far I should turn out faithful to that ideal
conception of one's own personality every man sets up for himself
secretly.


Meantime the chief mate, with an almost visible effect of
collaboration on the part of his round eyes and frightful whiskers,
was trying to evolve a theory of the anchored ship.  His dominant
trait was to take all things into earnest consideration.  He was of
a painstaking turn of mind.  As he used to say, he "liked to
account to himself" for practically everything that came in his
way, down to a miserable scorpion he had found in his cabin a week
before.  The why and the wherefore of that scorpion--how it got on
board and came to select his room rather than the pantry (which was
a dark place and more what a scorpion would be partial to), and how
on earth it managed to drown itself in the inkwell of his writing-
desk--had exercised him infinitely.  The ship within the islands
was much more easily accounted for; and just as we were about to
rise from table he made his pronouncement.  She was, he doubted
not, a ship from home lately arrived.  Probably she drew too much
water to cross the bar except at the top of spring tides.
Therefore she went into that natural harbour to wait for a few days
in preference to remaining in an open roadstead.

"That's so," confirmed the second mate, suddenly, in his slightly
hoarse voice.  "She draws over twenty feet.  She's the Liverpool
ship Sephora with a cargo of coal.  Hundred and twenty-three days
from Cardiff."

We looked at him in surprise.

"The tugboat skipper told me when he came on board for your
letters, sir," explained the young man.  "He expects to take her up
the river the day after to-morrow."

After thus overwhelming us with the extent of his information he
slipped out of the cabin.  The mate observed regretfully that he
"could not account for that young fellow's whims."  What prevented
him telling us all about it at once, he wanted to know.

I detained him as he was making a move.  For the last two days the
crew had had plenty of hard work, and the night before they had
very little sleep.  I felt painfully that I--a stranger--was doing
something unusual when I directed him to let all hands turn in
without setting an anchor-watch.  I proposed to keep on deck myself
till one o'clock or thereabouts.  I would get the second mate to
relieve me at that hour.

"He will turn out the cook and the steward at four," I concluded,
"and then give you a call.  Of course at the slightest sign of any
sort of wind we'll have the hands up and make a start at once."

He concealed his astonishment.  "Very well, sir."  Outside the
cuddy he put his head in the second mate's door to inform him of my
unheard-of caprice to take a five hours' anchor-watch on myself.  I
heard the other raise his voice incredulously--"What?  The captain
himself?"  Then a few more murmurs, a door closed, then another.  A
few moments later I went on deck.

My strangeness, which had made me sleepless, had prompted that
unconventional arrangement, as if I had expected in those solitary
hours of the night to get on terms with the ship of which I knew
nothing, manned by men of whom I knew very little more.  Fast
alongside a wharf, littered like any ship in port with a tangle of
unrelated things, invaded by unrelated shore people, I had hardly
seen her yet properly.  Now, as she lay cleared for sea, the
stretch of her maindeck seemed to me very fine under the stars.
Very fine, very roomy for her size, and very inviting.  I descended
the poop and paced the waist, my mind picturing to myself the
coming passage through the Malay Archipelago, down the Indian
Ocean, and up the Atlantic.  All its phases were familiar enough to
me, every characteristic, all the alternatives which were likely to
face me on the high seas--everything! . . . except the novel
responsibility of command.  But I took heart from the reasonable
thought that the ship was like other ships, the men like other men,
and that the sea was not likely to keep any special surprises
expressly for my discomfiture.

Arrived at that comforting conclusion, I bethought myself of a
cigar and went below to get it.  All was still down there.
Everybody at the after end of the ship was sleeping profoundly.  I
came out again on the quarter-deck, agreeably at ease in my
sleeping-suit on that warm breathless night, barefooted, a glowing
cigar in my teeth, and, going forward, I was met by the profound
silence of the fore end of the ship.  Only as I passed the door of
the forecastle I heard a deep, quiet, trustful sigh of some sleeper
inside.  And suddenly I rejoiced in the great security of the sea
as compared with the unrest of the land, in my choice of that
untempted life presenting no disquieting problems, invested with an
elementary moral beauty by the absolute straightforwardness of its
appeal and by the singleness of its purpose.

The riding-light in the fore-rigging burned with a clear,
untroubled, as if symbolic, flame, confident and bright in the
mysterious shades of the night.  Passing on my way aft along the
other side of the ship, I observed that the rope side-ladder, put
over, no doubt, for the master of the tug when he came to fetch
away our letters, had not been hauled in as it should have been.  I
became annoyed at this, for exactitude in small matters is the very
soul of discipline.  Then I reflected that I had myself
peremptorily dismissed my officers from duty, and by my own act had
prevented the anchor-watch being formally set and things properly
attended to.  I asked myself whether it was wise ever to interfere
with the established routine of duties even from the kindest of
motives.  My action might have made me appear eccentric.  Goodness
only knew how that absurdly whiskered mate would "account" for my
conduct, and what the whole ship thought of that informality of
their new captain.  I was vexed with myself.

Not from compunction certainly, but, as it were mechanically, I
proceeded to get the ladder in myself.  Now a side-ladder of that
sort is a light affair and comes in easily, yet my vigorous tug,
which should have brought it flying on board, merely recoiled upon
my body in a totally unexpected jerk.  What the devil! . . . I was
so astounded by the immovableness of that ladder that I remained
stock-still, trying to account for it to myself like that imbecile
mate of mine.  In the end, of course, I put my head over the rail.

The side of the ship made an opaque belt of shadow on the darkling
glassy shimmer of the sea.  But I saw at once something elongated
and pale floating very close to the ladder.  Before I could form a
guess a faint flash of phosphorescent light, which seemed to issue
suddenly from the naked body of a man, flickered in the sleeping
water with the elusive, silent play of summer lightning in a night
sky.  With a gasp I saw revealed to my stare a pair of feet, the
long legs, a broad livid back immersed right up to the neck in a
greenish cadaverous glow.  One hand, awash, clutched the bottom
rung of the ladder.  He was complete but for the head.  A headless
corpse!  The cigar dropped out of my gaping mouth with a tiny plop
and a short hiss quite audible in the absolute stillness of all
things under heaven.  At that I suppose he raised up his face, a
dimly pale oval in the shadow of the ship's side.  But even then I
could only barely make out down there the shape of his black-haired
head.  However, it was enough for the horrid, frost-bound sensation
which had gripped me about the chest to pass off.  The moment of
vain exclamations was past, too.  I only climbed on the spare spar
and leaned over the rail as far as I could, to bring my eyes nearer
to that mystery floating alongside.

As he hung by the ladder, like a resting swimmer, the sea-lightning
played about his limbs at every stir; and he appeared in it
ghastly, silvery, fish-like.  He remained as mute as a fish, too.
He made no motion to get out of the water, either.  It was
inconceivable that he should not attempt to come on board, and
strangely troubling to suspect that perhaps he did not want to.
And my first words were prompted by just that troubled incertitude.

"What's the matter?" I asked in my ordinary tone, speaking down to
the face upturned exactly under mine.

"Cramp," it answered, no louder.  Then slightly anxious, "I say, no
need to call any one."

"I was not going to," I said.

"Are you alone on deck?"

"Yes."

I had somehow the impression that he was on the point of letting go
the ladder to swim away beyond my ken--mysterious as he came.  But,
for the moment, this being appearing as if he had risen from the
bottom of the sea (it was certainly the nearest land to the ship)
wanted only to know the time.  I told him.  And he, down there,
tentatively:

"I suppose your captain's turned in?"

"I am sure he isn't," I said.

He seemed to struggle with himself, for I heard something like the
low, bitter murmur of doubt.  "What's the good?"  His next words
came out with a hesitating effort.

"Look here, my man.  Could you call him out quietly?"

I thought the time had come to declare myself.

"_I_ am the captain."

I heard a "By Jove!" whispered at the level of the water.  The
phosphorescence flashed in the swirl of the water all about his
limbs, his other hand seized the ladder.

"My name's Leggatt."

The voice was calm and resolute.  A good voice.  The self-
possession of that man had somehow induced a corresponding state in
myself.  It was very quietly that I remarked:

"You must be a good swimmer."

"Yes.  I've been in the water practically since nine o'clock.  The
question for me now is whether I am to let go this ladder and go on
swimming till I sink from exhaustion, or--to come on board here."

I felt this was no mere formula of desperate speech, but a real
alternative in the view of a strong soul.  I should have gathered
from this that he was young; indeed, it is only the young who are
ever confronted by such clear issues.  But at the time it was pure
intuition on my part.  A mysterious communication was established
already between us two--in the face of that silent, darkened
tropical sea.  I was young, too; young enough to make no comment.
The man in the water began suddenly to climb up the ladder, and I
hastened away from the rail to fetch some clothes.

Before entering the cabin I stood still, listening in the lobby at
the foot of the stairs.  A faint snore came through the closed door
of the chief mate's room.  The second mate's door was on the hook,
but the darkness in there was absolutely soundless.  He, too, was
young and could sleep like a stone.  Remained the steward, but he
was not likely to wake up before he was called.  I got a sleeping-
suit out of my room and, coming back on deck, saw the naked man
from the sea sitting on the main-hatch, glimmering white in the
darkness, his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands.  In a
moment he had concealed his damp body in a sleeping-suit of the
same grey-stripe pattern as the one I was wearing and followed me
like my double on the poop.  Together we moved right aft,
barefooted, silent.

"What is it?" I asked in a deadened voice, taking the lighted lamp
out of the binnacle, and raising it to his face.

"An ugly business."

He had rather regular features; a good mouth; light eyes under
somewhat heavy, dark eyebrows; a smooth, square forehead; no growth
on his cheeks; a small, brown moustache, and a well-shaped, round
chin.  His expression was concentrated, meditative, under the
inspecting light of the lamp I held up to his face; such as a man
thinking hard in solitude might wear.  My sleeping-suit was just
right for his size.  A well-knit young fellow of twenty-five at
most.  He caught his lower lip with the edge of white, even teeth.

"Yes," I said, replacing the lamp in the binnacle.  The warm, heavy
tropical night closed upon his head again.

"There's a ship over there," he murmured.

"Yes, I know.  The Sephora.  Did you know of us?"

"Hadn't the slightest idea.  I am the mate of her--"  He paused and
corrected himself.  "I should say I WAS."

"Aha!  Something wrong?"

"Yes.  Very wrong indeed.  I've killed a man."

"What do you mean?  Just now?"

"No, on the passage.  Weeks ago.  Thirty-nine south.  When I say a
man--"

"Fit of temper," I suggested, confidently.

The shadowy, dark head, like mine, seemed to nod imperceptibly
above the ghostly grey of my sleeping-suit.  It was, in the night,
as though I had been faced by my own reflection in the depths of a
sombre and immense mirror.

"A pretty thing to have to own up to for a Conway boy," murmured my
double, distinctly.

"You're a Conway boy?"

"I am," he said, as if startled.  Then, slowly . . . "Perhaps you
too--"

It was so; but being a couple of years older I had left before he
joined.  After a quick interchange of dates a silence fell; and I
thought suddenly of my absurd mate with his terrific whiskers and
the "Bless my soul--you don't say so" type of intellect.  My double
gave me an inkling of his thoughts by saying:

"My father's a parson in Norfolk.  Do you see me before a judge and
jury on that charge?  For myself I can't see the necessity.  There
are fellows that an angel from heaven--And I am not that.  He was
one of those creatures that are just simmering all the time with a
silly sort of wickedness.  Miserable devils that have no business
to live at all.  He wouldn't do his duty and wouldn't let anybody
else do theirs.  But what's the good of talking!  You know well
enough the sort of ill-conditioned snarling cur--"

He appealed to me as if our experiences had been as identical as
our clothes.  And I knew well enough the pestiferous danger of such
a character where there are no means of legal repression.  And I
knew well enough also that my double there was no homicidal
ruffian.  I did not think of asking him for details, and he told me
the story roughly in brusque, disconnected sentences.  I needed no
more.  I saw it all going on as though I were myself inside that
other sleeping-suit.

"It happened while we were setting a reefed foresail, at dusk.
Reefed foresail!  You understand the sort of weather.  The only
sail we had left to keep the ship running; so you may guess what it
had been like for days.  Anxious sort of job, that.  He gave me
some of his cursed insolence at the sheet.  I tell you I was
overdone with this terrific weather that seemed to have no end to
it.  Terrific, I tell you--and a deep ship.  I believe the fellow
himself was half crazed with funk.  It was no time for gentlemanly
reproof, so I turned round and felled him like an ox.  He up and at
me.  We closed just as an awful sea made for the ship.  All hands
saw it coming and took to the rigging, but I had him by the throat,
and went on shaking him like a rat, the men above us yelling, "Look
out! look out!"  Then a crash as if the sky had fallen on my head.
They say that for over ten minutes hardly anything was to be seen
of the ship--just the three masts and a bit of the forecastle head
and of the poop all awash driving along in a smother of foam.  It
was a miracle that they found us, jammed together behind the
forebits.  It's clear that I meant business, because I was holding
him by the throat still when they picked us up.  He was black in
the face.  It was too much for them.  It seems they rushed us aft
together, gripped as we were, screaming "Murder!" like a lot of
lunatics, and broke into the cuddy.  And the ship running for her
life, touch and go all the time, any minute her last in a sea fit
to turn your hair grey only a-looking at it.  I understand that the
skipper, too, started raving like the rest of them.  The man had
been deprived of sleep for more than a week, and to have this
sprung on him at the height of a furious gale nearly drove him out
of his mind.  I wonder they didn't fling me overboard after getting
the carcass of their precious ship-mate out of my fingers.  They
had rather a job to separate us, I've been told.  A sufficiently
fierce story to make an old judge and a respectable jury sit up a
bit.  The first thing I heard when I came to myself was the
maddening howling of that endless gale, and on that the voice of
the old man.  He was hanging on to my bunk, staring into my face
out of his sou'wester.

"'Mr. Leggatt, you have killed a man.  You can act no longer as
chief mate of this ship.'"

His care to subdue his voice made it sound monotonous.  He rested a
hand on the end of the skylight to steady himself with, and all
that time did not stir a limb, so far as I could see.  "Nice little
tale for a quiet tea-party," he concluded in the same tone.

One of my hands, too, rested on the end of the skylight; neither
did I stir a limb, so far as I knew.  We stood less than a foot
from each other.  It occurred to me that if old "Bless my soul--you
don't say so" were to put his head up the companion and catch sight
of us, he would think he was seeing double, or imagine himself come
upon a scene of weird witchcraft; the strange captain having a
quiet confabulation by the wheel with his own grey ghost.  I became
very much concerned to prevent anything of the sort.  I heard the
other's soothing undertone.

"My father's a parson in Norfolk," it said.  Evidently he had
forgotten he had told me this important fact before.  Truly a nice
little tale.

"You had better slip down into my stateroom now," I said, moving
off stealthily.  My double followed my movements; our bare feet
made no sound; I let him in, closed the door with care, and, after
giving a call to the second mate, returned on deck for my relief.

"Not much sign of any wind yet," I remarked when he approached.

"No, sir.  Not much," he assented, sleepily, in his hoarse voice,
with just enough deference, no more, and barely suppressing a yawn.

"Well, that's all you have to look out for.  You have got your
orders."

"Yes, sir."

I paced a turn or two on the poop and saw him take up his position
face forward with his elbow in the ratlines of the mizzen-rigging
before I went below.  The mate's faint snoring was still going on
peacefully.  The cuddy lamp was burning over the table on which
stood a vase with flowers, a polite attention from the ship's
provision merchant--the last flowers we should see for the next
three months at the very least.  Two bunches of bananas hung from
the beam symmetrically, one on each side of the rudder-casing.
Everything was as before in the ship--except that two of her
captain's sleeping-suits were simultaneously in use, one motionless
in the cuddy, the other keeping very still in the captain's
stateroom.

It must be explained here that my cabin had the form of the capital
letter L the door being within the angle and opening into the short
part of the letter.  A couch was to the left, the bed-place to the
right; my writing-desk and the chronometers' table faced the door.
But any one opening it, unless he stepped right inside, had no view
of what I call the long (or vertical) part of the letter.  It
contained some lockers surmounted by a bookcase; and a few clothes,
a thick jacket or two, caps, oilskin coat, and such like, hung on
hooks.  There was at the bottom of that part a door opening into my
bath-room, which could be entered also directly from the saloon.
But that way was never used.

The mysterious arrival had discovered the advantage of this
particular shape.  Entering my room, lighted strongly by a big
bulkhead lamp swung on gimbals above my writing-desk, I did not see
him anywhere till he stepped out quietly from behind the coats hung
in the recessed part.

"I heard somebody moving about, and went in there at once," he
whispered.

I, too, spoke under my breath.

"Nobody is likely to come in here without knocking and getting
permission."

He nodded.  His face was thin and the sunburn faded, as though he
had been ill.  And no wonder.  He had been, I heard presently, kept
under arrest in his cabin for nearly seven weeks.  But there was
nothing sickly in his eyes or in his expression.  He was not a bit
like me, really; yet, as we stood leaning over my bed-place,
whispering side by side, with our dark heads together and our backs
to the door, anybody bold enough to open it stealthily would have
been treated to the uncanny sight of a double captain busy talking
in whispers with his other self.

"But all this doesn't tell me how you came to hang on to our side-
ladder," I inquired, in the hardly audible murmurs we used, after
he had told me something more of the proceedings on board the
Sephora once the bad weather was over.

"When we sighted Java Head I had had time to think all those
matters out several times over.  I had six weeks of doing nothing
else, and with only an hour or so every evening for a tramp on the
quarter-deck."

He whispered, his arms folded on the side of my bed-place, staring
through the open port.  And I could imagine perfectly the manner of
this thinking out--a stubborn if not a steadfast operation;
something of which I should have been perfectly incapable.

"I reckoned it would be dark before we closed with the land," he
continued, so low that I had to strain my hearing, near as we were
to each other, shoulder touching shoulder almost.  "So I asked to
speak to the old man.  He always seemed very sick when he came to
see me--as if he could not look me in the face.  You know, that
foresail saved the ship.  She was too deep to have run long under
bare poles.  And it was I that managed to set it for him.  Anyway,
he came.  When I had him in my cabin--he stood by the door looking
at me as if I had the halter round my neck already--I asked him
right away to leave my cabin door unlocked at night while the ship
was going through Sunda Straits.  There would be the Java coast
within two or three miles, off Angier Point.  I wanted nothing
more.  I've had a prize for swimming my second year in the Conway."

"I can believe it," I breathed out.

"God only knows why they locked me in every night.  To see some of
their faces you'd have thought they were afraid I'd go about at
night strangling people.  Am I a murdering brute?  Do I look it?
By Jove! if I had been he wouldn't have trusted himself like that
into my room.  You'll say I might have chucked him aside and bolted
out, there and then--it was dark already.  Well, no.  And for the
same reason I wouldn't think of trying to smash the door.  There
would have been a rush to stop me at the noise, and I did not mean
to get into a confounded scrimmage.  Somebody else might have got
killed--for I would not have broken out only to get chucked back,
and I did not want any more of that work.  He refused, looking more
sick than ever.  He was afraid of the men, and also of that old
second mate of his who had been sailing with him for years--a grey-
headed old humbug; and his steward, too, had been with him devil
knows how long--seventeen years or more--a dogmatic sort of loafer
who hated me like poison, just because I was the chief mate.  No
chief mate ever made more than one voyage in the Sephora, you know.
Those two old chaps ran the ship.  Devil only knows what the
skipper wasn't afraid of (all his nerve went to pieces altogether
in that hellish spell of bad weather we had)--of what the law would
do to him--of his wife, perhaps.  Oh, yes! she's on board.  Though
I don't think she would have meddled.  She would have been only too
glad to have me out of the ship in any way.  The 'brand of Cain'
business, don't you see.  That's all right.  I was ready enough to
go off wandering on the face of the earth--and that was price
enough to pay for an Abel of that sort.  Anyhow, he wouldn't listen
to me.  'This thing must take its course.  I represent the law
here.'  He was shaking like a leaf.  'So you won't?'  'No!'  'Then
I hope you will be able to sleep on that,' I said, and turned my
back on him.  'I wonder that YOU can,' cries he, and locks the
door.

"Well, after that, I couldn't.  Not very well.  That was three
weeks ago.  We have had a slow passage through the Java Sea;
drifted about Carimata for ten days.  When we anchored here they
thought, I suppose, it was all right.  The nearest land (and that's
five miles) is the ship's destination; the consul would soon set
about catching me; and there would have been no object in bolting
to these islets there.  I don't suppose there's a drop of water on
them.  I don't know how it was, but to-night that steward, after
bringing me my supper, went out to let me eat it, and left the door
unlocked.  And I ate it--all there was, too.  After I had finished
I strolled out on the quarterdeck.  I don't know that I meant to do
anything.  A breath of fresh air was all I wanted, I believe.  Then
a sudden temptation came over me.  I kicked off my slippers and was
in the water before I had made up my mind fairly.  Somebody heard
the splash and they raised an awful hullabaloo.  'He's gone!  Lower
the boats!  He's committed suicide!  No, he's swimming.'  Certainly
I was swimming.  It's not so easy for a swimmer like me to commit
suicide by drowning.  I landed on the nearest islet before the boat
left the ship's side.  I heard them pulling about in the dark,
hailing, and so on, but after a bit they gave up.  Everything
quieted down and the anchorage became as still as death.  I sat
down on a stone and began to think.  I felt certain they would
start searching for me at daylight.  There was no place to hide on
those stony things--and if there had been, what would have been the
good?  But now I was clear of that ship, I was not going back.  So
after a while I took off all my clothes, tied them up in a bundle
with a stone inside, and dropped them in the deep water on the
outer side of that islet.  That was suicide enough for me.  Let
them think what they liked, but I didn't mean to drown myself.  I
meant to swim till I sank--but that's not the same thing.  I struck
out for another of these little islands, and it was from that one
that I first saw your riding-light.  Something to swim for.  I went
on easily, and on the way I came upon a flat rock a foot or two
above water.  In the daytime, I dare say, you might make it out
with a glass from your poop.  I scrambled up on it and rested
myself for a bit.  Then I made another start.  That last spell must
have been over a mile."

His whisper was getting fainter and fainter, and all the time he
stared straight out through the port-hole, in which there was not
even a star to be seen.  I had not interrupted him.  There was
something that made comment impossible in his narrative, or perhaps
in himself; a sort of feeling, a quality, which I can't find a name
for.  And when he ceased, all I found was a futile whisper:  "So
you swam for our light?"

"Yes--straight for it.  It was something to swim for.  I couldn't
see any stars low down because the coast was in the way, and I
couldn't see the land, either.  The water was like glass.  One
might have been swimming in a confounded thousand-feet deep cistern
with no place for scrambling out anywhere; but what I didn't like
was the notion of swimming round and round like a crazed bullock
before I gave out; and as I didn't mean to go back . . . No.  Do
you see me being hauled back, stark naked, off one of these little
islands by the scruff of the neck and fighting like a wild beast?
Somebody would have got killed for certain, and I did not want any
of that.  So I went on.  Then your ladder--"

"Why didn't you hail the ship?" I asked, a little louder.

He touched my shoulder lightly.  Lazy footsteps came right over our
heads and stopped.  The second mate had crossed from the other side
of the poop and might have been hanging over the rail, for all we
knew.

"He couldn't hear us talking--could he?"  My double breathed into
my very ear, anxiously.

His anxiety was an answer, a sufficient answer, to the question I
had put to him.  An answer containing all the difficulty of that
situation.  I closed the port-hole quietly, to make sure.  A louder
word might have been overheard.

"Who's that?" he whispered then.

"My second mate.  But I don't know much more of the fellow than you
do."

And I told him a little about myself.  I had been appointed to take
charge while I least expected anything of the sort, not quite a
fortnight ago.  I didn't know either the ship or the people.
Hadn't had the time in port to look about me or size anybody up.
And as to the crew, all they knew was that I was appointed to take
the ship home.  For the rest, I was almost as much of a stranger on
board as himself, I said.  And at the moment I felt it most
acutely.  I felt that it would take very little to make me a
suspect person in the eyes of the ship's company.

He had turned about meantime; and we, the two strangers in the
ship, faced each other in identical attitudes.

"Your ladder--" he murmured, after a silence.  "Who'd have thought
of finding a ladder hanging over at night in a ship anchored out
here!  I felt just then a very unpleasant faintness.  After the
life I've been leading for nine weeks, anybody would have got out
of condition.  I wasn't capable of swimming round as far as your
rudder-chains.  And, lo and behold! there was a ladder to get hold
of.  After I gripped it I said to myself, 'What's the good?'  When
I saw a man's head looking over I thought I would swim away
presently and leave him shouting--in whatever language it was.  I
didn't mind being looked at.  I--I liked it.  And then you speaking
to me so quietly--as if you had expected me--made me hold on a
little longer.  It had been a confounded lonely time--I don't mean
while swimming.  I was glad to talk a little to somebody that
didn't belong to the Sephora.  As to asking for the captain, that
was a mere impulse.  It could have been no use, with all the ship
knowing about me and the other people pretty certain to be round
here in the morning.  I don't know--I wanted to be seen, to talk
with somebody, before I went on.  I don't know what I would have
said. . . . 'Fine night, isn't it?' or something of the sort."

"Do you think they will be round here presently?" I asked with some
incredulity.

"Quite likely," he said, faintly.

He looked extremely haggard all of a sudden.  His head rolled on
his shoulders.

"H'm.  We shall see then.  Meantime get into that bed," I
whispered.  "Want help?  There."

It was a rather high bed-place with a set of drawers underneath.
This amazing swimmer really needed the lift I gave him by seizing
his leg.  He tumbled in, rolled over on his back, and flung one arm
across his eyes.  And then, with his face nearly hidden, he must
have looked exactly as I used to look in that bed.  I gazed upon my
other self for a while before drawing across carefully the two
green serge curtains which ran on a brass rod.  I thought for a
moment of pinning them together for greater safety, but I sat down
on the couch, and once there I felt unwilling to rise and hunt for
a pin.  I would do it in a moment.  I was extremely tired, in a
peculiarly intimate way, by the strain of stealthiness, by the
effort of whispering and the general secrecy of this excitement.
It was three o'clock by now and I had been on my feet since nine,
but I was not sleepy; I could not have gone to sleep.  I sat there,
fagged out, looking at the curtains, trying to clear my mind of the
confused sensation of being in two places at once, and greatly
bothered by an exasperating knocking in my head.  It was a relief
to discover suddenly that it was not in my head at all, but on the
outside of the door.  Before I could collect myself the words "Come
in" were out of my mouth, and the steward entered with a tray,
bringing in my morning coffee.  I had slept, after all, and I was
so frightened that I shouted, "This way!  I am here, steward," as
though he had been miles away.  He put down the tray on the table
next the couch and only then said, very quietly, "I can see you are
here, sir."  I felt him give me a keen look, but I dared not meet
his eyes just then.  He must have wondered why I had drawn the
curtains of my bed before going to sleep on the couch.  He went
out, hooking the door open as usual.

I heard the crew washing decks above me.  I knew I would have been
told at once if there had been any wind.  Calm, I thought, and I
was doubly vexed.  Indeed, I felt dual more than ever.  The steward
reappeared suddenly in the doorway.  I jumped up from the couch so
quickly that he gave a start.

"What do you want here?"

"Close your port, sir--they are washing decks."

"It is closed," I said, reddening.

"Very well, sir."  But he did not move from the doorway and
returned my stare in an extraordinary, equivocal manner for a time.
Then his eyes wavered, all his expression changed, and in a voice
unusually gentle, almost coaxingly:

"May I come in to take the empty cup away, sir?"

"Of course!"  I turned my back on him while he popped in and out.
Then I unhooked and closed the door and even pushed the bolt.  This
sort of thing could not go on very long.  The cabin was as hot as
an oven, too.  I took a peep at my double, and discovered that he
had not moved, his arm was still over his eyes; but his chest
heaved; his hair was wet; his chin glistened with perspiration.  I
reached over him and opened the port.

"I must show myself on deck," I reflected.

Of course, theoretically, I could do what I liked, with no one to
say nay to me within the whole circle of the horizon; but to lock
my cabin door and take the key away I did not dare.  Directly I put
my head out of the companion I saw the group of my two officers,
the second mate barefooted, the chief mate in long india-rubber
boots, near the break of the poop, and the steward half-way down
the poop-ladder talking to them eagerly.  He happened to catch
sight of me and dived, the second ran down on the main-deck
shouting some order or other, and the chief mate came to meet me,
touching his cap.

There was a sort of curiosity in his eye that I did not like.  I
don't know whether the steward had told them that I was "queer"
only, or downright drunk, but I know the man meant to have a good
look at me.  I watched him coming with a smile which, as he got
into point-blank range, took effect and froze his very whiskers.  I
did not give him time to open his lips.

"Square the yards by lifts and braces before the hands go to
breakfast."

It was the first particular order I had given on board that ship;
and I stayed on deck to see it executed, too.  I had felt the need
of asserting myself without loss of time.  That sneering young cub
got taken down a peg or two on that occasion, and I also seized the
opportunity of having a good look at the face of every foremast man
as they filed past me to go to the after braces.  At breakfast
time, eating nothing myself, I presided with such frigid dignity
that the two mates were only too glad to escape from the cabin as
soon as decency permitted; and all the time the dual working of my
mind distracted me almost to the point of insanity.  I was
constantly watching myself, my secret self, as dependent on my
actions as my own personality, sleeping in that bed, behind that
door which faced me as I sat at the head of the table.  It was very
much like being mad, only it was worse because one was aware of it.

I had to shake him for a solid minute, but when at last he opened
his eyes it was in the full possession of his senses, with an
inquiring look.

"All's well so far," I whispered.  "Now you must vanish into the
bath-room."

He did so, as noiseless as a ghost, and I then rang for the
steward, and facing him boldly, directed him to tidy up my
stateroom while I was having my bath--"and be quick about it."  As
my tone admitted of no excuses, he said, "Yes, sir," and ran off to
fetch his dust-pan and brushes.  I took a bath and did most of my
dressing, splashing, and whistling softly for the steward's
edification, while the secret sharer of my life stood drawn up bolt
upright in that little space, his face looking very sunken in
daylight, his eyelids lowered under the stern, dark line of his
eyebrows drawn together by a slight frown.

When I left him there to go back to my room the steward was
finishing dusting.  I sent for the mate and engaged him in some
insignificant conversation.  It was, as it were, trifling with the
terrific character of his whiskers; but my object was to give him
an opportunity for a good look at my cabin.  And then I could at
last shut, with a clear conscience, the door of my stateroom and
get my double back into the recessed part.  There was nothing else
for it.  He had to sit still on a small folding stool, half
smothered by the heavy coats hanging there.  We listened to the
steward going into the bath-room out of the saloon, filling the
water-bottles there, scrubbing the bath, setting things to rights,
whisk, bang, clatter--out again into the saloon--turn the key--
click.  Such was my scheme for keeping my second self invisible.
Nothing better could be contrived under the circumstances.  And
there we sat; I at my writing-desk ready to appear busy with some
papers, he behind me, out of sight of the door.  It would not have
been prudent to talk in daytime; and I could not have stood the
excitement of that queer sense of whispering to myself.  Now and
then glancing over my shoulder, I saw him far back there, sitting
rigidly on the low stool, his bare feet close together, his arms
folded, his head hanging on his breast--and perfectly still.
Anybody would have taken him for me.

I was fascinated by it myself.  Every moment I had to glance over
my shoulder.  I was looking at him when a voice outside the door
said:

"Beg pardon, sir."

"Well!" . . . I kept my eyes on him, and so, when the voice outside
the door announced, "There's a ship's boat coming our way, sir," I
saw him give a start--the first movement he had made for hours.
But he did not raise his bowed head.

"All right.  Get the ladder over."

I hesitated.  Should I whisper something to him?  But what?  His
immobility seemed to have been never disturbed.  What could I tell
him he did not know already? . . . Finally I went on deck.



CHAPTER II



The skipper of the Sephora had a thin red whisker all round his
face, and the sort of complexion that goes with hair of that
colour; also the particular, rather smeary shade of blue in the
eyes.  He was not exactly a showy figure; his shoulders were high,
his stature but middling--one leg slightly more bandy than the
other.  He shook hands, looking vaguely around.  A spiritless
tenacity was his main characteristic, I judged.  I behaved with a
politeness which seemed to disconcert him.  Perhaps he was shy.  He
mumbled to me as if he were ashamed of what he was saying; gave his
name (it was something like Archbold--but at this distance of years
I hardly am sure), his ship's name, and a few other particulars of
that sort, in the manner of a criminal making a reluctant and
doleful confession.  He had had terrible weather on the passage
out--terrible--terrible--wife aboard, too.

By this time we were seated in the cabin and the steward brought in
a tray with a bottle and glasses.  "Thanks!  No."  Never took
liquor.  Would have some water, though.  He drank two tumblerfuls.
Terrible thirsty work.  Ever since daylight had been exploring the
islands round his ship.

"What was that for--fun?" I asked, with an appearance of polite
interest.

"No!"  He sighed.  "Painful duty."

As he persisted in his mumbling and I wanted my double to hear
every word, I hit upon the notion of informing him that I regretted
to say I was hard of hearing.

"Such a young man, too!" he nodded, keeping his smeary blue,
unintelligent eyes fastened upon me.  What was the cause of it--
some disease? he inquired, without the least sympathy and as if he
thought that, if so, I'd got no more than I deserved.

"Yes; disease," I admitted in a cheerful tone which seemed to shock
him.  But my point was gained, because he had to raise his voice to
give me his tale.  It is not worth while to record that version.
It was just over two months since all this had happened, and he had
thought so much about it that he seemed completely muddled as to
its bearings, but still immensely impressed.

"What would you think of such a thing happening on board your own
ship?  I've had the Sephora for these fifteen years.  I am a well-
known shipmaster."

He was densely distressed--and perhaps I should have sympathised
with him if I had been able to detach my mental vision from the
unsuspected sharer of my cabin as though he were my second self.
There he was on the other side of the bulkhead, four or five feet
from us, no more, as we sat in the saloon.  I looked politely at
Captain Archbold (if that was his name), but it was the other I
saw, in a grey sleeping-suit, seated on a low stool, his bare feet
close together, his arms folded, and every word said between us
falling into the ears of his dark head bowed on his chest.

"I have been at sea now, man and boy, for seven-and-thirty years,
and I've never heard of such a thing happening in an English ship.
And that it should be my ship.  Wife on board, too."

I was hardly listening to him.

"Don't you think," I said, "that the heavy sea which, you told me,
came aboard just then might have killed the man?  I have seen the
sheer weight of a sea kill a man very neatly, by simply breaking
his neck."

"Good God!" he uttered, impressively, fixing his smeary blue eyes
on me.  "The sea!  No man killed by the sea ever looked like that."
He seemed positively scandalised at my suggestion.  And as I gazed
at him, certainly not prepared for anything original on his part,
he advanced his head close to mine and thrust his tongue out at me
so suddenly that I couldn't help starting back.

After scoring over my calmness in this graphic way he nodded
wisely.  If I had seen the sight, he assured me, I would never
forget it as long as I lived.  The weather was too bad to give the
corpse a proper sea burial.  So next day at dawn they took it up on
the poop, covering its face with a bit of bunting; he read a short
prayer, and then, just as it was, in its oilskins and long boots,
they launched it amongst those mountainous seas that seemed ready
every moment to swallow up the ship herself and the terrified lives
on board of her.

"That reefed foresail saved you," I threw in.

"Under God--it did," he exclaimed fervently.  "It was by a special
mercy, I firmly believe, that it stood some of those hurricane
squalls."

"It was the setting of that sail which--" I began.

"God's own hand in it," he interrupted me.  "Nothing less could
have done it.  I don't mind telling you that I hardly dared give
the order.  It seemed impossible that we could touch anything
without losing it, and then our last hope would have been gone."

The terror of that gale was on him yet.  I let him go on for a bit,
then said, casually--as if returning to a minor subject:

"You were very anxious to give up your mate to the shore people, I
believe?"

He was.  To the law.  His obscure tenacity on that point had in it
something incomprehensible and a little awful; something, as it
were, mystical, quite apart from his anxiety that he should not be
suspected of "countenancing any doings of that sort."  Seven-and-
thirty virtuous years at sea, of which over twenty of immaculate
command, and the last fifteen in the Sephora, seemed to have laid
him under some pitiless obligation.

"And you know," he went on, groping shamefacedly amongst his
feelings, "I did not engage that young fellow.  His people had some
interest with my owners.  I was in a way forced to take him on.  He
looked very smart, very gentlemanly, and all that.  But do you
know--I never liked him, somehow.  I am a plain man.  You see, he
wasn't exactly the sort for the chief mate of a ship like the
Sephora."

I had become so connected in thoughts and impressions with the
secret sharer of my cabin that I felt as if I, personally, were
being given to understand that I, too, was not the sort that would
have done for the chief mate of a ship like the Sephora.  I had no
doubt of it in my mind.

"Not at all the style of man.  You understand," he insisted,
superfluously, looking hard at me.

I smiled urbanely.  He seemed at a loss for a while.

"I suppose I must report a suicide."

"Beg pardon?"

"Suicide!  That's what I'll have to write to my owners directly I
get in."

"Unless you manage to recover him before to-morrow," I assented,
dispassionately. . . "I mean, alive."

He mumbled something which I really did not catch, and I turned my
ear to him in a puzzled manner.  He fairly bawled:

"The land--I say, the mainland is at least seven miles off my
anchorage."

"About that."

My lack of excitement, of curiosity, of surprise, of any sort of
pronounced interest, began to arouse his distrust.  But except for
the felicitous pretence of deafness I had not tried to pretend
anything.  I had felt utterly incapable of playing the part of
ignorance properly, and therefore was afraid to try.  It is also
certain that he had brought some ready-made suspicions with him,
and that he viewed my politeness as a strange and unnatural
phenomenon.  And yet how else could I have received him?  Not
heartily!  That was impossible for psychological reasons, which I
need not state here.  My only object was to keep off his inquiries.
Surlily?  Yes, but surliness might have provoked a point-blank
question.  From its novelty to him and from its nature, punctilious
courtesy was the manner best calculated to restrain the man.  But
there was the danger of his breaking through my defence bluntly.  I
could not, I think, have met him by a direct lie, also for
psychological (not moral) reasons.  If he had only known how afraid
I was of his putting my feeling of identity with the other to the
test!  But, strangely enough--(I thought of it only afterward)--I
believe that he was not a little disconcerted by the reverse side
of that weird situation, by something in me that reminded him of
the man he was seeking--suggested a mysterious similitude to the
young fellow he had distrusted and disliked from the first.

However that might have been, the silence was not very prolonged.
He took another oblique step.

"I reckon I had no more than a two-mile pull to your ship.  Not a
bit more."

"And quite enough, too, in this awful heat," I said.

Another pause full of mistrust followed.  Necessity, they say, is
mother of invention, but fear, too, is not barren of ingenious
suggestions.  And I was afraid he would ask me point-blank for news
of my other self.

"Nice little saloon, isn't it?" I remarked, as if noticing for the
first time the way his eyes roamed from one closed door to the
other.  "And very well fitted out too.  Here, for instance," I
continued, reaching over the back of my seat negligently and
flinging the door open, "is my bath-room."

He made an eager movement, but hardly gave it a glance.  I got up,
shut the door of the bath-room, and invited him to have a look
round, as if I were very proud of my accommodation.  He had to rise
and be shown round, but he went through the business without any
raptures whatever.

"And now we'll have a look at my stateroom," I declared, in a voice
as loud as I dared to make it, crossing the cabin to the starboard
side with purposely heavy steps.

He followed me in and gazed around.  My intelligent double had
vanished.  I played my part.

"Very convenient--isn't it?"

"Very nice.  Very comf. . . "  He didn't finish, and went out
brusquely as if to escape from some unrighteous wiles of mine.  But
it was not to be.  I had been too frightened not to feel vengeful;
I felt I had him on the run, and I meant to keep him on the run.
My polite insistence must have had something menacing in it,
because he gave in suddenly.  And I did not let him off a single
item; mate's room, pantry, storerooms, the very sail-locker which
was also under the poop--he had to look into them all.  When at
last I showed him out on the quarter-deck he drew a long,
spiritless sigh, and mumbled dismally that he must really be going
back to his ship now.  I desired my mate, who had joined us, to see
to the captain's boat.

The man of whiskers gave a blast on the whistle which he used to
wear hanging round his neck, and yelled, "Sephoras away!"  My
double down there in my cabin must have heard, and certainly could
not feel more relieved than I.  Four fellows came running out from
somewhere forward and went over the side, while my own men,
appearing on deck too, lined the rail.  I escorted my visitor to
the gangway ceremoniously, and nearly overdid it.  He was a
tenacious beast.  On the very ladder he lingered, and in that
unique, guiltily conscientious manner of sticking to the point:

"I say . . . you . . . you don't think that--"

I covered his voice loudly:

"Certainly not. . . . I am delighted.  Good-bye."

I had an idea of what he meant to say, and just saved myself by the
privilege of defective hearing.  He was too shaken generally to
insist, but my mate, close witness of that parting, looked
mystified and his face took on a thoughtful cast.  As I did not
want to appear as if I wished to avoid all communication with my
officers, he had the opportunity to address me.

"Seems a very nice man.  His boat's crew told our chaps a very
extraordinary story, if what I am told by the steward is true.  I
suppose you had it from the captain, sir?"

"Yes.  I had a story from the captain."

"A very horrible affair--isn't it, sir?"

"It is."

"Beats all these tales we hear about murders in Yankee ships."

"I don't think it beats them.  I don't think it resembles them in
the least."

"Bless my soul--you don't say so!  But of course I've no
acquaintance whatever with American ships, not I, so I couldn't go
against your knowledge.  It's horrible enough for me. . . . But the
queerest part is that those fellows seemed to have some idea the
man was hidden aboard here.  They had really.  Did you ever hear of
such a thing?"

"Preposterous--isn't it?"

We were walking to and fro athwart the quarterdeck.  No one of the
crew forward could be seen (the day was Sunday), and the mate
pursued:

"There was some little dispute about it.  Our chaps took offence.
'As if we would harbour a thing like that,' they said.  'Wouldn't
you like to look for him in our coal-hole?'  Quite a tiff.  But
they made it up in the end.  I suppose he did drown himself.  Don't
you, sir?"

"I don't suppose anything."

"You have no doubt in the matter, sir?"

"None whatever."

I left him suddenly.  I felt I was producing a bad impression, but
with my double down there it was most trying to be on deck.  And it
was almost as trying to be below.  Altogether a nerve-trying
situation.  But on the whole I felt less torn in two when I was
with him.  There was no one in the whole ship whom I dared take
into my confidence.  Since the hands had got to know his story, it
would have been impossible to pass him off for any one else, and an
accidental discovery was to be dreaded now more than ever. . . .

The steward being engaged in laying the table for dinner, we could
talk only with our eyes when I first went down.  Later in the
afternoon we had a cautious try at whispering.  The Sunday
quietness of the ship was against us; the stillness of air and
water around her was against us; the elements, the men were against
us--everything was against us in our secret partnership; time
itself--for this could not go on forever.  The very trust in
Providence was, I suppose, denied to his guilt.  Shall I confess
that this thought cast me down very much?  And as to the chapter of
accidents which counts for so much in the book of success, I could
only hope that it was closed.  For what favourable accident could
be expected?

"Did you hear everything?" were my first words as soon as we took
up our position side by side, leaning over my bed-place.

He had.  And the proof of it was his earnest whisper, "The man told
you he hardly dared to give the order."

I understood the reference to be to that saving foresail.

"Yes.  He was afraid of it being lost in the setting."

"I assure you he never gave the order.  He may think he did, but he
never gave it.  He stood there with me on the break of the poop
after the maintopsail blew away, and whimpered about our last hope-
-positively whimpered about it and nothing else--and the night
coming on!  To hear one's skipper go on like that in such weather
was enough to drive any fellow out of his mind.  It worked me up
into a sort of desperation.  I just took it into my own hands and
went away from him, boiling, and-- But what's the use telling you?
YOU know! . . . Do you think that if I had not been pretty fierce
with them I should have got the men to do anything?  Not it!  The
bo's'n perhaps?  Perhaps!  It wasn't a heavy sea--it was a sea gone
mad!  I suppose the end of the world will be something like that;
and a man may have the heart to see it coming once and be done with
it--but to have to face it day after day--I don't blame anybody.  I
was precious little better than the rest.  Only--I was an officer
of that old coal-waggon, anyhow--"

"I quite understand," I conveyed that sincere assurance into his
ear.  He was out of breath with whispering; I could hear him pant
slightly.  It was all very simple.  The same strung-up force which
had given twenty-four men a chance, at least, for their lives, had,
in a sort of recoil, crushed an unworthy mutinous existence.

But I had no leisure to weigh the merits of the matter--footsteps
in the saloon, a heavy knock.  "There's enough wind to get under
way with, sir."  Here was the call of a new claim upon my thoughts
and even upon my feelings.

"Turn the hands up," I cried through the door.  "I'll be on deck
directly."

I was going out to make the acquaintance of my ship.  Before I left
the cabin our eyes met--the eyes of the only two strangers on
board.  I pointed to the recessed part where the little camp-stool
awaited him and laid my finger on my lips.  He made a gesture--
somewhat vague--a little mysterious, accompanied by a faint smile,
as if of regret.

This is not the place to enlarge upon the sensations of a man who
feels for the first time a ship move under his feet to his own
independent word.  In my case they were not unalloyed.  I was not
wholly alone with my command; for there was that stranger in my
cabin.  Or rather, I was not completely and wholly with her.  Part
of me was absent.  That mental feeling of being in two places at
once affected me physically as if the mood of secrecy had
penetrated my very soul.  Before an hour had elapsed since the ship
had begun to move, having occasion to ask the mate (he stood by my
side) to take a compass bearing of the Pagoda, I caught myself
reaching up to his ear in whispers.  I say I caught myself, but
enough had escaped to startle the man.  I can't describe it
otherwise than by saying that he shied.  A grave, preoccupied
manner, as though he were in possession of some perplexing
intelligence, did not leave him henceforth.  A little later I moved
away from the rail to look at the compass with such a stealthy gait
that the helmsman noticed it--and I could not help noticing the
unusual roundness of his eyes.  These are trifling instances,
though it's to no commander's advantage to be suspected of
ludicrous eccentricities.  But I was also more seriously affected.
There are to a seaman certain words, gestures, that should in given
conditions come as naturally, as instinctively as the winking of a
menaced eye.  A certain order should spring on to his lips without
thinking; a certain sign should get itself made, so to speak,
without reflection.  But all unconscious alertness had abandoned
me.  I had to make an effort of will to recall myself back (from
the cabin) to the conditions of the moment.  I felt that I was
appearing an irresolute commander to those people who were watching
me more or less critically.

And, besides, there were the scares.  On the second day out, for
instance, coming off the deck in the afternoon (I had straw
slippers on my bare feet) I stopped at the open pantry door and
spoke to the steward.  He was doing something there with his back
to me.  At the sound of my voice he nearly jumped out of his skin,
as the saying is, and incidentally broke a cup.

"What on earth's the matter with you?" I asked, astonished.

He was extremely confused.  "Beg your pardon, sir.  I made sure you
were in your cabin."

"You see I wasn't."

"No, sir.  I could have sworn I had heard you moving in there not a
moment ago.  It's most extraordinary . . . very sorry, sir."

I passed on with an inward shudder.  I was so identified with my
secret double that I did not even mention the fact in those scanty,
fearful whispers we exchanged.  I suppose he had made some slight
noise of some kind or other.  It would have been miraculous if he
hadn't at one time or another.  And yet, haggard as he appeared, he
looked always perfectly self-controlled, more than calm--almost
invulnerable.  On my suggestion he remained almost entirely in the
bathroom, which, upon the whole, was the safest place.  There could
be really no shadow of an excuse for any one ever wanting to go in
there, once the steward had done with it.  It was a very tiny
place.  Sometimes he reclined on the floor, his legs bent, his head
sustained on one elbow.  At others I would find him on the camp-
stool, sitting in his grey sleeping-suit and with his cropped dark
hair like a patient, unmoved convict.  At night I would smuggle him
into my bed-place, and we would whisper together, with the regular
footfalls of the officer of the watch passing and repassing over
our heads.  It was an infinitely miserable time.  It was lucky that
some tins of fine preserves were stowed in a locker in my
stateroom; hard bread I could always get hold of; and so he lived
on stewed chicken, pate de foie gras, asparagus, cooked oysters,
sardines--on all sorts of abominable sham delicacies out of tins.
My early morning coffee he always drank; and it was all I dared do
for him in that respect.

Every day there was the horrible manoeuvring to go through so that
my room and then the bath-room should be done in the usual way.  I
came to hate the sight of the steward, to abhor the voice of that
harmless man.  I felt that it was he who would bring on the
disaster of discovery.  It hung like a sword over our heads.

The fourth day out, I think (we were then working down the east
side of the Gulf of Siam, tack for tack, in light winds and smooth
water)--the fourth day, I say, of this miserable juggling with the
unavoidable, as we sat at our evening meal, that man, whose
slightest movement I dreaded, after putting down the dishes ran up
on deck busily.  This could not be dangerous.  Presently he came
down again; and then it appeared that he had remembered a coat of
mine which I had thrown over a rail to dry after having been wetted
in a shower which had passed over the ship in the afternoon.
Sitting stolidly at the head of the table I became terrified at the
sight of the garment on his arm.  Of course he made for my door.
There was no time to lose.

"Steward," I thundered.  My nerves were so shaken that I could not
govern my voice and conceal my agitation.  This was the sort of
thing that made my terrifically whiskered mate tap his forehead
with his forefinger.  I had detected him using that gesture while
talking on deck with a confidential air to the carpenter.  It was
too far to hear a word, but I had no doubt that this pantomime
could only refer to the strange new captain.

"Yes, sir," the pale-faced steward turned resignedly to me.  It was
this maddening course of being shouted at, checked without rhyme or
reason, arbitrarily chased out of my cabin, suddenly called into
it, sent flying out of his pantry on incomprehensible errands, that
accounted for the growing wretchedness of his expression.

"Where are you going with that coat?"

"To your room, sir."

"Is there another shower coming?"

"I'm sure I don't know, sir.  Shall I go up again and see, sir?"

"No! never mind."

My object was attained, as of course my other self in there would
have heard everything that passed.  During this interlude my two
officers never raised their eyes off their respective plates; but
the lip of that confounded cub, the second mate, quivered visibly.

I expected the steward to hook my coat on and come out at once.  He
was very slow about it; but I dominated my nervousness sufficiently
not to shout after him.  Suddenly I became aware (it could be heard
plainly enough) that the fellow for some reason or other was
opening the door of the bath-room.  It was the end.  The place was
literally not big enough to swing a cat in.  My voice died in my
throat and I went stony all over.  I expected to hear a yell of
surprise and terror, and made a movement, but had not the strength
to get on my legs.  Everything remained still.  Had my second self
taken the poor wretch by the throat?  I don't know what I would
have done next moment if I had not seen the steward come out of my
room, close the door, and then stand quietly by the sideboard.

"Saved," I thought.  "But, no!  Lost!  Gone!  He was gone!"

I laid my knife and fork down and leaned back in my chair.  My head
swam.  After a while, when sufficiently recovered to speak in a
steady voice, I instructed my mate to put the ship round at eight
o'clock himself.

"I won't come on deck," I went on.  "I think I'll turn in, and
unless the wind shifts I don't want to be disturbed before
midnight.  I feel a bit seedy."

"You did look middling bad a little while ago," the chief mate
remarked without showing any great concern.

They both went out, and I stared at the steward clearing the table.
There was nothing to be read on that wretched man's face.  But why
did he avoid my eyes I asked myself.  Then I thought I should like
to hear the sound of his voice.

"Steward!"

"Sir!"  Startled as usual.

"Where did you hang up that coat?"

"In the bath-room, sir."  The usual anxious tone.  "It's not quite
dry yet, sir."

For some time longer I sat in the cuddy.  Had my double vanished as
he had come?  But of his coming there was an explanation, whereas
his disappearance would be inexplicable. . . . I went slowly into
my dark room, shut the door, lighted the lamp, and for a time dared
not turn round.  When at last I did I saw him standing bolt-upright
in the narrow recessed part.  It would not be true to say I had a
shock, but an irresistible doubt of his bodily existence flitted
through my mind.  Can it be, I asked myself, that he is not visible
to other eyes than mine?  It was like being haunted.  Motionless,
with a grave face, he raised his hands slightly at me in a gesture
which meant clearly, "Heavens! what a narrow escape!"  Narrow
indeed.  I think I had come creeping quietly as near insanity as
any man who has not actually gone over the border.  That gesture
restrained me, so to speak.

The mate with the terrific whiskers was now putting the ship on the
other tack.  In the moment of profound silence which follows upon
the hands going to their stations I heard on the poop his raised
voice:  "Hard alee!" and the distant shout of the order repeated on
the maindeck.  The sails, in that light breeze, made but a faint
fluttering noise.  It ceased.  The ship was coming round slowly; I
held my breath in the renewed stillness of expectation; one
wouldn't have thought that there was a single living soul on her
decks.  A sudden brisk shout, "Mainsail haul!" broke the spell, and
in the noisy cries and rush overhead of the men running away with
the main-brace we two, down in my cabin, came together in our usual
position by the bed-place.

He did not wait for my question.  "I heard him fumbling here and
just managed to squat myself down in the bath," he whispered to me.
"The fellow only opened the door and put his arm in to hang the
coat up.  All the same--"

"I never thought of that," I whispered back, even more appalled
than before at the closeness of the shave, and marvelling at that
something unyielding in his character which was carrying him
through so finely.  There was no agitation in his whisper.  Whoever
was being driven distracted, it was not he.  He was sane.  And the
proof of his sanity was continued when he took up the whispering
again.

"It would never do for me to come to life again."

It was something that a ghost might have said.  But what he was
alluding to was his old captain's reluctant admission of the theory
of suicide.  It would obviously serve his turn--if I had understood
at all the view which seemed to govern the unalterable purpose of
his action.

"You must maroon me as soon as ever you can get amongst these
islands off the Cambodje shore," he went on.

"Maroon you!  We are not living in a boy's adventure tale," I
protested.  His scornful whispering took me up.

"We aren't indeed!  There's nothing of a boy's tale in this.  But
there's nothing else for it.  I want no more.  You don't suppose I
am afraid of what can be done to me?  Prison or gallows or whatever
they may please.  But you don't see me coming back to explain such
things to an old fellow in a wig and twelve respectable tradesmen,
do you?  What can they know whether I am guilty or not--or of WHAT
I am guilty, either?  That's my affair.  What does the Bible say?
'Driven off the face of the earth.'  Very well.  I am off the face
of the earth now.  As I came at night so I shall go."

"Impossible!" I murmured.  "You can't."

"Can't? . . . Not naked like a soul on the Day of Judgment.  I
shall freeze on to this sleeping-suit.  The Last Day is not yet--
and you have understood thoroughly.  Didn't you?"

I felt suddenly ashamed of myself.  I may say truly that I
understood--and my hesitation in letting that man swim away from my
ship's side had been a mere sham sentiment, a sort of cowardice.

"It can't be done now till next night," I breathed out.  "The ship
is on the off-shore tack and the wind may fail us."

"As long as I know that you understand," he whispered.  "But of
course you do.  It's a great satisfaction to have got somebody to
understand.  You seem to have been there on purpose."  And in the
same whisper, as if we two whenever we talked had to say things to
each other which were not fit for the world to hear, he added,
"It's very wonderful."  We remained side by side talking in our
secret way--but sometimes silent or just exchanging a whispered
word or two at long intervals.  And as usual he stared through the
port.  A breath of wind came now and again into our faces.  The
ship might have been moored in dock, so gently and on an even keel
she slipped through the water, that did not murmur even at our
passage, shadowy and silent like a phantom sea.

At midnight I went on deck, and to my mate's great surprise put the
ship round on the other tack.  His terrible whiskers flitted round
me in silent criticism.  I certainly should not have done it if it
had been only a question of getting out of that sleepy gulf as
quickly as possible.  I believe he told the second mate, who
relieved him, that it was a great want of judgment.  The other only
yawned.  That intolerable cub shuffled about so sleepily and lolled
against the rails in such a slack, improper fashion that I came
down on him sharply.

"Aren't you properly awake yet?"

"Yes, sir!  I am awake."

"Well, then, be good enough to hold yourself as if you were.  And
keep a look-out.  If there's any current we'll be closing with some
islands before daylight."

The east side of the gulf is fringed with islands, some solitary,
others in groups.  On the blue background of the high coast they
seem to float on silvery patches of calm water, arid and grey, or
dark green and rounded like clumps of evergreen bushes, with the
larger ones, a mile or two long, showing the outlines of ridges,
ribs of grey rock under the dank mantle of matted leafage.  Unknown
to trade, to travel, almost to geography, the manner of life they
harbour is an unsolved secret.  There must be villages--settlements
of fishermen at least--on the largest of them, and some
communication with the world is probably kept up by native craft.
But all that forenoon, as we headed for them, fanned along by the
faintest of breezes, I saw no sign of man or canoe in the field of
the telescope I kept on pointing at the scattered group.

At noon I gave no orders for a change of course, and the mate's
whiskers became much concerned and seemed to be offering themselves
unduly to my notice.  At last I said:

"I am going to stand right in.  Quite in--as far as I can take
her."

The stare of extreme surprise imparted an air of ferocity also to
his eyes, and he looked truly terrific for a moment.

"We're not doing well in the middle of the gulf," I continued,
casually.  "I am going to look for the land breezes to-night."

"Bless my soul!  Do you mean, sir, in the dark amongst the lot of
all them islands and reefs and shoals?"

"Well--if there are any regular land breezes at all on this coast
one must get close inshore to find them, mustn't one?"

"Bless my soul!" he exclaimed again under his breath.  All that
afternoon he wore a dreamy, contemplative appearance which in him
was a mark of perplexity.  After dinner I went into my stateroom as
if I meant to take some rest.  There we two bent our dark heads
over a half-unrolled chart lying on my bed.

"There," I said.  "It's got to be Koh-ring.  I've been looking at
it ever since sunrise.  It has got two hills and a low point.  It
must be inhabited.  And on the coast opposite there is what looks
like the mouth of a biggish river--with some town, no doubt, not
far up.  It's the best chance for you that I can see."

"Anything.  Koh-ring let it be."

He looked thoughtfully at the chart as if surveying chances and
distances from a lofty height--and following with his eyes his own
figure wandering on the blank land of Cochin-China, and then
passing off that piece of paper clean out of sight into uncharted
regions.  And it was as if the ship had two captains to plan her
course for her.  I had been so worried and restless running up and
down that I had not had the patience to dress that day.  I had
remained in my sleeping-suit, with straw slippers and a soft floppy
hat.  The closeness of the heat in the gulf had been most
oppressive, and the crew were used to see me wandering in that airy
attire.

"She will clear the south point as she heads now," I whispered into
his ear.  "Goodness only knows when, though, but certainly after
dark.  I'll edge her in to half a mile, as far as I may be able to
judge in the dark--"

"Be careful," he murmured, warningly--and I realised suddenly that
all my future, the only future for which I was fit, would perhaps
go irretrievably to pieces in any mishap to my first command.

I could not stop a moment longer in the room.  I motioned him to
get out of sight and made my way on the poop.  That unplayful cub
had the watch.  I walked up and down for a while thinking things
out, then beckoned him over.

"Send a couple of hands to open the two quarterdeck ports," I said,
mildly.

He actually had the impudence, or else so forgot himself in his
wonder at such an incomprehensible order, as to repeat:

"Open the quarter-deck ports!  What for, sir?"

"The only reason you need concern yourself about is because I tell
you to do so.  Have them open wide and fastened properly."

He reddened and went off, but I believe made some jeering remark to
the carpenter as to the sensible practice of ventilating a ship's
quarter-deck.  I know he popped into the mate's cabin to impart the
fact to him because the whiskers came on deck, as it were by
chance, and stole glances at me from below--for signs of lunacy or
drunkenness, I suppose.

A little before supper, feeling more restless than ever, I
rejoined, for a moment, my second self.  And to find him sitting so
quietly was surprising, like something against nature, inhuman.

I developed my plan in a hurried whisper.

"I shall stand in as close as I dare and then put her round.  I
shall presently find means to smuggle you out of here into the
sail-locker, which communicates with the lobby.  But there is an
opening, a sort of square for hauling the sails out, which gives
straight on the quarter-deck and which is never closed in fine
weather, so as to give air to the sails.  ' When the ship's way is
deadened in stays and all the hands are aft at the main-braces you
shall have a clear road to slip out and get overboard through the
open quarter-deck port.  I've had them both fastened up.  Use a
rope's end to lower yourself into the water so as to avoid a
splash--you know.  It could be heard and cause some beastly
complication."

He kept silent for a while, then whispered, "I understand."

"I won't be there to see you go," I began with an effort.  "The
rest . . . I only hope I have understood, too."

"You have.  From first to last"--and for the first time there
seemed to be a faltering, something strained in his whisper.  He
caught hold of my arm, but the ringing of the supper bell made me
start.  He didn't, though; he only released his grip.

After supper I didn't come below again till well past eight
o'clock.  The faint, steady breeze was loaded with dew; and the
wet, darkened sails held all there was of propelling power in it.
The night, clear and starry, sparkled darkly, and the opaque,
lightless patches shifting slowly against the low stars were the
drifting islets.  On the port bow there was a big one more distant
and shadowily imposing by the great space of sky it eclipsed.

On opening the door I had a back view of my very own self looking
at a chart.  He had come out of the recess and was standing near
the table.

"Quite dark enough," I whispered.

He stepped back and leaned against my bed with a level, quiet
glance.  I sat on the couch.  We had nothing to say to each other.
Over our heads the officer of the watch moved here and there.  Then
I heard him move quickly.  I knew what that meant.  He was making
for the companion; and presently his voice was outside my door.

"We are drawing in pretty fast, sir.  Land looks rather close."

"Very well," I answered.  "I am coming on deck directly."

I waited till he was gone out of the cuddy, then rose.  My double
moved too.  The time had come to exchange our last whispers, for
neither of us was ever to hear each other's natural voice.

"Look here!" I opened a drawer and took out three sovereigns.
"Take this, anyhow.  I've got six and I'd give you the lot, only I
must keep a little money to buy some fruit and vegetables for the
crew from native boats as we go through Sunda Straits."

He shook his head.

"Take it," I urged him, whispering desperately.  "No one can tell
what--"

He smiled and slapped meaningly the only pocket of the sleeping-
jacket.  It was not safe, certainly.  But I produced a large old
silk handkerchief of mine, and tying the three pieces of gold in a
corner, pressed it on him.  He was touched, I suppose, because he
took it at last and tied it quickly round his waist under the
jacket, on his bare skin.

Our eyes met; several seconds elapsed, till, our glances still
mingled, I extended my hand and turned the lamp out.  Then I passed
through the cuddy, leaving the door of my room wide open. . . . .
"Steward!"

He was still lingering in the pantry in the greatness of his zeal,
giving a rub-up to a plated cruet stand the last thing before going
to bed.  Being careful not to wake up the mate, whose room was
opposite, I spoke in an undertone.

He looked round anxiously.  "Sir!"

"Can you get me a little hot water from the galley?"

"I am afraid, sir, the galley fire's been out for some time now."

"Go and see."

He fled up the stairs.

"Now," I whispered, loudly, into the saloon--too loudly, perhaps,
but I was afraid I couldn't make a sound.  He was by my side in an
instant--the double captain slipped past the stairs--through a tiny
dark passage . . . a sliding door.  We were in the sail-locker,
scrambling on our knees over the sails.  A sudden thought struck
me.  I saw myself wandering barefooted, bareheaded, the sun beating
on my dark poll.  I snatched off my floppy hat and tried hurriedly
in the dark to ram it on my other self.  He dodged and fended off
silently.  I wonder what he thought had come to me before he
understood and suddenly desisted.  Our hands met gropingly,
lingered united in a steady, motionless clasp for a second. . . .
No word was breathed by either of us when they separated.

I was standing quietly by the pantry door when the steward
returned.

"Sorry, sir.  Kettle barely warm.  Shall I light the spirit-lamp?"

"Never mind."

I came out on deck slowly.  It was now a matter of conscience to
shave the land as close as possible--for now he must go overboard
whenever the ship was put in stays.  Must!  There could be no going
back for him.  After a moment I walked over to leeward and my heart
flew into my mouth at the nearness of the land on the bow.  Under
any other circumstances I would not have held on a minute longer.
The second mate had followed me anxiously.

I looked on till I felt I could command my voice.  "She will
weather," I said then in a quiet tone.  "Are you going to try that,
sir?" he stammered out incredulously.

I took no notice of him and raised my tone just enough to be heard
by the helmsman.

"Keep her good full."

"Good full, sir."

The wind fanned my cheek, the sails slept, the world was silent.
The strain of watching the dark loom of the land grow bigger and
denser was too much for me.  I had shut my eyes--because the ship
must go closer.  She must!  The stillness was intolerable.  Were we
standing still?

When I opened my eyes the second view started my heart with a
thump.  The black southern hill of Koh-ring seemed to hang right
over the ship like a towering fragment of the everlasting night.
On that enormous mass of blackness there was not a gleam to be
seen, not a sound to be heard.  It was gliding irresistibly toward
us and yet seemed already within reach of the hand.  I saw the
vague figures of the watch grouped in the waist, gazing in awed
silence.

"Are you going on, sir," inquired an unsteady voice at my elbow.

I ignored it.  I had to go on.

"Keep her full.  Don't check her way.  That won't do now," I said,
warningly.

"I can't see the sails very well," the helmsman answered me, in
strange, quavering tones.

Was she close enough?  Already she was, I won't say in the shadow
of the land, but in the very blackness of it, already swallowed up
as it were, gone too close to be recalled, gone from me altogether.

"Give the mate a call," I said to the young man who stood at my
elbow as still as death.  "And turn all hands up."

My tone had a borrowed loudness reverberated from the height of the
land.  Several voices cried out together:  "We are all on deck,
sir."

Then stillness again, with the great shadow gliding closer,
towering higher, without a light, without a sound.  Such a hush had
fallen on the ship that she might have been a bark of the dead
floating in slowly under the very gate of Erebus.

"My God!  Where are we?"

It was the mate moaning at my elbow.  He was thunderstruck, and as
it were deprived of the moral support of his whiskers.  He clapped
his hands and absolutely cried out, "Lost!"

"Be quiet," I said, sternly.

He lowered his tone, but I saw the shadowy gesture of his despair.
"What are we doing here?"

"Looking for the land wind."

He made as if to tear his hair, and addressed me recklessly.

"She will never get out.  You have done it, sir.  I knew it'd end
in something like this.  She will never weather, and you are too
close now to stay.  She'll drift ashore before she's round.  O my
God!"

I caught his arm as he was raising it to batter his poor devoted
head, and shook it violently.

"She's ashore already," he wailed, trying to tear himself away.

"Is she? . . . Keep good full there!"

"Good full, sir," cried the helmsman in a frightened, thin, child-
like voice.

I hadn't let go the mate's arm and went on shaking it.  "Ready
about, do you hear?  You go forward"--shake--"and stop there"--
shake--"and hold your noise"--shake--"and see these head-sheets
properly overhauled"--shake, shake--shake.

And all the time I dared not look toward the land lest my heart
should fail me.  I released my grip at last and he ran forward as
if fleeing for dear life.

I wondered what my double there in the sail-locker thought of this
commotion.  He was able to hear everything--and perhaps he was able
to understand why, on my conscience, it had to be thus close--no
less.  My first order "Hard alee!" re-echoed ominously under the
towering shadow of Koh-ring as if I had shouted in a mountain
gorge.  And then I watched the land intently.  In that smooth water
and light wind it was impossible to feel the ship coming-to.  No!
I could not feel her.  And my second self was making now ready to
slip out and lower himself overboard.  Perhaps he was gone already
. . .?

The great black mass brooding over our very mastheads began to
pivot away from the ship's side silently.  And now I forgot the
secret stranger ready to depart, and remembered only that I was a
total stranger to the ship.  I did not know her.  Would she do it?
How was she to be handled?

I swung the mainyard and waited helplessly.  She was perhaps
stopped, and her very fate hung in the balance, with the black mass
of Koh-ring like the gate of the everlasting night towering over
her taffrail.  What would she do now?  Had she way on her yet?  I
stepped to the side swiftly, and on the shadowy water I could see
nothing except a faint phosphorescent flash revealing the glassy
smoothness of the sleeping surface.  It was impossible to tell--and
I had not learned yet the feel of my ship.  Was she moving?  What I
needed was something easily seen, a piece of paper, which I could
throw overboard and watch.  I had nothing on me.  To run down for
it I didn't dare.  There was no time.  All at once my strained,
yearning stare distinguished a white object floating within a yard
of the ship's side.  White on the black water.  A phosphorescent
flash passed under it.  What was that thing? . . . I recognised my
own floppy hat.  It must have fallen off his head . . . and he
didn't bother.

Now I had what I wanted--the saving mark for my eyes.  But I hardly
thought of my other self, now gone from the ship, to be hidden
forever from all friendly faces, to be a fugitive and a vagabond on
the earth, with no brand of the curse on his sane forehead to stay
a slaying hand . . . too proud to explain.

And I watched the hat--the expression of my sudden pity for his
mere flesh.  It had been meant to save his homeless head from the
dangers of the sun.  And now--behold--it was saving the ship, by
serving me for a mark to help out the ignorance of my strangeness.
Ha!  It was drifting forward, warning me just in time that the ship
had gathered sternway.

"Shift the helm," I said in a low voice to the seaman standing
still like a statue.

The man's eyes glistened wildly in the binnacle light as he jumped
round to the other side and spun round the wheel.

I walked to the break of the poop.  On the overshadowed deck all
hands stood by the forebraces waiting for my order.  The stars
ahead seemed to be gliding from right to left.  And all was so
still in the world that I heard the quiet remark "She's round,"
passed in a tone of intense relief between two seamen.

"Let go and haul."

The foreyards ran round with a great noise, amidst cheery cries.
And now the frightful whisker's made themselves heard giving
various orders.  Already the ship was drawing ahead.  And I was
alone with her.  Nothing! no one in the world should stand now
between us, throwing a shadow on the way of silent knowledge and
mute affection, the perfect communion of a seaman with his first
command.

Walking to the taffrail, I was in time to make out, on the very
edge of a darkness thrown by a towering black mass like the very
gateway of Erebus--yes, I was in time to catch an evanescent
glimpse of my white hat left behind to mark the spot where the
secret sharer of my cabin and of my thoughts, as though he were my
second self, had lowered himself into the water to take his
punishment:  a free man, a proud swimmer striking out for a new
destiny.




FREYA OF THE SEVEN ISLES




CHAPTER I



One day--and that day was many years ago now--I received a long,
chatty letter from one of my old chums and fellow-wanderers in
Eastern waters.  He was still out there, but settled down, and
middle-aged; I imagined him--grown portly in figure and domestic in
his habits; in short, overtaken by the fate common to all except to
those who, being specially beloved by the gods, get knocked on the
head early.  The letter was of the reminiscent "do you remember"
kind--a wistful letter of backward glances.  And, amongst other
things, "surely you remember old Nelson," he wrote.

Remember old Nelson!  Certainly.  And to begin with, his name was
not Nelson.  The Englishmen in the Archipelago called him Nelson
because it was more convenient, I suppose, and he never protested.
It would have been mere pedantry.  The true form of his name was
Nielsen.  He had come out East long before the advent of telegraph
cables, had served English firms, had married an English girl, had
been one of us for years, trading and sailing in all directions
through the Eastern Archipelago, across and around, transversely,
diagonally, perpendicularly, in semi-circles, and zigzags, and
figures of eights, for years and years.

There was no nook or cranny of these tropical waters that the
enterprise of old Nelson (or Nielsen) had not penetrated in an
eminently pacific way.  His tracks, if plotted out, would have
covered the map of the Archipelago like a cobweb--all of it, with
the sole exception of the Philippines.  He would never approach
that part, from a strange dread of Spaniards, or, to be exact, of
the Spanish authorities.  What he imagined they could do to him it
is impossible to say.  Perhaps at some time in his life he had read
some stories of the Inquisition.

But he was in general afraid of what he called "authorities"; not
the English authorities, which he trusted and respected, but the
other two of that part of the world.  He was not so horrified at
the Dutch as he was at the Spaniards, but he was even more
mistrustful of them.  Very mistrustful indeed.  The Dutch, in his
view, were capable of "playing any ugly trick on a man" who had the
misfortune to displease them.  There were their laws and
regulations, but they had no notion of fair play in applying them.
It was really pitiable to see the anxious circumspection of his
dealings with some official or other, and remember that this man
had been known to stroll up to a village of cannibals in New Guinea
in a quiet, fearless manner (and note that he was always fleshy all
his life, and, if I may say so, an appetising morsel) on some
matter of barter that did not amount perhaps to fifty pounds in the
end.

Remember old Nelson!  Rather!  Truly, none of us in my generation
had known him in his active days.  He was "retired" in our time.
He had bought, or else leased, part of a small island from the
Sultan of a little group called the Seven Isles, not far north from
Banka.  It was, I suppose, a legitimate transaction, but I have no
doubt that had he been an Englishman the Dutch would have
discovered a reason to fire him out without ceremony.  In this
connection the real form of his name stood him in good stead.  In
the character of an unassuming Dane whose conduct was most correct,
they let him be.  With all his money engaged in cultivation he was
naturally careful not to give even the shadow of offence, and it
was mostly for prudential reasons of that sort that he did not look
with a favourable eye on Jasper Allen.  But of that later.  Yes!
One remembered well enough old Nelson's big, hospitable bungalow
erected on a shelving point of land, his portly form, costumed
generally in a white shirt and trousers (he had a confirmed habit
of taking off his alpaca jacket on the slightest provocation), his
round blue eyes, his straggly, sandy-white moustache sticking out
all ways like the quills of the fretful porcupine, his propensity
to sit down suddenly and fan himself with his hat.  But there's no
use concealing the fact that what one remembered really was his
daughter, who at that time came out to live with him--and be a sort
of Lady of the Isles.

Freya Nelson (or Nielsen) was the kind of girl one remembers.  The
oval of her face was perfect; and within that fascinating frame the
most happy disposition of line and feature, with an admirable
complexion, gave an impression of health, strength, and what I
might call unconscious self-confidence--a most pleasant and, as it
were, whimsical determination.  I will not compare her eyes to
violets, because the real shade of their colour was peculiar, not
so dark and more lustrous.  They were of the wide-open kind, and
looked at one frankly in every mood.  I never did see the long,
dark eyelashes lowered--I dare say Jasper Allen did, being a
privileged person--but I have no doubt that the expression must
have been charming in a complex way.  She could--Jasper told me
once with a touchingly imbecile exultation--sit on her hair.  I
dare say, I dare say.  It was not for me to behold these wonders; I
was content to admire the neat and becoming way she used to do it
up so as not to conceal the good shape of her head.  And this
wealth of hair was so glossy that when the screens of the west
verandah were down, making a pleasant twilight there, or in the
shade of the grove of fruit-trees near the house, it seemed to give
out a golden light of its own.

She dressed generally in a white frock, with a skirt of walking
length, showing her neat, laced, brown boots.  If there was any
colour about her costume it was just a bit of blue perhaps.  No
exertion seemed to distress her.  I have seen her land from the
dinghy after a long pull in the sun (she rowed herself about a good
deal) with no quickened breath and not a single hair out of its
place.  In the morning when she came out on the verandah for the
first look westward, Sumatra way, over the sea, she seemed as fresh
and sparkling as a dewdrop.  But a dewdrop is evanescent, and there
was nothing evanescent about Freya.  I remember her round, solid
arms with the fine wrists, and her broad, capable hands with
tapering fingers.

I don't know whether she was actually born at sea, but I do know
that up to twelve years of age she sailed about with her parents in
various ships.  After old Nelson lost his wife it became a matter
of serious concern for him what to do with the girl.  A kind lady
in Singapore, touched by his dumb grief and deplorable perplexity,
offered to take charge of Freya.  This arrangement lasted some six
years, during which old Nelson (or Nielsen) "retired" and
established, himself on his island, and then it was settled (the
kind lady going away to Europe) that his daughter should join him.

As the first and most important preparation for that event the old
fellow ordered from his Singapore agent a Steyn and Ebhart's
"upright grand."  I was then commanding a little steamer in the
island trade, and it fell to my lot to take it out to him, so I
know something of Freya's "upright grand."  We landed the enormous
packing-case with difficulty on a flat piece of rock amongst some
bushes, nearly knocking the bottom out of one of my boats in the
course of that nautical operation.  Then, all my crew assisting,
engineers and firemen included, by the exercise of much anxious
ingenuity, and by means of rollers, levers, tackles, and inclined
planes of soaped planks, toiling in the sun like ancient Egyptians
at the building of a pyramid, we got it as far as the house and up
on to the edge of the west verandah--which was the actual drawing-
room of the bungalow.  There, the case being ripped off cautiously,
the beautiful rosewood monster stood revealed at last.  In reverent
excitement we coaxed it against the wall and drew the first free
breath of the day.  It was certainly the heaviest movable object on
that islet since the creation of the world.  The volume of sound it
gave out in that bungalow (which acted as a sounding-board) was
really astonishing.  It thundered sweetly right over the sea.
Jasper Allen told me that early of a morning on the deck of the
Bonito (his wonderfully fast and pretty brig) he could hear Freya
playing her scales quite distinctly.  But the fellow always
anchored foolishly close to the point, as I told him more than
once.  Of course, these seas are almost uniformly serene, and the
Seven Isles is a particularly calm and cloudless spot as a rule.
But still, now and again, an afternoon thunderstorm over Banka, or
even one of these vicious thick squalls, from the distant Sumatra
coast, would make a sudden sally upon the group, enveloping it for
a couple of hours in whirlwinds and bluish-black murk of a
particularly sinister aspect.  Then, with the lowered rattan-
screens rattling desperately in the wind and the bungalow shaking
all over, Freya would sit down to the piano and play fierce Wagner
music in the flicker of blinding flashes, with thunderbolts falling
all round, enough to make your hair stand on end; and Jasper would
remain stock still on the verandah, adoring the back view of her
supple, swaying figure, the miraculous sheen of her fair head, the
rapid hands on the keys, the white nape of her neck--while the
brig, down at the point there, surged at her cables within a
hundred yards of nasty, shiny, black rock-heads.  Ugh!

And this, if you please, for no reason but that, when he went on
board at night and laid his head on the pillow, he should feel that
he was as near as he could conveniently get to his Freya slumbering
in the bungalow.  Did you ever!  And, mind, this brig was the home
to be--their home--the floating paradise which he was gradually
fitting out like a yacht to sail his life blissfully away in with
Freya.  Imbecile!  But the fellow was always taking chances.

One day, I remember I watched with Freya on the verandah the brig
approaching the point from the northward.  I suppose Jasper made
the girl out with his long glass.  What does he do?  Instead of
standing on for another mile and a half along the shoals and then
tacking for the anchorage in a proper and seamanlike manner, he
spies a gap between two disgusting old jagged reefs, puts the helm
down suddenly, and shoots the brig through, with all her sails
shaking and rattling, so that we could hear the racket on the
verandah.  I drew my breath through my teeth, I can tell you, and
Freya swore.  Yes!  She clenched her capable fists and stamped with
her pretty brown boot and said "Damn!"  Then, looking at me with a
little heightened colour--not much--she remarked, "I forgot you
were there," and laughed.  To be sure, to be sure.  When Jasper was
in sight she was not likely to remember that anybody else in the
world was there.  In my concern at this mad trick I couldn't help
appealing to her sympathetic common sense.

"Isn't he a fool?" I said with feeling.

"Perfect idiot," she agreed warmly, looking at me straight with her
wide-open, earnest eyes and the dimple of a smile on her cheek.

"And that," I pointed out to her, "just to save twenty minutes or
so in meeting you."

We heard the anchor go down, and then she became very resolute and
threatening.

"Wait a bit.  I'll teach him."

She went into her own room and shut the door, leaving me alone on
the verandah with my instructions.  Long before the brig's sails
were furled, Jasper came up three steps at a time, forgetting to
say how d'ye do, and looking right and left eagerly.

"Where's Freya?  Wasn't she here just now?"

When I explained to him that he was to be deprived of Miss Freya's
presence for a whole hour, "just to teach him," he said I had put
her up to it, no doubt, and that he feared he would have yet to
shoot me some day.  She and I were getting too thick together.
Then he flung himself into a chair, and tried to talk to me about
his trip.  But the funny thing was that the fellow actually
suffered.  I could see it.  His voice failed him, and he sat there
dumb, looking at the door with the face of a man in pain.  Fact. .
. . And the next still funnier thing was that the girl calmly
walked out of her room in less than ten minutes.  And then I left.
I mean to say that I went away to seek old Nelson (or Nielsen) on
the back verandah, which was his own special nook in the
distribution of that house, with the kind purpose of engaging him
in conversation lest he should start roaming about and intrude
unwittingly where he was not wanted just then.

He knew that the brig had arrived, though he did not know that
Jasper was already with his daughter.  I suppose he didn't think it
was possible in the time.  A father naturally wouldn't.  He
suspected that Allen was sweet on his girl; the fowls of the air
and the fishes of the sea, most of the traders in the Archipelago,
and all sorts and conditions of men in the town of Singapore were
aware of it.  But he was not capable of appreciating how far the
girl was gone on the fellow.  He had an idea that Freya was too
sensible to ever be gone on anybody--I mean to an unmanageable
extent.  No; it was not that which made him sit on the back
verandah and worry himself in his unassuming manner during Jasper's
visits.  What he worried about were the Dutch "authorities."  For
it is a fact that the Dutch looked askance at the doings of Jasper
Allen, owner and master of the brig Bonito.  They considered him
much too enterprising in his trading.  I don't know that he ever
did anything illegal; but it seems to me that his immense activity
was repulsive to their stolid character and slow-going methods.
Anyway, in old Nelson's opinion, the captain of the Bonito was a
smart sailor, and a nice young man, but not a desirable
acquaintance upon the whole.  Somewhat compromising, you
understand.  On the other hand, he did not like to tell Jasper in
so many words to keep away.  Poor old Nelson himself was a nice
fellow.  I believe he would have shrunk from hurting the feelings
even of a mop-headed cannibal, unless, perhaps, under very strong
provocation.  I mean the feelings, not the bodies.  As against
spears, knives, hatchets, clubs, or arrows, old Nelson had proved
himself capable of taking his own part.  In every other respect he
had a timorous soul.  So he sat on the back verandah with a
concerned expression, and whenever the voices of his daughter and
Jasper Allen reached him, he would blow out his cheeks and let the
air escape with a dismal sound, like a much tried man.

Naturally I derided his fears which he, more or less, confided to
me.  He had a certain regard for my judgment, and a certain
respect, not for my moral qualities, however, but for the good
terms I was supposed to be on with the Dutch "authorities."  I knew
for a fact that his greatest bugbear, the Governor of Banka--a
charming, peppery, hearty, retired rear-admiral--had a distinct
liking for him.  This consoling assurance which I used always to
put forward, made old Nelson (or Nielsen) brighten up for a moment;
but in the end he would shake his head doubtfully, as much as to
say that this was all very well, but that there were depths in the
Dutch official nature which no one but himself had ever fathomed.
Perfectly ridiculous.

On this occasion I am speaking of, old Nelson was even fretty; for
while I was trying to entertain him with a very funny and somewhat
scandalous adventure which happened to a certain acquaintance of
ours in Saigon, he exclaimed suddenly:

"What the devil he wants to turn up here for!"

Clearly he had not heard a word of the anecdote.  And this annoyed
me, because the anecdote was really good.  I stared at him.

"Come, come!" I cried.  "Don't you know what Jasper Allen is
turning up here for?"

This was the first open allusion I had ever made to the true state
of affairs between Jasper and his daughter.  He took it very
calmly.

"Oh, Freya is a sensible girl!" he murmured absently, his mind's
eye obviously fixed on the "authorities."  No; Freya was no fool.
He was not concerned about that.  He didn't mind it in the least.
The fellow was just company for her; he amused the girl; nothing
more.

When the perspicacious old chap left off mumbling, all was still in
the house.  The other two were amusing themselves very quietly, and
no doubt very heartily.  What more absorbing and less noisy
amusement could they have found than to plan their future?  Side by
side on the verandah they must have been looking at the brig, the
third party in that fascinating game.  Without her there would have
been no future.  She was the fortune and the home, and the great
free world for them.  Who was it that likened a ship to a prison?
May I be ignominiously hanged at a yardarm if that's true.  The
white sails of that craft were the white wings--pinions, I believe,
would be the more poetical style--well, the white pinions, of their
soaring love.  Soaring as regards Jasper.  Freya, being a woman,
kept a better hold of the mundane connections of this affair.

But Jasper was elevated in the true sense of the word ever since
the day when, after they had been gazing at the brig in one of
those decisive silences that alone establish a perfect communion
between creatures gifted with speech, he proposed that she should
share the ownership of that treasure with him.  Indeed, he
presented the brig to her altogether.  But then his heart was in
the brig since the day he bought her in Manilla from a certain
middle-aged Peruvian, in a sober suit of black broadcloth,
enigmatic and sententious, who, for all I know, might have stolen
her on the South American coast, whence he said he had come over to
the Philippines "for family reasons."  This "for family reasons"
was distinctly good.  No true caballero would care to push on
inquiries after such a statement.

Indeed, Jasper was quite the caballero.  The brig herself was then
all black and enigmatical, and very dirty; a tarnished gem of the
sea, or, rather, a neglected work of art.  For he must have been an
artist, the obscure builder who had put her body together on lovely
lines out of the hardest tropical timber fastened with the purest
copper.  Goodness only knows in what part of the world she was
built.  Jasper himself had not been able to ascertain much of her
history from his sententious, saturnine Peruvian--if the fellow was
a Peruvian, and not the devil himself in disguise, as Jasper
jocularly pretended to believe.  My opinion is that she was old
enough to have been one of the last pirates, a slaver perhaps, or
else an opium clipper of the early days, if not an opium smuggler.

However that may be, she was as sound as on the day she first took
the water, sailed like a witch, steered like a little boat, and,
like some fair women of adventurous life famous in history, seemed
to have the secret of perpetual youth; so that there was nothing
unnatural in Jasper Allen treating her like a lover.  And that
treatment restored the lustre of her beauty.  He clothed her in
many coats of the very best white paint so skilfully, carefully,
artistically put on and kept clean by his badgered crew of picked
Malays, that no costly enamel such as jewellers use for their work
could have looked better and felt smoother to the touch.  A narrow
gilt moulding defined her elegant sheer as she sat on the water,
eclipsing easily the professional good looks of any pleasure yacht
that ever came to the East in those days.  For myself, I must say I
prefer a moulding of deep crimson colour on a white hull.  It gives
a stronger relief besides being less expensive; and I told Jasper
so.  But no, nothing less than the best gold-leaf would do, because
no decoration could be gorgeous enough for the future abode of his
Freya.

His feelings for the brig and for the girl were as indissolubly
united in his heart as you may fuse two precious metals together in
one crucible.  And the flame was pretty hot, I can assure you.  It
induced in him a fierce inward restlessness both of activity and
desire.  Too fine in face, with a lateral wave in his chestnut
hair, spare, long-limbed, with an eager glint in his steely eyes
and quick, brusque movements, he made me think sometimes of a
flashing sword-blade perpetually leaping out of the scabbard.  It
was only when he was near the girl, when he had her there to look
at, that this peculiarly tense attitude was replaced by a grave
devout watchfulness of her slightest movements and utterances.  Her
cool, resolute, capable, good-humoured self-possession seemed to
steady his heart.  Was it the magic of her face, of her voice, of
her glances which calmed him so?  Yet these were the very things
one must believe which had set his imagination ablaze--if love
begins in imagination.  But I am no man to discuss such mysteries,
and it strikes me that we have neglected poor old Nelson inflating
his cheeks in a state of worry on the back verandah.

I pointed out to him that, after all, Jasper was not a very
frequent visitor.  He and his brig worked hard all over the
Archipelago.  But all old Nelson said, and he said it uneasily,
was:

"I hope Heemskirk won't turn up here while the brig's about."

Getting up a scare about Heemskirk now!  Heemskirk! . . . Really,
one hadn't the patience--



CHAPTER II



For, pray, who was Heemskirk?  You shall see at once how
unreasonable this dread of Heemskirk. . . . Certainly, his nature
was malevolent enough.  That was obvious, directly you heard him
laugh.  Nothing gives away more a man's secret disposition than the
unguarded ring of his laugh.  But, bless my soul! if we were to
start at every evil guffaw like a hare at every sound, we shouldn't
be fit for anything but the solitude of a desert, or the seclusion
of a hermitage.  And even there we should have to put up with the
unavoidable company of the devil.

However, the devil is a considerable personage, who has known
better days and has moved high up in the hierarchy of Celestial
Host; but in the hierarchy of mere earthly Dutchmen, Heemskirk,
whose early days could not have been very splendid, was merely a
naval officer forty years of age, of no particular connections or
ability to boast of.  He was commanding the Neptun, a little
gunboat employed on dreary patrol duty up and down the Archipelago,
to look after the traders.  Not a very exalted position truly.  I
tell you, just a common middle-aged lieutenant of some twenty-five
years' service and sure to be retired before long--that's all.

He never bothered his head very much as to what was going on in the
Seven Isles group till he learned from some talk in Mintok or
Palembang, I suppose, that there was a pretty girl living there.
Curiosity, I presume, caused him to go poking around that way, and
then, after he had once seen Freya, he made a practice of calling
at the group whenever he found himself within half a day's steaming
from it.

I don't mean to say that Heemskirk was a typical Dutch naval
officer.  I have seen enough of them not to fall into that absurd
mistake.  He had a big, clean-shaven face; great flat, brown
cheeks, with a thin, hooked nose and a small, pursy mouth squeezed
in between.  There were a few silver threads in his black hair, and
his unpleasant eyes were nearly black, too.  He had a surly way of
casting side glances without moving his head, which was set low on
a short, round neck.  A thick, round trunk in a dark undress jacket
with gold shoulder-straps, was sustained by a straddly pair of
thick, round legs, in white drill trousers.  His round skull under
a white cap looked as if it were immensely thick too, but there
were brains enough in it to discover and take advantage maliciously
of poor old Nelson's nervousness before everything that was
invested with the merest shred of authority.

Heemskirk would land on the point and perambulate silently every
part of the plantation as if the whole place belonged to him,
before her went to the house.  On the verandah he would take the
best chair, and would stay for tiffin or dinner, just simply stay
on, without taking the trouble to invite himself by so much as a
word.

He ought to have been kicked, if only for his manner to Miss Freya.
Had he been a naked savage, armed with spears and poisoned arrows,
old Nelson (or Nielsen) would have gone for him with his bare
fists.  But these gold shoulder-straps--Dutch shoulder-straps at
that--were enough to terrify the old fellow; so he let the beggar
treat him with heavy contempt, devour his daughter with his eyes,
and drink the best part of his little stock of wine.

I saw something of this, and on one occasion I tried to pass a
remark on the subject.  It was pitiable to see the trouble in old
Nelson's round eyes.  At first he cried out that the lieutenant was
a good friend of his; a very good fellow.  I went on staring at him
pretty hard, so that at last he faltered, and had to own that, of
course, Heemskirk was not a very genial person outwardly, but all
the same at bottom. . . .

"I haven't yet met a genial Dutchman out here," I interrupted.
"Geniality, after all, is not of much consequence, but don't you
see--"

Nelson looked suddenly so frightened at what I was going to say
that I hadn't the heart to go on.  Of course, I was going to tell
him that the fellow was after his girl.  That just describes it
exactly.  What Heemskirk might have expected or what he thought he
could do, I don't know.  For all I can tell, he might have imagined
himself irresistible, or have taken Freya for what she was not, on
account of her lively, assured, unconstrained manner.  But there it
is.  He was after that girl.  Nelson could see it well enough.
Only he preferred to ignore it.  He did not want to be told of it.

"All I want is to live in peace and quietness with the Dutch
authorities," he mumbled shamefacedly.

He was incurable.  I was sorry for him, and I really think Miss
Freya was sorry for her father, too.  She restrained herself for
his sake, and as everything she did she did it simply,
unaffectedly, and even good humouredly.  No small effort that,
because in Heemskirk's attentions there was an insolent touch of
scorn, hard to put up with.  Dutchmen of that sort are over-bearing
to their inferiors, and that officer of the king looked upon old
Nelson and Freya as quite beneath him in every way.

I can't say I felt sorry for Freya.  She was not the sort of girl
to take anything tragically.  One could feel for her and sympathise
with her difficulty, but she seemed equal to any situation.  It was
rather admiration she extorted by her competent serenity.  It was
only when Jasper and Heemskirk were together at the bungalow, as it
happened now and then, that she felt the strain, and even then it
was not for everybody to see.  My eyes alone could detect a faint
shadow on the radiance of her personality.  Once I could not help
saying to her appreciatively:

"Upon my word you are wonderful."

She let it pass with a faint smile.

"The great thing is to prevent Jasper becoming unreasonable," she
said; and I could see real concern lurking in the quiet depths of
her frank eyes gazing straight at me.  "You will help to keep him
quiet, won't you?"

"Of course, we must keep him quiet," I declared, understanding very
well the nature of her anxiety.  "He's such a lunatic, too, when
he's roused."

"He is!" she assented, in a soft tone; for it was our joke to speak
of Jasper abusively.  "But I have tamed him a bit.  He's quite a
good boy now."

"He would squash Heemskirk like a blackbeetle all the same," I
remarked.

"Rather!" she murmured.  "And that wouldn't do," she added quickly.
"Imagine the state poor papa would get into.  Besides, I mean to be
mistress of the dear brig and sail about these seas, not go off
wandering ten thousand miles away from here."

"The sooner you are on board to look after the man and the brig the
better," I said seriously.  "They need you to steady them both a
bit.  I don't think Jasper will ever get sobered down till he has
carried you off from this island.  You don't see him when he is
away from you, as I do.  He's in a state of perpetual elation which
almost frightens me."

At this she smiled again, and then looked serious.  For it could
not be unpleasant to her to be told of her power, and she had some
sense of her responsibility.  She slipped away from me suddenly,
because Heemskirk, with old Nelson in attendance at his elbow, was
coming up the steps of the verandah.  Directly his head came above
the level of the floor his ill-natured black eyes shot glances here
and there.

"Where's your girl, Nelson?" he asked, in a tone as if every soul
in the world belonged to him.  And then to me:  "The goddess has
flown, eh?"

Nelson's Cove--as we used to call it--was crowded with shipping
that day.  There was first my steamer, then the Neptun gunboat
further out, and the Bonito, brig, anchored as usual so close
inshore that it looked as if, with a little skill and judgment, one
could shy a hat from the verandah on to her scrupulously holystoned
quarter-deck.  Her brasses flashed like gold, her white body-paint
had a sheen like a satin robe.  The rake of her varnished spars and
the big yards, squared to a hair, gave her a sort of martial
elegance.  She was a beauty.  No wonder that in possession of a
craft like that and the promise of a girl like Freya, Jasper lived
in a state of perpetual elation fit, perhaps, for the seventh
heaven, but not exactly safe in a world like ours.

I remarked politely to Heemskirk that, with three guests in the
house, Miss Freya had no doubt domestic matters to attend to.  I
knew, of course, that she had gone to meet Jasper at a certain
cleared spot on the banks of the only stream on Nelson's little
island.  The commander of the Neptun gave me a dubious black look,
and began to make himself at home, flinging his thick, cylindrical
carcass into a rocking-chair, and unbuttoning his coat.  Old Nelson
sat down opposite him in a most unassuming manner, staring
anxiously with his round eyes and fanning himself with his hat.  I
tried to make conversation to while the time away; not an easy task
with a morose, enamoured Dutchman constantly looking from one door
to another and answering one's advances either with a jeer or a
grunt.

However, the evening passed off all right.  Luckily, there is a
degree of bliss too intense for elation.  Jasper was quiet and
concentrated silently in watching Freya.  As we went on board our
respective ships I offered to give his brig a tow out next morning.
I did it on purpose to get him away at the earliest possible
moment.  So in the first cold light of the dawn we passed by the
gunboat lying black and still without a sound in her at the mouth
of the glassy cove.  But with tropical swiftness the sun had
climbed twice its diameter above the horizon before we had rounded
the reef and got abreast of the point.  On the biggest boulder
there stood Freya, all in white and, in her helmet, like a feminine
and martial statue with a rosy face, as I could see very well with
my glasses.  She fluttered an expressive handkerchief, and Jasper,
running up the main rigging of the white and warlike brig, waved
his hat in response.  Shortly afterwards we parted, I to the
northward and Jasper heading east with a light wind on the quarter,
for Banjermassin and two other ports, I believe it was, that trip.

This peaceful occasion was the last on which I saw all these people
assembled together; the charmingly fresh and resolute Freya, the
innocently round-eyed old Nelson, Jasper, keen, long limbed, lean
faced, admirably self-contained, in his manner, because
inconceivably happy under the eyes of his Freya; all three tall,
fair, and blue-eyed in varied shades, and amongst them the swarthy,
arrogant, black-haired Dutchman, shorter nearly by a head, and so
much thicker than any of them that he seemed to be a creature
capable of inflating itself, a grotesque specimen of mankind from
some other planet.

The contrast struck me all at once as we stood in the lighted
verandah, after rising from the dinner-table.  I was fascinated by
it for the rest of the evening, and I remember the impression of
something funny and ill-omened at the same time in it to this day.



CHAPTER III



A few weeks later, coming early one morning into Singapore, from a
journey to the southward, I saw the brig lying at anchor in all her
usual symmetry and splendour of aspect as though she had been taken
out of a glass case and put delicately into the water that very
moment.

She was well out in the roadstead, but I steamed in and took up my
habitual berth close in front of the town.  Before we had finished
breakfast a quarter-master came to tell me that Captain Allen's
boat was coming our way.

His smart gig dashed alongside, and in two bounds he was up our
accommodation-ladder and shaking me by the hand with his nervous
grip, his eyes snapping inquisitively, for he supposed I had called
at the Seven Isles group on my way.  I reached into my pocket for a
nicely folded little note, which he grabbed out of my hand without
ceremony and carried off on the bridge to read by himself.  After a
decent interval I followed him up there, and found him pacing to
and fro; for the nature of his emotions made him restless even in
his most thoughtful moments.

He shook his head at me triumphantly.

"Well, my dear boy," he said, "I shall be counting the days now."

I understood what he meant.  I knew that those young people had
settled already on a runaway match without official preliminaries.
This was really a logical decision.  Old Nelson (or Nielsen) would
never have agreed to give up Freya peaceably to this compromising
Jasper.  Heavens!  What would the Dutch authorities say to such a
match!  It sounds too ridiculous for words.  But there's nothing in
the world more selfishly hard than a timorous man in a fright about
his "little estate," as old Nelson used to call it in apologetic
accents.  A heart permeated by a particular sort of funk is proof
against sense, feeling, and ridicule.  It's a flint.

Jasper would have made his request all the same and then taken his
own way; but it was Freya who decided that nothing should be said,
on the ground that, "Papa would only worry himself to distraction."
He was capable of making himself ill, and then she wouldn't have
the heart to leave him.  Here you have the sanity of feminine
outlook and the frankness of feminine reasoning.  And for the rest,
Miss Freya could read "poor dear papa" in the way a woman reads a
man--like an open book.  His daughter once gone, old Nelson would
not worry himself.  He would raise a great outcry, and make no end
of lamentable fuss, but that's not the same thing.  The real
agonies of indecision, the anguish of conflicting feelings would be
spared to him.  And as he was too unassuming to rage, he would,
after a period of lamentation, devote himself to his "little
estate," and to keeping on good terms with the authorities.

Time would do the rest.  And Freya thought she could afford to
wait, while ruling over her own home in the beautiful brig and over
the man who loved her.  This was the life for her who had learned
to walk on a ship's deck.  She was a ship-child, a sea-girl if ever
there was one.  And of course she loved Jasper and trusted him; but
there was a shade of anxiety in her pride.  It is very fine and
romantic to possess for your very own a finely tempered and trusty
sword-blade, but whether it is the best weapon to counter with the
common cudgel-play of Fate--that's another question.

She knew that she had the more substance of the two--you needn't
try any cheap jokes, I am not talking of their weights.  She was
just a little anxious while he was away, and she had me who, being
a tried confidant, took the liberty to whisper frequently "The
sooner the better."  But there was a peculiar vein of obstinacy in
Miss Freya, and her reason for delay was characteristic.  "Not
before my twenty-first birthday; so that there shall be no mistake
in people's minds as to me being old enough to know what I am
doing."

Jasper's feelings were in such subjection that he had never even
remonstrated against the decree.  She was just splendid, whatever
she did or said, and there was an end of it for him.  I believe
that he was subtle enough to be even flattered at bottom--at times.
And then to console him he had the brig which seemed pervaded by
the spirit of Freya, since whatever he did on board was always done
under the supreme sanction of his love.

"Yes.  I'll soon begin to count the days," he repeated.  "Eleven
months more.  I'll have to crowd three trips into that."

"Mind you don't come to grief trying to do too much," I admonished
him.  But he dismissed my caution with a laugh and an elated
gesture.  Pooh!  Nothing, nothing could happen to the brig, he
cried, as if the flame of his heart could light up the dark nights
of uncharted seas, and the image of Freya serve for an unerring
beacon amongst hidden shoals; as if the winds had to wait on his
future, the stars fight for it in their courses; as if the magic of
his passion had the power to float a ship on a drop of dew or sail
her through the eye of a needle--simply because it was her
magnificent lot to be the servant of a love so full of grace as to
make all the ways of the earth safe, resplendent, and easy.

"I suppose," I said, after he had finished laughing at my innocent
enough remark, "I suppose you will be off to-day."

That was what he meant to do.  He had not gone at daylight only
because he expected me to come in.

"And only fancy what has happened yesterday," he went on.  "My mate
left me suddenly.  Had to.  And as there's nobody to be found at a
short notice I am going to take Schultz with me.  The notorious
Schultz!  Why don't you jump out of your skin?  I tell you I went
and unearthed Schultz late last evening, after no end of trouble.
'I am your man, captain,' he says, in that wonderful voice of his,
'but I am sorry to confess I have practically no clothes to my
back.  I have had to sell all my wardrobe to get a little food from
day to day.'  What a voice that man has got.  Talk about moving
stones!  But people seem to get used to it.  I had never seen him
before, and, upon my word, I felt suddenly tears rising to my eyes.
Luckily it was dusk.  He was sitting very quiet under a tree in a
native compound as thin as a lath, and when I peered down at him
all he had on was an old cotton singlet and a pair of ragged
pyjamas.  I bought him six white suits and two pairs of canvas
shoes.  Can't clear the ship without a mate.  Must have somebody.
I am going on shore presently to sign him on, and I shall take him
with me as I go back on board to get under way.  Now, I am a
lunatic--am I not?  Mad, of course.  Come on!  Lay it on thick.
Let yourself go.  I like to see you get excited."

He so evidently expected me to scold that I took especial pleasure
in exaggerating the calmness of my attitude.

"The worst that can be brought up against Schultz," I began,
folding my arms and speaking dispassionately, "is an awkward habit
of stealing the stores of every ship he has ever been in.  He will
do it.  That's really all that's wrong.  I don't credit absolutely
that story Captain Robinson tells of Schultz conspiring in
Chantabun with some ruffians in a Chinese junk to steal the anchor
off the starboard bow of the Bohemian Girl schooner.  Robinson's
story is too ingenious altogether.  That other tale of the
engineers of the Nan-Shan finding Schultz at midnight in the
engine-room busy hammering at the brass bearings to carry them off
for sale on shore seems to me more authentic.  Apart from this
little weakness, let me tell you that Schultz is a smarter sailor
than many who never took a drop of drink in their lives, and
perhaps no worse morally than some men you and I know who have
never stolen the value of a penny.  He may not be a desirable
person to have on board one's ship, but since you have no choice he
may be made to do, I believe.  The important thing is to understand
his psychology.  Don't give him any money till you have done with
him.  Not a cent, if he begs ever so.  For as sure as Fate the
moment you give him any money he will begin to steal.  Just
remember that."

I enjoyed Jasper's incredulous surprise.

"The devil he will!" he cried.  "What on earth for?  Aren't you
trying to pull my leg, old boy?"

"No.  I'm not.  You must understand Schultz's psychology.  He's
neither a loafer nor a cadger.  He's not likely to wander about
looking for somebody to stand him drinks.  But suppose he goes on
shore with five dollars, or fifty for that matter, in his pocket?
After the third or fourth glass he becomes fuddled and charitable.
He either drops his money all over the place, or else distributes
the lot around; gives it to any one who will take it.  Then it
occurs to him that the night is young yet, and that he may require
a good many more drinks for himself and his friends before morning.
So he starts off cheerfully for his ship.  His legs never get
affected nor his head either in the usual way.  He gets aboard and
simply grabs the first thing that seems to him suitable--the cabin
lamp, a coil of rope, a bag of biscuits, a drum of oil--and
converts it into money without thinking twice about it.  This is
the process and no other.  You have only to look out that he
doesn't get a start.  That's all."

"Confound his psychology," muttered Jasper.  "But a man with a
voice like his is fit to talk to the angels.  Is he incurable do
you think?"

I said that I thought so.  Nobody had prosecuted him yet, but no
one would employ him any longer.  His end would be, I feared, to
starve in some hole or other.

"Ah, well," reflected Jasper.  "The Bonito isn't trading to any
ports of civilisation.  That'll make it easier for him to keep
straight."

That was true.  The brig's business was on uncivilised coasts, with
obscure rajahs dwelling in nearly unknown bays; with native
settlements up mysterious rivers opening their sombre, forest-lined
estuaries among a welter of pale green reefs and dazzling sand-
banks, in lonely straits of calm blue water all aglitter with
sunshine.  Alone, far from the beaten tracks, she glided, all
white, round dark, frowning headlands, stole out, silent like a
ghost, from behind points of land stretching out all black in the
moonlight; or lay hove-to, like a sleeping sea-bird, under the
shadow of some nameless mountain waiting for a signal.  She would
be glimpsed suddenly on misty, squally days dashing disdainfully
aside the short aggressive waves of the Java Sea; or be seen far,
far away, a tiny dazzling white speck flying across the brooding
purple masses of thunderclouds piled up on the horizon.  Sometimes,
on the rare mail tracks, where civilisation brushes against wild
mystery, when the naive passengers crowding along the rail
exclaimed, pointing at her with interest:  "Oh, here's a yacht!"
the Dutch captain, with a hostile glance, would grunt
contemptuously:  "Yacht!  No!  That's only English Jasper.  A
pedlar--"

"A good seaman you say," ejaculated Jasper, still in the matter of
the hopeless Schultz with the wonderfully touching voice.

"First rate.  Ask any one.  Quite worth having--only impossible," I
declared.

"He shall have his chance to reform in the brig," said Jasper, with
a laugh.  "There will be no temptations either to drink or steal
where I am going to this time."

I didn't press him for anything more definite on that point.  In
fact, intimate as we were, I had a pretty clear notion of the
general run of his business.

But as we are going ashore in his gig he asked suddenly:  "By the
way, do you know where Heemskirk is?"

I eyed him covertly, and was reassured.  He had asked the question,
not as a lover, but as a trader.  I told him that I had heard in
Palembang that the Neptun was on duty down about Flores and
Sumbawa.  Quite out of his way.  He expressed his satisfaction.

"You know," he went on, "that fellow, when he gets on the Borneo
coast, amuses himself by knocking down my beacons.  I have had to
put up a few to help me in and out of the rivers.  Early this year
a Celebes trader becalmed in a prau was watching him at it.  He
steamed the gunboat full tilt at two of them, one after another,
smashing them to pieces, and then lowered a boat on purpose to pull
out a third, which I had a lot of trouble six months ago to stick
up in the middle of a mudflat for a tide mark.  Did you ever hear
of anything more provoking--eh?"

"I wouldn't quarrel with the beggar," I observed casually, yet
disliking that piece of news strongly.  "It isn't worth while."

"I quarrel?" cried Jasper.  "I don't want to quarrel.  I don't want
to hurt a single hair of his ugly head.  My dear fellow, when I
think of Freya's twenty-first birthday, all the world's my friend,
Heemskirk included.  It's a nasty, spiteful amusement, all the
same."

We parted rather hurriedly on the quay, each of us having his own
pressing business to attend to.  I would have been very much cut up
had I known that this hurried grasp of the hand with "So long, old
boy.  Good luck to you!" was the last of our partings.

On his return to the Straits I was away, and he was gone again
before I got back.  He was trying to achieve three trips before
Freya's twenty-first birthday.  At Nelson's Cove I missed him again
by only a couple of days.  Freya and I talked of "that lunatic" and
"perfect idiot" with great delight and infinite appreciation.  She
was very radiant, with a more pronounced gaiety, notwithstanding
that she had just parted from Jasper.  But this was to be their
last separation.

"Do get aboard as soon as you can, Miss Freya," I entreated.

She looked me straight in the face, her colour a little heightened
and with a sort of solemn ardour--if there was a little catch in
her voice.

"The very next day."

Ah, yes!  The very next day after her twenty-first birthday.  I was
pleased at this hint of deep feeling.  It was as if she had grown
impatient at last of the self-imposed delay.  I supposed that
Jasper's recent visit had told heavily.

"That's right," I said approvingly.  "I shall be much easier in my
mind when I know you have taken charge of that lunatic.  Don't you
lose a minute.  He, of course, will be on time--unless heavens
fall."

"Yes.  Unless--" she repeated in a thoughtful whisper, raising her
eyes to the evening sky without a speck of cloud anywhere.  Silent
for a time, we let our eyes wander over the waters below, looking
mysteriously still in the twilight, as if trustfully composed for a
long, long dream in the warm, tropical night.  And the peace all
round us seemed without limits and without end.

And then we began again to talk Jasper over in our usual strain.
We agreed that he was too reckless in many ways.  Luckily, the brig
was equal to the situation.  Nothing apparently was too much for
her.  A perfect darling of a ship, said Miss Freya.  She and her
father had spent an afternoon on board.  Jasper had given them some
tea.  Papa was grumpy. . . . I had a vision of old Nelson under the
brig's snowy awnings, nursing his unassuming vexation, and fanning
himself with his hat.  A comedy father. . . . As a new instance of
Jasper's lunacy, I was told that he was distressed at his inability
to have solid silver handles fitted to all the cabin doors.  "As if
I would have let him!" commented Miss Freya, with amused
indignation.  Incidentally, I learned also that Schultz, the
nautical kleptomaniac with the pathetic voice, was still hanging on
to his job, with Miss Freya's approval.  Jasper had confided to the
lady of his heart his purpose of straightening out the fellow's
psychology.  Yes, indeed.  All the world was his friend because it
breathed the same air with Freya.

Somehow or other, I brought Heemskirk's name into conversation,
and, to my great surprise, startled Miss Freya.  Her eyes expressed
something like distress, while she bit her lip as if to contain an
explosion of laughter.  Oh!  Yes.  Heemskirk was at the bungalow at
the same time with Jasper, but he arrived the day after.  He left
the same day as the brig, but a few hours later.

"What a nuisance he must have been to you two," I said feelingly.

Her eyes flashed at me a sort of frightened merriment, and suddenly
she exploded into a clear burst of laughter.  "Ha, ha, ha!"

I echoed it heartily, but not with the game charming tone:  "Ha,
ha, ha! . . . Isn't he grotesque?  Ha, ha, ha!"  And the
ludicrousness of old Nelson's inanely fierce round eyes in
association with his conciliatory manner to the lieutenant
presenting itself to my mind brought on another fit.

"He looks," I spluttered, "he looks--Ha, ha, ha!--amongst you three
. . . like an unhappy black-beetle.  Ha, ha, ha!"

She gave out another ringing peal, ran off into her own room, and
slammed the door behind her, leaving me profoundly astounded.  I
stopped laughing at once.

"What's the joke?" asked old Nelson's voice, half way down the
steps.

He came up, sat down, and blew out his cheeks, looking
inexpressibly fatuous.  But I didn't want to laugh any more.  And
what on earth, I asked myself, have we been laughing at in this
uncontrollable fashion.  I felt suddenly depressed.

Oh, yes.  Freya had started it.  The girl's overwrought, I thought.
And really one couldn't wonder at it.

I had no answer to old Nelson's question, but he was too aggrieved
at Jasper's visit to think of anything else.  He as good as asked
me whether I wouldn't undertake to hint to Jasper that he was not
wanted at the Seven Isles group.  I declared that it was not
necessary.  From certain circumstances which had come to my
knowledge lately, I had reason to think that he would not be much
troubled by Jasper Allen in the future.

He emitted an earnest "Thank God!" which nearly set me laughing
again, but he did not brighten up proportionately.  It seemed
Heemskirk had taken special pains to make himself disagreeable.
The lieutenant had frightened old Nelson very much by expressing a
sinister wonder at the Government permitting a white man to settle
down in that part at all.  "It is against our declared policy," he
had remarked.  He had also charged him with being in reality no
better than an Englishman.  He had even tried to pick a quarrel
with him for not learning to speak Dutch.

"I told him I was too old to learn now," sighed out old Nelson (or
Nielsen) dismally.  "He said I ought to have learned Dutch long
before.  I had been making my living in Dutch dependencies.  It was
disgraceful of me not to speak Dutch, he said.  He was as savage
with me as if I had been a Chinaman."

It was plain he had been viciously badgered.  He did not mention
how many bottles of his best claret he had offered up on the altar
of conciliation.  It must have been a generous libation.  But old
Nelson (or Nielsen) was really hospitable.  He didn't mind that;
and I only regretted that this virtue should be lavished on the
lieutenant-commander of the Neptun.  I longed to tell him that in
all probability he would be relieved from Heemskirk's visitations
also.  I did not do so only from the fear (absurd, I admit) of
arousing some sort of suspicion in his mind.  As if with this
guileless comedy father such a thing were possible!

Strangely enough, the last words on the subject of Heemskirk were
spoken by Freya, and in that very sense.  The lieutenant was
turning up persistently in old Nelson's conversation at dinner.  At
last I muttered a half audible "Damn the lieutenant."  I could see
that the girl was getting exasperated, too.

"And he wasn't well at all--was he, Freya?" old Nelson went on
moaning.  "Perhaps it was that which made him so snappish, hey,
Freya?  He looked very bad when he left us so suddenly.  His liver
must be in a bad state, too."

"Oh, he will end by getting over it," said Freya impatiently.  "And
do leave off worrying about him, papa.  Very likely you won't see
much of him for a long time to come."

The look she gave me in exchange for my discreet smile had no
hidden mirth in it.  Her eyes seemed hollowed, her face gone wan in
a couple of hours.  We had been laughing too much.  Overwrought!
Overwrought by the approach of the decisive moment.  After all,
sincere, courageous, and self-reliant as she was, she must have
felt both the passion and the compunction of her resolve.  The very
strength of love which had carried her up to that point must have
put her under a great moral strain, in which there might have been
a little simple remorse, too.  For she was honest--and there,
across the table, sat poor old Nelson (or Nielsen) staring at her,
round-eyed and so pathetically comic in his fierce aspect as to
touch the most lightsome heart.

He retired early to his room to soothe himself for a night's rest
by perusing his account-books.  We two remained on the verandah for
another hour or so, but we exchanged only languid phrases on things
without importance, as though we had been emotionally jaded by our
long day's talk on the only momentous subject.  And yet there was
something she might have told a friend.  But she didn't.  We parted
silently.  She distrusted my masculine lack of common sense,
perhaps. . . . O!  Freya!

Going down the precipitous path to the landing-stage, I was
confronted in the shadows of boulders and bushes by a draped
feminine figure whose appearance startled me at first.  It glided
into my way suddenly from behind a piece of rock.  But in a moment
it occurred to me that it could be no one else but Freya's maid, a
half-caste Malacca Portuguese.  One caught fleeting glimpses of her
olive face and dazzling white teeth about the house.  I had
observed her at times from a distance, as she sat within call under
the shade of some fruit trees, brushing and plaiting her long raven
locks.  It seemed to be the principal occupation of her leisure
hours.  We had often exchanged nods and smiles--and a few words,
too.  She was a pretty creature.  And once I had watched her
approvingly make funny and expressive grimaces behind Heemskirk's
back.  I understood (from Jasper) that she was in the secret, like
a comedy camerista.  She was to accompany Freya on her irregular
way to matrimony and "ever after" happiness.  Why should she be
roaming by night near the cove--unless on some love affair of her
own--I asked myself.  But there was nobody suitable within the
Seven Isles group, as far as I knew.  It flashed upon me that it
was myself she had been lying in wait for.

She hesitated, muffled from head to foot, shadowy and bashful.  I
advanced another pace, and how I felt is nobody's business.

"What is it?" I asked, very low.

"Nobody knows I am here," she whispered.

"And nobody can see us," I whispered back.

The murmur of words "I've been so frightened" reached me.  Just
then forty feet above our head, from the yet lighted verandah,
unexpected and startling, Freya's voice rang out in a clear,
imperious call:

"Antonia!"

With a stifled exclamation, the hesitating girl vanished out of the
path.  A bush near by rustled; then silence.  I waited wondering.
The lights on the verandah went out.  I waited a while longer then
continued down the path to my boat, wondering more than ever.

I remember the occurrences of that visit especially, because this
was the last time I saw the Nelson bungalow.  On arriving at the
Straits I found cable messages which made it necessary for me to
throw up my employment at a moment's notice and go home at once.  I
had a desperate scramble to catch the mailboat which was due to
leave next day, but I found time to write two short notes, one to
Freya, the other to Jasper.  Later on I wrote at length, this time
to Allen alone.  I got no answer.  I hunted up then his brother,
or, rather, half-brother, a solicitor in the city, a sallow, calm,
little man who looked at me over his spectacles thoughtfully.

Jasper was the only child of his father's second marriage, a
transaction which had failed to commend itself to the first, grown-
up family.

"You haven't heard for ages," I repeated, with secret annoyance.
"May I ask what 'for ages' means in this connection?"

"It means that I don't care whether I ever hear from him or not,"
retorted the little man of law, turning nasty suddenly.

I could not blame Jasper for not wasting his time in correspondence
with such an outrageous relative.  But why didn't he write to me--a
decent sort of friend, after all; enough of a friend to find for
his silence the excuse of forgetfulness natural to a state of
transcendental bliss?  I waited indulgently, but nothing ever came.
And the East seemed to drop out of my life without an echo, like a
stone falling into a well of prodigious depth.



CHAPTER IV



I suppose praiseworthy motives are a sufficient justification
almost for anything.  What could be more commendable in the
abstract than a girl's determination that "poor papa" should not be
worried, and her anxiety that the man of her choice should be kept
by any means from every occasion of doing something rash, something
which might endanger the whole scheme of their happiness?

Nothing could be more tender and more prudent.  We must also
remember the girl's self-reliant temperament, and the general
unwillingness of women--I mean women of sense--to make a fuss over
matters of that sort.

As has been said already, Heemskirk turned up some time after
Jasper's arrival at Nelson's Cove.  The sight of the brig lying
right under the bungalow was very offensive to him.  He did not fly
ashore before his anchor touched the ground as Jasper used to do.
On the contrary, he hung about his quarter-deck mumbling to
himself; and when he ordered his boat to be manned it was in an
angry voice.  Freya's existence, which lifted Jasper out of himself
into a blissful elation, was for Heemskirk a cause of secret
torment, of hours of exasperated brooding.

While passing the brig he hailed her harshly and asked if the
master was on board.  Schultz, smart and neat in a spotless white
suit, leaned over the taffrail, finding the question somewhat
amusing.  He looked humorously down into Heemskirk's boat, and
answered, in the most amiable modulations of his beautiful voice:
"Captain Allen is up at the house, sir."  But his expression
changed suddenly at the savage growl:  "What the devil are you
grinning at?" which acknowledged that information.

He watched Heemskirk land and, instead of going to the house,
stride away by another path into the grounds.

The desire-tormented Dutchman found old Nelson (or Nielsen) at his
drying-sheds, very busy superintending the manipulation of his
tobacco crop, which, though small, was of excellent quality, and
enjoying himself thoroughly.  But Heemskirk soon put a stop to this
simple happiness.  He sat down by the old chap, and by the sort of
talk which he knew was best calculated for the purpose, reduced him
before long to a state of concealed and perspiring nervousness.  It
was a horrid talk of "authorities," and old Nelson tried to defend
himself.  If he dealt with English traders it was because he had to
dispose of his produce somehow.  He was as conciliatory as he knew
how to be, and this very thing seemed to excite Heemskirk, who had
worked himself up into a heavily breathing state of passion.

"And the worst of them all is that Allen," he growled.  "Your
particular friend--eh?  You have let in a lot of these Englishmen
into this part.  You ought never to have been allowed to settle
here.  Never.  What's he doing here now?"

Old Nelson (or Nielsen), becoming very agitated, declared that
Jasper Allen was no particular friend of his.  No friend at all--at
all.  He had bought three tons of rice from him to feed his
workpeople on.  What sort of evidence of friendship was that?
Heemskirk burst out at last with the thought that had been gnawing
at his vitals:

"Yes.  Sell three tons of rice and flirt three days with that girl
of yours.  I am speaking to you as a friend, Nielsen.  This won't
do.  You are only on sufferance here."

Old Nelson was taken aback at first, but recovered pretty quickly.
Won't do!  Certainly!  Of course, it wouldn't do!  The last man in
the world.  But his girl didn't care for the fellow, and was too
sensible to fall in love with any one.  He was very earnest in
impressing on Heemskirk his own feeling of absolute security.  And
the lieutenant, casting doubting glances sideways, was yet willing
to believe him.

"Much you know about it," he grunted nevertheless.

"But I do know," insisted old Nelson, with the greater desperation
because he wanted to resist the doubts arising in his own mind.
"My own daughter!  In my own house, and I not to know!  Come!  It
would be a good joke, lieutenant."

"They seem to be carrying on considerably," remarked Heemskirk
moodily.  "I suppose they are together now," he added, feeling a
pang which changed what he meant for a mocking smile into a strange
grimace.

The harassed Nelson shook his hand at him.  He was at bottom
shocked at this insistence, and was even beginning to feel annoyed
at the absurdity of it.

"Pooh!  Pooh!  I'll tell you what, lieutenant:  you go to the house
and have a drop of gin-and-bitters before dinner.  Ask for Freya.
I must see the last of this tobacco put away for the night, but
I'll be along presently."

Heemskirk was not insensible to this suggestion.  It answered to
his secret longing, which was not a longing for drink, however.
Old Nelson shouted solicitously after his broad back a
recommendation to make himself comfortable, and that there was a
box of cheroots on the verandah.

It was the west verandah that old Nelson meant, the one which was
the living-room of the house, and had split-rattan screens of the
very finest quality.  The east verandah, sacred to his own privacy,
puffing out of cheeks, and other signs of perplexed thinking, was
fitted with stout blinds of sailcloth.  The north verandah was not
a verandah at all, really.  It was more like a long balcony.  It
did not communicate with the other two, and could only be
approached by a passage inside the house.  Thus it had a privacy
which made it a convenient place for a maiden's meditations without
words, and also for the discourses, apparently without sense,
which, passing between a young man and a maid, become pregnant with
a diversity of transcendental meanings.

This north verandah was embowered with climbing plants.  Freya,
whose room opened out on it, had furnished it as a sort of boudoir
for herself, with a few cane chairs and a sofa of the same kind.
On this sofa she and Jasper sat as close together as is possible in
this imperfect world where neither can a body be in two places at
once nor yet two bodies can be in one place at the same time.  They
had been sitting together all the afternoon, and I won't say that
their talk had been without sense.  Loving him with a little
judicious anxiety lest in his elation he should break his heart
over some mishap, Freya naturally would talk to him soberly.  He,
nervous and brusque when away from her, appeared always as if
overcome by her visibility, by the great wonder of being palpably
loved.  An old man's child, having lost his mother early, thrown
out to sea out of the way while very young, he had not much
experience of tenderness of any kind.

In this private, foliage-embowered verandah, and at this late hour
of the afternoon, he bent down a little, and, possessing himself of
Freya's hands, was kissing them one after another, while she smiled
and looked down at his head with the eyes of approving compassion.
At that same moment Heemskirk was approaching the house from the
north.

Antonia was on the watch on that side.  But she did not keep a very
good watch.  The sun was setting; she knew that her young mistress
and the captain of the Bonito were about to separate.  She was
walking to and fro in the dusky grove with a flower in her hair,
and singing softly to herself, when suddenly, within a foot of her,
the lieutenant appeared from behind a tree.  She bounded aside like
a startled fawn, but Heemskirk, with a lucid comprehension of what
she was there for, pounced upon her, and, catching her arm, clapped
his other thick hand over her mouth.

"If you try to make a noise I'll twist your neck!"

This ferocious figure of speech terrified the girl sufficiently.
Heemskirk had seen plainly enough on the verandah Freya's golden
head with another head very close to it.  He dragged the
unresisting maid with him by a circuitous way into the compound,
where he dismissed her with a vicious push in the direction of the
cluster of bamboo huts for the servants.

She was very much like the faithful camerista of Italian comedy,
but in her terror she bolted away without a sound from that thick,
short, black-eyed man with a cruel grip of fingers like a vice.
Quaking all over at a distance, extremely scared and half inclined
to laugh, she saw him enter the house at the back.

The interior of the bungalow was divided by two passages crossing
each other in the middle.  At that point Heemskirk, by turning his
head slightly to the left as he passed, secured the evidence of
"carrying on" so irreconcilable with old Nelson's assurances that
it made him stagger, with a rush of blood to his head.  Two white
figures, distinct against the light, stood in an unmistakable
attitude.  Freya's arms were round Jasper's neck.  Their faces were
characteristically superimposed on each other, and Heemskirk went
on, his throat choked with a sudden rising of curses, till on the
west verandah he stumbled blindly against a chair and then dropped
into another as though his legs had been swept from under him.  He
had indulged too long in the habit of appropriating Freya to
himself in his thoughts.  "Is that how you entertain your visitors-
-you . . " he thought, so outraged that he could not find a
sufficiently degrading epithet.

Freya struggled a little and threw her head back.

"Somebody has come in," she whispered.  Jasper, holding her clasped
closely to his breast, and looking down into her face, suggested
casually:

"Your father."

Freya tried to disengage herself, but she had not the heart
absolutely to push him away with her hands.

"I believe it's Heemskirk," she breathed out at him.

He, plunging into her eyes in a quiet rapture, was provoked to a
vague smile by the sound of the name.

"The ass is always knocking down my beacons outside the river," he
murmured.  He attached no other meaning to Heemskirk's existence;
but Freya was asking herself whether the lieutenant had seen them.

"Let me go, kid," she ordered in a peremptory whisper.  Jasper
obeyed, and, stepping back at once, continued his contemplation of
her face under another angle.  "I must go and see," she said to
herself anxiously.

She instructed him hurriedly to wait a moment after she was gone
and then to slip on to the back verandah and get a quiet smoke
before he showed himself.

"Don't stay late this evening," was her last recommendation before
she left him.

Then Freya came out on the west verandah with her light, rapid
step.  While going through the doorway she managed to shake down
the folds of the looped-up curtains at the end of the passage so as
to cover Jasper's retreat from the bower.  Directly she appeared
Heemskirk jumped up as if to fly at her.  She paused and he made
her an exaggerated low bow.

It irritated Freya.

"Oh!  It's you, Mr. Heemskirk.  How do you do?"  She spoke in her
usual tone.  Her face was not plainly visible to him in the dusk of
the deep verandah.  He dared not trust himself to speak, his rage
at what he had seen was so great.  And when she added with
serenity:  "Papa will be coming in before long," he called her
horrid names silently, to himself, before he spoke with contorted
lips.

"I have seen your father already.  We had a talk in the sheds.  He
told me some very interesting things.  Oh, very--"

Freya sat down.  She thought:  "He has seen us, for certain."  She
was not ashamed.  What she was afraid of was some foolish or
awkward complication.  But she could not conceive how much her
person had been appropriated by Heemskirk (in his thoughts).  She
tried to be conversational.

"You are coming now from Palembang, I suppose?"

"Eh?  What?  Oh, yes!  I come from Palembang.  Ha, ha, ha!  You
know what your father said?  He said he was afraid you were having
a very dull time of it here."

"And I suppose you are going to cruise in the Moluccas," continued
Freya, who wanted to impart some useful information to Jasper if
possible.  At the same time she was always glad to know that those
two men were a few hundred miles apart when not under her eye.

Heemskirk growled angrily.

"Yes.  Moluccas," glaring in the direction of her shadowy figure.
"Your father thinks it's very quiet for you here.  I tell you what,
Miss Freya.  There isn't such a quiet spot on earth that a woman
can't find an opportunity of making a fool of somebody."

Freya thought:  "I mustn't let him provoke me."  Presently the
Tamil boy, who was Nelson's head servant, came in with the lights.
She addressed him at once with voluble directions where to put the
lamps, told him to bring the tray with the gin and bitters, and to
send Antonia into the house.

"I will have to leave you to yourself, Mr. Heemskirk, for a while,"
she said.

And she went to her room to put on another frock.  She made a quick
change of it because she wished to be on the verandah before her
father and the lieutenant met again.  She relied on herself to
regulate that evening's intercourse between these two.  But
Antonia, still scared and hysterical, exhibited a bruise on her arm
which roused Freya's indignation.

"He jumped on me out of the bush like a tiger," said the girl,
laughing nervously with frightened eyes.

"The brute!" thought Freya.  "He meant to spy on us, then."  She
was enraged, but the recollection of the thick Dutchman in white
trousers wide at the hips and narrow at the ankles, with his
shoulder-straps and black bullet head, glaring at her in the light
of the lamps, was so repulsively comical that she could not help a
smiling grimace.  Then she became anxious.  The absurdities of
three men were forcing this anxiety upon her:  Jasper's
impetuosity, her father's fears, Heemskirk's infatuation.  She was
very tender to the first two, and she made up her mind to display
all her feminine diplomacy.  All this, she said to herself, will be
over and done with before very long now.

Heemskirk on the verandah, lolling in a chair, his legs extended
and his white cap reposing on his stomach, was lashing himself into
a fury of an atrocious character altogether incomprehensible to a
girl like Freya.  His chin was resting on his chest, his eyes gazed
stonily at his shoes.  Freya examined him from behind the curtain.
He didn't stir.  He was ridiculous.  But this absolute stillness
was impressive.  She stole back along the passage to the east
verandah, where Jasper was sitting quietly in the dark, doing what
he was told, like a good boy.

"Psst," she hissed.  He was by her side in a moment.

"Yes.  What is it?" he murmured.

"It's that beetle," she whispered uneasily.  Under the impression
of Heemskirk's sinister immobility she had half a mind to let
Jasper know that they had been seen.  But she was by no means
certain that Heemskirk would tell her father--and at any rate not
that evening.  She concluded rapidly that the safest thing would be
to get Jasper out of the way as soon as possible.

"What has he been doing?" asked Jasper in a calm undertone.

"Oh, nothing!  Nothing.  He sits there looking cross.  But you know
how he's always worrying papa."

"Your father's quite unreasonable," pronounced Jasper judicially.

"I don't know," she said in a doubtful tone.  Something of old
Nelson's dread of the authorities had rubbed off on the girl since
she had to live with it day after day.  "I don't know.  Papa's
afraid of being reduced to beggary, as he says, in his old days.
Look here, kid, you had better clear out to-morrow, first thing."

Jasper had hoped for another afternoon with Freya, an afternoon of
quiet felicity with the girl by his side and his eyes on his brig,
anticipating a blissful future.  His silence was eloquent with
disappointment, and Freya understood it very well.  She, too, was
disappointed.  But it was her business to be sensible.

"We shan't have a moment to ourselves with that beetle creeping
round the house," she argued in a low, hurried voice.  "So what's
the good of your staying?  And he won't go while the brig's here.
You know he won't."

"He ought to be reported for loitering," murmured Jasper with a
vexed little laugh.

"Mind you get under way at daylight," recommended Freya under her
breath.

He detained her after the manner of lovers.  She expostulated
without struggling because it was hard for her to repulse him.  He
whispered into her ear while he put his arms round her.

"Next time we two meet, next time I hold you like this, it shall be
on board.  You and I, in the brig--all the world, all the life--"
And then he flashed out:  "I wonder I can wait!  I feel as if I
must carry you off now, at once.  I could run with you in my hands-
-down the path--without stumbling--without touching the earth--"

She was still.  She listened to the passion in his voice.  She was
saying to herself that if she were to whisper the faintest yes, if
she were but to sigh lightly her consent, he would do it.  He was
capable of doing it--without touching the earth.  She closed her
eyes and smiled in the dark, abandoning herself in a delightful
giddiness, for an instant, to his encircling arm.  But before he
could be tempted to tighten his grasp she was out of it, a foot
away from him and in full possession of herself.

That was the steady Freya.  She was touched by the deep sigh which
floated up to her from the white figure of Jasper, who did not
stir.

"You are a mad kid," she said tremulously.  Then with a change of
tone:  "No one could carry me off.  Not even you.  I am not the
sort of girl that gets carried off."  His white form seemed to
shrink a little before the force of that assertion and she
relented.  "Isn't it enough for you to know that you have--that you
have carried me away?" she added in a tender tone.

He murmured an endearing word, and she continued:

"I've promised you--I've said I would come--and I shall come of my
own free will.  You shall wait for me on board.  I shall get up the
side--by myself, and walk up to you on the deck and say:  'Here I
am, kid.'  And then--and then I shall be carried off.  But it will
be no man who will carry me off--it will be the brig, your brig--
our brig. . . . I love the beauty!"

She heard an inarticulate sound, something like a moan wrung out by
pain or delight, and glided away.  There was that other man on the
other verandah, that dark, surly Dutchman who could make trouble
between Jasper and her father, bring about a quarrel, ugly words,
and perhaps a physical collision.  What a horrible situation!  But,
even putting aside that awful extremity, she shrank from having to
live for some three months with a wretched, tormented, angry,
distracted, absurd man.  And when the day came, the day and the
hour, what should she do if her father tried to detain her by main
force--as was, after all, possible?  Could she actually struggle
with him hand to hand?  But it was of lamentations and entreaties
that she was really afraid.  Could she withstand them?  What an
odious, cruel, ridiculous position would that be!

"But it won't be.  He'll say nothing," she thought as she came out
quickly on the west verandah, and, seeing that Heemskirk did not
move, sat down on a chair near the doorway and kept her eyes on
him.  The outraged lieutenant had not changed his attitude; only
his cap had fallen off his stomach and was lying on the floor.  His
thick black eyebrows were knitted by a frown, while he looked at
her out of the corners of his eyes.  And their sideways glance in
conjunction with the hooked nose, the whole bulky, ungainly,
sprawling person, struck Freya as so comically moody that, inwardly
discomposed as she was, she could not help smiling.  She did her
best to give that smile a conciliatory character.  She did not want
to provoke Heemskirk needlessly.

And the lieutenant, perceiving that smile, was mollified.  It never
entered his head that his outward appearance, a naval officer, in
uniform, could appear ridiculous to that girl of no position--the
daughter of old Nielsen.  The recollection of her arms round
Jasper's neck still irritated and excited him.  "The hussy!" he
thought.  "Smiling--eh?  That's how you are amusing yourself.
Fooling your father finely, aren't you?  You have a taste for that
sort of fun--have you?  Well, we shall see--"  He did not alter his
position, but on his pursed-up lips there also appeared a smile of
surly and ill-omened amusement, while his eyes returned to the
contemplation of his boots.

Freya felt hot with indignation.  She sat radiantly fair in the
lamplight, her strong, well-shaped hands lying one on top of the
other in her lap. . . "Odious creature," she thought.  Her face
coloured with sudden anger.  "You have scared my maid out of her
senses," she said aloud.  "What possessed you?"

He was thinking so deeply of her that the sound of her voice,
pronouncing these unexpected words, startled him extremely.  He
jerked up his head and looked so bewildered that Freya insisted
impatiently:

"I mean Antonia.  You have bruised her arm.  What did you do it
for?"

"Do you want to quarrel with me?" he asked thickly, with a sort of
amazement.  He blinked like an owl.  He was funny.  Freya, like all
women, had a keen sense of the ridiculous in outward appearance.

"Well, no; I don't think I do."  She could not help herself.  She
laughed outright, a clear, nervous laugh in which Heemskirk joined
suddenly with a harsh "Ha, ha, ha!"

Voices and footsteps were heard in the passage, and Jasper, with
old Nelson, came out.  Old Nelson looked at his daughter
approvingly, for he liked the lieutenant to be kept in good humour.
And he also joined sympathetically in the laugh.  "Now, lieutenant,
we shall have some dinner," he said, rubbing his hands cheerily.
Jasper had gone straight to the balustrade.  The sky was full of
stars, and in the blue velvety night the cove below had a denser
blackness, in which the riding-lights of the brig and of the
gunboat glimmered redly, like suspended sparks.  "Next time this
riding-light glimmers down there, I'll be waiting for her on the
quarter-deck to come and say 'Here I am,'" Jasper thought; and his
heart seemed to grow bigger in his chest, dilated by an oppressive
happiness that nearly wrung out a cry from him.  There was no wind.
Not a leaf below him stirred, and even the sea was but a still
uncomplaining shadow.  Far away on the unclouded sky the pale
lightning, the heat-lightning of the tropics, played tremulously
amongst the low stars in short, faint, mysteriously consecutive
flashes, like incomprehensible signals from some distant planet.

The dinner passed off quietly.  Freya sat facing her father, calm
but pale.  Heemskirk affected to talk only to old Nelson.  Jasper's
behaviour was exemplary.  He kept his eyes under control, basking
in the sense of Freya's nearness, as people bask in the sun without
looking up to heaven.  And very soon after dinner was over, mindful
of his instructions, he declared that it was time for him to go on
board his ship.

Heemskirk did not look up.  Ensconced in the rocking-chair, and
puffing at a cheroot, he had the air of meditating surlily over
some odious outbreak.  So at least it seemed to Freya.  Old Nelson
said at once:  "I'll stroll down with you."  He had begun a
professional conversation about the dangers of the New Guinea
coast, and wanted to relate to Jasper some experience of his own
"over there."  Jasper was such a good listener!  Freya made as if
to accompany them, but her father frowned, shook his head, and
nodded significantly towards the immovable Heemskirk blotting out
smoke with half-closed eyes and protruded lips.  The lieutenant
must not be left alone.  Take offence, perhaps.

Freya obeyed these signs.  "Perhaps it is better for me to stay,"
she thought.  Women are not generally prone to review their own
conduct, still less to condemn it.  The embarrassing masculine
absurdities are in the main responsible for its ethics.  But,
looking at Heemskirk, Freya felt regret and even remorse.  His
thick bulk in repose suggested the idea of repletion, but as a
matter of fact he had eaten very little.  He had drunk a great
deal, however.  The fleshy lobes of his unpleasant big ears with
deeply folded rims were crimson.  They quite flamed in the
neighbourhood of the flat, sallow cheeks.  For a considerable time
he did not raise his heavy brown eyelids.  To be at the mercy of
such a creature was humiliating; and Freya, who always ended by
being frank with herself, thought regretfully:  "If only I had been
open with papa from the first!  But then what an impossible life he
would have led me!"  Yes.  Men were absurd in many ways; lovably
like Jasper, impracticably like her father, odiously like that
grotesquely supine creature in the chair.  Was it possible to talk
him over?  Perhaps it was not necessary?  "Oh!  I can't talk to
him," she thought.  And when Heemskirk, still without looking at
her, began resolutely to crush his half-smoked cheroot on the
coffee-tray, she took alarm, glided towards the piano, opened it in
tremendous haste, and struck the keys before she sat down.

In an instant the verandah, the whole carpetless wooden bungalow
raised on piles, became filled with an uproarious, confused
resonance.  But through it all she heard, she felt on the floor the
heavy, prowling footsteps of the lieutenant moving to and fro at
her back.  He was not exactly drunk, but he was sufficiently primed
to make the suggestions of his excited imagination seem perfectly
feasible and even clever; beautifully, unscrupulously clever.
Freya, aware that he had stopped just behind her, went on playing
without turning her head.  She played with spirit, brilliantly, a
fierce piece of music, but when his voice reached her she went cold
all over.  It was the voice, not the words.  The insolent
familiarity of tone dismayed her to such an extent that she could
not understand at first what he was saying.  His utterance was
thick, too.

"I suspected. . . . Of course I suspected something of your little
goings on.  I am not a child.  But from suspecting to seeing--
seeing, you understand--there's an enormous difference.  That sort
of thing. . . . Come!  One isn't made of stone.  And when a man has
been worried by a girl as I have been worried by you, Miss Freya--
sleeping and waking, then, of course. . . . But I am a man of the
world.  It must be dull for you here . . . I say, won't you leave
off this confounded playing . . .?"

This last was the only sentence really which she made out.  She
shook her head negatively, and in desperation put on the loud
pedal, but she could not make the sound of the piano cover his
raised voice.

"Only, I am surprised that you should. . . . An English trading
skipper, a common fellow.  Low, cheeky lot, infesting these
islands.  I would make short work of such trash!  While you have
here a good friend, a gentleman ready to worship at your feet--your
pretty feet--an officer, a man of family.  Strange, isn't it?  But
what of that!  You are fit for a prince."

Freya did not turn her head.  Her face went stiff with horror and
indignation.  This adventure was altogether beyond her conception
of what was possible.  It was not in her character to jump up and
run away.  It seemed to her, too, that if she did move there was no
saying what might happen.  Presently her father would be back, and
then the other would have to leave off.  It was best to ignore--to
ignore.  She went on playing loudly and correctly, as though she
were alone, as if Heemskirk did not exist.  That proceeding
irritated him.

"Come!  You may deceive your father," he bawled angrily, "but I am
not to be made a fool of!  Stop this infernal noise . . . Freya . .
. Hey!  You Scandinavian Goddess of Love!  Stop!  Do you hear?
That's what you are--of love.  But the heathen gods are only devils
in disguise, and that's what you are, too--a deep little devil.
Stop it, I say, or I will lift you off that stool!"

Standing behind her, he devoured her with his eyes, from the golden
crown of her rigidly motionless head to the heels of her shoes, the
line of her shapely shoulders, the curves of her fine figure
swaying a little before the keyboard.  She had on a light dress;
the sleeves stopped short at the elbows in an edging of lace.  A
satin ribbon encircled her waist.  In an access of irresistible,
reckless hopefulness he clapped both his hands on that waist--and
then the irritating music stopped at last.  But, quick as she was
in springing away from the contact (the round music-stool going
over with a crash), Heemskirk's lips, aiming at her neck, landed a
hungry, smacking kiss just under her ear.  A deep silence reigned
for a time.  And then he laughed rather feebly.

He was disconcerted somewhat by her white, still face, the big
light violet eyes resting on him stonily.  She had not uttered a
sound.  She faced him, steadying herself on the corner of the piano
with one extended hand.  The other went on rubbing with mechanical
persistency the place his lips had touched.

"What's the trouble?" he said, offended.  "Startled you?  Look
here:  don't let us have any of that nonsense.  You don't mean to
say a kiss frightens you so much as all that. . . . I know better.
. . . I don't mean to be left out in the cold."

He had been gazing into her face with such strained intentness that
he could no longer see it distinctly.  Everything round him was
rather misty.  He forgot the overturned stool, caught his foot
against it, and lurched forward slightly, saying in an ingratiating
tone:

"I'm not bad fun, really.  You try a few kisses to begin with--"

He said no more, because his head received a terrific concussion,
accompanied by an explosive sound.  Freya had swung her round,
strong arm with such force that the impact of her open palm on his
flat cheek turned him half round.  Uttering a faint, hoarse yell,
the lieutenant clapped both his hands to the left side of his face,
which had taken on suddenly a dusky brick-red tinge.  Freya, very
erect, her violet eyes darkened, her palm still tingling from the
blow, a sort of restrained determined smile showing a tiny gleam of
her white teeth, heard her father's rapid, heavy tread on the path
below the verandah.  Her expression lost its pugnacity and became
sincerely concerned.  She was sorry for her father.  She stooped
quickly to pick up the music-stool, as if anxious to obliterate the
traces. . . . But that was no good.  She had resumed her attitude,
one hand resting lightly on the piano, before old Nelson got up to
the top of the stairs.

Poor father!  How furious he will be--how upset!  And afterwards,
what tremors, what unhappiness!  Why had she not been open with him
from the first?  His round, innocent stare of amazement cut her to
the quick.  But he was not looking at her.  His stare was directed
to Heemskirk, who, with his back to him and with his hands still up
to his face, was hissing curses through his teeth, and (she saw him
in profile) glaring at her balefully with one black, evil eye.

"What's the matter?" asked old Nelson, very much bewildered.

She did not answer him.  She thought of Jasper on the deck of the
brig, gazing up at the lighted bungalow, and she felt frightened.
It was a mercy that one of them at least was on board out of the
way.  She only wished he were a hundred miles off.  And yet she was
not certain that she did.  Had Jasper been mysteriously moved that
moment to reappear on the verandah she would have thrown her
consistency, her firmness, her self-possession, to the winds, and
flown into his arms.

"What is it?  What is it?" insisted the unsuspecting Nelson,
getting quite excited.  "Only this minute you were playing a tune,
and--"

Freya, unable to speak in her apprehension of what was coming (she
was also fascinated by that black, evil, glaring eye), only nodded
slightly at the lieutenant, as much as to say:  "Just look at him!"

"Why, yes!" exclaimed old Nelson.  "I see.  What on earth--"

Meantime he had cautiously approached Heemskirk, who, bursting into
incoherent imprecations, was stamping with both feet where he
stood.  The indignity of the blow, the rage of baffled purpose, the
ridicule of the exposure, and the impossibility of revenge maddened
him to a point when he simply felt he must howl with fury.

"Oh, oh, oh!" he howled, stamping across the verandah as though he
meant to drive his foot through the floor at every step.

"Why, is his face hurt?" asked the astounded old Nelson.  The truth
dawned suddenly upon his innocent mind.  "Dear me!" he cried,
enlightened.  "Get some brandy, quick, Freya. . . . You are subject
to it, lieutenant?  Fiendish, eh?  I know, I know!  Used to go
crazy all of a sudden myself in the time. . . . And the little
bottle of laudanum from the medicine-chest, too, Freya.  Look
sharp. . . . Don't you see he's got a toothache?"

And, indeed, what other explanation could have presented itself to
the guileless old Nelson, beholding this cheek nursed with both
hands, these wild glances, these stampings, this distracted swaying
of the body?  It would have demanded a preternatural acuteness to
hit upon the true cause.  Freya had not moved.  She watched
Heemskirk's savagely inquiring, black stare directed stealthily
upon herself.  "Aha, you would like to be let off!" she said to
herself.  She looked at him unflinchingly, thinking it out.  The
temptation of making an end of it all without further trouble was
irresistible.  She gave an almost imperceptible nod of assent, and
glided away.

"Hurry up that brandy!" old Nelson shouted, as she disappeared in
the passage.

Heemskirk relieved his deeper feelings by a sudden string of curses
in Dutch and English which he sent after her.  He raved to his
heart's content, flinging to and fro the verandah and kicking
chairs out of his way; while Nelson (or Nielsen), whose sympathy
was profoundly stirred by these evidences of agonising pain,
hovered round his dear (and dreaded) lieutenant, fussing like an
old hen.

"Dear me, dear me!  Is it so bad?  I know well what it is.  I used
to frighten my poor wife sometimes.  Do you get it often like this,
lieutenant?"

Heemskirk shouldered him viciously out of his way, with a short,
insane laugh.  But his staggering host took it in good part; a man
beside himself with excruciating toothache is not responsible.

"Go into my room, lieutenant," he suggested urgently.  "Throw
yourself on my bed.  We will get something to ease you in a
minute."

He seized the poor sufferer by the arm and forced him gently
onwards to the very bed, on which Heemskirk, in a renewed access of
rage, flung himself down with such force that he rebounded from the
mattress to the height of quite a foot.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the scared Nelson, and incontinently ran off
to hurry up the brandy and the laudanum, very angry that so little
alacrity was shown in relieving the tortures of his precious guest.
In the end he got these things himself.

Half an hour later he stood in the inner passage of the house,
surprised by faint, spasmodic sounds of a mysterious nature,
between laughter and sobs.  He frowned; then went straight towards
his daughter's room and knocked at the door.

Freya, her glorious fair hair framing her white face and rippling
down a dark-blue dressing-gown, opened it partly.

The light in the room was dim.  Antonia, crouching in a corner,
rocked herself backwards and forwards, uttering feeble moans.  Old
Nelson had not much experience in various kinds of feminine
laughter, but he was certain there had been laughter there.

"Very unfeeling, very unfeeling!" he said, with weighty
displeasure.  "What is there so amusing in a man being in pain?  I
should have thought a woman--a young girl--"

"He was so funny," murmured Freya, whose eyes glistened strangely
in the semi-obscurity of the passage.  "And then, you know, I don't
like him," she added, in an unsteady voice.

"Funny!" repeated old Nelson, amazed at this evidence of
callousness in one so young.  "You don't like him!  Do you mean to
say that, because you don't like him, you--Why, it's simply cruel!
Don't you know it's about the worst sort of pain there is?  Dogs
have been known to go mad with it."

"He certainly seemed to have gone mad," Freya said with an effort,
as if she were struggling with some hidden feeling.

But her father was launched.

"And you know how he is.  He notices everything.  He is a fellow to
take offence for the least little thing--regular Dutchman--and I
want to keep friendly with him.  It's like this, my girl:  if that
rajah of ours were to do something silly--and you know he is a
sulky, rebellious beggar--and the authorities took into their heads
that my influence over him wasn't good, you would find yourself
without a roof over your head--"

She cried:  "What nonsense, father!" in a not very assured tone,
and discovered that he was angry, angry enough to achieve irony;
yes, old Nelson (or Nielsen), irony!  Just a gleam of it.

"Oh, of course, if you have means of your own--a mansion, a
plantation that I know nothing of--"  But he was not capable of
sustained irony.  "I tell you they would bundle me out of here," he
whispered forcibly; "without compensation, of course.  I know these
Dutch.  And the lieutenant's just the fellow to start the trouble
going.  He has the ear of influential officials.  I wouldn't offend
him for anything--for anything--on no consideration whatever. . . .
What did you say?"

It was only an inarticulate exclamation.  If she ever had a half-
formed intention of telling him everything she had given it up now.
It was impossible, both out of regard for his dignity and for the
peace of his poor mind.

"I don't care for him myself very much," old Nelson's subdued
undertone confessed in a sigh.  "He's easier now," he went on,
after a silence.  "I've given him up my bed for the night.  I shall
sleep on my verandah, in the hammock.  No; I can't say I like him
either, but from that to laugh at a man because he's driven crazy
with pain is a long way.  You've surprised me, Freya.  That side of
his face is quite flushed."

Her shoulders shook convulsively under his hands, which he laid on
her paternally.  His straggly, wiry moustache brushed her forehead
in a good-night kiss.  She closed the door, and went away from it
to the middle of the room before she allowed herself a tired-out
sort of laugh, without buoyancy.

"Flushed!  A little flushed!" she repeated to herself.  "I hope so,
indeed!  A little--"

Her eyelashes were wet.  Antonia, in her corner, moaned and
giggled, and it was impossible to tell where the moans ended and
the giggles began.

The mistress and the maid had been somewhat hysterical, for Freya,
on fleeing into her room, had found Antonia there, and had told her
everything.

"I have avenged you, my girl," she exclaimed.

And then they had laughingly cried and cryingly laughed with
admonitions--"Ssh, not so loud!  Be quiet!" on one part, and
interludes of "I am so frightened. . . . He's an evil man," on the
other.

Antonia was very much afraid of Heemskirk.  She was afraid of him
because of his personal appearance:  because of his eyes and his
eyebrows, and his mouth and his nose and his limbs.  Nothing could
be more rational.  And she thought him an evil man, because, to her
eyes, he looked evil.  No ground for an opinion could be sounder.
In the dimness of the room, with only a nightlight burning at the
head of Freya's bed, the camerista crept out of her corner to
crouch at the feet of her mistress, supplicating in whispers:

"There's the brig.  Captain Allen.  Let us run away at once--oh,
let us run away!  I am so frightened.  Let us!  Let us!"

"I!  Run away!" thought Freya to herself, without looking down at
the scared girl.  "Never."

Both the resolute mistress under the mosquito-net and the
frightened maid lying curled up on a mat at the foot of the bed did
not sleep very well that night.  The person that did not sleep at
all was Lieutenant Heemskirk.  He lay on his back staring
vindictively in the darkness.  Inflaming images and humiliating
reflections succeeded each other in his mind, keeping up,
augmenting his anger.  A pretty tale this to get about!  But it
must not be allowed to get about.  The outrage had to be swallowed
in silence.  A pretty affair!  Fooled, led on, and struck by the
girl--and probably fooled by the father, too.  But no.  Nielsen was
but another victim of that shameless hussy, that brazen minx, that
sly, laughing, kissing, lying . . .

"No; he did not deceive me on purpose," thought the tormented
lieutenant.  "But I should like to pay him off, all the same, for
being such an imbecile--"

Well, some day, perhaps.  One thing he was firmly resolved on:  he
had made up his mind to steal early out of the house.  He did not
think he could face the girl without going out of his mind with
fury.

"Fire and perdition!  Ten thousand devils!  I shall choke here
before the morning!" he muttered to himself, lying rigid on his
back on old Nelson's bed, his breast heaving for air.

He arose at daylight and started cautiously to open the door.
Faint sounds in the passage alarmed him, and remaining concealed he
saw Freya coming out.  This unexpected sight deprived him of all
power to move away from the crack of the door.  It was the
narrowest crack possible, but commanding the view of the end of the
verandah.  Freya made for that end hastily to watch the brig
passing the point.  She wore her dark dressing-gown; her feet were
bare, because, having fallen asleep towards the morning, she ran
out headlong in her fear of being too late.  Heemskirk had never
seen her looking like this, with her hair drawn back smoothly to
the shape of her head, and hanging in one heavy, fair tress down
her back, and with that air of extreme youth, intensity, and
eagerness.  And at first he was amazed, and then he gnashed his
teeth.  He could not face her at all.  He muttered a curse, and
kept still behind the door.

With a low, deep-breathed "Ah!" when she first saw the brig already
under way, she reached for Nelson's long glass reposing on brackets
high up the wall.  The wide sleeve of the dressing-gown slipped
back, uncovering her white arm as far as the shoulder.  Heemskirk
gripping the door-handle, as if to crush it, felt like a man just
risen to his feet from a drinking bout.

And Freya knew that he was watching her.  She knew.  She had seen
the door move as she came out of the passage.  She was aware of his
eyes being on her, with scornful bitterness, with triumphant
contempt.

"You are there," she thought, levelling the long glass.  "Oh, well,
look on, then!"

The green islets appeared like black shadows, the ashen sea was
smooth as glass, the clear robe of the colourless dawn, in which
even the brig appeared shadowy, had a hem of light in the east.
Directly Freya had made out Jasper on deck, with his own long glass
directed to the bungalow, she laid hers down and raised both her
beautiful white arms above her head.  In that attitude of supreme
cry she stood still, glowing with the consciousness of Jasper's
adoration going out to her figure held in the field of his glass
away there, and warmed, too, by the feeling of evil passion, the
burning, covetous eyes of the other, fastened on her back.  In the
fervour of her love, in the caprice of her mind, and with that
mysterious knowledge of masculine nature women seem to be born to,
she thought:

"You are looking on--you will--you must!  Then you shall see
something."

She brought both her hands to her lips, then flung them out,
sending a kiss over the sea, as if she wanted to throw her heart
along with it on the deck of the brig.  Her face was rosy, her eyes
shone.  Her repeated, passionate gesture seemed to fling kisses by
the hundred again and again and again, while the slowly ascending
sun brought the glory of colour to the world, turning the islets
green, the sea blue, the brig below her white--dazzlingly white in
the spread of her wings--with the red ensign streaming like a tiny
flame from the peak.

And each time she murmured with a rising inflexion:

"Take this--and this--and this--" till suddenly her arms fell.  She
had seen the ensign dipped in response, and next moment the point
below hid the hull of the brig from her view.  Then she turned away
from the balustrade, and, passing slowly before the door of her
father's room with her eyelids lowered, and an enigmatic expression
on her face, she disappeared behind the curtain.

But instead of going along the passage, she remained concealed and
very still on the other side to watch what would happen.  For some
time the broad, furnished verandah remained empty.  Then the door
of old Nelson's room came open suddenly, and Heemskirk staggered
out.  His hair was rumpled, his eyes bloodshot, his unshaven face
looked very dark.  He gazed wildly about, saw his cap on a table,
snatched it up, and made for the stairs quietly, but with a
strange, tottering gait, like the last effort of waning strength.

Shortly after his head had sunk below the level of the floor, Freya
came out from behind the curtain, with compressed, scheming lips,
and no softness at all in her luminous eyes.  He could not be
allowed to sneak off scot free.  Never--never!  She was excited,
she tingled all over, she had tasted blood!  He must be made to
understand that she had been aware of having been watched; he must
know that he had been seen slinking off shamefully.  But to run to
the front rail and shout after him would have been childish, crude-
-undignified.  And to shout--what?  What word?  What phrase?  No;
it was impossible.  Then how? . . . She frowned, discovered it,
dashed at the piano, which had stood open all night, and made the
rosewood monster growl savagery in an irritated bass.  She struck
chords as if firing shots after that straddling, broad figure in
ample white trousers and a dark uniform jacket with gold shoulder-
straps, and then she pursued him with the same thing she had played
the evening before--a modern, fierce piece of love music which had
been tried more than once against the thunderstorms of the group.
She accentuated its rhythm with triumphant malice, so absorbed in
her purpose that she did not notice the presence of her father,
who, wearing an old threadbare ulster of a check pattern over his
sleeping suit, had run out from the back verandah to inquire the
reason of this untimely performance.  He stared at her.

"What on earth? . . . Freya!"  His voice was nearly drowned by the
piano.  "What's become of the lieutenant?" he shouted.

She looked up at him as if her soul were lost in her music, with
unseeing eyes.

"Gone."

"Wha-a-t? . . . Where?"

She shook her head slightly, and went on playing louder than
before.  Old Nelson's innocently anxious gaze starting from the
open door of his room, explored the whole place high and low, as if
the lieutenant were something small which might have been crawling
on the floor or clinging to a wall.  But a shrill whistle coming
somewhere from below pierced the ample volume of sound rolling out
of the piano in great, vibrating waves.  The lieutenant was down at
the cove, whistling for the boat to come and take him off to his
ship.  And he seemed to be in a terrific hurry, too, for he
whistled again almost directly, waited for a moment, and then sent
out a long, interminable, shrill call as distressful to hear as
though he had shrieked without drawing breath.  Freya ceased
playing suddenly.

"Going on board," said old Nelson, perturbed by the event.  "What
could have made him clear out so early?  Queer chap.  Devilishly
touchy, too!  I shouldn't wonder if it was your conduct last night
that hurt his feelings?  I noticed you, Freya.  You as well as
laughed in his face, while he was suffering agonies from neuralgia.
It isn't the way to get yourself liked.  He's offended with you."

Freya's hands now reposed passive on the keys; she bowed her fair
head, feeling a sudden discontent, a nervous lassitude, as though
she had passed through some exhausting crisis.  Old Nelson (or
Nielsen), looking aggrieved, was revolving matters of policy in his
bald head.

"I think it would be right for me to go on board just to inquire,
some time this morning," he declared fussily.  "Why don't they
bring me my morning tea?  Do you hear, Freya?  You have astonished
me, I must say.  I didn't think a young girl could be so unfeeling.
And the lieutenant thinks himself a friend of ours, too!  What?
No?  Well, he calls himself a friend, and that's something to a
person in my position.  Certainly!  Oh, yes, I must go on board."

"Must you?" murmured Freya listlessly; then added, in her thought:
"Poor man!"



CHAPTER V



In respect of the next seven weeks, all that is necessary to say
is, first, that old Nelson (or Nielsen) failed in paying his
politic call.  The Neptun gunboat of H.M. the King of the
Netherlands, commanded by an outraged and infuriated lieutenant,
left the cove at an unexpectedly early hour.  When Freya's father
came down to the shore, after seeing his precious crop of tobacco
spread out properly in the sun, she was already steaming round the
point.  Old Nelson regretted the circumstance for many days.

"Now, I don't know in what disposition the man went away," he
lamented to his hard daughter.  He was amazed at her hardness.  He
was almost frightened by her indifference.

Next, it must be recorded that the same day the gunboat Neptun,
steering east, passed the brig Bonito becalmed in sight of
Carimata, with her head to the eastward, too.  Her captain, Jasper
Allen, giving himself up consciously to a tender, possessive
reverie of his Freya, did not get out of his long chair on the poop
to look at the Neptun which passed so close that the smoke belching
out suddenly from her short black funnel rolled between the masts
of the Bonito, obscuring for a moment the sunlit whiteness of her
sails, consecrated to the service of love.  Jasper did not even
turn his head for a glance.  But Heemskirk, on the bridge, had
gazed long and earnestly at the brig from the distance, gripping
hard the brass rail in front of him, till, the two ships closing,
he lost all confidence in himself, and retreating to the chartroom,
pulled the door to with a crash.  There, his brows knitted, his
mouth drawn on one side in sardonic meditation, he sat through many
still hours--a sort of Prometheus in the bonds of unholy desire,
having his very vitals torn by the beak and claws of humiliated
passion.

That species of fowl is not to be shooed off as easily as a
chicken.  Fooled, cheated, deceived, led on, outraged, mocked at--
beak and claws!  A sinister bird!  The lieutenant had no mind to
become the talk of the Archipelago, as the naval officer who had
had his face slapped by a girl.  Was it possible that she really
loved that rascally trader?  He tried not to think, but, worse than
thoughts, definite impressions beset him in his retreat.  He saw
her--a vision plain, close to, detailed, plastic, coloured, lighted
up--he saw her hanging round the neck of that fellow.  And he shut
his eyes, only to discover that this was no remedy.  Then a piano
began to play near by, very plainly; and he put his fingers to his
ears with no better effect.  It was not to be borne--not in
solitude.  He bolted out of the chartroom, and talked of
indifferent things somewhat wildly with the officer of the watch on
the bridge, to the mocking accompaniment of a ghostly piano.

The last thing to be recorded is that Lieutenant Heemskirk instead
of pursuing his course towards Ternate, where he was expected, went
out of his way to call at Makassar, where no one was looking for
his arrival.  Once there, he gave certain explanations and laid a
certain proposal before the governor, or some other authority, and
obtained permission to do what he thought fit in these matters.
Thereupon the Neptun, giving up Ternate altogether, steamed north
in view of the mountainous coast of Celebes, and then crossing the
broad straits took up her station on the low coast of virgin
forests, inviolate and mute, in waters phosphorescent at night;
deep blue in daytime with gleaming green patches over the submerged
reefs.  For days the Neptun could be seen moving smoothly up and
down the sombre face of the shore, or hanging about with a watchful
air near the silvery breaks of broad estuaries, under the great
luminous sky never softened, never veiled, and flooding the earth
with the everlasting sunshine of the tropics--that sunshine which,
in its unbroken splendour, oppresses the soul with an inexpressible
melancholy more intimate, more penetrating, more profound than the
grey sadness of the northern mists.


The trading brig Bonito appeared gliding round a sombre forest-clad
point of land on the silvery estuary of a great river.  The breath
of air that gave her motion would not have fluttered the flame of a
torch.  She stole out into the open from behind a veil of
unstirring leaves, mysteriously silent, ghostly white, and solemnly
stealthy in her imperceptible progress; and Jasper, his elbow in
the main rigging, and his head leaning against his hand, thought of
Freya.  Everything in the world reminded him of her.  The beauty of
the loved woman exists in the beauties of Nature.  The swelling
outlines of the hills, the curves of a coast, the free sinuosities
of a river are less suave than the harmonious lines of her body,
and when she moves, gliding lightly, the grace of her progress
suggests the power of occult forces which rule the fascinating
aspects of the visible world.

Dependent on things as all men are, Jasper loved his vessel--the
house of his dreams.  He lent to her something of Freya's soul.
Her deck was the foothold of their love.  The possession of his
brig appeased his passion in a soothing certitude of happiness
already conquered.

The full moon was some way up, perfect and serene, floating in air
as calm and limpid as the glance of Freya's eyes.  There was not a
sound in the brig.

"Here she shall stand, by my side, on evenings like this," he
thought, with rapture.

And it was at that moment, in this peace, in this serenity, under
the full, benign gaze of the moon propitious to lovers, on a sea
without a wrinkle, under a sky without a cloud, as if all Nature
had assumed its most clement mood in a spirit of mockery, that the
gunboat Neptun, detaching herself from the dark coast under which
she had been lying invisible, steamed out to intercept the trading
brig Bonito standing out to sea.

Directly the gunboat had been made out emerging from her ambush,
Schultz, of the fascinating voice, had given signs of strange
agitation.  All that day, ever since leaving the Malay town up the
river, he had shown a haggard face, going about his duties like a
man with something weighing on his mind.  Jasper had noticed it,
but the mate, turning away, as though he had not liked being looked
at, had muttered shamefacedly of a headache and a touch of fever.
He must have had it very badly when, dodging behind his captain he
wondered aloud:  "What can that fellow want with us?" . . . A naked
man standing in a freezing blast and trying not to shiver could not
have spoken with a more harshly uncertain intonation.  But it might
have been fever--a cold fit.

"He wants to make himself disagreeable, simply," said Jasper, with
perfect good humour.  "He has tried it on me before.  However, we
shall soon see."

And, indeed, before long the two vessels lay abreast within easy
hail.  The brig, with her fine lines and her white sails, looked
vaporous and sylph-like in the moonlight.  The gunboat, short,
squat, with her stumpy dark spars naked like dead trees, raised
against the luminous sky of that resplendent night, threw a heavy
shadow on the lane of water between the two ships.

Freya haunted them both like an ubiquitous spirit, and as if she
were the only woman in the world.  Jasper remembered her earnest
recommendation to be guarded and cautious in all his acts and words
while he was away from her.  In this quite unforeseen encounter he
felt on his ear the very breath of these hurried admonitions
customary to the last moment of their partings, heard the half-
jesting final whisper of the "Mind, kid, I'd never forgive you!"
with a quick pressure on his arm, which he answered by a quiet,
confident smile.  Heemskirk was haunted in another fashion.  There
were no whispers in it; it was more like visions.  He saw that girl
hanging round the neck of a low vagabond--that vagabond, the
vagabond who had just answered his hail.  He saw her stealing bare-
footed across a verandah with great, clear, wide-open, eager eyes
to look at a brig--that brig.  If she had shrieked, scolded, called
names! . . . But she had simply triumphed over him.  That was all.
Led on (he firmly believed it), fooled, deceived, outraged, struck,
mocked at. . . . Beak and claws!  The two men, so differently
haunted by Freya of the Seven Isles, were not equally matched.

In the intense stillness, as of sleep, which had fallen upon the
two vessels, in a world that itself seemed but a delicate dream, a
boat pulled by Javanese sailors crossing the dark lane of water
came alongside the brig.  The white warrant officer in her, perhaps
the gunner, climbed aboard.  He was a short man, with a rotund
stomach and a wheezy voice.  His immovable fat face looked lifeless
in the moonlight, and he walked with his thick arms hanging away
from his body as though he had been stuffed.  His cunning little
eyes glittered like bits of mica.  He conveyed to Jasper, in broken
English, a request to come on board the Neptun.

Jasper had not expected anything so unusual.  But after a short
reflection he decided to show neither annoyance, nor even surprise.
The river from which he had come had been politically disturbed for
a couple of years, and he was aware that his visits there were
looked upon with some suspicion.  But he did not mind much the
displeasure of the authorities, so terrifying to old Nelson.  He
prepared to leave the brig, and Schultz followed him to the rail as
if to say something, but in the end stood by in silence.  Jasper
getting over the side, noticed his ghastly face.  The eyes of the
man who had found salvation in the brig from the effects of his
peculiar psychology looked at him with a dumb, beseeching
expression.

"What's the matter?" Jasper asked.

"I wonder how this will end?" said he of the beautiful voice, which
had even fascinated the steady Freya herself.  But where was its
charming timbre now?  These words had sounded like a raven's croak.

"You are ill," said Jasper positively.

"I wish I were dead!" was the startling statement uttered by
Schultz talking to himself in the extremity of some mysterious
trouble.  Jasper gave him a keen glance, but this was not the time
to investigate the morbid outbreak of a feverish man.  He did not
look as though he were actually delirious, and that for the moment
must suffice.  Schultz made a dart forward.

"That fellow means harm!" he said desperately.  "He means harm to
you, Captain Allen.  I feel it, and I--"

He choked with inexplicable emotion.

"All right, Schultz.  I won't give him an opening."  Jasper cut him
short and swung himself into the boat.

On board the Neptun Heemskirk, standing straddle-legs in the flood
of moonlight, his inky shadow falling right across the quarter-
deck, made no sign at his approach, but secretly he felt something
like the heave of the sea in his chest at the sight of that man.
Jasper waited before him in silence.

Brought face to face in direct personal contact, they fell at once
into the manner of their casual meetings in old Nelson's bungalow.
They ignored each other's existence--Heemskirk moodily; Jasper,
with a perfectly colourless quietness.

"What's going on in that river you've just come out of?" asked the
lieutenant straight away.

"I know nothing of the troubles, if you mean that," Jasper
answered.  "I've landed there half a cargo of rice, for which I got
nothing in exchange, and went away.  There's no trade there now,
but they would have been starving in another week--if I hadn't
turned up."

"Meddling!  English meddling!  And suppose the rascals don't
deserve anything better than to starve, eh?"

"There are women and children there, you know," observed Jasper, in
his even tone.

"Oh, yes!  When an Englishman talks of women and children, you may
be sure there's something fishy about the business.  Your doings
will have to be investigated."

They spoke in turn, as though they had been disembodied spirits--
mere voices in empty air; for they looked at each other as if there
had been nothing there, or, at most, with as much recognition as
one gives to an inanimate object, and no more.  But now a silence
fell.  Heemskirk had thought, all at once:  "She will tell him all
about it.  She will tell him while she hangs round his neck
laughing."  And the sudden desire to annihilate Jasper on the spot
almost deprived him of his senses by its vehemence.  He lost the
power of speech, of vision.  For a moment he absolutely couldn't
see Jasper.  But he heard him inquiring, as of the world at large:

"Am I, then, to conclude that the brig is detained?"

Heemskirk made a recovery in a flush of malignant satisfaction.

"She is.  I am going to take her to Makassar in tow."

"The courts will have to decide on the legality of this," said
Jasper, aware that the matter was becoming serious, but with
assumed indifference.

"Oh, yes, the courts!  Certainly.  And as to you, I shall keep you
on board here."

Jasper's dismay at being parted from his ship was betrayed by a
stony immobility.  It lasted but an instant.  Then he turned away
and hailed the brig.  Mr. Schultz answered:

"Yes, sir."

"Get ready to receive a tow-rope from the gunboat!  We are going to
be taken to Makassar."

"Good God!  What's that for, sir?" came an anxious cry faintly.

"Kindness, I suppose," Jasper, ironical, shouted with great
deliberation.  "We might have been--becalmed in here--for days.
And hospitality.  I am invited to stay--on board here."

The answer to this information was a loud ejaculation of distress.
Jasper thought anxiously:  "Why, the fellow's nerve's gone to
pieces;" and with an awkward uneasiness of a new sort, looked
intently at the brig.  The thought that he was parted from her--for
the first time since they came together--shook the apparently
careless fortitude of his character to its very foundations, which
were deep.  All that time neither Heemskirk nor even his inky
shadow had stirred in the least.

"I am going to send a boat's crew and an officer on board your
vessel," he announced to no one in particular.  Jasper, tearing
himself away from the absorbed contemplation of the brig, turned
round, and, without passion, almost without expression in his
voice, entered his protest against the whole of the proceedings.
What he was thinking of was the delay.  He counted the days.
Makassar was actually on his way; and to be towed there really
saved time.  On the other hand, there would be some vexing
formalities to go through.  But the thing was too absurd.  "The
beetle's gone mad," he thought.  "I'll be released at once.  And if
not, Mesman must enter into a bond for me."  Mesman was a Dutch
merchant with whom Jasper had had many dealings, a considerable
person in Makassar.

"You protest?  H'm!" Heemskirk muttered, and for a little longer
remained motionless, his legs planted well apart, and his head
lowered as though he were studying his own comical, deeply-split
shadow.  Then he made a sign to the rotund gunner, who had kept at
hand, motionless, like a vilely-stuffed specimen of a fat man, with
a lifeless face and glittering little eyes.  The fellow approached,
and stood at attention.

"You will board the brig with a boat's crew!"

"Ya, mynherr!"

"You will have one of your men to steer her all the time," went on
Heemskirk, giving his orders in English, apparently for Jasper's
edification.  "You hear?"

"Ya, mynherr."

"You will remain on deck and in charge all the time."

"Ya, mynherr."

Jasper felt as if, together with the command of the brig, his very
heart were being taken out of his breast.  Heemskirk asked, with a
change of tone:

"What weapons have you on board?"

At one time all the ships trading in the China Seas had a licence
to carry a certain quantity of firearms for purposes of defence.
Jasper answered:

"Eighteen rifles with their bayonets, which were on board when I
bought her, four years ago.  They have been declared."

"Where are they kept?"

"Fore-cabin.  Mate has the key."

"You will take possession of them," said Heemskirk to the gunner.

"Ya, mynherr."

"What is this for?  What do you mean to imply?" cried out Jasper;
then bit his lip.  "It's monstrous!" he muttered.

Heemskirk raised for a moment a heavy, as if suffering, glance.

"You may go," he said to his gunner.  The fat man saluted, and
departed.

During the next thirty hours the steady towing was interrupted
once.  At a signal from the brig, made by waving a flag on the
forecastle, the gunboat was stopped.  The badly-stuffed specimen of
a warrant-officer, getting into his boat, arrived on board the
Neptun and hurried straight into his commander's cabin, his
excitement at something he had to communicate being betrayed by the
blinking of his small eyes.  These two were closeted together for
some time, while Jasper at the taffrail tried to make out if
anything out of the common had occurred on board the brig.

But nothing seemed to be amiss on board.  However, he kept a look-
out for the gunner; and, though he had avoided speaking to anybody
since he had finished with Heemskirk, he stopped that man when he
came out on deck again to ask how his mate was.

"He was feeling not very well when I left," he explained.

The fat warrant-officer, holding himself as though the effort of
carrying his big stomach in front of him demanded a rigid carriage,
understood with difficulty.  Not a single one of his features
showed the slightest animation, but his little eyes blinked rapidly
at last.

"Oh, ya!  The mate.  Ya, ya!  He is very well.  But, mein Gott, he
is one very funny man!"

Jasper could get no explanation of that remark, because the
Dutchman got into the boat hurriedly, and went back on board the
brig.  But he consoled himself with the thought that very soon all
this unpleasant and rather absurd experience would be over.  The
roadstead of Makassar was in sight already.  Heemskirk passed by
him going on the bridge.  For the first time the lieutenant looked
at Jasper with marked intention; and the strange roll of his eyes
was so funny--it had been long agreed by Jasper and Freya that the
lieutenant was funny--so ecstatically gratified, as though he were
rolling a tasty morsel on his tongue, that Jasper could not help a
broad smile.  And then he turned to his brig again.

To see her, his cherished possession, animated by something of his
Freya's soul, the only foothold of two lives on the wide earth, the
security of his passion, the companion of adventure, the power to
snatch the calm, adorable Freya to his breast, and carry her off to
the end of the world; to see this beautiful thing embodying
worthily his pride and his love, to see her captive at the end of a
tow-rope was not indeed a pleasant experience.  It had something
nightmarish in it, as, for instance, the dream of a wild sea-bird
loaded with chains.

Yet what else could he want to look at?  Her beauty would sometimes
come to his heart with the force of a spell, so that he would
forget where he was.  And, besides, that sense of superiority which
the certitude of being loved gives to a young man, that illusion of
being set above the Fates by a tender look in a woman's eyes,
helped him, the first shock over, to go through these experiences
with an amused self-confidence.  For what evil could touch the
elect of Freya?

It was now afternoon, the sun being behind the two vessels as they
headed for the harbour.  "The beetle's little joke shall soon be
over," thought Jasper, without any great animosity.  As a seaman
well acquainted with that part of the world, a casual glance was
enough to tell him what was being done.  "Hallo," he thought, "he
is going through Spermonde Passage.  We shall be rounding Tamissa
reef presently."  And again he returned to the contemplation of his
brig, that main-stay of his material and emotional existence which
would be soon in his hands again.  On a sea, calm like a millpond,
a heavy smooth ripple undulated and streamed away from her bows,
for the powerful Neptun was towing at great speed, as if for a
wager.  The Dutch gunner appeared on the forecastle of the Bonito,
and with him a couple of men.  They stood looking at the coast, and
Jasper lost himself in a loverlike trance.

The deep-toned blast of the gunboat's steam-whistle made him
shudder by its unexpectedness.  Slowly he looked about.  Swift as
lightning he leaped from where he stood, bounding forward along the
deck.

"You will be on Tamissa reef!" he yelled.

High up on the bridge Heemskirk looked back over his shoulder
heavily; two seamen were spinning the wheel round, and the Neptun
was already swinging rapidly away from the edge of the pale water
over the danger.  Ha! just in time.  Jasper turned about instantly
to watch his brig; and, even before he realised that--in obedience,
it appears, to Heemskirk's orders given beforehand to the gunner--
the tow-rope had been let go at the blast of the whistle, before he
had time to cry out or to move a limb, he saw her cast adrift and
shooting across the gunboat's stern with the impetus of her speed.
He followed her fine, gliding form with eyes growing big with
incredulity, wild with horror.  The cries on board of her came to
him only as a dreadful and confused murmur through the loud
thumping of blood in his ears, while she held on.  She ran upright
in a terrible display of her gift of speed, with an incomparable
air of life and grace.  She ran on till the smooth level of water
in front of her bows seemed to sink down suddenly as if sucked
away; and, with a strange, violent tremor of her mast-heads she
stopped, inclined her lofty spars a little, and lay still.  She lay
still on the reef, while the Neptun, fetching a wide circle,
continued at full speed up Spermonde Passage, heading for the town.
She lay still, perfectly still, with something ill-omened and
unnatural in her attitude.  In an instant the subtle melancholy of
things touched by decay had fallen on her in the sunshine; she was
but a speck in the brilliant emptiness of space, already lonely,
already desolate.

"Hold him!" yelled a voice from the bridge.

Jasper had started to run to his brig with a headlong impulse, as a
man dashes forward to pull away with his hands a living, breathing,
loved creature from the brink of destruction.  "Hold him!  Stick to
him!" vociferated the lieutenant at the top of the bridge-ladder,
while Jasper struggled madly without a word, only his head emerging
from the heaving crowd of the Neptun's seamen, who had flung
themselves upon him obediently.  "Hold--I would not have that
fellow drown himself for anything now!"

Jasper ceased struggling.

One by one they let go of him; they fell back gradually farther and
farther, in attentive silence, leaving him standing unsupported in
a widened, clear space, as if to give him plenty of room to fall
after the struggle.  He did not even sway perceptibly.  Half an
hour later, when the Neptun anchored in front of the town, he had
not stirred yet, had moved neither head nor limb as much as a
hair's breadth.  Directly the rumble of the gunboat's cable had
ceased, Heemskirk came down heavily from the bridge.

"Call a sampan" he said, in a gloomy tone, as he passed the sentry
at the gangway, and then moved on slowly towards the spot where
Jasper, the object of many awed glances, stood looking at the deck,
as if lost in a brown study.  Heemskirk came up close, and stared
at him thoughtfully, with his fingers over his lips.  Here he was,
the favoured vagabond, the only man to whom that infernal girl was
likely to tell the story.  But he would not find it funny.  The
story how Lieutenant Heemskirk--No, he would not laugh at it.  He
looked as though he would never laugh at anything in his life.

Suddenly Jasper looked up.  His eyes, without any other expression
but bewilderment, met those of Heemskirk, observant and sombre.

"Gone on the reef!" he said, in a low, astounded tone.  "On-the-
reef!" he repeated still lower, and as if attending inwardly to the
birth of some awful and amazing sensation.

"On the very top of high-water, spring tides," Heemskirk struck in,
with a vindictive, exulting violence which flashed and expired.  He
paused, as if weary, fixing upon Jasper his arrogant eyes, over
which secret disenchantment, the unavoidable shadow of all passion,
seemed to pass like a saddening cloud.  "On the very top," he
repeated, rousing himself in fierce reaction to snatch his laced
cap off his head with a horizontal, derisive flourish towards the
gangway.  "And now you may go ashore to the courts, you damned
Englishman!" he said.



CHAPTER VI



The affair of the brig Bonito was bound to cause a sensation in
Makassar, the prettiest, and perhaps the cleanest-looking of all
the towns in the Islands; which however knows few occasions for
excitement.  The "front," with its special population, was soon
aware that something had happened.  A steamer towing a sailing
vessel had been observed far out to sea for some time, and when the
steamer came in alone, leaving the other outside, attention was
aroused.  Why was that?  Her masts only could be seen--with furled
sails--remaining in the same place to the southward.  And soon the
rumour ran all along the crowded seashore street that there was a
ship on Tamissa reef.  That crowd interpreted the appearance
correctly.  Its cause was beyond their penetration, for who could
associate a girl nine hundred miles away with the stranding of a
ship on Tamissa reef, or look for the remote filiation of that
event in the psychology of at least three people, even if one of
them, Lieutenant Heemskirk, was at that very moment passing amongst
them on his way to make his verbal report?

No; the minds on the "front" were not competent for that sort of
investigation, but many hands there--brown hands, yellow hands,
white hands--were raised to shade the eyes gazing out to sea.  The
rumour spread quickly.  Chinese shopkeepers came to their doors,
more than one white merchant, even, rose from his desk to go to the
window.  After all, a ship on Tamissa was not an everyday
occurrence.  And presently the rumour took a more definite shape.
An English trader--detained on suspicion at sea by the Neptun--
Heemskirk was towing him in to test a case, and by some strange
accident--

Later on the name came out.  "The Bonito--what!  Impossible!  Yes--
yes, the Bonito.  Look!  You can see from here; only two masts.
It's a brig.  Didn't think that man would ever let himself be
caught.  Heemskirk's pretty smart, too.  They say she's fitted out
in her cabin like a gentleman's yacht.  That Allen is a sort of
gentleman too.  An extravagant beggar."

A young man entered smartly Messrs. Mesman Brothers' office on the
"front," bubbling with some further information.

"Oh, yes; that's the Bonito for certain!  But you don't know the
story I've heard just now.  The fellow must have been feeding that
river with firearms for the last year or two.  Well, it seems he
has grown so reckless from long impunity that he has actually dared
to sell the very ship's rifles this time.  It's a fact.  The rifles
are not on board.  What impudence!  Only, he didn't know that there
was one of our warships on the coast.  But those Englishmen are so
impudent that perhaps he thought that nothing would be done to him
for it.  Our courts do let off these fellows too often, on some
miserable excuse or other.  But, at any rate, there's an end of the
famous Bonito.  I have just heard in the harbour-office that she
must have gone on at the very top of high-water; and she is in
ballast, too.  No human power, they think, can move her from where
she is.  I only hope it is so.  It would be fine to have the
notorious Bonito stuck up there as a warning to others."

Mr. J. Mesman, a colonial-born Dutchman, a kind, paternal old
fellow, with a clean-shaven, quiet, handsome fade, and a head of
fine iron-grey hair curling a little on his collar, did not say a
word in defence of Jasper and the Bonito.  He rose from his arm-
chair suddenly.  His face was visibly troubled.  It had so happened
that once, from a business talk of ways and means, island trade,
money matters, and so on, Jasper had been led to open himself to
him on the subject of Freya; and the excellent man, who had known
old Nelson years before and even remembered something of Freya, was
much astonished and amused by the unfolding of the tale.

"Well, well, well!  Nelson!  Yes; of course.  A very honest sort of
man.  And a little child with very fair hair.  Oh, yes!  I have a
distinct recollection.  And so she has grown into such a fine girl,
so very determined, so very--"  And he laughed almost boisterously.
"Mind, when you have happily eloped with your future wife, Captain
Allen, you must come along this way, and we shall welcome her here.
A little fair-headed child!  I remember.  I remember."

It was that knowledge which had brought trouble to his face at the
first news of the wreck.  He took up his hat.

"Where are you going, Mr. Mesman?"

"I am going to look for Allen.  I think he must be ashore.  Does
anybody know?"

No one of those present knew.  And Mr. Mesman went out on the
"front" to make inquiries.

The other part of the town, the part near the church and the fort,
got its information in another way.  The first thing disclosed to
it was Jasper himself, walking rapidly, as though he were pursued.
And, as a matter of fact, a Chinaman, obviously a sampan man, was
following him at the same headlong pace.  Suddenly, while passing
Orange House, Jasper swerved and went in, or, rather, rushed in,
startling Gomez, the hotel clerk, very much.  But a Chinaman
beginning to make an unseemly noise at the door claimed the
immediate attention of Gomez.  His grievance was that the white man
whom he had brought on shore from the gunboat had not paid him his
boat-fare.  He had pursued him so far, asking for it all the way.
But the white man had taken no notice whatever of his just claim.
Gomez satisfied the coolie with a few coppers, and then went to
look for Jasper, whom he knew very well.  He found him standing
stiffly by a little round table.  At the other end of the verandah
a few men sitting there had stopped talking, and were looking at
him in silence.  Two billiard-players, with cues in their hands,
had come to the door of the billiard-room and stared, too.

On Gomez coming up to him, Jasper raised one hand to point at his
own throat.  Gomez noted the somewhat soiled state of his white
clothes, then took one look at his face, and fled away to order the
drink for which Jasper seemed to be asking.

Where he wanted to go--or what purpose--where he, perhaps, only
imagined himself to be going, when a sudden impulse or the sight of
a familiar place had made him turn into Orange House--it is
impossible to say.  He was steadying himself lightly with the tips
of his fingers on the little table.  There were on that verandah
two men whom he knew well personally, but his gaze roaming
incessantly as though he were looking for a way of escape, passed
and repassed over them without a sign of recognition.  They, on
their side, looking at him, doubted the evidence of their own eyes.
It was not that his face was distorted.  On the contrary, it was
still, it was set.  But its expression, somehow, was
unrecognisable.  Can that be him? they wondered with awe.

In his head there was a wild chaos of clear thoughts.  Perfectly
clear.  It was this clearness which was so terrible in conjunction
with the utter inability to lay hold of any single one of them all.
He was saying to himself, or to them:  "Steady, steady."  A China
boy appeared before him with a glass on a tray.  He poured the
drink down his throat, and rushed out.  His disappearance removed
the spell of wonder from the beholders.  One of the men jumped up
and moved quickly to that side of the verandah from which almost
the whole of the roadstead could be seen.  At the very moment when
Jasper, issuing from the door of the Orange House, was passing
under him in the street below, he cried to the others excitedly:

"That was Allen right enough!  But where is his brig?"

Jasper heard these words with extraordinary loudness.  The heavens
rang with them, as if calling him to account; for those were the
very words Freya would have to use.  It was an annihilating
question; it struck his consciousness like a thunderbolt and
brought a sudden night upon the chaos of his thoughts even as he
walked.  He did not check his pace.  He went on in the darkness for
another three strides, and then fell.

The good Mesman had to push on as far as the hospital before he
found him.  The doctor there talked of a slight heatstroke.
Nothing very much.  Out in three days. . . . It must be admitted
that the doctor was right.  In three days, Jasper Allen came out of
the hospital and became visible to the town--very visible indeed--
and remained so for quite a long time; long enough to become almost
one of the sights of the place; long enough to become disregarded
at last; long enough for the tale of his haunting visibility to be
remembered in the islands to this day.

The talk on the "front" and Jasper's appearance in the Orange House
stand at the beginning of the famous Bonito case, and give a view
of its two aspects--the practical and the psychological.  The case
for the courts and the case for compassion; that last terribly
evident and yet obscure.

It has, you must understand, remained obscure even for that friend
of mine who wrote me the letter mentioned in the very first lines
of this narrative.  He was one of those in Mr. Mesman's office, and
accompanied that gentleman in his search for Jasper.  His letter
described to me the two aspects and some of the episodes of the
case.  Heemskirk's attitude was that of deep thankfulness for not
having lost his own ship, and that was all.  Haze over the land was
his explanation of having got so close to Tamissa reef.  He saved
his ship, and for the rest he did not care.  As to the fat gunner,
he deposed simply that he thought at the time that he was acting
for the best by letting go the tow-rope, but admitted that he was
greatly confused by the suddenness of the emergency.

As a matter of fact, he had acted on very precise instructions from
Heemskirk, to whom through several years' service together in the
East he had become a sort of devoted henchman.  What was most
amazing in the detention of the Bonito was his story how,
proceeding to take possession of the firearms as ordered, he
discovered that there were no firearms on board.  All he found in
the fore-cabin was an empty rack for the proper number of eighteen
rifles, but of the rifles themselves never a single one anywhere in
the ship.  The mate of the brig, who looked rather ill and behaved
excitedly, as though he were perhaps a lunatic, wanted him to
believe that Captain Allen knew nothing of this; that it was he,
the mate, who had recently sold these rifles in the dead of night
to a certain person up the river.  In proof of this story he
produced a bag of silver dollars and pressed it on his, the
gunner's, acceptance.  Then, suddenly flinging it down on the deck,
he beat his own head with both his fists and started heaping
shocking curses upon his own soul for an ungrateful wretch not fit
to live.

All this the gunner reported at once to his commanding officer.

What Heemskirk intended by taking upon himself to detain the Bonito
it is difficult to say, except that he meant to bring some trouble
into the life of the man favoured by Freya.  He had been looking at
Jasper with a desire to strike that man of kisses and embraces to
the earth.  The question was:  How could he do it without giving
himself away?  But the report of the gunner created a serious case
enough.  Yet Allen had friends--and who could tell whether he
wouldn't somehow succeed in wriggling out of it?  The idea of
simply towing the brig so much compromised on to the reef came to
him while he was listening to the fat gunner in his cabin.  There
was but little risk of being disapproved now.  And it should be
made to appear an accident.

Going out on deck he had gloated upon his unconscious victim with
such a sinister roll of his eyes, such a queerly pursed mouth, that
Jasper could not help smiling.  And the lieutenant had gone on the
bridge, saying to himself:

"You wait!  I shall spoil the taste of those sweet kisses for you.
When you hear of Lieutenant Heemskirk in the future that name won't
bring a smile on your lips, I swear.  You are delivered into my
hands."

And this possibility had come about without any planning, one could
almost say naturally, as if events had mysteriously shaped
themselves to fit the purposes of a dark passion.  The most astute
scheming could not have served Heemskirk better.  It was given to
him to taste a transcendental, an incredible perfection of
vengeance; to strike a deadly blow into that hated person's heart,
and to watch him afterwards walking about with the dagger in his
breast.

For that is what the state of Jasper amounted to.  He moved, acted,
weary-eyed, keen-faced, lank and restless, with brusque movements
and fierce gestures; he talked incessantly in a frenzied and
fatigued voice, but within himself he knew that nothing would ever
give him back the brig, just as nothing can heal a pierced heart.
His soul, kept quiet in the stress of love by the unflinching
Freya's influence, was like a still but overwound string.  The
shock had started it vibrating, and the string had snapped.  He had
waited for two years in a perfectly intoxicated confidence for a
day that now would never come to a man disarmed for life by the
loss of the brig, and, it seemed to him, made unfit for love to
which he had no foothold to offer.

Day after day he would traverse the length of the town, follow the
coast, and, reaching the point of land opposite that part of the
reef on which his brig lay stranded, look steadily across the water
at her beloved form, once the home of an exulting hope, and now, in
her inclined, desolated immobility, towering above the lonely sea-
horizon, a symbol of despair.

The crew had left her in due course in her own boats which directly
they reached the town were sequestrated by the harbour authorities.
The vessel, too, was sequestrated pending proceedings; but these
same authorities did not take the trouble to set a guard on board.
For, indeed, what could move her from there?  Nothing, unless a
miracle; nothing, unless Jasper's eyes, fastened on her tensely for
hours together, as though he hoped by the mere power of vision to
draw her to his breast.

All this story, read in my friend's very chatty letter, dismayed me
not a little.  But it was really appalling to read his relation of
how Schultz, the mate, went about everywhere affirming with
desperate pertinacity that it was he alone who had sold the rifles.
"I stole them," he protested.  Of course, no one would believe him.
My friend himself did not believe him, though he, of course,
admired this self-sacrifice.  But a good many people thought it was
going too far to make oneself out a thief for the sake of a friend.
Only, it was such an obvious lie, too, that it did not matter,
perhaps.

I, who, in view of Schultz's psychology, knew how true that must
be, admit that I was appalled.  So this was how a perfidious
destiny took advantage of a generous impulse!  And I felt as though
I were an accomplice in this perfidy, since I did to a certain
extent encourage Jasper.  Yet I had warned him as well.

"The man seemed to have gone crazy on this point," wrote my friend.
"He went to Mesman with his story.  He says that some rascally
white man living amongst the natives up that river made him drunk
with some gin one evening, and then jeered at him for never having
any money.  Then he, protesting to us that he was an honest man and
must be believed, described himself as being a thief whenever he
took a drop too much, and told us that he went on board and passed
the rifles one by one without the slightest compunction to a canoe
which came alongside that night, receiving ten dollars apiece for
them.

"Next day he was ill with shame and grief, but had not the courage
to confess his lapse to his benefactor.  When the gunboat stopped
the brig he felt ready to die with the apprehension of the
consequences, and would have died happily, if he could have been
able to bring the rifles back by the sacrifice of his life.  He
said nothing to Jasper, hoping that the brig would be released
presently.  When it turned out otherwise and his captain was
detained on board the gunboat, he was ready to commit suicide from
despair; only he thought it his duty to live in order to let the
truth be known.  'I am an honest man!  I am an honest man!' he
repeated, in a voice that brought tears to our eyes.  'You must
believe me when I tell you that I am a thief--a vile, low, cunning,
sneaking thief as soon as I've had a glass or two.  Take me
somewhere where I may tell the truth on oath.'

"When we had at last convinced him that his story could be of no
use to Jasper--for what Dutch court, having once got hold of an
English trader, would accept such an explanation; and, indeed, how,
when, where could one hope to find proofs of such a tale?--he made
as if to tear his hair in handfuls, but, calming down, said:
'Good-bye, then, gentlemen,' and went out of the room so crushed
that he seemed hardly able to put one foot before the other.  That
very night he committed suicide by cutting his throat in the house
of a half-caste with whom he had been lodging since he came ashore
from the wreck."

That throat, I thought with a shudder, which could produce the
tender, persuasive, manly, but fascinating voice which had aroused
Jasper's ready compassion and had secured Freya's sympathy!  Who
could ever have supposed such an end in store for the impossible,
gentle Schultz, with his idiosyncrasy of naive pilfering, so
absurdly straightforward that, even in the people who had suffered
from it, it aroused nothing more than a sort of amused
exasperation?  He was really impossible.  His lot evidently should
have been a half-starved, mysterious, but by no means tragic
existence as a mild-eyed, inoffensive beachcomber on the fringe of
native life.  There are occasions when the irony of fate, which
some people profess to discover in the working out of our lives,
wears the aspect of crude and savage jesting.

I shook my head over the manes of Schultz, and went on with my
friend's letter.  It told me how the brig on the reef, looted by
the natives from the coast villages, acquired gradually the
lamentable aspect, the grey ghastliness of a wreck; while Jasper,
fading daily into a mere shadow of a man, strode brusquely all
along the "front" with horribly lively eyes and a faint, fixed
smile on his lips, to spend the day on a lonely spit of sand
looking eagerly at her, as though he had expected some shape on
board to rise up and make some sort of sign to him over the
decaying bulwarks.  The Mesmans were taking care of him as far as
it was possible.  The Bonito case had been referred to Batavia,
where no doubt it would fade away in a fog of official papers. . .
. It was heartrending to read all this.  That active and zealous
officer, Lieutenant Heemskirk, his air of sullen, darkly-pained
self-importance not lightened by the approval of his action
conveyed to him unofficially, had gone on to take up his station in
the Moluccas. . . .

Then, at the end of the bulky, kindly-meant epistle, dealing with
the island news of half a year at least, my friend wrote:  "A
couple of months ago old Nelson turned up here, arriving by the
mail-boat from Java.  Came to see Mesman, it seems.  A rather
mysterious visit, and extraordinarily short, after coming all that
way.  He stayed just four days at the Orange House, with apparently
nothing in particular to do, and then caught the south-going
steamer for the Straits.  I remember people saying at one time that
Allen was rather sweet on old Nelson's daughter, the girl that was
brought up by Mrs. Harley and then went to live with him at the
Seven Isles group.  Surely you remember old Nelson--"

Remember old Nelson!  Rather!

The letter went on to inform me further that old Nelson, at least,
remembered me, since some time after his flying visit to Makassar
he had written to the Mesmans asking for my address in London.

That old Nelson (or Nielsen), the note of whose personality was a
profound, echoless irresponsiveness to everything around him,
should wish to write, or find anything to write about to anybody,
was in itself a cause for no small wonder.  And to me, of all
people!  I waited with uneasy impatience for whatever disclosure
could come from that naturally benighted intelligence, but my
impatience had time to wear out before my eyes beheld old Nelson's
trembling, painfully-formed handwriting, senile and childish at the
same time, on an envelope bearing a penny stamp and the postal mark
of the Notting Hill office.  I delayed opening it in order to pay
the tribute of astonishment due to the event by flinging my hands
above my head.  So he had come home to England, to be definitely
Nelson; or else was on his way home to Denmark, where he would
revert for ever to his original Nielsen!  But old Nelson (or
Nielsen) out of the tropics seemed unthinkable.  And yet he was
there, asking me to call.

His address was at a boarding-house in one of those Bayswater
squares, once of leisure, which nowadays are reduced to earning
their living.  Somebody had recommended him there.  I started to
call on him on one of those January days in London, one of those
wintry days composed of the four devilish elements, cold, wet, mud,
and grime, combined with a particular stickiness of atmosphere that
clings like an unclean garment to one's very soul.  Yet on
approaching his abode I saw, like a flicker far behind the soiled
veil of the four elements, the wearisome and splendid glitter of a
blue sea with the Seven Islets like minute specks swimming in my
eye, the high red roof of the bungalow crowning the very smallest
of them all.  This visual reminiscence was profoundly disturbing.
I knocked at the door with a faltering hand.

Old Nelson (or Nielsen) got up from the table at which he was
sitting with a shabby pocket-book full of papers before him.  He
took off his spectacles before shaking hands.  For a moment neither
of us said a word; then, noticing me looking round somewhat
expectantly, he murmured some words, of which I caught only
"daughter" and "Hong Kong," cast his eyes down, and sighed.

His moustache, sticking all ways out, as of yore, was quite white
now.  His old cheeks were softly rounded, with some colour in them;
strangely enough, that something childlike always noticeable in the
general contour of his physiognomy had become much more marked.
Like his handwriting, he looked childish and senile.  He showed his
age most in his unintelligently furrowed, anxious forehead and in
his round, innocent eyes, which appeared to me weak and blinking
and watery; or was it that they were full of tears? . . .

To discover old Nelson fully informed upon any matter whatever was
a new experience.  And after the first awkwardness had worn off he
talked freely, with, now and then, a question to start him going
whenever he lapsed into silence, which he would do suddenly,
clasping his hands on his waistcoat in an attitude which would
recall to me the east verandah, where he used to sit talking
quietly and puffing out his cheeks in what seemed now old, very old
days.  He talked in a reasonable somewhat anxious tone.

"No, no.  We did not know anything for weeks.  Out of the way like
that, we couldn't, of course.  No mail service to the Seven Isles.
But one day I ran over to Banka in my big sailing-boat to see
whether there were any letters, and saw a Dutch paper.  But it
looked only like a bit of marine news:  English brig Bonito gone
ashore outside Makassar roads.  That was all.  I took the paper
home with me and showed it to her.  'I will never forgive him!' she
cries with her old spirit.  'My dear,' I said, 'you are a sensible
girl.  The best man may lose a ship.  But what about your health?'
I was beginning to be frightened at her looks.  She would not let
me talk even of going to Singapore before.  But, really, such a
sensible girl couldn't keep on objecting for ever.  'Do what you
like, papa,' she says.  Rather a job, that.  Had to catch a steamer
at sea, but I got her over all right.  There, doctors, of course.
Fever.  Anaemia.  Put her to bed.  Two or three women very kind to
her.  Naturally in our papers the whole story came out before long.
She reads it to the end, lying on the couch; then hands the
newspaper back to me, whispers 'Heemskirk,' and goes off into a
faint."

He blinked at me for quite a long time, his eyes running full of
tears again.

"Next day," he began, without any emotion in his voice, "she felt
stronger, and we had a long talk.  She told me everything."

Here old Nelson, with his eyes cast down, gave me the whole story
of the Heemskirk episode in Freya's words; then went on in his
rather jerky utterance, and looking up innocently:

"'My dear,' I said, 'you have behaved in the main like a sensible
girl.'  'I have been horrid,' she cries, 'and he is breaking his
heart over there.'  Well, she was too sensible not to see she
wasn't in a state to travel.  But I went.  She told me to go.  She
was being looked after very well.  Anaemia.  Getting better, they
said."

He paused.

"You did see him?" I murmured.

"Oh, yes; I did see him," he started again, talking in that
reasonable voice as though he were arguing a point.  "I did see
him.  I came upon him.  Eyes sunk an inch into his head; nothing
but skin on the bones of his face, a skeleton in dirty white
clothes.  That's what he looked like.  How Freya . . . But she
never did--not really.  He was sitting there, the only live thing
for miles along that coast, on a drift-log washed up on the shore.
They had clipped his hair in the hospital, and it had not grown
again.  He stared, holding his chin in his hand, and with nothing
on the sea between him and the sky but that wreck.  When I came up
to him he just moved his head a bit.  'Is that you, old man?' says
he--like that.

"If you had seen him you would have understood at once how
impossible it was for Freya to have ever loved that man.  Well,
well.  I don't say.  She might have--something.  She was lonely,
you know.  But really to go away with him!  Never!  Madness.  She
was too sensible . . . I began to reproach him gently.  And by and
by he turns on me.  'Write to you!  What about?  Come to her!  What
with?  If I had been a man I would have carried her off, but she
made a child, a happy child, of me.  Tell her that the day the only
thing I had belonging to me in the world perished on this reef I
discovered that I had no power over her. . . Has she come here with
you?' he shouts, blazing at me suddenly with his hollow eyes.  I
shook my head.  Come with me, indeed!  Anaemia!  'Aha!  You see?
Go away, then, old man, and leave me alone here with that ghost,'
he says, jerking his head at the wreck of his brig.

"Mad!  It was getting dusk.  I did not care to stop any longer all
by myself with that man in that lonely place.  I was not going to
tell him of Freya's illness.  Anaemia!  What was the good?  Mad!
And what sort of husband would he have made, anyhow, for a sensible
girl like Freya?  Why, even my little property I could not have
left them.  The Dutch authorities would never have allowed an
Englishman to settle there.  It was not sold then.  My man Mahmat,
you know, was looking after it for me.  Later on I let it go for a
tenth of its value to a Dutch half-caste.  But never mind.  It was
nothing to me then.  Yes; I went away from him.  I caught the
return mail-boat.  I told everything to Freya.  'He's mad,' I said;
'and, my dear, the only thing he loved was his brig.'

"'Perhaps,' she says to herself, looking straight away--her eyes
were nearly as hollow as his--'perhaps it is true.  Yes!  I would
never allow him any power over me.'"

Old Nelson paused.  I sat fascinated, and feeling a little cold in
that room with a blazing fire.

"So you see," he continued, "she never really cared for him.  Much
too sensible.  I took her away to Hong Kong.  Change of climate,
they said.  Oh, these doctors!  My God!  Winter time!  There came
ten days of cold mists and wind and rain.  Pneumonia.  But look
here!  We talked a lot together.  Days and evenings.  Who else had
she? . . . She talked a lot to me, my own girl.  Sometimes she
would laugh a little.  Look at me and laugh a little--"

I shuddered.  He looked up vaguely, with a childish, puzzled
moodiness.

"She would say:  'I did not really mean to be a bad daughter to
you, papa.'  And I would say:  'Of course, my dear.  You could not
have meant it.'  She would lie quiet and then say:  'I wonder?'
And sometimes, 'I've been really a coward,' she would tell me.  You
know, sick people they say things.  And so she would say too:
'I've been conceited, headstrong, capricious.  I sought my own
gratification.  I was selfish or afraid.' . . . But sick people,
you know, they say anything.  And once, after lying silent almost
all day, she said:  'Yes; perhaps, when the day came I would not
have gone.  Perhaps!  I don't know,' she cried.  'Draw the curtain,
papa.  Shut the sea out.  It reproaches me with my folly.'"  He
gasped and paused.

"So you see," he went on in a murmur.  "Very ill, very ill indeed.
Pneumonia.  Very sudden."  He pointed his finger at the carpet,
while the thought of the poor girl, vanquished in her struggle with
three men's absurdities, and coming at last to doubt her own self,
held me in a very anguish of pity.

"You see yourself," he began again in a downcast manner.  "She
could not have really . . . She mentioned you several times.  Good
friend.  Sensible man.  So I wanted to tell you myself--let you
know the truth.  A fellow like that!  How could it be?  She was
lonely.  And perhaps for a while . . . Mere nothing.  There could
never have been a question of love for my Freya--such a sensible
girl--"

"Man!" I cried, rising upon him wrathfully, "don't you see that she
died of it?"

He got up too.  "No! no!" he stammered, as if angry.  "The doctors!
Pneumonia.  Low state.  The inflammation of the . . . They told me.
Pneu--"

He did not finish the word.  It ended in a sob.  He flung his arms
out in a gesture of despair, giving up his ghastly pretence with a
low, heartrending cry:

"And I thought that she was so sensible!"





TYPHOON

BY JOSEPH CONRAD



Far as the mariner on highest mast Can see all around upon the calmed
vast, So wide was Neptune's hall . . . -- KEATS



AUTHOR'S NOTE

The main characteristic of this volume consists in this, that all the
stories composing it belong not only to the same period but have been
written one after another in the order in which they appear in the book.

The period is that which follows on my connection with Blackwood's
Magazine. I had just finished writing "The End of the Tether" and was
casting about for some subject which could be developed in a shorter
form than the tales in the volume of "Youth" when the instance of a
steamship full of returning coolies from Singapore to some port in
northern China occurred to my recollection. Years before I had heard
it being talked about in the East as a recent occurrence. It was for us
merely one subject of conversation amongst many others of the kind. Men
earning their bread in any very specialized occupation will talk shop,
not only because it is the most vital interest of their lives but also
because they have not much knowledge of other subjects. They have never
had the time to get acquainted with them. Life, for most of us, is not
so much a hard as an exacting taskmaster.

I never met anybody personally concerned in this affair, the interest of
which for us was, of course, not the bad weather but the extraordinary
complication brought into the ship's life at a moment of exceptional
stress by the human element below her deck. Neither was the story itself
ever enlarged upon in my hearing. In that company each of us could
imagine easily what the whole thing was like. The financial difficulty
of it, presenting also a human problem, was solved by a mind much too
simple to be perplexed by anything in the world except men's idle talk
for which it was not adapted.

From the first the mere anecdote, the mere statement I might say, that
such a thing had happened on the high seas, appeared to me a sufficient
subject for meditation. Yet it was but a bit of a sea yarn after all. I
felt that to bring out its deeper significance which was quite apparent
to me, something other, something more was required; a leading motive
that would harmonize all these violent noises, and a point of view that
would put all that elemental fury into its proper place.

What was needed of course was Captain MacWhirr. Directly I perceived him
I could see that he was the man for the situation. I don't mean to
say that I ever saw Captain MacWhirr in the flesh, or had ever come in
contact with his literal mind and his dauntless temperament. MacWhirr is
not an acquaintance of a few hours, or a few weeks, or a few months. He
is the product of twenty years of life. My own life. Conscious invention
had little to do with him. If it is true that Captain MacWhirr never
walked and breathed on this earth (which I find for my part extremely
difficult to believe) I can also assure my readers that he is perfectly
authentic. I may venture to assert the same of every aspect of the
story, while I confess that the particular typhoon of the tale was not a
typhoon of my actual experience.

At its first appearance "Typhoon," the story, was classed by some
critics as a deliberately intended storm-piece. Others picked out
MacWhirr, in whom they perceived a definite symbolic intention. Neither
was exclusively my intention. Both the typhoon and Captain MacWhirr
presented themselves to me as the necessities of the deep conviction
with which I approached the subject of the story. It was their
opportunity. It was also my opportunity; and it would be vain to
discourse about what I made of it in a handful of pages, since the pages
themselves are here, between the covers of this volume, to speak for
themselves.

This is a belated reflection. If it had occurred to me before it would
have perhaps done away with the existence of this Author's Note; for,
indeed, the same remark applies to every story in this volume. None
of them are stories of experience in the absolute sense of the word.
Experience in them is but the canvas of the attempted picture. Each of
them has its more than one intention. With each the question is what the
writer has done with his opportunity; and each answers the question for
itself in words which, if I may say so without undue solemnity, were
written with a conscientious regard for the truth of my own sensations.
And each of those stories, to mean something, must justify itself in its
own way to the conscience of each successive reader.

"Falk"--the second story in the volume--offended the delicacy of one
critic at least by certain peculiarities of its subject. But what is the
subject of "Falk"? I personally do not feel so very certain about it. He
who reads must find out for himself. My intention in writing "Falk"
was not to shock anybody. As in most of my writings I insist not on
the events but on their effect upon the persons in the tale. But in
everything I have written there is always one invariable intention, and
that is to capture the reader's attention, by securing his interest and
enlisting his sympathies for the matter in hand, whatever it may be,
within the limits of the visible world and within the boundaries of
human emotions.

I may safely say that Falk is absolutely true to my experience of
certain straightforward characters combining a perfectly natural
ruthlessness with a certain amount of moral delicacy. Falk obeys the law
of self-preservation without the slightest misgivings as to his right,
but at a crucial turn of that ruthlessly preserved life he will not
condescend to dodge the truth. As he is presented as sensitive enough to
be affected permanently by a certain unusual experience, that experience
had to be set by me before the reader vividly; but it is not the subject
of the tale. If we go by mere facts then the subject is Falk's attempt
to get married; in which the narrator of the tale finds himself
unexpectedly involved both on its ruthless and its delicate side.

"Falk" shares with one other of my stories ("The Return" in the "Tales
of Unrest" volume) the distinction of never having been serialized. I
think the copy was shown to the editor of some magazine who rejected it
indignantly on the sole ground that "the girl never says anything." This
is perfectly true. From first to last Hermann's niece utters no word in
the tale--and it is not because she is dumb, but for the simple reason
that whenever she happens to come under the observation of the narrator
she has either no occasion or is too profoundly moved to speak. The
editor, who obviously had read the story, might have perceived that for
himself. Apparently he did not, and I refrained from pointing out the
impossibility to him because, since he did not venture to say that "the
girl" did not live, I felt no concern at his indignation.

All the other stories were serialized. The "Typhoon" appeared in the
early numbers of the Pall Mall Magazine, then under the direction of the
late Mr. Halkett. It was on that occasion, too, that I saw for the first
time my conceptions rendered by an artist in another medium. Mr. Maurice
Grieffenhagen knew how to combine in his illustrations the effect of his
own most distinguished personal vision with an absolute fidelity to the
inspiration of the writer. "Amy Foster" was published in The Illustrated
London News with a fine drawing of Amy on her day out giving tea to the
children at her home, in a hat with a big feather. "To-morrow" appeared
first in the Pall Mall Magazine. Of that story I will only say that
it struck many people by its adaptability to the stage and that I was
induced to dramatize it under the title of "One Day More"; up to the
present my only effort in that direction. I may also add that each of
the four stories on their appearance in book form was picked out on
various grounds as the "best of the lot" by different critics, who
reviewed the volume with a warmth of appreciation and understanding, a
sympathetic insight and a friendliness of expression for which I cannot
be sufficiently grateful.


1919. J. C.



TYPHOON

I

Captain MacWhirr, of the steamer Nan-Shan, had a physiognomy that, in
the order of material appearances, was the exact counterpart of his
mind: it presented no marked characteristics of firmness or stupidity;
it had no pronounced characteristics whatever; it was simply ordinary,
irresponsive, and unruffled.

The only thing his aspect might have been said to suggest, at times, was
bashfulness; because he would sit, in business offices ashore, sunburnt
and smiling faintly, with downcast eyes. When he raised them, they were
perceived to be direct in their glance and of blue colour. His hair was
fair and extremely fine, clasping from temple to temple the bald dome
of his skull in a clamp as of fluffy silk. The hair of his face, on the
contrary, carroty and flaming, resembled a growth of copper wire clipped
short to the line of the lip; while, no matter how close he shaved,
fiery metallic gleams passed, when he moved his head, over the
surface of his cheeks. He was rather below the medium height, a bit
round-shouldered, and so sturdy of limb that his clothes always looked a
shade too tight for his arms and legs. As if unable to grasp what is due
to the difference of latitudes, he wore a brown bowler hat, a complete
suit of a brownish hue, and clumsy black boots. These harbour togs gave
to his thick figure an air of stiff and uncouth smartness. A thin silver
watch chain looped his waistcoat, and he never left his ship for the
shore without clutching in his powerful, hairy fist an elegant umbrella
of the very best quality, but generally unrolled. Young Jukes, the chief
mate, attending his commander to the gangway, would sometimes venture
to say, with the greatest gentleness, "Allow me, sir"--and possessing
himself of the umbrella deferentially, would elevate the ferule, shake
the folds, twirl a neat furl in a jiffy, and hand it back; going through
the performance with a face of such portentous gravity, that Mr. Solomon
Rout, the chief engineer, smoking his morning cigar over the skylight,
would turn away his head in order to hide a smile. "Oh! aye! The blessed
gamp. . . . Thank 'ee, Jukes, thank 'ee," would mutter Captain MacWhirr,
heartily, without looking up.

Having just enough imagination to carry him through each successive day,
and no more, he was tranquilly sure of himself; and from the very same
cause he was not in the least conceited. It is your imaginative superior
who is touchy, overbearing, and difficult to please; but every ship
Captain MacWhirr commanded was the floating abode of harmony and peace.
It was, in truth, as impossible for him to take a flight of fancy as
it would be for a watchmaker to put together a chronometer with nothing
except a two-pound hammer and a whip-saw in the way of tools. Yet the
uninteresting lives of men so entirely given to the actuality of the
bare existence have their mysterious side. It was impossible in Captain
MacWhirr's case, for instance, to understand what under heaven could
have induced that perfectly satisfactory son of a petty grocer in
Belfast to run away to sea. And yet he had done that very thing at the
age of fifteen. It was enough, when you thought it over, to give you the
idea of an immense, potent, and invisible hand thrust into the ant-heap
of the earth, laying hold of shoulders, knocking heads together, and
setting the unconscious faces of the multitude towards inconceivable
goals and in undreamt-of directions.

His father never really forgave him for this undutiful stupidity. "We
could have got on without him," he used to say later on, "but there's
the business. And he an only son, too!" His mother wept very much after
his disappearance. As it had never occurred to him to leave word behind,
he was mourned over for dead till, after eight months, his first letter
arrived from Talcahuano. It was short, and contained the statement:
"We had very fine weather on our passage out." But evidently, in the
writer's mind, the only important intelligence was to the effect that
his captain had, on the very day of writing, entered him regularly on
the ship's articles as Ordinary Seaman. "Because I can do the work," he
explained. The mother again wept copiously, while the remark, "Tom's an
ass," expressed the emotions of the father. He was a corpulent man, with
a gift for sly chaffing, which to the end of his life he exercised
in his intercourse with his son, a little pityingly, as if upon a
half-witted person.

MacWhirr's visits to his home were necessarily rare, and in the course
of years he despatched other letters to his parents, informing them of
his successive promotions and of his movements upon the vast earth. In
these missives could be found sentences like this: "The heat here is
very great." Or: "On Christmas day at 4 P. M. we fell in with some
icebergs." The old people ultimately became acquainted with a good
many names of ships, and with the names of the skippers who commanded
them--with the names of Scots and English shipowners--with the names
of seas, oceans, straits, promontories--with outlandish names of
lumber-ports, of rice-ports, of cotton-ports--with the names of
islands--with the name of their son's young woman. She was called Lucy.
It did not suggest itself to him to mention whether he thought the name
pretty. And then they died.

The great day of MacWhirr's marriage came in due course, following
shortly upon the great day when he got his first command.

All these events had taken place many years before the morning when, in
the chart-room of the steamer Nan-Shan, he stood confronted by the
fall of a barometer he had no reason to distrust. The fall--taking into
account the excellence of the instrument, the time of the year, and
the ship's position on the terrestrial globe--was of a nature ominously
prophetic; but the red face of the man betrayed no sort of inward
disturbance. Omens were as nothing to him, and he was unable to discover
the message of a prophecy till the fulfilment had brought it home to his
very door. "That's a fall, and no mistake," he thought. "There must be
some uncommonly dirty weather knocking about."

The Nan-Shan was on her way from the southward to the treaty port of
Fu-chau, with some cargo in her lower holds, and two hundred Chinese
coolies returning to their village homes in the province of Fo-kien,
after a few years of work in various tropical colonies. The morning was
fine, the oily sea heaved without a sparkle, and there was a queer white
misty patch in the sky like a halo of the sun. The fore-deck, packed
with Chinamen, was full of sombre clothing, yellow faces, and pigtails,
sprinkled over with a good many naked shoulders, for there was no wind,
and the heat was close. The coolies lounged, talked, smoked, or stared
over the rail; some, drawing water over the side, sluiced each other;
a few slept on hatches, while several small parties of six sat on their
heels surrounding iron trays with plates of rice and tiny teacups; and
every single Celestial of them was carrying with him all he had in the
world--a wooden chest with a ringing lock and brass on the corners,
containing the savings of his labours: some clothes of ceremony,
sticks of incense, a little opium maybe, bits of nameless rubbish of
conventional value, and a small hoard of silver dollars, toiled for in
coal lighters, won in gambling-houses or in petty trading, grubbed out
of earth, sweated out in mines, on railway lines, in deadly jungle,
under heavy burdens--amassed patiently, guarded with care, cherished
fiercely.

A cross swell had set in from the direction of Formosa Channel about ten
o'clock, without disturbing these passengers much, because the Nan-Shan,
with her flat bottom, rolling chocks on bilges, and great breadth of
beam, had the reputation of an exceptionally steady ship in a sea-way.
Mr. Jukes, in moments of expansion on shore, would proclaim loudly
that the "old girl was as good as she was pretty." It would never have
occurred to Captain MacWhirr to express his favourable opinion so loud
or in terms so fanciful.

She was a good ship, undoubtedly, and not old either. She had been built
in Dumbarton less than three years before, to the order of a firm of
merchants in Siam--Messrs. Sigg and Son. When she lay afloat, finished
in every detail and ready to take up the work of her life, the builders
contemplated her with pride.

"Sigg has asked us for a reliable skipper to take her out," remarked one
of the partners; and the other, after reflecting for a while, said:
"I think MacWhirr is ashore just at present." "Is he? Then wire him
at once. He's the very man," declared the senior, without a moment's
hesitation.

Next morning MacWhirr stood before them unperturbed, having travelled
from London by the midnight express after a sudden but undemonstrative
parting with his wife. She was the daughter of a superior couple who had
seen better days.

"We had better be going together over the ship, Captain," said the
senior partner; and the three men started to view the perfections of the
Nan-Shan from stem to stern, and from her keelson to the trucks of her
two stumpy pole-masts.

Captain MacWhirr had begun by taking off his coat, which he hung on the
end of a steam windless embodying all the latest improvements.

"My uncle wrote of you favourably by yesterday's mail to our good
friends--Messrs. Sigg, you know--and doubtless they'll continue you out
there in command," said the junior partner. "You'll be able to boast of
being in charge of the handiest boat of her size on the coast of China,
Captain," he added.

"Have you? Thank 'ee," mumbled vaguely MacWhirr, to whom the view of
a distant eventuality could appeal no more than the beauty of a wide
landscape to a purblind tourist; and his eyes happening at the moment to
be at rest upon the lock of the cabin door, he walked up to it, full of
purpose, and began to rattle the handle vigorously, while he observed,
in his low, earnest voice, "You can't trust the workmen nowadays. A
brand-new lock, and it won't act at all. Stuck fast. See? See?"

As soon as they found themselves alone in their office across the yard:
"You praised that fellow up to Sigg. What is it you see in him?" asked
the nephew, with faint contempt.

"I admit he has nothing of your fancy skipper about him, if that's what
you mean," said the elder man, curtly. "Is the foreman of the joiners
on the Nan-Shan outside? . . . Come in, Bates. How is it that you let
Tait's people put us off with a defective lock on the cabin door? The
Captain could see directly he set eye on it. Have it replaced at once.
The little straws, Bates . . . the little straws. . . ."

The lock was replaced accordingly, and a few days afterwards the
Nan-Shan steamed out to the East, without MacWhirr having offered any
further remark as to her fittings, or having been heard to utter a
single word hinting at pride in his ship, gratitude for his appointment,
or satisfaction at his prospects.

With a temperament neither loquacious nor taciturn he found very little
occasion to talk. There were matters of duty, of course--directions,
orders, and so on; but the past being to his mind done with, and the
future not there yet, the more general actualities of the day required
no comment--because facts can speak for themselves with overwhelming
precision.

Old Mr. Sigg liked a man of few words, and one that "you could be sure
would not try to improve upon his instructions." MacWhirr satisfying
these requirements, was continued in command of the Nan-Shan, and
applied himself to the careful navigation of his ship in the China seas.
She had come out on a British register, but after some time Messrs. Sigg
judged it expedient to transfer her to the Siamese flag.

At the news of the contemplated transfer Jukes grew restless, as if
under a sense of personal affront. He went about grumbling to himself,
and uttering short scornful laughs. "Fancy having a ridiculous
Noah's Ark elephant in the ensign of one's ship," he said once at the
engine-room door. "Dash me if I can stand it: I'll throw up the billet.
Don't it make you sick, Mr. Rout?" The chief engineer only cleared his
throat with the air of a man who knows the value of a good billet.

The first morning the new flag floated over the stern of the Nan-Shan
Jukes stood looking at it bitterly from the bridge. He struggled with
his feelings for a while, and then remarked, "Queer flag for a man to
sail under, sir."

"What's the matter with the flag?" inquired Captain MacWhirr. "Seems all
right to me." And he walked across to the end of the bridge to have a
good look.

"Well, it looks queer to me," burst out Jukes, greatly exasperated, and
flung off the bridge.

Captain MacWhirr was amazed at these manners. After a while he stepped
quietly into the chart-room, and opened his International Signal
Code-book at the plate where the flags of all the nations are correctly
figured in gaudy rows. He ran his finger over them, and when he came to
Siam he contemplated with great attention the red field and the white
elephant. Nothing could be more simple; but to make sure he brought the
book out on the bridge for the purpose of comparing the coloured drawing
with the real thing at the flagstaff astern. When next Jukes, who was
carrying on the duty that day with a sort of suppressed fierceness,
happened on the bridge, his commander observed:

"There's nothing amiss with that flag."

"Isn't there?" mumbled Jukes, falling on his knees before a deck-locker
and jerking therefrom viciously a spare lead-line.

"No. I looked up the book. Length twice the breadth and the elephant
exactly in the middle. I thought the people ashore would know how to
make the local flag. Stands to reason. You were wrong, Jukes. . . ."

"Well, sir," began Jukes, getting up excitedly, "all I can say--" He
fumbled for the end of the coil of line with trembling hands.

"That's all right." Captain MacWhirr soothed him, sitting heavily on a
little canvas folding-stool he greatly affected. "All you have to do is
to take care they don't hoist the elephant upside-down before they get
quite used to it."

Jukes flung the new lead-line over on the fore-deck with a loud "Here
you are, bo'ss'en--don't forget to wet it thoroughly," and turned with
immense resolution towards his commander; but Captain MacWhirr spread
his elbows on the bridge-rail comfortably.

"Because it would be, I suppose, understood as a signal of distress," he
went on. "What do you think? That elephant there, I take it, stands for
something in the nature of the Union Jack in the flag. . . ."

"Does it!" yelled Jukes, so that every head on the Nan-Shan's decks
looked towards the bridge. Then he sighed, and with sudden resignation:
"It would certainly be a dam' distressful sight," he said, meekly.

Later in the day he accosted the chief engineer with a confidential,
"Here, let me tell you the old man's latest."

Mr. Solomon Rout (frequently alluded to as Long Sol, Old Sol, or Father
Rout), from finding himself almost invariably the tallest man on board
every ship he joined, had acquired the habit of a stooping, leisurely
condescension. His hair was scant and sandy, his flat cheeks were pale,
his bony wrists and long scholarly hands were pale, too, as though he
had lived all his life in the shade.

He smiled from on high at Jukes, and went on smoking and glancing about
quietly, in the manner of a kind uncle lending an ear to the tale of an
excited schoolboy. Then, greatly amused but impassive, he asked:

"And did you throw up the billet?"

"No," cried Jukes, raising a weary, discouraged voice above the harsh
buzz of the Nan-Shan's friction winches. All of them were hard at work,
snatching slings of cargo, high up, to the end of long derricks, only,
as it seemed, to let them rip down recklessly by the run. The cargo
chains groaned in the gins, clinked on coamings, rattled over the
side; and the whole ship quivered, with her long gray flanks smoking in
wreaths of steam. "No," cried Jukes, "I didn't. What's the good? I might
just as well fling my resignation at this bulkhead. I don't believe you
can make a man like that understand anything. He simply knocks me over."

At that moment Captain MacWhirr, back from the shore, crossed the deck,
umbrella in hand, escorted by a mournful, self-possessed Chinaman,
walking behind in paper-soled silk shoes, and who also carried an
umbrella.

The master of the Nan-Shan, speaking just audibly and gazing at his
boots as his manner was, remarked that it would be necessary to call
at Fu-chau this trip, and desired Mr. Rout to have steam up to-morrow
afternoon at one o'clock sharp. He pushed back his hat to wipe his
forehead, observing at the same time that he hated going ashore
anyhow; while overtopping him Mr. Rout, without deigning a word, smoked
austerely, nursing his right elbow in the palm of his left hand.
Then Jukes was directed in the same subdued voice to keep the forward
'tween-deck clear of cargo. Two hundred coolies were going to be put
down there. The Bun Hin Company were sending that lot home. Twenty-five
bags of rice would be coming off in a sampan directly, for stores. All
seven-years'-men they were, said Captain MacWhirr, with a camphor-wood
chest to every man. The carpenter should be set to work nailing
three-inch battens along the deck below, fore and aft, to keep these
boxes from shifting in a sea-way. Jukes had better look to it at once.
"D'ye hear, Jukes?" This chinaman here was coming with the ship as far
as Fu-chau--a sort of interpreter he would be. Bun Hin's clerk he
was, and wanted to have a look at the space. Jukes had better take him
forward. "D'ye hear, Jukes?"

Jukes took care to punctuate these instructions in proper places with
the obligatory "Yes, sir," ejaculated without enthusiasm. His brusque
"Come along, John; make look see" set the Chinaman in motion at his
heels.

"Wanchee look see, all same look see can do," said Jukes, who having no
talent for foreign languages mangled the very pidgin-English cruelly. He
pointed at the open hatch. "Catchee number one piecie place to sleep in.
Eh?"

He was gruff, as became his racial superiority, but not unfriendly. The
Chinaman, gazing sad and speechless into the darkness of the hatchway,
seemed to stand at the head of a yawning grave.

"No catchee rain down there--savee?" pointed out Jukes. "Suppose all'ee
same fine weather, one piecie coolie-man come topside," he pursued,
warming up imaginatively. "Make so--Phooooo!" He expanded his chest and
blew out his cheeks. "Savee, John? Breathe--fresh air. Good. Eh? Washee
him piecie pants, chow-chow top-side--see, John?"

With his mouth and hands he made exuberant motions of eating rice and
washing clothes; and the Chinaman, who concealed his distrust of this
pantomime under a collected demeanour tinged by a gentle and refined
melancholy, glanced out of his almond eyes from Jukes to the hatch and
back again. "Velly good," he murmured, in a disconsolate undertone, and
hastened smoothly along the decks, dodging obstacles in his course. He
disappeared, ducking low under a sling of ten dirty gunny-bags full of
some costly merchandise and exhaling a repulsive smell.

Captain MacWhirr meantime had gone on the bridge, and into the
chart-room, where a letter, commenced two days before, awaited
termination. These long letters began with the words, "My darling wife,"
and the steward, between the scrubbing of the floors and the dusting
of chronometer-boxes, snatched at every opportunity to read them. They
interested him much more than they possibly could the woman for whose
eye they were intended; and this for the reason that they related in
minute detail each successive trip of the Nan-Shan.

Her master, faithful to facts, which alone his consciousness reflected,
would set them down with painstaking care upon many pages. The house
in a northern suburb to which these pages were addressed had a bit of
garden before the bow-windows, a deep porch of good appearance,
coloured glass with imitation lead frame in the front door. He paid
five-and-forty pounds a year for it, and did not think the rent too
high, because Mrs. MacWhirr (a pretentious person with a scraggy
neck and a disdainful manner) was admittedly ladylike, and in the
neighbourhood considered as "quite superior." The only secret of her
life was her abject terror of the time when her husband would come home
to stay for good. Under the same roof there dwelt also a daughter called
Lydia and a son, Tom. These two were but slightly acquainted with their
father. Mainly, they knew him as a rare but privileged visitor, who of
an evening smoked his pipe in the dining-room and slept in the house.
The lanky girl, upon the whole, was rather ashamed of him; the boy
was frankly and utterly indifferent in a straightforward, delightful,
unaffected way manly boys have.

And Captain MacWhirr wrote home from the coast of China twelve times
every year, desiring quaintly to be "remembered to the children," and
subscribing himself "your loving husband," as calmly as if the words so
long used by so many men were, apart from their shape, worn-out things,
and of a faded meaning.

The China seas north and south are narrow seas. They are seas full of
every-day, eloquent facts, such as islands, sand-banks, reefs, swift and
changeable currents--tangled facts that nevertheless speak to a seaman
in clear and definite language. Their speech appealed to Captain
MacWhirr's sense of realities so forcibly that he had given up his
state-room below and practically lived all his days on the bridge of
his ship, often having his meals sent up, and sleeping at night in the
chart-room. And he indited there his home letters. Each of them, without
exception, contained the phrase, "The weather has been very fine this
trip," or some other form of a statement to that effect. And this
statement, too, in its wonderful persistence, was of the same perfect
accuracy as all the others they contained.

Mr. Rout likewise wrote letters; only no one on board knew how chatty he
could be pen in hand, because the chief engineer had enough imagination
to keep his desk locked. His wife relished his style greatly. They were
a childless couple, and Mrs. Rout, a big, high-bosomed, jolly woman of
forty, shared with Mr. Rout's toothless and venerable mother a little
cottage near Teddington. She would run over her correspondence, at
breakfast, with lively eyes, and scream out interesting passages in a
joyous voice at the deaf old lady, prefacing each extract by the
warning shout, "Solomon says!" She had the trick of firing off
Solomon's utterances also upon strangers, astonishing them easily by the
unfamiliar text and the unexpectedly jocular vein of these quotations.
On the day the new curate called for the first time at the cottage, she
found occasion to remark, "As Solomon says: 'the engineers that go down
to the sea in ships behold the wonders of sailor nature';" when a change
in the visitor's countenance made her stop and stare.

"Solomon. . . . Oh! . . . Mrs. Rout," stuttered the young man, very red
in the face, "I must say . . . I don't. . . ."

"He's my husband," she announced in a great shout, throwing herself
back in the chair. Perceiving the joke, she laughed immoderately with a
handkerchief to her eyes, while he sat wearing a forced smile, and,
from his inexperience of jolly women, fully persuaded that she must
be deplorably insane. They were excellent friends afterwards; for,
absolving her from irreverent intention, he came to think she was a
very worthy person indeed; and he learned in time to receive without
flinching other scraps of Solomon's wisdom.

"For my part," Solomon was reported by his wife to have said once, "give
me the dullest ass for a skipper before a rogue. There is a way to
take a fool; but a rogue is smart and slippery." This was an airy
generalization drawn from the particular case of Captain MacWhirr's
honesty, which, in itself, had the heavy obviousness of a lump of clay.
On the other hand, Mr. Jukes, unable to generalize, unmarried, and
unengaged, was in the habit of opening his heart after another fashion
to an old chum and former shipmate, actually serving as second officer
on board an Atlantic liner.

First of all he would insist upon the advantages of the Eastern trade,
hinting at its superiority to the Western ocean service. He extolled
the sky, the seas, the ships, and the easy life of the Far East. The
Nan-Shan, he affirmed, was second to none as a sea-boat.

"We have no brass-bound uniforms, but then we are like brothers here,"
he wrote. "We all mess together and live like fighting-cocks. . . . All
the chaps of the black-squad are as decent as they make that kind, and
old Sol, the Chief, is a dry stick. We are good friends. As to our old
man, you could not find a quieter skipper. Sometimes you would think he
hadn't sense enough to see anything wrong. And yet it isn't that. Can't
be. He has been in command for a good few years now. He doesn't do
anything actually foolish, and gets his ship along all right without
worrying anybody. I believe he hasn't brains enough to enjoy kicking
up a row. I don't take advantage of him. I would scorn it. Outside the
routine of duty he doesn't seem to understand more than half of what you
tell him. We get a laugh out of this at times; but it is dull, too, to
be with a man like this--in the long-run. Old Sol says he hasn't much
conversation. Conversation! O Lord! He never talks. The other day I had
been yarning under the bridge with one of the engineers, and he must
have heard us. When I came up to take my watch, he steps out of the
chart-room and has a good look all round, peeps over at the sidelights,
glances at the compass, squints upward at the stars. That's his regular
performance. By-and-by he says: 'Was that you talking just now in the
port alleyway?' 'Yes, sir.' 'With the third engineer?' 'Yes, sir.' He
walks off to starboard, and sits under the dodger on a little campstool
of his, and for half an hour perhaps he makes no sound, except that I
heard him sneeze once. Then after a while I hear him getting up over
there, and he strolls across to port, where I was. 'I can't understand
what you can find to talk about,' says he. 'Two solid hours. I am not
blaming you. I see people ashore at it all day long, and then in the
evening they sit down and keep at it over the drinks. Must be saying the
same things over and over again. I can't understand.'

"Did you ever hear anything like that? And he was so patient about it.
It made me quite sorry for him. But he is exasperating, too, sometimes.
Of course one would not do anything to vex him even if it were worth
while. But it isn't. He's so jolly innocent that if you were to put your
thumb to your nose and wave your fingers at him he would only wonder
gravely to himself what got into you. He told me once quite simply that
he found it very difficult to make out what made people always act so
queerly. He's too dense to trouble about, and that's the truth."

Thus wrote Mr. Jukes to his chum in the Western ocean trade, out of the
fulness of his heart and the liveliness of his fancy.

He had expressed his honest opinion. It was not worthwhile trying to
impress a man of that sort. If the world had been full of such men, life
would have probably appeared to Jukes an unentertaining and unprofitable
business. He was not alone in his opinion. The sea itself, as if sharing
Mr. Jukes' good-natured forbearance, had never put itself out to startle
the silent man, who seldom looked up, and wandered innocently over
the waters with the only visible purpose of getting food, raiment,
and house-room for three people ashore. Dirty weather he had known, of
course. He had been made wet, uncomfortable, tired in the usual way,
felt at the time and presently forgotten. So that upon the whole he had
been justified in reporting fine weather at home. But he had never been
given a glimpse of immeasurable strength and of immoderate wrath, the
wrath that passes exhausted but never appeased--the wrath and fury
of the passionate sea. He knew it existed, as we know that crime and
abominations exist; he had heard of it as a peaceable citizen in a town
hears of battles, famines, and floods, and yet knows nothing of what
these things mean--though, indeed, he may have been mixed up in a street
row, have gone without his dinner once, or been soaked to the skin in
a shower. Captain MacWhirr had sailed over the surface of the oceans as
some men go skimming over the years of existence to sink gently into
a placid grave, ignorant of life to the last, without ever having been
made to see all it may contain of perfidy, of violence, and of terror.
There are on sea and land such men thus fortunate--or thus disdained by
destiny or by the sea.



II

Observing the steady fall of the barometer, Captain MacWhirr thought,
"There's some dirty weather knocking about." This is precisely what he
thought. He had had an experience of moderately dirty weather--the term
dirty as applied to the weather implying only moderate discomfort to the
seaman. Had he been informed by an indisputable authority that the
end of the world was to be finally accomplished by a catastrophic
disturbance of the atmosphere, he would have assimilated the information
under the simple idea of dirty weather, and no other, because he had
no experience of cataclysms, and belief does not necessarily imply
comprehension. The wisdom of his county had pronounced by means of an
Act of Parliament that before he could be considered as fit to take
charge of a ship he should be able to answer certain simple questions on
the subject of circular storms such as hurricanes, cyclones, typhoons;
and apparently he had answered them, since he was now in command of the
Nan-Shan in the China seas during the season of typhoons. But if he
had answered he remembered nothing of it. He was, however, conscious of
being made uncomfortable by the clammy heat. He came out on the bridge,
and found no relief to this oppression. The air seemed thick. He gasped
like a fish, and began to believe himself greatly out of sorts.

The Nan-Shan was ploughing a vanishing furrow upon the circle of the
sea that had the surface and the shimmer of an undulating piece of
gray silk. The sun, pale and without rays, poured down leaden heat in a
strangely indecisive light, and the Chinamen were lying prostrate about
the decks. Their bloodless, pinched, yellow faces were like the faces
of bilious invalids. Captain MacWhirr noticed two of them especially,
stretched out on their backs below the bridge. As soon as they had
closed their eyes they seemed dead. Three others, however, were
quarrelling barbarously away forward; and one big fellow, half naked,
with herculean shoulders, was hanging limply over a winch; another,
sitting on the deck, his knees up and his head drooping sideways in
a girlish attitude, was plaiting his pigtail with infinite languor
depicted in his whole person and in the very movement of his fingers.
The smoke struggled with difficulty out of the funnel, and instead
of streaming away spread itself out like an infernal sort of cloud,
smelling of sulphur and raining soot all over the decks.

"What the devil are you doing there, Mr. Jukes?" asked Captain MacWhirr.

This unusual form of address, though mumbled rather than spoken, caused
the body of Mr. Jukes to start as though it had been prodded under the
fifth rib. He had had a low bench brought on the bridge, and sitting on
it, with a length of rope curled about his feet and a piece of canvas
stretched over his knees, was pushing a sail-needle vigorously. He
looked up, and his surprise gave to his eyes an expression of innocence
and candour.

"I am only roping some of that new set of bags we made last trip for
whipping up coals," he remonstrated, gently. "We shall want them for the
next coaling, sir."

"What became of the others?"

"Why, worn out of course, sir."

Captain MacWhirr, after glaring down irresolutely at his chief mate,
disclosed the gloomy and cynical conviction that more than half of them
had been lost overboard, "if only the truth was known," and retired
to the other end of the bridge. Jukes, exasperated by this unprovoked
attack, broke the needle at the second stitch, and dropping his work got
up and cursed the heat in a violent undertone.

The propeller thumped, the three Chinamen forward had given up
squabbling very suddenly, and the one who had been plaiting his tail
clasped his legs and stared dejectedly over his knees. The lurid
sunshine cast faint and sickly shadows. The swell ran higher and swifter
every moment, and the ship lurched heavily in the smooth, deep hollows
of the sea.

"I wonder where that beastly swell comes from," said Jukes aloud,
recovering himself after a stagger.

"North-east," grunted the literal MacWhirr, from his side of the bridge.
"There's some dirty weather knocking about. Go and look at the glass."

When Jukes came out of the chart-room, the cast of his countenance had
changed to thoughtfulness and concern. He caught hold of the bridge-rail
and stared ahead.

The temperature in the engine-room had gone up to a hundred and
seventeen degrees. Irritated voices were ascending through the skylight
and through the fiddle of the stokehold in a harsh and resonant uproar,
mingled with angry clangs and scrapes of metal, as if men with limbs of
iron and throats of bronze had been quarrelling down there. The second
engineer was falling foul of the stokers for letting the steam go down.
He was a man with arms like a blacksmith, and generally feared; but that
afternoon the stokers were answering him back recklessly, and slammed
the furnace doors with the fury of despair. Then the noise ceased
suddenly, and the second engineer appeared, emerging out of the
stokehold streaked with grime and soaking wet like a chimney-sweep
coming out of a well. As soon as his head was clear of the fiddle he
began to scold Jukes for not trimming properly the stokehold
ventilators; and in answer Jukes made with his hands deprecatory
soothing signs meaning: "No wind--can't be helped--you can see for
yourself." But the other wouldn't hear reason. His teeth flashed angrily
in his dirty face. He didn't mind, he said, the trouble of punching
their blanked heads down there, blank his soul, but did the condemned
sailors think you could keep steam up in the God-forsaken boilers simply
by knocking the blanked stokers about? No, by George! You had to get
some draught, too--may he be everlastingly blanked for a swab-headed
deck-hand if you didn't! And the chief, too, rampaging before the
steam-gauge and carrying on like a lunatic up and down the engine-room
ever since noon. What did Jukes think he was stuck up there for, if he
couldn't get one of his decayed, good-for-nothing deck-cripples to turn
the ventilators to the wind?

The relations of the "engine-room" and the "deck" of the Nan-Shan were,
as is known, of a brotherly nature; therefore Jukes leaned over and
begged the other in a restrained tone not to make a disgusting ass of
himself; the skipper was on the other side of the bridge. But the second
declared mutinously that he didn't care a rap who was on the other side
of the bridge, and Jukes, passing in a flash from lofty disapproval into
a state of exaltation, invited him in unflattering terms to come up and
twist the beastly things to please himself, and catch such wind as a
donkey of his sort could find. The second rushed up to the fray. He
flung himself at the port ventilator as though he meant to tear it out
bodily and toss it overboard. All he did was to move the cowl round a
few inches, with an enormous expenditure of force, and seemed spent
in the effort. He leaned against the back of the wheelhouse, and Jukes
walked up to him.

"Oh, Heavens!" ejaculated the engineer in a feeble voice. He lifted
his eyes to the sky, and then let his glassy stare descend to meet the
horizon that, tilting up to an angle of forty degrees, seemed to hang on
a slant for a while and settled down slowly. "Heavens! Phew! What's up,
anyhow?"

Jukes, straddling his long legs like a pair of compasses, put on an
air of superiority. "We're going to catch it this time," he said. "The
barometer is tumbling down like anything, Harry. And you trying to kick
up that silly row. . . ."

The word "barometer" seemed to revive the second engineer's mad
animosity. Collecting afresh all his energies, he directed Jukes in a
low and brutal tone to shove the unmentionable instrument down his
gory throat. Who cared for his crimson barometer? It was the steam--the
steam--that was going down; and what between the firemen going faint and
the chief going silly, it was worse than a dog's life for him; he didn't
care a tinker's curse how soon the whole show was blown out of the
water. He seemed on the point of having a cry, but after regaining his
breath he muttered darkly, "I'll faint them," and dashed off. He stopped
upon the fiddle long enough to shake his fist at the unnatural daylight,
and dropped into the dark hole with a whoop.

When Jukes turned, his eyes fell upon the rounded back and the big red
ears of Captain MacWhirr, who had come across. He did not look at his
chief officer, but said at once, "That's a very violent man, that second
engineer."

"Jolly good second, anyhow," grunted Jukes. "They can't keep up steam,"
he added, rapidly, and made a grab at the rail against the coming lurch.

Captain MacWhirr, unprepared, took a run and brought himself up with a
jerk by an awning stanchion.

"A profane man," he said, obstinately. "If this goes on, I'll have to
get rid of him the first chance."

"It's the heat," said Jukes. "The weather's awful. It would make a saint
swear. Even up here I feel exactly as if I had my head tied up in a
woollen blanket."

Captain MacWhirr looked up. "D'ye mean to say, Mr. Jukes, you ever had
your head tied up in a blanket? What was that for?"

"It's a manner of speaking, sir," said Jukes, stolidly.

"Some of you fellows do go on! What's that about saints swearing? I wish
you wouldn't talk so wild. What sort of saint would that be that would
swear? No more saint than yourself, I expect. And what's a blanket got
to do with it--or the weather either. . . . The heat does not make me
swear--does it? It's filthy bad temper. That's what it is. And what's
the good of your talking like this?"

Thus Captain MacWhirr expostulated against the use of images in speech,
and at the end electrified Jukes by a contemptuous snort, followed by
words of passion and resentment: "Damme! I'll fire him out of the ship
if he don't look out."

And Jukes, incorrigible, thought: "Goodness me! Somebody's put a new
inside to my old man. Here's temper, if you like. Of course it's the
weather; what else? It would make an angel quarrelsome--let alone a
saint."

All the Chinamen on deck appeared at their last gasp.

At its setting the sun had a diminished diameter and an expiring brown,
rayless glow, as if millions of centuries elapsing since the morning
had brought it near its end. A dense bank of cloud became visible to the
northward; it had a sinister dark olive tint, and lay low and motionless
upon the sea, resembling a solid obstacle in the path of the ship. She
went floundering towards it like an exhausted creature driven to its
death. The coppery twilight retired slowly, and the darkness brought
out overhead a swarm of unsteady, big stars, that, as if blown upon,
flickered exceedingly and seemed to hang very near the earth. At eight
o'clock Jukes went into the chart-room to write up the ship's log.

He copies neatly out of the rough-book the number of miles, the course
of the ship, and in the column for "wind" scrawled the word "calm" from
top to bottom of the eight hours since noon. He was exasperated by the
continuous, monotonous rolling of the ship. The heavy inkstand would
slide away in a manner that suggested perverse intelligence in dodging
the pen. Having written in the large space under the head of "Remarks"
"Heat very oppressive," he stuck the end of the penholder in his teeth,
pipe fashion, and mopped his face carefully.

"Ship rolling heavily in a high cross swell," he began again, and
commented to himself, "Heavily is no word for it." Then he wrote:
"Sunset threatening, with a low bank of clouds to N. and E. Sky clear
overhead."

Sprawling over the table with arrested pen, he glanced out of the door,
and in that frame of his vision he saw all the stars flying upwards
between the teakwood jambs on a black sky. The whole lot took flight
together and disappeared, leaving only a blackness flecked with white
flashes, for the sea was as black as the sky and speckled with foam
afar. The stars that had flown to the roll came back on the return swing
of the ship, rushing downwards in their glittering multitude, not of
fiery points, but enlarged to tiny discs brilliant with a clear wet
sheen.

Jukes watched the flying big stars for a moment, and then wrote: "8 P.M.
Swell increasing. Ship labouring and taking water on her decks. Battened
down the coolies for the night. Barometer still falling." He paused, and
thought to himself, "Perhaps nothing whatever'll come of it." And then
he closed resolutely his entries: "Every appearance of a typhoon coming
on."

On going out he had to stand aside, and Captain MacWhirr strode over the
doorstep without saying a word or making a sign.

"Shut the door, Mr. Jukes, will you?" he cried from within.

Jukes turned back to do so, muttering ironically: "Afraid to catch cold,
I suppose." It was his watch below, but he yearned for communion with
his kind; and he remarked cheerily to the second mate: "Doesn't look so
bad, after all--does it?"

The second mate was marching to and fro on the bridge, tripping down
with small steps one moment, and the next climbing with difficulty the
shifting slope of the deck. At the sound of Jukes' voice he stood still,
facing forward, but made no reply.

"Hallo! That's a heavy one," said Jukes, swaying to meet the long roll
till his lowered hand touched the planks. This time the second mate made
in his throat a noise of an unfriendly nature.

He was an oldish, shabby little fellow, with bad teeth and no hair on
his face. He had been shipped in a hurry in Shanghai, that trip when
the second officer brought from home had delayed the ship three hours
in port by contriving (in some manner Captain MacWhirr could never
understand) to fall overboard into an empty coal-lighter lying
alongside, and had to be sent ashore to the hospital with concussion of
the brain and a broken limb or two.

Jukes was not discouraged by the unsympathetic sound. "The Chinamen must
be having a lovely time of it down there," he said. "It's lucky for them
the old girl has the easiest roll of any ship I've ever been in. There
now! This one wasn't so bad."

"You wait," snarled the second mate.

With his sharp nose, red at the tip, and his thin pinched lips, he
always looked as though he were raging inwardly; and he was concise in
his speech to the point of rudeness. All his time off duty he spent
in his cabin with the door shut, keeping so still in there that he was
supposed to fall asleep as soon as he had disappeared; but the man who
came in to wake him for his watch on deck would invariably find him with
his eyes wide open, flat on his back in the bunk, and glaring irritably
from a soiled pillow. He never wrote any letters, did not seem to hope
for news from anywhere; and though he had been heard once to mention
West Hartlepool, it was with extreme bitterness, and only in connection
with the extortionate charges of a boarding-house. He was one of those
men who are picked up at need in the ports of the world. They are
competent enough, appear hopelessly hard up, show no evidence of any
sort of vice, and carry about them all the signs of manifest failure.
They come aboard on an emergency, care for no ship afloat, live in their
own atmosphere of casual connection amongst their shipmates who know
nothing of them, and make up their minds to leave at inconvenient times.
They clear out with no words of leavetaking in some God-forsaken port
other men would fear to be stranded in, and go ashore in company of a
shabby sea-chest, corded like a treasure-box, and with an air of shaking
the ship's dust off their feet.

"You wait," he repeated, balanced in great swings with his back to
Jukes, motionless and implacable.

"Do you mean to say we are going to catch it hot?" asked Jukes with
boyish interest.

"Say? . . . I say nothing. You don't catch me," snapped the little
second mate, with a mixture of pride, scorn, and cunning, as if Jukes'
question had been a trap cleverly detected. "Oh, no! None of you here
shall make a fool of me if I know it," he mumbled to himself.

Jukes reflected rapidly that this second mate was a mean little beast,
and in his heart he wished poor Jack Allen had never smashed himself up
in the coal-lighter. The far-off blackness ahead of the ship was like
another night seen through the starry night of the earth--the starless
night of the immensities beyond the created universe, revealed in its
appalling stillness through a low fissure in the glittering sphere of
which the earth is the kernel.

"Whatever there might be about," said Jukes, "we are steaming straight
into it."

"You've said it," caught up the second mate, always with his back to
Jukes. "You've said it, mind--not I."

"Oh, go to Jericho!" said Jukes, frankly; and the other emitted a
triumphant little chuckle.

"You've said it," he repeated.

"And what of that?"

"I've known some real good men get into trouble with their skippers for
saying a dam' sight less," answered the second mate feverishly. "Oh, no!
You don't catch me."

"You seem deucedly anxious not to give yourself away," said Jukes,
completely soured by such absurdity. "I wouldn't be afraid to say what I
think."

"Aye, to me! That's no great trick. I am nobody, and well I know it."

The ship, after a pause of comparative steadiness, started upon a series
of rolls, one worse than the other, and for a time Jukes, preserving
his equilibrium, was too busy to open his mouth. As soon as the violent
swinging had quieted down somewhat, he said: "This is a bit too much of
a good thing. Whether anything is coming or not I think she ought to be
put head on to that swell. The old man is just gone in to lie down. Hang
me if I don't speak to him."

But when he opened the door of the chart-room he saw his captain reading
a book. Captain MacWhirr was not lying down: he was standing up with
one hand grasping the edge of the bookshelf and the other holding open
before his face a thick volume. The lamp wriggled in the gimbals,
the loosened books toppled from side to side on the shelf, the long
barometer swung in jerky circles, the table altered its slant every
moment. In the midst of all this stir and movement Captain MacWhirr,
holding on, showed his eyes above the upper edge, and asked, "What's the
matter?"

"Swell getting worse, sir."

"Noticed that in here," muttered Captain MacWhirr. "Anything wrong?"

Jukes, inwardly disconcerted by the seriousness of the eyes looking at
him over the top of the book, produced an embarrassed grin.

"Rolling like old boots," he said, sheepishly.

"Aye! Very heavy--very heavy. What do you want?"

At this Jukes lost his footing and began to flounder. "I was thinking of
our passengers," he said, in the manner of a man clutching at a straw.

"Passengers?" wondered the Captain, gravely. "What passengers?"

"Why, the Chinamen, sir," explained Jukes, very sick of this
conversation.

"The Chinamen! Why don't you speak plainly? Couldn't tell what you
meant. Never heard a lot of coolies spoken of as passengers before.
Passengers, indeed! What's come to you?"

Captain MacWhirr, closing the book on his forefinger, lowered his arm
and looked completely mystified. "Why are you thinking of the Chinamen,
Mr. Jukes?" he inquired.

Jukes took a plunge, like a man driven to it. "She's rolling her decks
full of water, sir. Thought you might put her head on perhaps--for a
while. Till this goes down a bit--very soon, I dare say. Head to the
eastward. I never knew a ship roll like this."

He held on in the doorway, and Captain MacWhirr, feeling his grip on
the shelf inadequate, made up his mind to let go in a hurry, and fell
heavily on the couch.

"Head to the eastward?" he said, struggling to sit up. "That's more than
four points off her course."

"Yes, sir. Fifty degrees. . . . Would just bring her head far enough
round to meet this. . . ."

Captain MacWhirr was now sitting up. He had not dropped the book, and he
had not lost his place.

"To the eastward?" he repeated, with dawning astonishment. "To the . . .
Where do you think we are bound to? You want me to haul a full-powered
steamship four points off her course to make the Chinamen comfortable!
Now, I've heard more than enough of mad things done in the world--but
this. . . . If I didn't know you, Jukes, I would think you were in
liquor. Steer four points off. . . . And what afterwards? Steer four
points over the other way, I suppose, to make the course good. What put
it into your head that I would start to tack a steamer as if she were a
sailing-ship?"

"Jolly good thing she isn't," threw in Jukes, with bitter readiness.
"She would have rolled every blessed stick out of her this afternoon."

"Aye! And you just would have had to stand and see them go," said
Captain MacWhirr, showing a certain animation. "It's a dead calm, isn't
it?"

"It is, sir. But there's something out of the common coming, for sure."

"Maybe. I suppose you have a notion I should be getting out of the
way of that dirt," said Captain MacWhirr, speaking with the utmost
simplicity of manner and tone, and fixing the oilcloth on the floor
with a heavy stare. Thus he noticed neither Jukes' discomfiture nor the
mixture of vexation and astonished respect on his face.

"Now, here's this book," he continued with deliberation, slapping his
thigh with the closed volume. "I've been reading the chapter on the
storms there."

This was true. He had been reading the chapter on the storms. When he
had entered the chart-room, it was with no intention of taking the book
down. Some influence in the air--the same influence, probably, that
caused the steward to bring without orders the Captain's sea-boots and
oilskin coat up to the chart-room--had as it were guided his hand to
the shelf; and without taking the time to sit down he had waded with a
conscious effort into the terminology of the subject. He lost himself
amongst advancing semi-circles, left- and right-hand quadrants, the
curves of the tracks, the probable bearing of the centre, the shifts of
wind and the readings of barometer. He tried to bring all these
things into a definite relation to himself, and ended by becoming
contemptuously angry with such a lot of words, and with so much advice,
all head-work and supposition, without a glimmer of certitude.

"It's the damnedest thing, Jukes," he said. "If a fellow was to believe
all that's in there, he would be running most of his time all over the
sea trying to get behind the weather."

Again he slapped his leg with the book; and Jukes opened his mouth, but
said nothing.

"Running to get behind the weather! Do you understand that, Mr. Jukes?
It's the maddest thing!" ejaculated Captain MacWhirr, with pauses,
gazing at the floor profoundly. "You would think an old woman had been
writing this. It passes me. If that thing means anything useful, then
it means that I should at once alter the course away, away to the devil
somewhere, and come booming down on Fu-chau from the northward at the
tail of this dirty weather that's supposed to be knocking about in our
way. From the north! Do you understand, Mr. Jukes? Three hundred extra
miles to the distance, and a pretty coal bill to show. I couldn't bring
myself to do that if every word in there was gospel truth, Mr. Jukes.
Don't you expect me. . . ."

And Jukes, silent, marvelled at this display of feeling and loquacity.

"But the truth is that you don't know if the fellow is right, anyhow.
How can you tell what a gale is made of till you get it? He isn't aboard
here, is he? Very well. Here he says that the centre of them things
bears eight points off the wind; but we haven't got any wind, for all
the barometer falling. Where's his centre now?"

"We will get the wind presently," mumbled Jukes.

"Let it come, then," said Captain MacWhirr, with dignified indignation.
"It's only to let you see, Mr. Jukes, that you don't find everything in
books. All these rules for dodging breezes and circumventing the winds
of heaven, Mr. Jukes, seem to me the maddest thing, when you come to
look at it sensibly."

He raised his eyes, saw Jukes gazing at him dubiously, and tried to
illustrate his meaning.

"About as queer as your extraordinary notion of dodging the ship head
to sea, for I don't know how long, to make the Chinamen comfortable;
whereas all we've got to do is to take them to Fu-chau, being timed to
get there before noon on Friday. If the weather delays me--very well.
There's your log-book to talk straight about the weather. But suppose
I went swinging off my course and came in two days late, and they asked
me: 'Where have you been all that time, Captain?' What could I say to
that? 'Went around to dodge the bad weather,' I would say. 'It must've
been dam' bad,' they would say. 'Don't know,' I would have to say; 'I've
dodged clear of it.' See that, Jukes? I have been thinking it all out
this afternoon."

He looked up again in his unseeing, unimaginative way. No one had ever
heard him say so much at one time. Jukes, with his arms open in the
doorway, was like a man invited to behold a miracle. Unbounded wonder
was the intellectual meaning of his eye, while incredulity was seated in
his whole countenance.

"A gale is a gale, Mr. Jukes," resumed the Captain, "and a full-powered
steam-ship has got to face it. There's just so much dirty weather
knocking about the world, and the proper thing is to go through it with
none of what old Captain Wilson of the Melita calls 'storm strategy.'
The other day ashore I heard him hold forth about it to a lot of
shipmasters who came in and sat at a table next to mine. It seemed to me
the greatest nonsense. He was telling them how he outmanoeuvred, I
think he said, a terrific gale, so that it never came nearer than fifty
miles to him. A neat piece of head-work he called it. How he knew there
was a terrific gale fifty miles off beats me altogether. It was like
listening to a crazy man. I would have thought Captain Wilson was old
enough to know better."

Captain MacWhirr ceased for a moment, then said, "It's your watch below,
Mr. Jukes?"

Jukes came to himself with a start. "Yes, sir."

"Leave orders to call me at the slightest change," said the Captain.
He reached up to put the book away, and tucked his legs upon the couch.
"Shut the door so that it don't fly open, will you? I can't stand a
door banging. They've put a lot of rubbishy locks into this ship, I must
say."

Captain MacWhirr closed his eyes.

He did so to rest himself. He was tired, and he experienced that state
of mental vacuity which comes at the end of an exhaustive discussion
that has liberated some belief matured in the course of meditative
years. He had indeed been making his confession of faith, had he only
known it; and its effect was to make Jukes, on the other side of the
door, stand scratching his head for a good while.

Captain MacWhirr opened his eyes.

He thought he must have been asleep. What was that loud noise? Wind? Why
had he not been called? The lamp wriggled in its gimbals, the barometer
swung in circles, the table altered its slant every moment; a pair of
limp sea-boots with collapsed tops went sliding past the couch. He put
out his hand instantly, and captured one.

Jukes' face appeared in a crack of the door: only his face, very red,
with staring eyes. The flame of the lamp leaped, a piece of paper flew
up, a rush of air enveloped Captain MacWhirr. Beginning to draw on the
boot, he directed an expectant gaze at Jukes' swollen, excited features.

"Came on like this," shouted Jukes, "five minutes ago . . . all of a
sudden."

The head disappeared with a bang, and a heavy splash and patter of drops
swept past the closed door as if a pailful of melted lead had been
flung against the house. A whistling could be heard now upon the
deep vibrating noise outside. The stuffy chart-room seemed as full of
draughts as a shed. Captain MacWhirr collared the other sea-boot on its
violent passage along the floor. He was not flustered, but he could not
find at once the opening for inserting his foot. The shoes he had flung
off were scurrying from end to end of the cabin, gambolling playfully
over each other like puppies. As soon as he stood up he kicked at them
viciously, but without effect.

He threw himself into the attitude of a lunging fencer, to reach after
his oilskin coat; and afterwards he staggered all over the confined
space while he jerked himself into it. Very grave, straddling his legs
far apart, and stretching his neck, he started to tie deliberately
the strings of his sou'-wester under his chin, with thick fingers that
trembled slightly. He went through all the movements of a woman putting
on her bonnet before a glass, with a strained, listening attention, as
though he had expected every moment to hear the shout of his name in the
confused clamour that had suddenly beset his ship. Its increase filled
his ears while he was getting ready to go out and confront whatever it
might mean. It was tumultuous and very loud--made up of the rush of the
wind, the crashes of the sea, with that prolonged deep vibration of the
air, like the roll of an immense and remote drum beating the charge of
the gale.

He stood for a moment in the light of the lamp, thick, clumsy, shapeless
in his panoply of combat, vigilant and red-faced.

"There's a lot of weight in this," he muttered.

As soon as he attempted to open the door the wind caught it. Clinging
to the handle, he was dragged out over the doorstep, and at once found
himself engaged with the wind in a sort of personal scuffle whose
object was the shutting of that door. At the last moment a tongue of air
scurried in and licked out the flame of the lamp.

Ahead of the ship he perceived a great darkness lying upon a multitude
of white flashes; on the starboard beam a few amazing stars drooped, dim
and fitful, above an immense waste of broken seas, as if seen through a
mad drift of smoke.

On the bridge a knot of men, indistinct and toiling, were making great
efforts in the light of the wheelhouse windows that shone mistily on
their heads and backs. Suddenly darkness closed upon one pane, then on
another. The voices of the lost group reached him after the manner of
men's voices in a gale, in shreds and fragments of forlorn shouting
snatched past the ear. All at once Jukes appeared at his side, yelling,
with his head down.

"Watch--put in--wheelhouse shutters--glass--afraid--blow in."

Jukes heard his commander upbraiding.

"This--come--anything--warning--call me."

He tried to explain, with the uproar pressing on his lips.

"Light air--remained--bridge--sudden--north-east--could
turn--thought--you--sure--hear."

They had gained the shelter of the weather-cloth, and could converse
with raised voices, as people quarrel.

"I got the hands along to cover up all the ventilators. Good job I had
remained on deck. I didn't think you would be asleep, and so . . . What
did you say, sir? What?"

"Nothing," cried Captain MacWhirr. "I said--all right."

"By all the powers! We've got it this time," observed Jukes in a howl.

"You haven't altered her course?" inquired Captain MacWhirr, straining
his voice.

"No, sir. Certainly not. Wind came out right ahead. And here comes the
head sea."

A plunge of the ship ended in a shock as if she had landed her forefoot
upon something solid. After a moment of stillness a lofty flight of
sprays drove hard with the wind upon their faces.

"Keep her at it as long as we can," shouted Captain MacWhirr.

Before Jukes had squeezed the salt water out of his eyes all the stars
had disappeared.



III

Jukes was as ready a man as any half-dozen young mates that may be
caught by casting a net upon the waters; and though he had been somewhat
taken aback by the startling viciousness of the first squall, he had
pulled himself together on the instant, had called out the hands and had
rushed them along to secure such openings about the deck as had not been
already battened down earlier in the evening. Shouting in his fresh,
stentorian voice, "Jump, boys, and bear a hand!" he led in the work,
telling himself the while that he had "just expected this."

But at the same time he was growing aware that this was rather more than
he had expected. From the first stir of the air felt on his cheek the
gale seemed to take upon itself the accumulated impetus of an avalanche.
Heavy sprays enveloped the Nan-Shan from stem to stern, and instantly in
the midst of her regular rolling she began to jerk and plunge as though
she had gone mad with fright.

Jukes thought, "This is no joke." While he was exchanging explanatory
yells with his captain, a sudden lowering of the darkness came upon the
night, falling before their vision like something palpable. It was as
if the masked lights of the world had been turned down. Jukes was
uncritically glad to have his captain at hand. It relieved him as though
that man had, by simply coming on deck, taken most of the gale's weight
upon his shoulders. Such is the prestige, the privilege, and the burden
of command.

Captain MacWhirr could expect no relief of that sort from any one on
earth. Such is the loneliness of command. He was trying to see, with
that watchful manner of a seaman who stares into the wind's eye as if
into the eye of an adversary, to penetrate the hidden intention and
guess the aim and force of the thrust. The strong wind swept at him out
of a vast obscurity; he felt under his feet the uneasiness of his ship,
and he could not even discern the shadow of her shape. He wished it
were not so; and very still he waited, feeling stricken by a blind man's
helplessness.

To be silent was natural to him, dark or shine. Jukes, at his elbow,
made himself heard yelling cheerily in the gusts, "We must have got
the worst of it at once, sir." A faint burst of lightning quivered all
round, as if flashed into a cavern--into a black and secret chamber of
the sea, with a floor of foaming crests.

It unveiled for a sinister, fluttering moment a ragged mass of clouds
hanging low, the lurch of the long outlines of the ship, the black
figures of men caught on the bridge, heads forward, as if petrified in
the act of butting. The darkness palpitated down upon all this, and then
the real thing came at last.

It was something formidable and swift, like the sudden smashing of
a vial of wrath. It seemed to explode all round the ship with an
overpowering concussion and a rush of great waters, as if an immense dam
had been blown up to windward. In an instant the men lost touch of each
other. This is the disintegrating power of a great wind: it isolates one
from one's kind. An earthquake, a landslip, an avalanche, overtake a man
incidentally, as it were--without passion. A furious gale attacks him
like a personal enemy, tries to grasp his limbs, fastens upon his mind,
seeks to rout his very spirit out of him.

Jukes was driven away from his commander. He fancied himself whirled a
great distance through the air. Everything disappeared--even, for
a moment, his power of thinking; but his hand had found one of
the rail-stanchions. His distress was by no means alleviated by an
inclination to disbelieve the reality of this experience. Though young,
he had seen some bad weather, and had never doubted his ability to
imagine the worst; but this was so much beyond his powers of fancy that
it appeared incompatible with the existence of any ship whatever. He
would have been incredulous about himself in the same way, perhaps, had
he not been so harassed by the necessity of exerting a wrestling effort
against a force trying to tear him away from his hold. Moreover, the
conviction of not being utterly destroyed returned to him through the
sensations of being half-drowned, bestially shaken, and partly choked.

It seemed to him he remained there precariously alone with the stanchion
for a long, long time. The rain poured on him, flowed, drove in sheets.
He breathed in gasps; and sometimes the water he swallowed was fresh and
sometimes it was salt. For the most part he kept his eyes shut tight, as
if suspecting his sight might be destroyed in the immense flurry of
the elements. When he ventured to blink hastily, he derived some moral
support from the green gleam of the starboard light shining feebly upon
the flight of rain and sprays. He was actually looking at it when its
ray fell upon the uprearing sea which put it out. He saw the head of the
wave topple over, adding the mite of its crash to the tremendous uproar
raging around him, and almost at the same instant the stanchion was
wrenched away from his embracing arms. After a crushing thump on his
back he found himself suddenly afloat and borne upwards. His first
irresistible notion was that the whole China Sea had climbed on the
bridge. Then, more sanely, he concluded himself gone overboard. All the
time he was being tossed, flung, and rolled in great volumes of water,
he kept on repeating mentally, with the utmost precipitation, the words:
"My God! My God! My God! My God!"

All at once, in a revolt of misery and despair, he formed the crazy
resolution to get out of that. And he began to thresh about with his
arms and legs. But as soon as he commenced his wretched struggles he
discovered that he had become somehow mixed up with a face, an oilskin
coat, somebody's boots. He clawed ferociously all these things in
turn, lost them, found them again, lost them once more, and finally was
himself caught in the firm clasp of a pair of stout arms. He returned
the embrace closely round a thick solid body. He had found his captain.

They tumbled over and over, tightening their hug. Suddenly the water
let them down with a brutal bang; and, stranded against the side of the
wheelhouse, out of breath and bruised, they were left to stagger up in
the wind and hold on where they could.

Jukes came out of it rather horrified, as though he had escaped some
unparalleled outrage directed at his feelings. It weakened his faith in
himself. He started shouting aimlessly to the man he could feel near him
in that fiendish blackness, "Is it you, sir? Is it you, sir?" till his
temples seemed ready to burst. And he heard in answer a voice, as if
crying far away, as if screaming to him fretfully from a very great
distance, the one word "Yes!" Other seas swept again over the bridge.
He received them defencelessly right over his bare head, with both his
hands engaged in holding.

The motion of the ship was extravagant. Her lurches had an appalling
helplessness: she pitched as if taking a header into a void, and seemed
to find a wall to hit every time. When she rolled she fell on her side
headlong, and she would be righted back by such a demolishing blow that
Jukes felt her reeling as a clubbed man reels before he collapses. The
gale howled and scuffled about gigantically in the darkness, as though
the entire world were one black gully. At certain moments the air
streamed against the ship as if sucked through a tunnel with a
concentrated solid force of impact that seemed to lift her clean out
of the water and keep her up for an instant with only a quiver running
through her from end to end. And then she would begin her tumbling again
as if dropped back into a boiling cauldron. Jukes tried hard to compose
his mind and judge things coolly.

The sea, flattened down in the heavier gusts, would uprise and overwhelm
both ends of the Nan-Shan in snowy rushes of foam, expanding wide,
beyond both rails, into the night. And on this dazzling sheet, spread
under the blackness of the clouds and emitting a bluish glow, Captain
MacWhirr could catch a desolate glimpse of a few tiny specks black as
ebony, the tops of the hatches, the battened companions, the heads of
the covered winches, the foot of a mast. This was all he could see of
his ship. Her middle structure, covered by the bridge which bore him,
his mate, the closed wheelhouse where a man was steering shut up with
the fear of being swept overboard together with the whole thing in one
great crash--her middle structure was like a half-tide rock awash upon a
coast. It was like an outlying rock with the water boiling up, streaming
over, pouring off, beating round--like a rock in the surf to which
shipwrecked people cling before they let go--only it rose, it sank, it
rolled continuously, without respite and rest, like a rock that should
have miraculously struck adrift from a coast and gone wallowing upon the
sea.

The Nan-Shan was being looted by the storm with a senseless, destructive
fury: trysails torn out of the extra gaskets, double-lashed awnings
blown away, bridge swept clean, weather-cloths burst, rails twisted,
light-screens smashed--and two of the boats had gone already. They had
gone unheard and unseen, melting, as it were, in the shock and smother
of the wave. It was only later, when upon the white flash of another
high sea hurling itself amidships, Jukes had a vision of two pairs of
davits leaping black and empty out of the solid blackness, with one
overhauled fall flying and an iron-bound block capering in the air, that
he became aware of what had happened within about three yards of his
back.

He poked his head forward, groping for the ear of his commander. His
lips touched it--big, fleshy, very wet. He cried in an agitated tone,
"Our boats are going now, sir."

And again he heard that voice, forced and ringing feebly, but with a
penetrating effect of quietness in the enormous discord of noises, as if
sent out from some remote spot of peace beyond the black wastes of the
gale; again he heard a man's voice--the frail and indomitable sound that
can be made to carry an infinity of thought, resolution and purpose,
that shall be pronouncing confident words on the last day, when heavens
fall, and justice is done--again he heard it, and it was crying to him,
as if from very, very far--"All right."

He thought he had not managed to make himself understood. "Our boats--I
say boats--the boats, sir! Two gone!"

The same voice, within a foot of him and yet so remote, yelled sensibly,
"Can't be helped."

Captain MacWhirr had never turned his face, but Jukes caught some more
words on the wind.

"What can--expect--when hammering through--such--Bound to
leave--something behind--stands to reason."

Watchfully Jukes listened for more. No more came. This was all Captain
MacWhirr had to say; and Jukes could picture to himself rather than see
the broad squat back before him. An impenetrable obscurity pressed down
upon the ghostly glimmers of the sea. A dull conviction seized upon
Jukes that there was nothing to be done.

If the steering-gear did not give way, if the immense volumes of water
did not burst the deck in or smash one of the hatches, if the engines
did not give up, if way could be kept on the ship against this terrific
wind, and she did not bury herself in one of these awful seas, of whose
white crests alone, topping high above her bows, he could now and then
get a sickening glimpse--then there was a chance of her coming out of
it. Something within him seemed to turn over, bringing uppermost the
feeling that the Nan-Shan was lost.

"She's done for," he said to himself, with a surprising mental
agitation, as though he had discovered an unexpected meaning in this
thought. One of these things was bound to happen. Nothing could be
prevented now, and nothing could be remedied. The men on board did not
count, and the ship could not last. This weather was too impossible.

Jukes felt an arm thrown heavily over his shoulders; and to this
overture he responded with great intelligence by catching hold of his
captain round the waist.

They stood clasped thus in the blind night, bracing each other against
the wind, cheek to cheek and lip to ear, in the manner of two hulks
lashed stem to stern together.

And Jukes heard the voice of his commander hardly any louder than
before, but nearer, as though, starting to march athwart the prodigious
rush of the hurricane, it had approached him, bearing that strange
effect of quietness like the serene glow of a halo.

"D'ye know where the hands got to?" it asked, vigorous and evanescent at
the same time, overcoming the strength of the wind, and swept away from
Jukes instantly.

Jukes didn't know. They were all on the bridge when the real force of
the hurricane struck the ship. He had no idea where they had crawled to.
Under the circumstances they were nowhere, for all the use that could be
made of them. Somehow the Captain's wish to know distressed Jukes.

"Want the hands, sir?" he cried, apprehensively.

"Ought to know," asserted Captain MacWhirr. "Hold hard."

They held hard. An outburst of unchained fury, a vicious rush of the
wind absolutely steadied the ship; she rocked only, quick and light like
a child's cradle, for a terrific moment of suspense, while the whole
atmosphere, as it seemed, streamed furiously past her, roaring away from
the tenebrous earth.

It suffocated them, and with eyes shut they tightened their grasp.
What from the magnitude of the shock might have been a column of water
running upright in the dark, butted against the ship, broke short,
and fell on her bridge, crushingly, from on high, with a dead burying
weight.

A flying fragment of that collapse, a mere splash, enveloped them in one
swirl from their feet over their heads, filling violently their ears,
mouths and nostrils with salt water. It knocked out their legs, wrenched
in haste at their arms, seethed away swiftly under their chins; and
opening their eyes, they saw the piled-up masses of foam dashing to and
fro amongst what looked like the fragments of a ship. She had given way
as if driven straight in. Their panting hearts yielded, too, before the
tremendous blow; and all at once she sprang up again to her desperate
plunging, as if trying to scramble out from under the ruins.

The seas in the dark seemed to rush from all sides to keep her back
where she might perish. There was hate in the way she was handled, and
a ferocity in the blows that fell. She was like a living creature thrown
to the rage of a mob: hustled terribly, struck at, borne up, flung
down, leaped upon. Captain MacWhirr and Jukes kept hold of each other,
deafened by the noise, gagged by the wind; and the great physical
tumult beating about their bodies, brought, like an unbridled display
of passion, a profound trouble to their souls. One of those wild and
appalling shrieks that are heard at times passing mysteriously overhead
in the steady roar of a hurricane, swooped, as if borne on wings, upon
the ship, and Jukes tried to outscream it.

"Will she live through this?"

The cry was wrenched out of his breast. It was as unintentional as the
birth of a thought in the head, and he heard nothing of it himself. It
all became extinct at once--thought, intention, effort--and of his cry
the inaudible vibration added to the tempest waves of the air.

He expected nothing from it. Nothing at all. For indeed what answer
could be made? But after a while he heard with amazement the frail and
resisting voice in his ear, the dwarf sound, unconquered in the giant
tumult.

"She may!"

It was a dull yell, more difficult to seize than a whisper. And
presently the voice returned again, half submerged in the vast crashes,
like a ship battling against the waves of an ocean.

"Let's hope so!" it cried--small, lonely and unmoved, a stranger to
the visions of hope or fear; and it flickered into disconnected words:
"Ship. . . . . This. . . . Never--Anyhow . . . for the best." Jukes gave
it up.

Then, as if it had come suddenly upon the one thing fit to withstand
the power of a storm, it seemed to gain force and firmness for the last
broken shouts:

"Keep on hammering . . . builders . . . good men. . . . . And chance it
. . . engines. . . . Rout . . . good man."

Captain MacWhirr removed his arm from Jukes' shoulders, and thereby
ceased to exist for his mate, so dark it was; Jukes, after a tense
stiffening of every muscle, would let himself go limp all over. The
gnawing of profound discomfort existed side by side with an incredible
disposition to somnolence, as though he had been buffeted and worried
into drowsiness. The wind would get hold of his head and try to shake
it off his shoulders; his clothes, full of water, were as heavy as lead,
cold and dripping like an armour of melting ice: he shivered--it lasted
a long time; and with his hands closed hard on his hold, he was letting
himself sink slowly into the depths of bodily misery. His mind became
concentrated upon himself in an aimless, idle way, and when something
pushed lightly at the back of his knees he nearly, as the saying is,
jumped out of his skin.

In the start forward he bumped the back of Captain MacWhirr, who didn't
move; and then a hand gripped his thigh. A lull had come, a menacing
lull of the wind, the holding of a stormy breath--and he felt himself
pawed all over. It was the boatswain. Jukes recognized these hands, so
thick and enormous that they seemed to belong to some new species of
man.

The boatswain had arrived on the bridge, crawling on all fours against
the wind, and had found the chief mate's legs with the top of his head.
Immediately he crouched and began to explore Jukes' person upwards with
prudent, apologetic touches, as became an inferior.

He was an ill-favoured, undersized, gruff sailor of fifty, coarsely
hairy, short-legged, long-armed, resembling an elderly ape. His
strength was immense; and in his great lumpy paws, bulging like brown
boxing-gloves on the end of furry forearms, the heaviest objects were
handled like playthings. Apart from the grizzled pelt on his chest, the
menacing demeanour and the hoarse voice, he had none of the classical
attributes of his rating. His good nature almost amounted to imbecility:
the men did what they liked with him, and he had not an ounce of
initiative in his character, which was easy-going and talkative. For
these reasons Jukes disliked him; but Captain MacWhirr, to Jukes'
scornful disgust, seemed to regard him as a first-rate petty officer.

He pulled himself up by Jukes' coat, taking that liberty with the
greatest moderation, and only so far as it was forced upon him by the
hurricane.

"What is it, boss'n, what is it?" yelled Jukes, impatiently. What could
that fraud of a boss'n want on the bridge? The typhoon had got on Jukes'
nerves. The husky bellowings of the other, though unintelligible, seemed
to suggest a state of lively satisfaction.

There could be no mistake. The old fool was pleased with something.

The boatswain's other hand had found some other body, for in a changed
tone he began to inquire: "Is it you, sir? Is it you, sir?" The wind
strangled his howls.

"Yes!" cried Captain MacWhirr.



IV

All that the boatswain, out of a superabundance of yells, could make
clear to Captain MacWhirr was the bizarre intelligence that "All them
Chinamen in the fore 'tween deck have fetched away, sir."

Jukes to leeward could hear these two shouting within six inches of
his face, as you may hear on a still night half a mile away two men
conversing across a field. He heard Captain MacWhirr's exasperated
"What? What?" and the strained pitch of the other's hoarseness. "In a
lump . . . seen them myself. . . . Awful sight, sir . . . thought . . .
tell you."

Jukes remained indifferent, as if rendered irresponsible by the force
of the hurricane, which made the very thought of action utterly vain.
Besides, being very young, he had found the occupation of keeping his
heart completely steeled against the worst so engrossing that he had
come to feel an overpowering dislike towards any other form of activity
whatever. He was not scared; he knew this because, firmly believing he
would never see another sunrise, he remained calm in that belief.

These are the moments of do-nothing heroics to which even good men
surrender at times. Many officers of ships can no doubt recall a case
in their experience when just such a trance of confounded stoicism would
come all at once over a whole ship's company. Jukes, however, had
no wide experience of men or storms. He conceived himself to be
calm--inexorably calm; but as a matter of fact he was daunted; not
abjectly, but only so far as a decent man may, without becoming
loathsome to himself.

It was rather like a forced-on numbness of spirit. The long, long
stress of a gale does it; the suspense of the interminably culminating
catastrophe; and there is a bodily fatigue in the mere holding on to
existence within the excessive tumult; a searching and insidious fatigue
that penetrates deep into a man's breast to cast down and sadden his
heart, which is incorrigible, and of all the gifts of the earth--even
before life itself--aspires to peace.

Jukes was benumbed much more than he supposed. He held on--very wet,
very cold, stiff in every limb; and in a momentary hallucination of
swift visions (it is said that a drowning man thus reviews all his life)
he beheld all sorts of memories altogether unconnected with his present
situation. He remembered his father, for instance: a worthy business
man, who at an unfortunate crisis in his affairs went quietly to bed
and died forthwith in a state of resignation. Jukes did not recall these
circumstances, of course, but remaining otherwise unconcerned he seemed
to see distinctly the poor man's face; a certain game of nap played when
quite a boy in Table Bay on board a ship, since lost with all hands;
the thick eyebrows of his first skipper; and without any emotion, as
he might years ago have walked listlessly into her room and found her
sitting there with a book, he remembered his mother--dead, too, now--the
resolute woman, left badly off, who had been very firm in his bringing
up.

It could not have lasted more than a second, perhaps not so much. A
heavy arm had fallen about his shoulders; Captain MacWhirr's voice was
speaking his name into his ear.

"Jukes! Jukes!"

He detected the tone of deep concern. The wind had thrown its weight
on the ship, trying to pin her down amongst the seas. They made a clean
breach over her, as over a deep-swimming log; and the gathered weight
of crashes menaced monstrously from afar. The breakers flung out of the
night with a ghostly light on their crests--the light of sea-foam that
in a ferocious, boiling-up pale flash showed upon the slender body of
the ship the toppling rush, the downfall, and the seething mad scurry
of each wave. Never for a moment could she shake herself clear of
the water; Jukes, rigid, perceived in her motion the ominous sign of
haphazard floundering. She was no longer struggling intelligently. It
was the beginning of the end; and the note of busy concern in Captain
MacWhirr's voice sickened him like an exhibition of blind and pernicious
folly.

The spell of the storm had fallen upon Jukes. He was penetrated by it,
absorbed by it; he was rooted in it with a rigour of dumb attention.
Captain MacWhirr persisted in his cries, but the wind got between them
like a solid wedge. He hung round Jukes' neck as heavy as a millstone,
and suddenly the sides of their heads knocked together.

"Jukes! Mr. Jukes, I say!"

He had to answer that voice that would not be silenced. He answered in
the customary manner: ". . . Yes, sir."

And directly, his heart, corrupted by the storm that breeds a craving
for peace, rebelled against the tyranny of training and command.

Captain MacWhirr had his mate's head fixed firm in the crook of his
elbow, and pressed it to his yelling lips mysteriously. Sometimes
Jukes would break in, admonishing hastily: "Look out, sir!" or Captain
MacWhirr would bawl an earnest exhortation to "Hold hard, there!" and
the whole black universe seemed to reel together with the ship. They
paused. She floated yet. And Captain MacWhirr would resume, his shouts.
". . . . Says . . . whole lot . . . fetched away. . . . Ought to see
. . . what's the matter."

Directly the full force of the hurricane had struck the ship, every part
of her deck became untenable; and the sailors, dazed and dismayed, took
shelter in the port alleyway under the bridge. It had a door aft, which
they shut; it was very black, cold, and dismal. At each heavy fling of
the ship they would groan all together in the dark, and tons of water
could be heard scuttling about as if trying to get at them from above.
The boatswain had been keeping up a gruff talk, but a more unreasonable
lot of men, he said afterwards, he had never been with. They were snug
enough there, out of harm's way, and not wanted to do anything, either;
and yet they did nothing but grumble and complain peevishly like so many
sick kids. Finally, one of them said that if there had been at least
some light to see each other's noses by, it wouldn't be so bad. It was
making him crazy, he declared, to lie there in the dark waiting for the
blamed hooker to sink.

"Why don't you step outside, then, and be done with it at once?" the
boatswain turned on him.

This called up a shout of execration. The boatswain found himself
overwhelmed with reproaches of all sorts. They seemed to take it ill
that a lamp was not instantly created for them out of nothing. They
would whine after a light to get drowned by--anyhow! And though the
unreason of their revilings was patent--since no one could hope to reach
the lamp-room, which was forward--he became greatly distressed. He did
not think it was decent of them to be nagging at him like this. He told
them so, and was met by general contumely. He sought refuge, therefore,
in an embittered silence. At the same time their grumbling and sighing
and muttering worried him greatly, but by-and-by it occurred to him that
there were six globe lamps hung in the 'tween-deck, and that there could
be no harm in depriving the coolies of one of them.

The Nan-Shan had an athwartship coal-bunker, which, being at times used
as cargo space, communicated by an iron door with the fore 'tween-deck.
It was empty then, and its manhole was the foremost one in the alleyway.
The boatswain could get in, therefore, without coming out on deck at
all; but to his great surprise he found he could induce no one to help
him in taking off the manhole cover. He groped for it all the same, but
one of the crew lying in his way refused to budge.

"Why, I only want to get you that blamed light you are crying for," he
expostulated, almost pitifully.

Somebody told him to go and put his head in a bag. He regretted he could
not recognize the voice, and that it was too dark to see, otherwise,
as he said, he would have put a head on that son of a sea-cook, anyway,
sink or swim. Nevertheless, he had made up his mind to show them he
could get a light, if he were to die for it.

Through the violence of the ship's rolling, every movement was
dangerous. To be lying down seemed labour enough. He nearly broke
his neck dropping into the bunker. He fell on his back, and was sent
shooting helplessly from side to side in the dangerous company of a
heavy iron bar--a coal-trimmer's slice probably--left down there by
somebody. This thing made him as nervous as though it had been a
wild beast. He could not see it, the inside of the bunker coated with
coal-dust being perfectly and impenetrably black; but he heard it
sliding and clattering, and striking here and there, always in the
neighbourhood of his head. It seemed to make an extraordinary noise,
too--to give heavy thumps as though it had been as big as a bridge
girder. This was remarkable enough for him to notice while he was flung
from port to starboard and back again, and clawing desperately the
smooth sides of the bunker in the endeavour to stop himself. The door
into the 'tween-deck not fitting quite true, he saw a thread of dim
light at the bottom.

Being a sailor, and a still active man, he did not want much of a chance
to regain his feet; and as luck would have it, in scrambling up he put
his hand on the iron slice, picking it up as he rose. Otherwise he would
have been afraid of the thing breaking his legs, or at least knocking
him down again. At first he stood still. He felt unsafe in this darkness
that seemed to make the ship's motion unfamiliar, unforeseen, and
difficult to counteract. He felt so much shaken for a moment that he
dared not move for fear of "taking charge again." He had no mind to get
battered to pieces in that bunker.

He had struck his head twice; he was dazed a little. He seemed to hear
yet so plainly the clatter and bangs of the iron slice flying about
his ears that he tightened his grip to prove to himself he had it there
safely in his hand. He was vaguely amazed at the plainness with which
down there he could hear the gale raging. Its howls and shrieks seemed
to take on, in the emptiness of the bunker, something of the human
character, of human rage and pain--being not vast but infinitely
poignant. And there were, with every roll, thumps, too--profound,
ponderous thumps, as if a bulky object of five-ton weight or so had got
play in the hold. But there was no such thing in the cargo. Something on
deck? Impossible. Or alongside? Couldn't be.

He thought all this quickly, clearly, competently, like a seaman, and
in the end remained puzzled. This noise, though, came deadened from
outside, together with the washing and pouring of water on deck above
his head. Was it the wind? Must be. It made down there a row like the
shouting of a big lot of crazed men. And he discovered in himself
a desire for a light, too--if only to get drowned by--and a nervous
anxiety to get out of that bunker as quickly as possible.

He pulled back the bolt: the heavy iron plate turned on its hinges; and
it was as though he had opened the door to the sounds of the tempest.
A gust of hoarse yelling met him: the air was still; and the rushing
of water overhead was covered by a tumult of strangled, throaty shrieks
that produced an effect of desperate confusion. He straddled his legs
the whole width of the doorway and stretched his neck. And at first
he perceived only what he had come to seek: six small yellow flames
swinging violently on the great body of the dusk.

It was stayed like the gallery of a mine, with a row of stanchions
in the middle, and cross-beams overhead, penetrating into the gloom
ahead--indefinitely. And to port there loomed, like the caving in of
one of the sides, a bulky mass with a slanting outline. The whole place,
with the shadows and the shapes, moved all the time. The boatswain
glared: the ship lurched to starboard, and a great howl came from that
mass that had the slant of fallen earth.

Pieces of wood whizzed past. Planks, he thought, inexpressibly startled,
and flinging back his head. At his feet a man went sliding over,
open-eyed, on his back, straining with uplifted arms for nothing: and
another came bounding like a detached stone with his head between his
legs and his hands clenched. His pigtail whipped in the air; he made a
grab at the boatswain's legs, and from his opened hand a bright white
disc rolled against the boatswain's foot. He recognized a silver dollar,
and yelled at it with astonishment. With a precipitated sound of
trampling and shuffling of bare feet, and with guttural cries, the mound
of writhing bodies piled up to port detached itself from the ship's side
and sliding, inert and struggling, shifted to starboard, with a dull,
brutal thump. The cries ceased. The boatswain heard a long moan through
the roar and whistling of the wind; he saw an inextricable confusion of
heads and shoulders, naked soles kicking upwards, fists raised, tumbling
backs, legs, pigtails, faces.

"Good Lord!" he cried, horrified, and banged-to the iron door upon this
vision.

This was what he had come on the bridge to tell. He could not keep it
to himself; and on board ship there is only one man to whom it is
worth while to unburden yourself. On his passage back the hands in the
alleyway swore at him for a fool. Why didn't he bring that lamp? What
the devil did the coolies matter to anybody? And when he came out, the
extremity of the ship made what went on inside of her appear of little
moment.

At first he thought he had left the alleyway in the very moment of her
sinking. The bridge ladders had been washed away, but an enormous sea
filling the after-deck floated him up. After that he had to lie on his
stomach for some time, holding to a ring-bolt, getting his breath now
and then, and swallowing salt water. He struggled farther on his hands
and knees, too frightened and distracted to turn back. In this way
he reached the after-part of the wheelhouse. In that comparatively
sheltered spot he found the second mate.

The boatswain was pleasantly surprised--his impression being that
everybody on deck must have been washed away a long time ago. He asked
eagerly where the Captain was.

The second mate was lying low, like a malignant little animal under a
hedge.

"Captain? Gone overboard, after getting us into this mess." The mate,
too, for all he knew or cared. Another fool. Didn't matter. Everybody
was going by-and-by.

The boatswain crawled out again into the strength of the wind; not
because he much expected to find anybody, he said, but just to get away
from "that man." He crawled out as outcasts go to face an inclement
world. Hence his great joy at finding Jukes and the Captain. But what
was going on in the 'tween-deck was to him a minor matter by that time.
Besides, it was difficult to make yourself heard. But he managed to
convey the idea that the Chinaman had broken adrift together with their
boxes, and that he had come up on purpose to report this. As to the
hands, they were all right. Then, appeased, he subsided on the deck in
a sitting posture, hugging with his arms and legs the stand of the
engine-room telegraph--an iron casting as thick as a post. When that
went, why, he expected he would go, too. He gave no more thought to the
coolies.


Captain MacWhirr had made Jukes understand that he wanted him to go down
below--to see.

"What am I to do then, sir?" And the trembling of his whole wet body
caused Jukes' voice to sound like bleating.

"See first . . . Boss'n . . . says . . . adrift."

"That boss'n is a confounded fool," howled Jukes, shakily.

The absurdity of the demand made upon him revolted Jukes. He was as
unwilling to go as if the moment he had left the deck the ship were sure
to sink.

"I must know . . . can't leave. . . ."

"They'll settle, sir."

"Fight . . . boss'n says they fight. . . . Why? Can't have . . .
fighting . . . board ship. . . . Much rather keep you here . . . case
. . . I should . . . washed overboard myself. . . . Stop it . . . some
way. You see and tell me . . . through engine-room tube. Don't want you
. . . come up here . . . too often. Dangerous . . . moving about . . .
deck."

Jukes, held with his head in chancery, had to listen to what seemed
horrible suggestions.

"Don't want . . . you get lost . . . so long . . . ship isn't. . . . .
Rout . . . Good man . . . Ship . . . may . . . through this . . . all
right yet."

All at once Jukes understood he would have to go.

"Do you think she may?" he screamed.

But the wind devoured the reply, out of which Jukes heard only the one
word, pronounced with great energy ". . . . Always. . . ."

Captain MacWhirr released Jukes, and bending over the boatswain, yelled,
"Get back with the mate." Jukes only knew that the arm was gone off
his shoulders. He was dismissed with his orders--to do what? He was
exasperated into letting go his hold carelessly, and on the instant
was blown away. It seemed to him that nothing could stop him from being
blown right over the stern. He flung himself down hastily, and the
boatswain, who was following, fell on him.

"Don't you get up yet, sir," cried the boatswain. "No hurry!"

A sea swept over. Jukes understood the boatswain to splutter that the
bridge ladders were gone. "I'll lower you down, sir, by your hands,"
he screamed. He shouted also something about the smoke-stack being
as likely to go overboard as not. Jukes thought it very possible, and
imagined the fires out, the ship helpless. . . . The boatswain by his
side kept on yelling. "What? What is it?" Jukes cried distressfully; and
the other repeated, "What would my old woman say if she saw me now?"

In the alleyway, where a lot of water had got in and splashed in the
dark, the men were still as death, till Jukes stumbled against one of
them and cursed him savagely for being in the way. Two or three voices
then asked, eager and weak, "Any chance for us, sir?"

"What's the matter with you fools?" he said brutally. He felt as though
he could throw himself down amongst them and never move any more. But
they seemed cheered; and in the midst of obsequious warnings, "Look
out! Mind that manhole lid, sir," they lowered him into the bunker. The
boatswain tumbled down after him, and as soon as he had picked himself
up he remarked, "She would say, 'Serve you right, you old fool, for
going to sea.'"

The boatswain had some means, and made a point of alluding to them
frequently. His wife--a fat woman--and two grown-up daughters kept a
greengrocer's shop in the East-end of London.

In the dark, Jukes, unsteady on his legs, listened to a faint thunderous
patter. A deadened screaming went on steadily at his elbow, as it were;
and from above the louder tumult of the storm descended upon these near
sounds. His head swam. To him, too, in that bunker, the motion of the
ship seemed novel and menacing, sapping his resolution as though he had
never been afloat before.

He had half a mind to scramble out again; but the remembrance of Captain
MacWhirr's voice made this impossible. His orders were to go and see.
What was the good of it, he wanted to know. Enraged, he told himself he
would see--of course. But the boatswain, staggering clumsily, warned him
to be careful how he opened that door; there was a blamed fight going
on. And Jukes, as if in great bodily pain, desired irritably to know
what the devil they were fighting for.

"Dollars! Dollars, sir. All their rotten chests got burst open. Blamed
money skipping all over the place, and they are tumbling after it head
over heels--tearing and biting like anything. A regular little hell in
there."

Jukes convulsively opened the door. The short boatswain peered under his
arm.

One of the lamps had gone out, broken perhaps. Rancorous, guttural cries
burst out loudly on their ears, and a strange panting sound, the working
of all these straining breasts. A hard blow hit the side of the ship:
water fell above with a stunning shock, and in the forefront of the
gloom, where the air was reddish and thick, Jukes saw a head bang the
deck violently, two thick calves waving on high, muscular arms twined
round a naked body, a yellow-face, open-mouthed and with a set wild
stare, look up and slide away. An empty chest clattered turning over;
a man fell head first with a jump, as if lifted by a kick; and farther
off, indistinct, others streamed like a mass of rolling stones down
a bank, thumping the deck with their feet and flourishing their arms
wildly. The hatchway ladder was loaded with coolies swarming on it
like bees on a branch. They hung on the steps in a crawling, stirring
cluster, beating madly with their fists the underside of the battened
hatch, and the headlong rush of the water above was heard in the
intervals of their yelling. The ship heeled over more, and they began
to drop off: first one, then two, then all the rest went away together,
falling straight off with a great cry.

Jukes was confounded. The boatswain, with gruff anxiety, begged him,
"Don't you go in there, sir."

The whole place seemed to twist upon itself, jumping incessantly the
while; and when the ship rose to a sea Jukes fancied that all these men
would be shot upon him in a body. He backed out, swung the door to, and
with trembling hands pushed at the bolt. . . .

As soon as his mate had gone Captain MacWhirr, left alone on the bridge,
sidled and staggered as far as the wheelhouse. Its door being hinged
forward, he had to fight the gale for admittance, and when at last he
managed to enter, it was with an instantaneous clatter and a bang, as
though he had been fired through the wood. He stood within, holding on
to the handle.

The steering-gear leaked steam, and in the confined space the glass of
the binnacle made a shiny oval of light in a thin white fog. The wind
howled, hummed, whistled, with sudden booming gusts that rattled
the doors and shutters in the vicious patter of sprays. Two coils of
lead-line and a small canvas bag hung on a long lanyard, swung wide off,
and came back clinging to the bulkheads. The gratings underfoot were
nearly afloat; with every sweeping blow of a sea, water squirted
violently through the cracks all round the door, and the man at the
helm had flung down his cap, his coat, and stood propped against the
gear-casing in a striped cotton shirt open on his breast. The little
brass wheel in his hands had the appearance of a bright and fragile
toy. The cords of his neck stood hard and lean, a dark patch lay in the
hollow of his throat, and his face was still and sunken as in death.

Captain MacWhirr wiped his eyes. The sea that had nearly taken him
overboard had, to his great annoyance, washed his sou'-wester hat off
his bald head. The fluffy, fair hair, soaked and darkened, resembled a
mean skein of cotton threads festooned round his bare skull. His face,
glistening with sea-water, had been made crimson with the wind, with
the sting of sprays. He looked as though he had come off sweating from
before a furnace.

"You here?" he muttered, heavily.

The second mate had found his way into the wheelhouse some time before.
He had fixed himself in a corner with his knees up, a fist pressed
against each temple; and this attitude suggested rage, sorrow,
resignation, surrender, with a sort of concentrated unforgiveness. He
said mournfully and defiantly, "Well, it's my watch below now: ain't
it?"

The steam gear clattered, stopped, clattered again; and the helmsman's
eyeballs seemed to project out of a hungry face as if the compass card
behind the binnacle glass had been meat. God knows how long he had been
left there to steer, as if forgotten by all his shipmates. The bells had
not been struck; there had been no reliefs; the ship's routine had gone
down wind; but he was trying to keep her head north-north-east. The
rudder might have been gone for all he knew, the fires out, the engines
broken down, the ship ready to roll over like a corpse. He was
anxious not to get muddled and lose control of her head, because the
compass-card swung far both ways, wriggling on the pivot, and sometimes
seemed to whirl right round. He suffered from mental stress. He was
horribly afraid, also, of the wheelhouse going. Mountains of water kept
on tumbling against it. When the ship took one of her desperate dives
the corners of his lips twitched.

Captain MacWhirr looked up at the wheelhouse clock. Screwed to the
bulk-head, it had a white face on which the black hands appeared to
stand quite still. It was half-past one in the morning.

"Another day," he muttered to himself.

The second mate heard him, and lifting his head as one grieving amongst
ruins, "You won't see it break," he exclaimed. His wrists and his knees
could be seen to shake violently. "No, by God! You won't. . . ."

He took his face again between his fists.

The body of the helmsman had moved slightly, but his head didn't budge
on his neck,--like a stone head fixed to look one way from a column.
During a roll that all but took his booted legs from under him, and
in the very stagger to save himself, Captain MacWhirr said austerely,
"Don't you pay any attention to what that man says." And then, with an
indefinable change of tone, very grave, he added, "He isn't on duty."

The sailor said nothing.

The hurricane boomed, shaking the little place, which seemed air-tight;
and the light of the binnacle flickered all the time.

"You haven't been relieved," Captain MacWhirr went on, looking down. "I
want you to stick to the helm, though, as long as you can. You've
got the hang of her. Another man coming here might make a mess of it.
Wouldn't do. No child's play. And the hands are probably busy with a job
down below. . . . Think you can?"

The steering-gear leaped into an abrupt short clatter, stopped
smouldering like an ember; and the still man, with a motionless gaze,
burst out, as if all the passion in him had gone into his lips: "By
Heavens, sir! I can steer for ever if nobody talks to me."

"Oh! aye! All right. . . ." The Captain lifted his eyes for the first
time to the man, ". . . Hackett."

And he seemed to dismiss this matter from his mind. He stooped to the
engine-room speaking-tube, blew in, and bent his head. Mr. Rout below
answered, and at once Captain MacWhirr put his lips to the mouthpiece.

With the uproar of the gale around him he applied alternately his lips
and his ear, and the engineer's voice mounted to him, harsh and as if
out of the heat of an engagement. One of the stokers was disabled,
the others had given in, the second engineer and the donkey-man were
firing-up. The third engineer was standing by the steam-valve. The
engines were being tended by hand. How was it above?

"Bad enough. It mostly rests with you," said Captain MacWhirr. Was the
mate down there yet? No? Well, he would be presently. Would Mr. Rout
let him talk through the speaking-tube?--through the deck speaking-tube,
because he--the Captain--was going out again on the bridge directly.
There was some trouble amongst the Chinamen. They were fighting, it
seemed. Couldn't allow fighting anyhow. . . .

Mr. Rout had gone away, and Captain MacWhirr could feel against his ear
the pulsation of the engines, like the beat of the ship's heart. Mr.
Rout's voice down there shouted something distantly. The ship pitched
headlong, the pulsation leaped with a hissing tumult, and stopped dead.
Captain MacWhirr's face was impassive, and his eyes were fixed aimlessly
on the crouching shape of the second mate. Again Mr. Rout's voice
cried out in the depths, and the pulsating beats recommenced, with slow
strokes--growing swifter.

Mr. Rout had returned to the tube. "It don't matter much what they do,"
he said, hastily; and then, with irritation, "She takes these dives as
if she never meant to come up again."

"Awful sea," said the Captain's voice from above.

"Don't let me drive her under," barked Solomon Rout up the pipe.

"Dark and rain. Can't see what's coming," uttered the voice.
"Must--keep--her--moving--enough to steer--and chance it," it went on to
state distinctly.

"I am doing as much as I dare."

"We are--getting--smashed up--a good deal up here," proceeded the voice
mildly. "Doing--fairly well--though. Of course, if the wheelhouse should
go. . . ."

Mr. Rout, bending an attentive ear, muttered peevishly something under
his breath.

But the deliberate voice up there became animated to ask: "Jukes turned
up yet?" Then, after a short wait, "I wish he would bear a hand. I want
him to be done and come up here in case of anything. To look after the
ship. I am all alone. The second mate's lost. . . ."

"What?" shouted Mr. Rout into the engine-room, taking his head away.
Then up the tube he cried, "Gone overboard?" and clapped his ear to.

"Lost his nerve," the voice from above continued in a matter-of-fact
tone. "Damned awkward circumstance."

Mr. Rout, listening with bowed neck, opened his eyes wide at this.
However, he heard something like the sounds of a scuffle and broken
exclamations coming down to him. He strained his hearing; and all the
time Beale, the third engineer, with his arms uplifted, held between
the palms of his hands the rim of a little black wheel projecting at the
side of a big copper pipe.

He seemed to be poising it above his head, as though it were a correct
attitude in some sort of game.

To steady himself, he pressed his shoulder against the white bulkhead,
one knee bent, and a sweat-rag tucked in his belt hanging on his hip.
His smooth cheek was begrimed and flushed, and the coal dust on his
eyelids, like the black pencilling of a make-up, enhanced the liquid
brilliance of the whites, giving to his youthful face something of a
feminine, exotic and fascinating aspect. When the ship pitched he would
with hasty movements of his hands screw hard at the little wheel.

"Gone crazy," began the Captain's voice suddenly in the tube. "Rushed at
me. . . . Just now. Had to knock him down. . . . This minute. You heard,
Mr. Rout?"

"The devil!" muttered Mr. Rout. "Look out, Beale!"

His shout rang out like the blast of a warning trumpet, between the iron
walls of the engine-room. Painted white, they rose high into the dusk of
the skylight, sloping like a roof; and the whole lofty space resembled
the interior of a monument, divided by floors of iron grating, with
lights flickering at different levels, and a mass of gloom lingering in
the middle, within the columnar stir of machinery under the motionless
swelling of the cylinders. A loud and wild resonance, made up of all the
noises of the hurricane, dwelt in the still warmth of the air. There was
in it the smell of hot metal, of oil, and a slight mist of steam. The
blows of the sea seemed to traverse it in an unringing, stunning shock,
from side to side.

Gleams, like pale long flames, trembled upon the polish of metal; from
the flooring below the enormous crank-heads emerged in their turns
with a flash of brass and steel--going over; while the connecting-rods,
big-jointed, like skeleton limbs, seemed to thrust them down and pull
them up again with an irresistible precision. And deep in the half-light
other rods dodged deliberately to and fro, crossheads nodded, discs
of metal rubbed smoothly against each other, slow and gentle, in a
commingling of shadows and gleams.

Sometimes all those powerful and unerring movements would slow down
simultaneously, as if they had been the functions of a living organism,
stricken suddenly by the blight of languor; and Mr. Rout's eyes would
blaze darker in his long sallow face. He was fighting this fight in a
pair of carpet slippers. A short shiny jacket barely covered his loins,
and his white wrists protruded far out of the tight sleeves, as though
the emergency had added to his stature, had lengthened his limbs,
augmented his pallor, hollowed his eyes.

He moved, climbing high up, disappearing low down, with a restless,
purposeful industry, and when he stood still, holding the guard-rail in
front of the starting-gear, he would keep glancing to the right at the
steam-gauge, at the water-gauge, fixed upon the white wall in the light
of a swaying lamp. The mouths of two speaking-tubes gaped stupidly at his
elbow, and the dial of the engine-room telegraph resembled a clock of
large diameter, bearing on its face curt words instead of figures. The
grouped letters stood out heavily black, around the pivot-head of the
indicator, emphatically symbolic of loud exclamations: AHEAD, ASTERN,
SLOW, Half, STAND BY; and the fat black hand pointed downwards to the
word FULL, which, thus singled out, captured the eye as a sharp cry
secures attention.

The wood-encased bulk of the low-pressure cylinder, frowning portly from
above, emitted a faint wheeze at every thrust, and except for that
low hiss the engines worked their steel limbs headlong or slow with a
silent, determined smoothness. And all this, the white walls, the moving
steel, the floor plates under Solomon Rout's feet, the floors of
iron grating above his head, the dusk and the gleams, uprose and sank
continuously, with one accord, upon the harsh wash of the waves against
the ship's side. The whole loftiness of the place, booming hollow to the
great voice of the wind, swayed at the top like a tree, would go over
bodily, as if borne down this way and that by the tremendous blasts.

"You've got to hurry up," shouted Mr. Rout, as soon as he saw Jukes
appear in the stokehold doorway.

Jukes' glance was wandering and tipsy; his red face was puffy, as though
he had overslept himself. He had had an arduous road, and had travelled
over it with immense vivacity, the agitation of his mind corresponding
to the exertions of his body. He had rushed up out of the bunker,
stumbling in the dark alleyway amongst a lot of bewildered men who, trod
upon, asked "What's up, sir?" in awed mutters all round him;--down the
stokehold ladder, missing many iron rungs in his hurry, down into a
place deep as a well, black as Tophet, tipping over back and forth like
a see-saw. The water in the bilges thundered at each roll, and lumps of
coal skipped to and fro, from end to end, rattling like an avalanche of
pebbles on a slope of iron.

Somebody in there moaned with pain, and somebody else could be seen
crouching over what seemed the prone body of a dead man; a lusty voice
blasphemed; and the glow under each fire-door was like a pool of flaming
blood radiating quietly in a velvety blackness.

A gust of wind struck upon the nape of Jukes' neck and next moment
he felt it streaming about his wet ankles. The stokehold ventilators
hummed: in front of the six fire-doors two wild figures, stripped to the
waist, staggered and stooped, wrestling with two shovels.

"Hallo! Plenty of draught now," yelled the second engineer at once, as
though he had been all the time looking out for Jukes. The donkeyman,
a dapper little chap with a dazzling fair skin and a tiny, gingery
moustache, worked in a sort of mute transport. They were keeping a full
head of steam, and a profound rumbling, as of an empty furniture van
trotting over a bridge, made a sustained bass to all the other noises of
the place.

"Blowing off all the time," went on yelling the second. With a sound as
of a hundred scoured saucepans, the orifice of a ventilator spat upon
his shoulder a sudden gush of salt water, and he volleyed a stream of
curses upon all things on earth including his own soul, ripping and
raving, and all the time attending to his business. With a sharp clash
of metal the ardent pale glare of the fire opened upon his bullet head,
showing his spluttering lips, his insolent face, and with another clang
closed like the white-hot wink of an iron eye.

"Where's the blooming ship? Can you tell me? blast my eyes! Under
water--or what? It's coming down here in tons. Are the condemned cowls
gone to Hades? Hey? Don't you know anything--you jolly sailor-man you
. . . ?"

Jukes, after a bewildered moment, had been helped by a roll to dart
through; and as soon as his eyes took in the comparative vastness, peace
and brilliance of the engine-room, the ship, setting her stern heavily
in the water, sent him charging head down upon Mr. Rout.

The chief's arm, long like a tentacle, and straightening as if worked
by a spring, went out to meet him, and deflected his rush into a
spin towards the speaking-tubes. At the same time Mr. Rout repeated
earnestly:

"You've got to hurry up, whatever it is."

Jukes yelled "Are you there, sir?" and listened. Nothing. Suddenly the
roar of the wind fell straight into his ear, but presently a small voice
shoved aside the shouting hurricane quietly.

"You, Jukes?--Well?"

Jukes was ready to talk: it was only time that seemed to be wanting. It
was easy enough to account for everything. He could perfectly imagine
the coolies battened down in the reeking 'tween-deck, lying sick and
scared between the rows of chests. Then one of these chests--or perhaps
several at once--breaking loose in a roll, knocking out others, sides
splitting, lids flying open, and all these clumsy Chinamen rising up in
a body to save their property. Afterwards every fling of the ship would
hurl that tramping, yelling mob here and there, from side to side, in a
whirl of smashed wood, torn clothing, rolling dollars. A struggle once
started, they would be unable to stop themselves. Nothing could stop
them now except main force. It was a disaster. He had seen it, and that
was all he could say. Some of them must be dead, he believed. The rest
would go on fighting. . . .

He sent up his words, tripping over each other, crowding the narrow
tube. They mounted as if into a silence of an enlightened comprehension
dwelling alone up there with a storm. And Jukes wanted to be dismissed
from the face of that odious trouble intruding on the great need of the
ship.



V

He waited. Before his eyes the engines turned with slow labour, that in
the moment of going off into a mad fling would stop dead at Mr. Rout's
shout, "Look out, Beale!" They paused in an intelligent immobility,
stilled in mid-stroke, a heavy crank arrested on the cant, as if
conscious of danger and the passage of time. Then, with a "Now, then!"
from the chief, and the sound of a breath expelled through clenched
teeth, they would accomplish the interrupted revolution and begin
another.

There was the prudent sagacity of wisdom and the deliberation of
enormous strength in their movements. This was their work--this patient
coaxing of a distracted ship over the fury of the waves and into the
very eye of the wind. At times Mr. Rout's chin would sink on his breast,
and he watched them with knitted eyebrows as if lost in thought.

The voice that kept the hurricane out of Jukes' ear began: "Take the
hands with you . . . ," and left off unexpectedly.

"What could I do with them, sir?"

A harsh, abrupt, imperious clang exploded suddenly. The three pairs of
eyes flew up to the telegraph dial to see the hand jump from FULL
to STOP, as if snatched by a devil. And then these three men in the
engineroom had the intimate sensation of a check upon the ship, of a
strange shrinking, as if she had gathered herself for a desperate leap.

"Stop her!" bellowed Mr. Rout.

Nobody--not even Captain MacWhirr, who alone on deck had caught sight of
a white line of foam coming on at such a height that he couldn't believe
his eyes--nobody was to know the steepness of that sea and the awful
depth of the hollow the hurricane had scooped out behind the running
wall of water.

It raced to meet the ship, and, with a pause, as of girding the loins,
the Nan-Shan lifted her bows and leaped. The flames in all the lamps
sank, darkening the engine-room. One went out. With a tearing crash and
a swirling, raving tumult, tons of water fell upon the deck, as though
the ship had darted under the foot of a cataract.

Down there they looked at each other, stunned.

"Swept from end to end, by God!" bawled Jukes.

She dipped into the hollow straight down, as if going over the edge of
the world. The engine-room toppled forward menacingly, like the inside
of a tower nodding in an earthquake. An awful racket, of iron things
falling, came from the stokehold. She hung on this appalling slant long
enough for Beale to drop on his hands and knees and begin to crawl as if
he meant to fly on all fours out of the engine-room, and for Mr. Rout
to turn his head slowly, rigid, cavernous, with the lower jaw dropping.
Jukes had shut his eyes, and his face in a moment became hopelessly
blank and gentle, like the face of a blind man.

At last she rose slowly, staggering, as if she had to lift a mountain
with her bows.

Mr. Rout shut his mouth; Jukes blinked; and little Beale stood up
hastily.

"Another one like this, and that's the last of her," cried the chief.

He and Jukes looked at each other, and the same thought came into their
heads. The Captain! Everything must have been swept away. Steering-gear
gone--ship like a log. All over directly.

"Rush!" ejaculated Mr. Rout thickly, glaring with enlarged, doubtful
eyes at Jukes, who answered him by an irresolute glance.

The clang of the telegraph gong soothed them instantly. The black hand
dropped in a flash from STOP to FULL.

"Now then, Beale!" cried Mr. Rout.

The steam hissed low. The piston-rods slid in and out. Jukes put his
ear to the tube. The voice was ready for him. It said: "Pick up all the
money. Bear a hand now. I'll want you up here." And that was all.

"Sir?" called up Jukes. There was no answer.

He staggered away like a defeated man from the field of battle. He had
got, in some way or other, a cut above his left eyebrow--a cut to the
bone. He was not aware of it in the least: quantities of the China Sea,
large enough to break his neck for him, had gone over his head, had
cleaned, washed, and salted that wound. It did not bleed, but only gaped
red; and this gash over the eye, his dishevelled hair, the disorder of
his clothes, gave him the aspect of a man worsted in a fight with fists.

"Got to pick up the dollars." He appealed to Mr. Rout, smiling pitifully
at random.

"What's that?" asked Mr. Rout, wildly. "Pick up . . . ? I don't care.
. . ." Then, quivering in every muscle, but with an exaggeration of
paternal tone, "Go away now, for God's sake. You deck people'll drive
me silly. There's that second mate been going for the old man. Don't you
know? You fellows are going wrong for want of something to do. . . ."

At these words Jukes discovered in himself the beginnings of anger. Want
of something to do--indeed. . . . Full of hot scorn against the
chief, he turned to go the way he had come. In the stokehold the plump
donkeyman toiled with his shovel mutely, as if his tongue had been cut
out; but the second was carrying on like a noisy, undaunted maniac, who
had preserved his skill in the art of stoking under a marine boiler.

"Hallo, you wandering officer! Hey! Can't you get some of your
slush-slingers to wind up a few of them ashes? I am getting choked with
them here. Curse it! Hallo! Hey! Remember the articles: Sailors and
firemen to assist each other. Hey! D'ye hear?"

Jukes was climbing out frantically, and the other, lifting up his face
after him, howled, "Can't you speak? What are you poking about here for?
What's your game, anyhow?"

A frenzy possessed Jukes. By the time he was back amongst the men in the
darkness of the alleyway, he felt ready to wring all their necks at the
slightest sign of hanging back. The very thought of it exasperated him.
He couldn't hang back. They shouldn't.

The impetuosity with which he came amongst them carried them along. They
had already been excited and startled at all his comings and goings--by
the fierceness and rapidity of his movements; and more felt than seen
in his rushes, he appeared formidable--busied with matters of life and
death that brooked no delay. At his first word he heard them drop into
the bunker one after another obediently, with heavy thumps.

They were not clear as to what would have to be done. "What is it? What
is it?" they were asking each other. The boatswain tried to explain;
the sounds of a great scuffle surprised them: and the mighty shocks,
reverberating awfully in the black bunker, kept them in mind of their
danger. When the boatswain threw open the door it seemed that an eddy of
the hurricane, stealing through the iron sides of the ship, had set all
these bodies whirling like dust: there came to them a confused uproar,
a tempestuous tumult, a fierce mutter, gusts of screams dying away, and
the tramping of feet mingling with the blows of the sea.

For a moment they glared amazed, blocking the doorway. Jukes pushed
through them brutally. He said nothing, and simply darted in. Another
lot of coolies on the ladder, struggling suicidally to break through the
battened hatch to a swamped deck, fell off as before, and he disappeared
under them like a man overtaken by a landslide.

The boatswain yelled excitedly: "Come along. Get the mate out. He'll be
trampled to death. Come on."

They charged in, stamping on breasts, on fingers, on faces, catching
their feet in heaps of clothing, kicking broken wood; but before they
could get hold of him Jukes emerged waist deep in a multitude of clawing
hands. In the instant he had been lost to view, all the buttons of his
jacket had gone, its back had got split up to the collar, his waistcoat
had been torn open. The central struggling mass of Chinamen went over to
the roll, dark, indistinct, helpless, with a wild gleam of many eyes in
the dim light of the lamps.

"Leave me alone--damn you. I am all right," screeched Jukes. "Drive them
forward. Watch your chance when she pitches. Forward with 'em. Drive
them against the bulkhead. Jam 'em up."

The rush of the sailors into the seething 'tween-deck was like a splash
of cold water into a boiling cauldron. The commotion sank for a moment.

The bulk of Chinamen were locked in such a compact scrimmage that,
linking their arms and aided by an appalling dive of the ship, the
seamen sent it forward in one great shove, like a solid block. Behind
their backs small clusters and loose bodies tumbled from side to side.

The boatswain performed prodigious feats of strength. With his long arms
open, and each great paw clutching at a stanchion, he stopped the rush
of seven entwined Chinamen rolling like a boulder. His joints cracked;
he said, "Ha!" and they flew apart. But the carpenter showed the greater
intelligence. Without saying a word to anybody he went back into the
alleyway, to fetch several coils of cargo gear he had seen there--chain
and rope. With these life-lines were rigged.

There was really no resistance. The struggle, however it began, had
turned into a scramble of blind panic. If the coolies had started up
after their scattered dollars they were by that time fighting only
for their footing. They took each other by the throat merely to save
themselves from being hurled about. Whoever got a hold anywhere would
kick at the others who caught at his legs and hung on, till a roll sent
them flying together across the deck.

The coming of the white devils was a terror. Had they come to kill? The
individuals torn out of the ruck became very limp in the seamen's hands:
some, dragged aside by the heels, were passive, like dead bodies, with
open, fixed eyes. Here and there a coolie would fall on his knees as if
begging for mercy; several, whom the excess of fear made unruly, were
hit with hard fists between the eyes, and cowered; while those who were
hurt submitted to rough handling, blinking rapidly without a plaint.
Faces streamed with blood; there were raw places on the shaven heads,
scratches, bruises, torn wounds, gashes. The broken porcelain out of the
chests was mostly responsible for the latter. Here and there a Chinaman,
wild-eyed, with his tail unplaited, nursed a bleeding sole.

They had been ranged closely, after having been shaken into submission,
cuffed a little to allay excitement, addressed in gruff words of
encouragement that sounded like promises of evil. They sat on the deck
in ghastly, drooping rows, and at the end the carpenter, with two hands
to help him, moved busily from place to place, setting taut and hitching
the life-lines. The boatswain, with one leg and one arm embracing a
stanchion, struggled with a lamp pressed to his breast, trying to get
a light, and growling all the time like an industrious gorilla. The
figures of seamen stooped repeatedly, with the movements of gleaners,
and everything was being flung into the bunker: clothing, smashed wood,
broken china, and the dollars, too, gathered up in men's jackets. Now
and then a sailor would stagger towards the doorway with his arms full
of rubbish; and dolorous, slanting eyes followed his movements.

With every roll of the ship the long rows of sitting Celestials would
sway forward brokenly, and her headlong dives knocked together the line
of shaven polls from end to end. When the wash of water rolling on the
deck died away for a moment, it seemed to Jukes, yet quivering from his
exertions, that in his mad struggle down there he had overcome the wind
somehow: that a silence had fallen upon the ship, a silence in which the
sea struck thunderously at her sides.

Everything had been cleared out of the 'tween-deck--all the wreckage,
as the men said. They stood erect and tottering above the level of heads
and drooping shoulders. Here and there a coolie sobbed for his breath.
Where the high light fell, Jukes could see the salient ribs of one, the
yellow, wistful face of another; bowed necks; or would meet a dull stare
directed at his face. He was amazed that there had been no corpses; but
the lot of them seemed at their last gasp, and they appeared to him more
pitiful than if they had been all dead.

Suddenly one of the coolies began to speak. The light came and went on
his lean, straining face; he threw his head up like a baying hound. From
the bunker came the sounds of knocking and the tinkle of some dollars
rolling loose; he stretched out his arm, his mouth yawned black, and the
incomprehensible guttural hooting sounds, that did not seem to belong to
a human language, penetrated Jukes with a strange emotion as if a brute
had tried to be eloquent.

Two more started mouthing what seemed to Jukes fierce denunciations; the
others stirred with grunts and growls. Jukes ordered the hands out of
the 'tweendecks hurriedly. He left last himself, backing through the
door, while the grunts rose to a loud murmur and hands were extended
after him as after a malefactor. The boatswain shot the bolt, and
remarked uneasily, "Seems as if the wind had dropped, sir."

The seamen were glad to get back into the alleyway. Secretly each of
them thought that at the last moment he could rush out on deck--and
that was a comfort. There is something horribly repugnant in the idea
of being drowned under a deck. Now they had done with the Chinamen, they
again became conscious of the ship's position.

Jukes on coming out of the alleyway found himself up to the neck in
the noisy water. He gained the bridge, and discovered he could detect
obscure shapes as if his sight had become preternaturally acute. He saw
faint outlines. They recalled not the familiar aspect of the Nan-Shan,
but something remembered--an old dismantled steamer he had seen years
ago rotting on a mudbank. She recalled that wreck.

There was no wind, not a breath, except the faint currents created by
the lurches of the ship. The smoke tossed out of the funnel was settling
down upon her deck. He breathed it as he passed forward. He felt the
deliberate throb of the engines, and heard small sounds that seemed to
have survived the great uproar: the knocking of broken fittings, the
rapid tumbling of some piece of wreckage on the bridge. He perceived
dimly the squat shape of his captain holding on to a twisted
bridge-rail, motionless and swaying as if rooted to the planks. The
unexpected stillness of the air oppressed Jukes.

"We have done it, sir," he gasped.

"Thought you would," said Captain MacWhirr.

"Did you?" murmured Jukes to himself.

"Wind fell all at once," went on the Captain.

Jukes burst out: "If you think it was an easy job--"

But his captain, clinging to the rail, paid no attention. "According to
the books the worst is not over yet."

"If most of them hadn't been half dead with seasickness and fright, not
one of us would have come out of that 'tween-deck alive," said Jukes.

"Had to do what's fair by them," mumbled MacWhirr, stolidly. "You don't
find everything in books."

"Why, I believe they would have risen on us if I hadn't ordered the
hands out of that pretty quick," continued Jukes with warmth.

After the whisper of their shouts, their ordinary tones, so distinct,
rang out very loud to their ears in the amazing stillness of the air. It
seemed to them they were talking in a dark and echoing vault.

Through a jagged aperture in the dome of clouds the light of a few stars
fell upon the black sea, rising and falling confusedly. Sometimes the
head of a watery cone would topple on board and mingle with the rolling
flurry of foam on the swamped deck; and the Nan-Shan wallowed heavily at
the bottom of a circular cistern of clouds. This ring of dense vapours,
gyrating madly round the calm of the centre, encompassed the ship like
a motionless and unbroken wall of an aspect inconceivably sinister.
Within, the sea, as if agitated by an internal commotion, leaped in
peaked mounds that jostled each other, slapping heavily against her
sides; and a low moaning sound, the infinite plaint of the storm's
fury, came from beyond the limits of the menacing calm. Captain MacWhirr
remained silent, and Jukes' ready ear caught suddenly the faint,
long-drawn roar of some immense wave rushing unseen under that thick
blackness, which made the appalling boundary of his vision.

"Of course," he started resentfully, "they thought we had caught at the
chance to plunder them. Of course! You said--pick up the money. Easier
said than done. They couldn't tell what was in our heads. We came in,
smash--right into the middle of them. Had to do it by a rush."

"As long as it's done . . . ," mumbled the Captain, without attempting
to look at Jukes. "Had to do what's fair."

"We shall find yet there's the devil to pay when this is over," said
Jukes, feeling very sore. "Let them only recover a bit, and you'll
see. They will fly at our throats, sir. Don't forget, sir, she isn't
a British ship now. These brutes know it well, too. The damned Siamese
flag."

"We are on board, all the same," remarked Captain MacWhirr.

"The trouble's not over yet," insisted Jukes, prophetically, reeling and
catching on. "She's a wreck," he added, faintly.

"The trouble's not over yet," assented Captain MacWhirr, half aloud
. . . . "Look out for her a minute."

"Are you going off the deck, sir?" asked Jukes, hurriedly, as if the
storm were sure to pounce upon him as soon as he had been left alone
with the ship.

He watched her, battered and solitary, labouring heavily in a wild scene
of mountainous black waters lit by the gleams of distant worlds. She
moved slowly, breathing into the still core of the hurricane the excess
of her strength in a white cloud of steam--and the deep-toned vibration
of the escape was like the defiant trumpeting of a living creature of
the sea impatient for the renewal of the contest. It ceased suddenly.
The still air moaned. Above Jukes' head a few stars shone into a pit
of black vapours. The inky edge of the cloud-disc frowned upon the ship
under the patch of glittering sky. The stars, too, seemed to look at her
intently, as if for the last time, and the cluster of their splendour
sat like a diadem on a lowering brow.

Captain MacWhirr had gone into the chart-room. There was no light there;
but he could feel the disorder of that place where he used to live
tidily. His armchair was upset. The books had tumbled out on the floor:
he scrunched a piece of glass under his boot. He groped for the matches,
and found a box on a shelf with a deep ledge. He struck one, and
puckering the corners of his eyes, held out the little flame towards
the barometer whose glittering top of glass and metals nodded at him
continuously.

It stood very low--incredibly low, so low that Captain MacWhirr grunted.
The match went out, and hurriedly he extracted another, with thick,
stiff fingers.

Again a little flame flared up before the nodding glass and metal of the
top. His eyes looked at i