istence, not proved to be dependent on causation; in other words,
with the properties of Kinds. It is with these uniformities principally
that the marvelous stories related by travelers are apt to be at variance;
as of men with tails, or with wings, and (until confirmed by experience)
of flying fish; or of ice, in the celebrated anecdote of the Dutch
travelers and the King of Siam. Facts of this description, facts
previously unheard of, but which could not from any known law of causation
be pronounced impossible, are what Hume characterizes as not contrary to
experience, but merely unconformable to it; and Bentham, in his treatise
on Evidence, denominates them facts disconformable _in specie_, as
distinguished from such as are disconformable _in toto_ or in _degree_

In a case of this description, the fact asserted is the existence of a new
Kind; which in itself is not in the slightest degree incredible, and only
to be rejected if the improbability that any variety of object existing at
the particular place and time should not have been discovered sooner, be
greater than that of error or mendacity in the witnesses. Accordingly,
such assertions, when made by credible persons, and of unexplored places,
are not disbelieved, but at most regarded as requiring confirmation from
subsequent observers; unless the alleged properties of the supposed new
Kind are at variance with known properties of some larger kind which
includes it; or, in other words, unless, in the new Kind which is asserted
to exist, some properties are said to have been found disjoined from
others which have always been known to accompany them; as in the case of
Pliny’s men, or any other kind of animal of a structure different from
that which has always been found to co-exist with animal life. On the mode
of dealing with any such case, little needs be added to what has been said
on the same topic in the twenty-second chapter.(203) When the uniformities
of co-existence which the alleged fact would violate, are such as to raise
a strong presumption of their being the result of causation, the fact
which conflicts with them is to be disbelieved; at least provisionally,
and subject to further investigation. When the presumption amounts to a
virtual certainty, as in the case of the general structure of organized
beings, the only question requiring consideration is whether, in phenomena
so little understood, there may not be liabilities to counteraction from
causes hitherto unknown; or whether the phenomena may not be capable of
originating in some other way, which would produce a different set of
derivative uniformities. Where (as in the case of the flying fish, or the
ornithorhynchus) the generalization to which the alleged fact would be an
exception is very special and of limited range, neither of the above
suppositions can be deemed very improbable; and it is generally, in the
case of such alleged anomalies, wise to suspend our judgment, pending the
subsequent inquiries which will not fail to confirm the assertion if it be
true. But when the generalization is very comprehensive, embracing a vast
number and variety of observations, and covering a considerable province
of the domain of nature; then, for reasons which have been fully
explained, such an empirical law comes near to the certainty of an
ascertained law of causation; and any alleged exception to it can not be
admitted, unless on the evidence of some law of causation proved by a
still more complete induction.

Such uniformities in the course of nature as do not bear marks of being
the results of causation are, as we have already seen, admissible as
universal truths with a degree of credence proportioned to their
generality. Those which are true of all things whatever, or at least which
are totally independent of the varieties of Kinds, namely, the laws of
number and extension, to which we may add the law of causation itself, are
probably the only ones, an exception to which is absolutely and
permanently incredible. Accordingly, it is to assertions supposed to be
contradictory to these laws, or to some others coming near to them in
generality, that the word impossibility (at least _total_ impossibility)
seems to be generally confined. Violations of other laws, of special laws
of causation, for instance, are said, by persons studious of accuracy in
expression, to be impossible _in the circumstances of the case_; or
impossible unless some cause had existed which did not exist in the
particular case.(204) Of no assertion, not in contradiction to some of
these very general laws, will more than improbability be asserted by any
cautious person; and improbability not of the highest degree, unless the
time and place in which the fact is said to have occurred, render it
almost certain that the anomaly, if real, could not have been overlooked
by other observers. Suspension of judgment is in all other cases the
resource of the judicious inquirer; provided the testimony in favor of the
anomaly presents, when well sifted, no suspicious circumstances.

But the testimony is scarcely ever found to stand that test, in cases in
which the anomaly is not real. In the instances on record in which a great
number of witnesses, of good reputation and scientific acquirements, have
testified to the truth of something which has turned out untrue, there
have almost always been circumstances which, to a keen observer who had
taken due pains to sift the matter, would have rendered the testimony
untrustworthy. There have generally been means of accounting for the
impression on the senses or minds of the alleged percipients, by
fallacious appearances; or some epidemic delusion, propagated by the
contagious influence of popular feeling, has been concerned in the case;
or some strong interest has been implicated—religious zeal, party feeling,
vanity, or at least the passion for the marvelous, in persons strongly
susceptible of it. When none of these or similar circumstances exist to
account for the apparent strength of the testimony; and where the
assertion is not in contradiction either to those universal laws which
know no counteraction or anomaly, or to the generalizations next in
comprehensiveness to them, but would only amount, if admitted, to the
existence of an unknown cause or an anomalous Kind, in circumstances not
so thoroughly explored but that it is credible that things hitherto
unknown may still come to light; a cautious person will neither admit nor
reject the testimony, but will wait for confirmation at other times and
from other unconnected sources. Such ought to have been the conduct of the
King of Siam when the Dutch travelers affirmed to him the existence of
ice. But an ignorant person is as obstinate in his contemptuous
incredulity as he is unreasonably credulous. Any thing unlike his own
narrow experience he disbelieves, if it flatters no propensity; any
nursery tale is swallowed implicitly by him if it does.

§ 4. I shall now advert to a very serious misapprehension of the
principles of the subject, which has been committed by some of the writers
against Hume’s Essay on Miracles, and by Bishop Butler before them, in
their anxiety to destroy what appeared to them a formidable weapon of
assault against the Christian religion; and the effect of which is
entirely to confound the doctrine of the Grounds of Disbelief. The mistake
consists in overlooking the distinction between (what may be called)
improbability before the fact and improbability after it; or (since, as
Mr. Venn remarks, the distinction of past and future is not the material
circumstance) between the improbability of a mere guess being right, and
the improbability of an alleged fact being true.

Many events are altogether improbable to us, before they have happened, or
before we are informed of their happening, which are not in the least
incredible when we are informed of them, because not contrary to any, even
approximate, induction. In the cast of a perfectly fair die, the chances
are five to one against throwing ace, that is, ace will be thrown on an
average only once in six throws. But this is no reason against believing
that ace was thrown on a given occasion, if any credible witness asserts
it; since though ace is only thrown once in six times, _some_ number which
is only thrown once in six times must have been thrown if the die was
thrown at all. The improbability, then, or, in other words, the
unusualness, of any fact, is no reason for disbelieving it, if the nature
of the case renders it certain that either that or something equally
improbable, that is, equally unusual, did happen. Nor is this all; for
even if the other five sides of the die were all twos, or all threes, yet
as ace would still, on the average, come up once in every six throws, its
coming up in a given throw would be not in any way contradictory to
experience. If we disbelieved all facts which had the chances against them
beforehand, we should believe hardly any thing. We are told that A. B.
died yesterday; the moment before we were so told, the chances against his
having died on that day may have been ten thousand to one; but since he
was certain to die at some time or other, and when he died must
necessarily die on some particular day, while the preponderance of chances
is very great against every day in particular, experience affords no
ground for discrediting any testimony which may be produced to the event’s
having taken place on a given day.

Yet it has been considered by Dr. Campbell and others, as a complete
answer to Hume’s doctrine (that things are incredible which are _contrary_
to the uniform course of experience), that we do not disbelieve, merely
because the chances were against them, things in strict _conformity_ to
the uniform course of experience; that we do not disbelieve an alleged
fact merely because the combination of causes on which it depends occurs
only once in a certain number of times. It is evident that whatever is
shown by observation, or can be proved from laws of nature, to occur in a
certain proportion (however small) of the whole number of possible cases,
is not contrary to experience; though we are right in disbelieving it, if
some other supposition respecting the matter in question involves, on the
whole, a less departure from the ordinary course of events. Yet on such
grounds as this have able writers been led to the extraordinary
conclusion, that nothing supported by credible testimony ought ever to be
disbelieved.

§ 5. We have considered two species of events, commonly said to be
improbable; one kind which are in no way extraordinary, but which, having
an immense preponderance of chances against them, are improbable until
they are affirmed, but no longer; another kind which, being contrary to
some recognized law of nature, are incredible on any amount of testimony
except such as would be sufficient to shake our belief in the law itself.
But between these two classes of events, there is an intermediate class,
consisting of what are commonly termed Coincidences: in other words, those
combinations of chances which present some peculiar and unexpected
regularity, assimilating them, in so far, to the results of law. As if,
for example, in a lottery of a thousand tickets, the numbers should be
drawn in the exact order of what are called the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3,
etc. We have still to consider the principles of evidence applicable to
this case: whether there is any difference between coincidences and
ordinary events, in the amount of testimony or other evidence necessary to
render them credible.

It is certain that on every rational principle of expectation, a
combination of this peculiar sort may be expected quite as often as any
other given series of a thousand numbers; that with perfectly fair dice,
sixes will be thrown twice, thrice, or any number of times in succession,
quite as often in a thousand or a million throws, as any other succession
of numbers fixed upon beforehand; and that no judicious player would give
greater odds against the one series than against the other.
Notwithstanding this, there is a general disposition to regard the one as
much more improbable than the other, and as requiring much stronger
evidence to make it credible. Such is the force of this impression, that
it has led some thinkers to the conclusion, that nature has greater
difficulty in producing regular combinations than irregular ones; or in
other words, that there is some general tendency of things, some law,
which prevents regular combinations from occurring, or at least from
occurring so often as others. Among these thinkers may be numbered
D’Alembert; who, in an Essay on Probabilities to be found in the fifth
volume of his _Mélanges_, contends that regular combinations, though
equally probable according to the mathematical theory with any others, are
physically less probable. He appeals to common sense, or, in other words,
to common impressions; saying, if dice thrown repeatedly in our presence
gave sixes every time, should we not, before the number of throws had
reached ten (not to speak of thousands of millions), be ready to affirm,
with the most positive conviction, that the dice were false?

The common and natural impression is in favor of D’Alembert: the regular
series would be thought much more unlikely than an irregular. But this
common impression is, I apprehend, merely grounded on the fact, that
scarcely any body remembers to have ever seen one of these peculiar
coincidences: the reason of which is simply that no one’s experience
extends to any thing like the number of trials, within which that or any
other given combination of events can be expected to happen. The chance of
sixes on a single throw of two dice being 1/36, the chance of sixes ten
times in succession is 1 divided by the tenth power of 36; in other words,
such a concurrence is only likely to happen once in 3,656,158,440,062,976
trials, a number which no dice-player’s experience comes up to a millionth
part of. But if, instead of sixes ten times, any other given succession of
ten throws had been fixed upon, it would have been exactly as unlikely
that in any individual’s experience that particular succession had ever
occurred; although this does not _seem_ equally improbable, because no one
would be likely to have remembered whether it had occurred or not, and
because the comparison is tacitly made, not between sixes ten times and
any one particular series of throws, but between all regular and all
irregular successions taken together.

That (as D’Alembert says) if the succession of sixes was actually thrown
before our eyes, we should ascribe it not to chance, but to unfairness in
the dice, is unquestionably true. But this arises from a totally different
principle. We should then be considering, not the probability of the fact
in itself, but the comparative probability with which, when it is known to
have happened, it may be referred to one or to another cause. The regular
series is not at all less likely than the irregular one to be brought
about by chance, but it is much more likely than the irregular one to be
produced by design; or by some general cause operating through the
structure of the dice. It is the nature of casual combinations to produce
a repetition of the same event, as often and no oftener than any other
series of events. But it is the nature of general causes to reproduce, in
the same circumstances, always the same event. Common sense and science
alike dictate that, all other things being the same, we should rather
attribute the effect to a cause which if real would be very likely to
produce it, than to a cause which would be very unlikely to produce it.
According to Laplace’s sixth theorem, which we demonstrated in a former
chapter, the difference of probability arising from the superior
_efficacy_ of the constant cause, unfairness in the dice, would after a
very few throws far outweigh any antecedent probability which there could
be against its existence.

D’Alembert should have put the question in another manner. He should have
supposed that we had ourselves previously tried the dice, and knew by
ample experience that they were fair. Another person then tries them in
our absence, and assures us that he threw sixes ten times in succession.
Is the assertion credible or not? Here the effect to be accounted for is
not the occurrence itself, but the fact of the witness’s asserting it.
This may arise either from its having really happened, or from some other
cause. What we have to estimate is the comparative probability of these
two suppositions.

If the witness affirmed that he had thrown any other series of numbers,
supposing him to be a person of veracity, and tolerable accuracy, and to
profess that he took particular notice, we should believe him. But the ten
sixes are exactly as likely to have been really thrown as the other
series. If, therefore, this assertion is less credible than the other, the
reason must be, not that it is less likely than the other to be made
truly, but that it is more likely than the other to be made falsely.

One reason obviously presents itself why what is called a coincidence,
should be oftener asserted falsely than an ordinary combination. It
excites wonder. It gratifies the love of the marvelous. The motives,
therefore, to falsehood, one of the most frequent of which is the desire
to astonish, operate more strongly in favor of this kind of assertion than
of the other kind. Thus far there is evidently more reason for
discrediting an alleged coincidence, than a statement in itself not more
probable, but which if made would not be thought remarkable. There are
cases, however, in which the presumption on this ground would be the other
way. There are some witnesses who, the more extraordinary an occurrence
might appear, would be the more anxious to verify it by the utmost
carefulness of observation before they would venture to believe it, and
still more before they would assert it to others.

§ 6. Independently, however, of any peculiar chances of mendacity arising
from the nature of the assertion, Laplace contends, that merely on the
general ground of the fallibility of testimony, a coincidence is not
credible on the same amount of testimony on which we should be warranted
in believing an ordinary combination of events. In order to do justice to
his argument, it is necessary to illustrate it by the example chosen by
himself.

If, says Laplace, there were one thousand tickets in a box, and one only
has been drawn out, then if an eye-witness affirms that the number drawn
was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is not on
that account the less credible; its credibility is equal to the antecedent
probability of the witness’s veracity. But if there were in the box 999
black balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that the white
ball was drawn, the case according to Laplace is very different: the
credibility of his assertion is but a small fraction of what it was in the
former case; the reason of the difference being as follows:

The witnesses of whom we are speaking must, from the nature of the case,
be of a kind whose credibility falls materially short of certainty; let us
suppose, then, the credibility of the witness in the case in question to
be 9/10; that is, let us suppose that in every ten statements which the
witness makes, nine on an average are correct, and one incorrect. Let us
now suppose that there have taken place a sufficient number of drawings to
exhaust all the possible combinations, the witness deposing in every one.
In one case out of every ten in all these drawings he will actually have
made a false announcement. But in the case of the thousand tickets these
false announcements will have been distributed impartially over all the
numbers, and of the 999 cases in which No. 79 was not drawn, there will
have been only one case in which it was announced. On the contrary, in the
case of the thousand balls (the announcement being always either “black”
or “white”), if white was not drawn, and there was a false announcement,
that false announcement _must_ have been white; and since by the
supposition there was a false announcement once in every ten times, white
will have been announced falsely in one-tenth part of all the cases in
which it was not drawn, that is, in one-tenth part of 999 cases out of
every thousand. White, then, is drawn, on an average, exactly as often as
No. 79, but it is announced, without having been really drawn, 999 times
as often as No. 79; the announcement, therefore, requires a much greater
amount of testimony to render it credible.(205)

To make this argument valid it must of course be supposed, that the
announcements made by the witness are average specimens of his general
veracity and accuracy; or, at least, that they are neither more nor less
so in the case of the black and white balls, than in the case of the
thousand tickets. This assumption, however, is not warranted. A person is
far less likely to mistake, who has only one form of error to guard
against, than if he had 999 different errors to avoid. For instance, in
the example chosen, a messenger who might make a mistake once in ten times
in reporting the number drawn in a lottery, might not err once in a
thousand times if sent simply to observe whether a ball was black or
white. Laplace’s argument, therefore, is faulty even as applied to his own
case. Still less can that case be received as completely representing all
cases of coincidence. Laplace has so contrived his example, that though
black answers to 999 distinct possibilities, and white only to one, the
witness has nevertheless no bias which can make him prefer black to white.
The witness did not know that there were 999 black balls in the box and
only one white; or if he did, Laplace has taken care to make all the 999
cases so undistinguishably alike, that there is hardly a possibility of
any cause of falsehood or error operating in favor of any of them, which
would not operate in the same manner if there were only one. Alter this
supposition, and the whole argument falls to the ground. Let the balls,
for instance, be numbered, and let the white ball be No. 79. Considered in
respect of their color, there are but two things which the witness can be
interested in asserting, or can have dreamed or hallucinated, or has to
choose from if he answers at random, viz., black and white; but considered
in respect of the numbers attached to them, there are a thousand; and if
his interest or error happens to be connected with the numbers, though the
only assertion he makes is about the color, the case becomes precisely
assimilated to that of the thousand tickets. Or instead of the balls
suppose a lottery, with 1000 tickets and but one prize, and that I hold
No. 79, and being interested only in that, ask the witness not what was
the number drawn, but whether it was 79 or some other. There are now only
two cases, as in Laplace’s example; yet he surely would not say that if
the witness answered 79, the assertion would be in an enormous proportion
less credible, than if he made the same answer to the same question asked
in the other way. If, for instance (to put a case supposed by Laplace
himself), he has staked a large sum on one of the chances, and thinks that
by announcing its occurrence he shall increase his credit; he is equally
likely to have betted on any one of the 999 numbers which are attached to
black balls, and so far as the chances of mendacity from this cause are
concerned, there will be 999 times as many chances of his announcing black
falsely as white.

Or suppose a regiment of 1000 men, 999 Englishmen and one Frenchman, and
that of these one man has been killed, and it is not known which. I ask
the question, and the witness answers, the Frenchman. This was not only as
improbable _a priori_, but is in itself as singular a circumstance, as
remarkable a coincidence, as the drawing of the white ball; yet we should
believe the statement as readily, as if the answer had been John Thompson.
Because, though the 999 Englishmen were all alike in the point in which
they differed from the Frenchman, they were not, like the 999 black balls,
undistinguishable in every other respect; but being all different, they
admitted as many chances of interest or error, as if each man had been of
a different nation; and if a lie was told or a mistake made, the
misstatement was as likely to fall on any Jones or Thompson of the set, as
on the Frenchman.

The example of a coincidence selected by D’Alembert, that of sixes thrown
on a pair of dice ten times in succession, belongs to this sort of cases
rather than to such as Laplace’s. The coincidence is here far more
remarkable, because of far rarer occurrence, than the drawing of the white
ball. But though the improbability of its really occurring is greater, the
superior probability of its being announced falsely can not be established
with the same evidence. The announcement “black” represented 999 cases,
but the witness may not have known this, and if he did, the 999 cases are
so exactly alike, that there is really only one set of possible causes of
mendacity corresponding to the whole. The announcement “sixes _not_ drawn
ten times,” represents, and is known by the witness to represent, a great
multitude of contingencies, every one of which being unlike every other,
there may be a different and a fresh set of causes of mendacity
corresponding to each.

It appears to me, therefore, that Laplace’s doctrine is not strictly true
of any coincidences, and is wholly inapplicable to most; and that to know
whether a coincidence does or does not require more evidence to render it
credible than an ordinary event, we must refer, in every instance, to
first principles, and estimate afresh what is the probability that the
given testimony would have been delivered in that instance, supposing the
fact which it asserts not to be true.

With these remarks we close the discussion of the Grounds of Disbelief;
and along with it, such exposition as space admits, and as the writer has
it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of Induction.





                                 Book IV.


OF OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


    “Clear and distinct ideas are terms which, though familiar and
    frequent in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who
    uses does not perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here
    and there one who gives himself the trouble to consider them so
    far as to know what he himself or others precisely mean by them; I
    have, therefore, in most places, chose to put determinate or
    determined, instead of clear and distinct, as more likely to
    direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this matter.”—LOCKE’S
    _Essay on the Human Understanding_; Epistle to the Reader.

    “Il ne peut y avoir qu’une méthode parfaite, qui est la _méthode
    naturelle_; on nomme ainsi un arrangement dans lequel les êtres du
    même genre seraient plus voisins entre eux que ceux de tous les
    autres genres; les genres du même ordre, plus que ceux de tous les
    autres ordres; et ainsi de suite. Cette méthode est l’idéal auquel
    l’histoire naturelle doit tendre; car il est évident que si l’on y
    parvenait, l’on aurait l’expression exacte et complète de la
    nature entière.”—CUVIER, _Règne Animal_, Introduction.

    “Deux grandes notions philosophiques dominent la théorie
    fondamentale de la méthode naturelle proprement dite, savoir la
    formation des groupes naturels, et ensuite leur succession
    hiérarchique.”—COMTE, _Cours de Philosophie Positive_, 42me leçon.




                                Chapter I.


Of Observation And Description.


§ 1. The inquiry which occupied us in the two preceding Books, has
conducted us to what appears a satisfactory solution of the principal
problem of Logic, according to the conception I have formed of the
science. We have found, that the mental process with which Logic is
conversant, the operation of ascertaining truths by means of evidence, is
always, even when appearances point to a different theory of it, a process
of induction. And we have particularized the various modes of induction,
and obtained a clear view of the principles to which it must conform, in
order to lead to results which can be relied on.

The consideration of Induction, however, does not end with the direct
rules for its performance. Something must be said of those other
operations of the mind, which are either necessarily presupposed in all
induction, or are instrumental to the more difficult and complicated
inductive processes. The present Book will be devoted to the consideration
of these subsidiary operations; among which our attention must first be
given to those, which are indispensable preliminaries to all induction
whatsoever.

Induction being merely the extension to a class of cases, of something
which has been observed to be true in certain individual instances of the
class; the first place among the operations subsidiary to induction, is
claimed by Observation. This is not, however, the place to lay down rules
for making good observers; nor is it within the competence of Logic to do
so, but of the art of intellectual Education. Our business with
observation is only in its connection with the appropriate problem of
logic, the estimation of evidence. We have to consider, not how or what to
observe, but under what conditions observation is to be relied on; what is
needful, in order that the fact, supposed to be observed, may safely be
received as true.

§ 2. The answer to this question is very simple, at least in its first
aspect. The sole condition is, that what is supposed to have been observed
shall really have been observed; that it be an observation, not an
inference. For in almost every act of our perceiving faculties,
observation and inference are intimately blended. What we are said to
observe is usually a compound result, of which one-tenth may be
observation, and the remaining nine-tenths inference.

I affirm, for example, that I hear a man’s voice. This would pass, in
common language, for a direct perception. All, however, which is really
perception, is that I hear a sound. That the sound is a voice, and that
voice the voice of a man, are not perceptions but inferences. I affirm,
again, that I saw my brother at a certain hour this morning. If any
proposition concerning a matter of fact would commonly be said to be known
by the direct testimony of the senses, this surely would be so. The truth,
however, is far otherwise. I only saw a certain colored surface; or rather
I had the kind of visual sensations which are usually produced by a
colored surface; and from these as marks, known to be such by previous
experience, I concluded that I saw my brother. I might have had sensations
precisely similar, when my brother was not there. I might have seen some
other person so nearly resembling him in appearance, as, at the distance,
and, with the degree of attention which I bestowed, to be mistaken for
him. I might have been asleep, and have dreamed that I saw him; or in a
state of nervous disorder, which brought his image before me in a waking
hallucination. In all these modes, many have been led to believe that they
saw persons well known to them, who were dead or far distant. If any of
these suppositions had been true, the affirmation that I saw my brother
would have been erroneous; but whatever was matter of direct perception,
namely the visual sensations, would have been real. The inference only
would have been ill grounded; I should have ascribed those sensations to a
wrong cause.

Innumerable instances might be given, and analyzed in the same manner, of
what are vulgarly called errors of sense. There are none of them properly
errors of sense; they are erroneous inferences from sense. When I look at
a candle through a multiplying glass, I see what seems a dozen candles
instead of one; and if the real circumstances of the case were skillfully
disguised, I might suppose that there were really that number; there would
be what is called an optical deception. In the kaleidoscope there really
is that deception; when I look through the instrument, instead of what is
actually there, namely a casual arrangement of colored fragments, the
appearance presented is that of the same combination several times
repeated in symmetrical arrangement round a point. The delusion is of
course effected by giving me the same sensations which I should have had
if such a symmetrical combination had really been presented to me. If I
cross two of my fingers, and bring any small object, a marble for
instance, into contact with both, at points not usually touched
simultaneously by one object, I can hardly, if my eyes are shut, help
believing that there are two marbles instead of one. But it is not my
touch in this case, nor my sight in the other, which is deceived; the
deception, whether durable or only momentary, is in my judgment. From my
senses I have only the sensations, and those are genuine. Being accustomed
to have those or similar sensations when, and only when, a certain
arrangement of outward objects is present to my organs, I have the habit
of instantly, when I experience the sensations, inferring the existence of
that state of outward things. This habit has become so powerful, that the
inference, performed with the speed and certainty of an instinct, is
confounded with intuitive perceptions. When it is correct, I am
unconscious that it ever needed proof; even when I know it to be
incorrect, I can not without considerable effort abstain from making it.
In order to be aware that it is not made by instinct but by an acquired
habit, I am obliged to reflect on the slow process through which I learned
to judge by the eye of many things which I now appear to perceive directly
by sight; and on the reverse operation performed by persons learning to
draw, who with difficulty and labor divest themselves of their acquired
perceptions, and learn afresh to see things as they appear to the eye.

It would be easy to prolong these illustrations, were there any need to
expatiate on a topic so copiously exemplified in various popular works.
From the examples already given, it is seen sufficiently, that the
individual facts from which we collect our inductive generalizations are
scarcely ever obtained by observation alone. Observation extends only to
the sensations by which we recognize objects; but the propositions which
we make use of, either in science or in common life, relate mostly to the
objects themselves. In every act of what is called observation, there is
at least one inference—from the sensations to the presence of the object;
from the marks or diagnostics, to the entire phenomenon. And hence, among
other consequences, follows the seeming paradox, that a general
proposition collected from particulars is often more certainly true than
any one of the particular propositions from which, by an act of induction,
it was inferred. For, each of those particular (or rather singular)
propositions involved an inference, from the impression on the senses to
the fact which caused that impression; and this inference may have been
erroneous in any one of the instances, but can not well have been
erroneous in all of them, provided their number was sufficient to
eliminate chance. The conclusion, therefore, that is, the general
proposition, may deserve more complete reliance than it would be safe to
repose in any one of the inductive premises.

The logic of observation, then, consists solely in a correct
discrimination between that, in a result of observation, which has really
been perceived, and that which is an inference from the perception.
Whatever portion is inference, is amenable to the rules of induction
already treated of, and requires no further notice here; the question for
us in this place is, when all which is inference is taken away what
remains? There remains, in the first place, the mind’s own feelings or
states of consciousness, namely, its outward feelings or sensations, and
its inward feelings—its thoughts, emotions, and volitions. Whether any
thing else remains, or all else is inference from this; whether the mind
is capable of directly perceiving or apprehending any thing except states
of its own consciousness—is a problem of metaphysics not to be discussed
in this place. But after excluding all questions on which metaphysicians
differ, it remains true, that for most purposes the discrimination we are
called upon practically to exercise is that between sensations or other
feelings, of our own or of other people, and inferences drawn from them.
And on the theory of Observation this is all which seems necessary to be
said for the purposes of the present work.

§ 3. If, in the simplest observation, or in what passes for such, there is
a large part which is not observation but something else; so in the
simplest description of an observation, there is, and must always be, much
more asserted than is contained in the perception itself. We can not
describe a fact, without implying more than the fact. The perception is
only of one individual thing; but to describe it is to affirm a connection
between it and every other thing which is either denoted or connoted by
any of the terms used. To begin with an example, than which none can be
conceived more elementary: I have a sensation of sight, and I endeavor to
describe it by saying that I see something white. In saying this, I do not
solely affirm my sensation; I also class it. I assert a resemblance
between the thing I see, and all things which I and others are accustomed
to call white. I assert that it resembles them in the circumstance in
which they all resemble one another, in that which is the ground of their
being called by the name. This is not merely one way of describing an
observation, but the only way. If I would either register my observation
for my own future use, or make it known for the benefit of others, I must
assert a resemblance between the fact which I have observed and something
else. It is inherent in a description, to be the statement of a
resemblance, or resemblances.

We thus see that it is impossible to express in words any result of
observation, without performing an act possessing what Dr. Whewell
considers to be characteristic of Induction. There is always something
introduced which was not included in the observation itself; some
conception common to the phenomenon with other phenomena to which it is
compared. An observation can not be spoken of in language at all without
declaring more than that one observation; without assimilating it to other
phenomena already observed and classified. But this identification of an
object—this recognition of it as possessing certain known
characteristics—has never been confounded with Induction. It is an
operation which precedes all induction, and supplies it with its
materials. It is a perception of resemblances, obtained by comparison.

These resemblances are not always apprehended directly, by merely
comparing the object observed with some other present object, or with our
recollection of an object which is absent. They are often ascertained
through intermediate marks, that is, deductively. In describing some new
kind of animal, suppose me to say that it measures ten feet in length,
from the forehead to the extremity of the tail. I did not ascertain this
by the unassisted eye. I had a two-foot rule which I applied to the
object, and, as we commonly say, measured it; an operation which was not
wholly manual, but partly also mathematical, involving the two
propositions, Five times two is ten, and Things which are equal to the
same thing are equal to one another. Hence, the fact that the animal is
ten feet long is not an immediate perception, but a conclusion from
reasoning; the minor premises alone being furnished by observation of the
object. Nevertheless, this is called an observation, or a description of
the animal, not an induction respecting it.

To pass at once from a very simple to a very complex example: I affirm
that the earth is globular. The assertion is not grounded on direct
perception; for the figure of the earth can not, by us, be directly
perceived, though the assertion would not be true unless circumstances
could be supposed under which its truth could be so perceived. That the
form of the earth is globular is inferred from certain marks, as for
instance from this, that its shadow thrown upon the moon is circular; or
this, that on the sea, or any extensive plain, our horizon is always a
circle; either of which marks is incompatible with any other than a
globular form. I assert further, that the earth is that particular kind of
a globe which is termed an oblate spheroid; because it is found by
measurement in the direction of the meridian, that the length on the
surface of the earth which subtends a given angle at its centre,
diminishes as we recede from the equator and approach the poles. But these
propositions, that the earth is globular, and that it is an oblate
spheroid, assert, each of them, an individual fact; in its own nature
capable of being perceived by the senses when the requisite organs and the
necessary position are supposed, and only not actually perceived because
those organs and that position are wanting. This identification of the
earth, first as a globe, and next as an oblate spheroid, which, if the
fact could have been seen, would have been called a description of the
figure of the earth, may without impropriety be so called when, instead of
being seen, it is inferred. But we could not without impropriety call
either of these assertions an induction from facts respecting the earth.
They are not general propositions collected from particular facts, but
particular facts deduced from general propositions. They are conclusions
obtained deductively, from premises originating in induction: but of these
premises some were not obtained by observation of the earth, nor had any
peculiar reference to it.

If, then, the truth respecting the figure of the earth is not an
induction, why should the truth respecting the figure of the earth’s orbit
be so? The two cases only differ in this, that the form of the orbit was
not, like the form of the earth itself, deduced by ratiocination from
facts which were marks of ellipticity, but was got at by boldly guessing
that the path was an ellipse, and finding afterward, on examination, that
the observations were in harmony with the hypothesis. According to Dr.
Whewell, however, this process of guessing and verifying our guesses is
not only induction, but the whole of induction: no other exposition can be
given of that logical operation. That he is wrong in the latter assertion,
the whole of the preceding book has, I hope, sufficiently proved; and that
the process by which the ellipticity of the planetary orbits was
ascertained, is not induction at all, was attempted to be shown in the
second chapter of the same Book.(206) We are now, however, prepared to go
more into the heart of the matter than at that earlier period of our
inquiry, and to show, not merely what the operation in question is not,
but what it is.

§ 4. We observed, in the second chapter, that the proposition “the earth
moves in an ellipse,” so far as it only serves for the colligation or
connecting together of actual observations (that is, as it only affirms
that the observed positions of the earth may be correctly represented by
as many points in the circumference of an imaginary ellipse), is not an
induction, but a description: it is an induction, only when it affirms
that the intermediate positions, of which there has been no direct
observation, would be found to correspond to the remaining points of the
same elliptic circumference. Now, though this real induction is one thing,
and the description another, we are in a very different condition for
making the induction before we have obtained the description, and after
it. For inasmuch as the description, like all other descriptions, contains
the assertion of a resemblance between the phenomenon described and
something else; in pointing out something which the series of observed
places of a planet resembles, it points out something in which the several
places themselves agree. If the series of places correspond to as many
points of an ellipse, the places themselves agree in being situated in
that ellipse. We have, therefore, by the same process which gave us the
description, obtained the requisites for an induction by the Method of
Agreement. The successive observed places of the earth being considered as
effects, and its motion as the cause which produces them, we find that
those effects, that is, those places, agree in the circumstance of being
in an ellipse. We conclude that the remaining effects, the places which
have not been observed, agree in the same circumstance, and that the _law_
of the motion of the earth is motion in an ellipse.

The Colligation of Facts, therefore, by means of hypotheses, or, as Dr.
Whewell prefers to say, by means of Conceptions, instead of being, as he
supposes, Induction itself, takes its proper place among operations
subsidiary to Induction. All Induction supposes that we have previously
compared the requisite number of individual instances, and ascertained in
what circumstances they agree. The Colligation of Facts is no other than
this preliminary operation. When Kepler, after vainly endeavoring to
connect the observed places of a planet by various hypotheses of circular
motion, at last tried the hypotheses of an ellipse and found it answer to
the phenomena; what he really attempted, first unsuccessfully and at last
successfully, was to discover the circumstance in which all the observed
positions of the planet agreed. And when he in like manner connected
another set of observed facts, the periodic times of the different
planets, by the proposition that the squares of the times are proportional
to the cubes of the distances, what he did was simply to ascertain the
property in which the periodic times of all the different planets agreed.

Since, therefore, all that is true and to the purpose in Dr. Whewell’s
doctrine of Conceptions might be fully expressed by the more familiar term
Hypothesis; and since his Colligation of Facts by means of appropriate
Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of finding by a comparison of
phenomena, in what consists their agreement or resemblance; I would
willingly have confined myself to those better understood expressions, and
persevered to the end in the same abstinence which I have hitherto
observed from ideological discussions; considering the mechanism of our
thoughts to be a topic distinct from and irrelevant to the principles and
rules by which the trustworthiness of the results of thinking is to be
estimated. Since, however, a work of such high pretensions, and, it must
also be said, of so much real merit, has rested the whole theory of
Induction upon such ideological considerations, it seems necessary for
others who follow to claim for themselves and their doctrines whatever
position may properly belong to them on the same metaphysical ground. And
this is the object of the succeeding chapter.




                               Chapter II.


Of Abstraction, Or The Formation Of Conceptions.


§ 1. The metaphysical inquiry into the nature and composition of what have
been called Abstract Ideas, or, in other words, of the notions which
answer in the mind to classes and to general names, belongs not to Logic,
but to a different science, and our purpose does not require that we
should enter upon it here. We are only concerned with the universally
acknowledged fact, that such notions or conceptions do exist. The mind can
conceive a multitude of individual things as one assemblage or class; and
general names do really suggest to us certain ideas or mental
representations, otherwise we could not use the names with consciousness
of a meaning. Whether the idea called up by a general name is composed of
the various circumstances in which all the individuals denoted by the name
agree, and of no others (which is the doctrine of Locke, Brown, and the
Conceptualists); or whether it be the idea of some one of those
individuals, clothed in its individualizing peculiarities, but with the
accompanying knowledge that those peculiarities are not properties of the
class (which is the doctrine of Berkeley, Mr. Bailey,(207) and the modern
Nominalists); or whether (as held by Mr. James Mill) the idea of the class
is that of a miscellaneous assemblage of individuals belonging to the
class; or whether, finally, it be any one or any other of all these,
according to the accidental circumstances of the case; certain it is, that
_some_ idea or mental conception is suggested by a general name, whenever
we either hear it or employ it with consciousness of a meaning. And this,
which we may call, if we please, a general idea, _represents_ in our minds
the whole class of things to which the name is applied. Whenever we think
or reason concerning the class, we do so by means of this idea. And the
voluntary power which the mind has, of attending to one part of what is
present to it at any moment, and neglecting another part, enables us to
keep our reasonings and conclusions respecting the class unaffected by any
thing in the idea or mental image which is not really, or at least which
we do not really believe to be common, to the whole class.(208)

There are, then, such things as general conceptions, or conceptions by
means of which we can think generally; and when we form a set of phenomena
into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another to ascertain
in what they agree, some general conception is implied in this mental
operation. And inasmuch as such a comparison is a necessary preliminary to
Induction, it is most true that Induction could not go on without general
conceptions.

§ 2. But it does not therefore follow that these general conceptions must
have existed in the mind previously to the comparison. It is not a law of
our intellect, that in comparing things with each other and taking note of
their agreement we merely recognize as realized in the outward world
something that we already had in our minds. The conception originally
found its way to us as the _result_ of such a comparison. It was obtained
(in metaphysical phrase) by _abstraction_ from individual things. These
things may be things which we perceived or thought of on former occasions,
but they may also be the things which we are perceiving or thinking of on
the very occasion. When Kepler compared the observed places of the planet
Mars, and found that they agreed in being points of an elliptic
circumference, he applied a general conception which was already in his
mind, having been derived from his former experience. But this is by no
means universally the case. When we compare several objects and find them
to agree in being white, or when we compare the various species of
ruminating animals and find them to agree in being cloven-footed, we have
just as much a general conception in our minds as Kepler had in his: we
have the conception of “a white thing,” or the conception of “a
cloven-footed animal.” But no one supposes that we necessarily bring these
conceptions with us, and _superinduce_ them (to adopt Dr. Whewell’s
expression) upon the facts: because in these simple cases every body sees
that the very act of comparison which ends in our connecting the facts by
means of the conception, may be the source from which we derive the
conception itself. If we had never seen any white object or had never seen
any cloven-footed animal before, we should at the same time and by the
same mental act acquire the idea, and employ it for the colligation of the
observed phenomena. Kepler, on the contrary, really had to bring the idea
with him, and superinduce it upon the facts; he could not evolve it out of
them: if he had not already had the idea, he would not have been able to
acquire it by a comparison of the planet’s positions. But this inability
was a mere accident; the idea of an ellipse could have been acquired from
the paths of the planets as effectually as from any thing else, if the
paths had not happened to be invisible. If the planet had left a visible
track, and we had been so placed that we could see it at the proper angle,
we might have abstracted our original idea of an ellipse from the
planetary orbit. Indeed, every conception which can be made the instrument
for connecting a set of facts, might have been originally evolved from
those very facts. The conception is a conception _of_ something; and that
which it is a conception of, is really _in_ the facts, and might, under
some supposable circumstances, or by some supposable extension of the
faculties which we actually possess, have been detected in them. And not
only is this always in itself possible, but it actually happens in almost
all cases in which the obtaining of the right conception is a matter of
any considerable difficulty. For if there be no new conception required;
if one of those already familiar to mankind will serve the purpose, the
accident of being the first to whom the right one occurs, may happen to
almost any body; at least in the case of a set of phenomena which the
whole scientific world are engaged in attempting to connect. The honor, in
Kepler’s case, was that of the accurate, patient, and toilsome
calculations by which he compared the results that followed from his
different guesses, with the observations of Tycho Brahe; but the merit was
very small of guessing an ellipse; the only wonder is that men had not
guessed it before, nor could they have failed to do so if there had not
existed an obstinate _a priori_ prejudice that the heavenly bodies must
move, if not in a circle, in some combination of circles.

The really difficult cases are those in which the conception destined to
create light and order out of darkness and confusion has to be sought for
among the very phenomena which it afterward serves to arrange. Why,
according to Dr. Whewell himself, did the ancients fail in discovering the
laws of mechanics, that is, of equilibrium and of the communication of
motion? Because they had not, or at least had not clearly, the ideas or
conceptions of pressure and resistance, momentum, and uniform and
accelerating force. And whence could they have obtained these ideas except
from the very facts of equilibrium and motion? The tardy development of
several of the physical sciences, for example, of optics, electricity,
magnetism, and the higher generalizations of chemistry, he ascribes to the
fact that mankind had not yet possessed themselves of the Idea of
Polarity, that is, the idea of opposite properties in opposite directions.
But what was there to suggest such an idea, until, by a separate
examination of several of these different branches of knowledge, it was
shown that the facts of each of them did present, in some instances at
least, the curious phenomenon of opposite properties in opposite
directions? The thing was superficially manifest only in two cases, those
of the magnet and of electrified bodies; and there the conception was
encumbered with the circumstance of material poles, or fixed points in the
body itself, in which points this opposition of properties seemed to be
inherent. The first comparison and abstraction had led only to this
conception of poles; and if any thing corresponding to that conception had
existed in the phenomena of chemistry or optics, the difficulty now justly
considered so great, would have been extremely small. The obscurity arose
from the fact, that the polarities in chemistry and optics were distinct
species, though of the same genus, with the polarities in electricity and
magnetism; and that in order to assimilate the phenomena to one another,
it was necessary to compare a polarity without poles, such for instance as
is exemplified in the polarization of light, and the polarity with
(apparent) poles, which we see in the magnet; and to recognize that these
polarities, while different in many other respects, agree in the one
character which is expressed by the phrase, opposite properties in
opposite directions. From the result of such a comparison it was that the
minds of scientific men formed this new general conception; between which,
and the first confused feeling of an analogy between some of the phenomena
of light and those of electricity and magnetism, there is a long interval,
filled up by the labors and more or less sagacious suggestions of many
superior minds.

The conceptions, then, which we employ for the colligation and
methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within, but are
impressed upon the mind from without; they are never obtained otherwise
than by way of comparison and abstraction, and, in the most important and
the most numerous cases, are evolved by abstraction from the very
phenomena which it is their office to colligate. I am far, however, from
wishing to imply that it is not often a very difficult thing to perform
this process of abstraction well, or that the success of an inductive
operation does not, in many cases, principally depend on the skill with
which we perform it. Bacon was quite justified in designating as one of
the principal obstacles to good induction, general conceptions wrongly
formed, “notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ;” to which Dr. Whewell adds,
that not only does bad abstraction make bad induction, but that, in order
to perform induction well, we must have abstracted well; our general
conceptions must be “clear” and “appropriate” to the matter in hand.

§ 3. In attempting to show what the difficulty in this matter really is,
and how it is surmounted, I must beg the reader, once for all, to bear
this in mind; that although, in discussing the opinions of a different
school of philosophy, I am willing to adopt their language, and to speak,
therefore, of connecting facts through the instrumentality of a
conception, this technical phraseology means neither more nor less than
what is commonly called comparing the facts with one another and
determining in what they agree. Nor has the technical expression even the
advantage of being metaphysically correct. The facts are not _connected_,
except in a merely metaphorical acceptation of the term. The _ideas_ of
the facts may become connected, that is, we may be led to think of them
together; but this consequence is no more than what may be produced by any
casual association. What really takes place, is, I conceive, more
philosophically expressed by the common word Comparison, than by the
phrases “to connect” or “to superinduce.” For, as the general conception
is itself obtained by a comparison of particular phenomena, so, when
obtained, the mode in which we apply it to other phenomena is again by
comparison. We compare phenomena with each other to get the conception,
and we then compare those and other phenomena _with_ the conception. We
get the conception of an animal (for instance) by comparing different
animals, and when we afterward see a creature resembling an animal, we
compare it with our general conception of an animal; and if it agrees with
that general conception, we include it in the class. The conception
becomes the type of comparison.

And we need only consider what comparison is, to see that where the
objects are more than two, and still more when they are an indefinite
number, a type of some sort is an indispensable condition of the
comparison. When we have to arrange and classify a great number of objects
according to their agreements and differences, we do not make a confused
attempt to compare all with all. We know that two things are as much as
the mind can easily attend to at a time, and we therefore fix upon one of
the objects, either at hazard or because it offers in a peculiarly
striking manner some important character, and, taking this as our
standard, compare it with one object after another. If we find a second
object which presents a remarkable agreement with the first, inducing us
to class them together, the question instantly arises, in what particular
circumstances do they agree? and to take notice of these circumstances is
already a first stage of abstraction, giving rise to a general conception.
Having advanced thus far, when we now take in hand a third object we
naturally ask ourselves the question, not merely whether this third object
agrees with the first, but whether it agrees with it in the same
circumstances in which the second did? in other words, whether it agrees
with the general conception which has been obtained by abstraction from
the first and second? Thus we see the tendency of general conceptions, as
soon as formed, to substitute themselves as types, for whatever individual
objects previously answered that purpose in our comparisons. We may,
perhaps, find that no considerable number of other objects agree with this
first general conception; and that we must drop the conception, and
beginning again with a different individual case, proceed by fresh
comparisons to a different general conception. Sometimes, again, we find
that the same conception will serve, by merely leaving out some of its
circumstances; and by this higher effort of abstraction, we obtain a still
more general conception; as in the case formerly referred to, the
scientific world rose from the conception of poles to the general
conception of opposite properties in opposite directions; or as those
South-Sea islanders, whose conception of a quadruped had been abstracted
from hogs (the only animals of that description which they had seen), when
they afterward compared that conception with other quadrupeds, dropped
some of the circumstances, and arrived at the more general conception
which Europeans associate with the term.

These brief remarks contain, I believe, all that is well grounded in the
doctrine, that the conception by which the mind arranges and gives unity
to phenomena must be furnished by the mind itself, and that we find the
right conception by a tentative process, trying first one and then another
until we hit the mark. The conception is not furnished _by_ the mind until
it has been furnished _to_ the mind; and the facts which supply it are
sometimes extraneous facts, but more often the very facts which we are
attempting to arrange by it. It is quite true, however, that in
endeavoring to arrange the facts, at whatever point we begin, we never
advance three steps without forming a general conception, more or less
distinct and precise; and that this general conception becomes the clue
which we instantly endeavor to trace through the rest of the facts, or
rather, becomes the standard with which we thenceforth compare them. If we
are not satisfied with the agreements which we discover among the
phenomena by comparing them with this type, or with some still more
general conception which by an additional stage of abstraction we can form
from the type; we change our path, and look out for other agreements; we
recommence the comparison from a different starting-point, and so generate
a different set of general conceptions. This is the tentative process
which Dr. Whewell speaks of; and which has not unnaturally suggested the
theory, that the conception is supplied by the mind itself; since the
different conceptions which the mind successively tries, it either already
possessed from its previous experience, or they were supplied to it in the
first stage of the corresponding act of comparison; so that, in the
subsequent part of the process, the conception manifested itself as
something compared with the phenomena, not evolved from them.

§ 4. If this be a correct account of the instrumentality of general
conceptions in the comparison which necessarily precedes Induction, we are
now able to translate into our own language what Dr. Whewell means by
saying that conceptions, to be subservient to Induction, must be “clear”
and “appropriate.”

If the conception corresponds to a real agreement among the phenomena; if
the comparison which we have made of a set of objects has led us to class
them according to real resemblances and differences; the conception which
does this can not fail to be appropriate, for some purpose or other. The
question of appropriateness is relative to the particular object we have
in view. As soon as, by our comparison, we have ascertained some
agreement, something which can be predicated in common of a number of
objects; we have obtained a basis on which an inductive process is capable
of being founded. But the agreements, or the ulterior consequences to
which those agreements lead, may be of very different degrees of
importance. If, for instance, we only compare animals according to their
color, and class those together which are colored alike, we form the
general conceptions of a white animal, a black animal, etc., which are
conceptions legitimately formed; and if an induction were to be attempted
concerning the causes of the colors of animals, this comparison would be
the proper and necessary preparation for such an induction, but would not
help us toward a knowledge of the laws of any other of the properties of
animals; while if, with Cuvier, we compare and class them according to the
structure of the skeleton, or, with Blainville, according to the nature of
their outward integuments, the agreements and differences which are
observable in these respects are not only of much greater importance in
themselves, but are marks of agreements and differences in many other
important particulars of the structure and mode of life of the animals.
If, therefore, the study of their structure and habits be our object, the
conceptions generated by these last comparisons are far more “appropriate”
than those generated by the former. Nothing, other than this, can be meant
by the appropriateness of a conception.

When Dr. Whewell says that the ancients, or the school-men, or any modern
inquirers, missed discovering the real law of a phenomenon because they
applied to it an inappropriate instead of an appropriate conception; he
can only mean that in comparing various instances of the phenomenon, to
ascertain in what those instances agreed, they missed the important points
of agreement; and fastened upon such as were either imaginary, and not
agreements at all, or, if real agreements, were comparatively trifling,
and had no connection with the phenomenon, the law of which was sought.

Aristotle, philosophizing on the subject of motion, remarked that certain
motions apparently take place spontaneously; bodies fall to the ground,
flame ascends, bubbles of air rise in water, etc.; and these he called
natural motions; while others not only never take place without external
incitement, but even when such incitement is applied, tend spontaneously
to cease; which, to distinguish them from the former, he called violent
motions. Now, in comparing the so-called natural motions with one another,
it appeared to Aristotle that they agreed in one circumstance, namely,
that the body which moved (or seemed to move) spontaneously, was moving
_toward its own place_; meaning thereby the place from whence it
originally came, or the place where a great quantity of matter similar to
itself was assembled. In the other class of motions, as when bodies are
thrown up in the air, they are, on the contrary, moving _from_ their own
place. Now, this conception of a body moving toward its own place may
justly be considered inappropriate; because, though it expresses a
circumstance really found in some of the most familiar instances of motion
apparently spontaneous, yet, first, there are many other cases of such
motion, in which that circumstance is absent; the motion, for instance, of
the earth and planets. Secondly, even when it is present, the motion, on
closer examination, would often be seen not to be spontaneous; as, when
air rises in water, it does not rise by its own nature, but is pushed up
by the superior weight of the water which presses upon it. Finally, there
are many cases in which the spontaneous motion takes place in the contrary
direction to what the theory considers as the body’s own place; for
instance, when a fog rises from a lake, or when water dries up. The
agreement, therefore, which Aristotle selected as his principle of
classification, did not extend to all cases of the phenomenon he wanted to
study, spontaneous motion; while it did include cases of the absence of
the phenomenon, cases of motion not spontaneous. The conception was hence
“inappropriate.” We may add that, in the case in question, no conception
would be appropriate; there is no agreement which runs through all the
cases of spontaneous or apparently spontaneous motion and no others; they
can not be brought under one law; it is a case of Plurality of
Causes.(209)

§ 5. So much for the first of Dr. Whewell’s conditions, that conceptions
must be appropriate. The second is, that they shall be “clear:” and let us
consider what this implies. Unless the conception corresponds to a real
agreement, it has a worse defect than that of not being clear: it is not
applicable to the case at all. Among the phenomena, therefore, which we
are attempting to connect by means of the conception, we must suppose that
there really is an agreement, and that the conception is a conception of
that agreement. In order, then, that it may be clear, the only requisite
is, that we shall know exactly in what the agreement consists; that it
shall have been carefully observed, and accurately remembered. We are said
not to have a clear conception of the resemblance among a set of objects,
when we have only a general feeling that they resemble, without having
analyzed their resemblance, or perceived in what points it consists, and
fixed in our memory an exact recollection of those points. This want of
clearness, or, as it may be otherwise called, this vagueness in the
general conception, may be owing either to our having no accurate
knowledge of the objects themselves, or merely to our not having carefully
compared them. Thus a person may have no clear idea of a ship because he
has never seen one, or because he remembers but little, and that faintly,
of what he has seen. Or he may have a perfect knowledge and remembrance of
many ships of various kinds, frigates among the rest, but he may have no
clear but only a confused idea of a frigate, because he has never been
told, and has not compared them sufficiently to have remarked and
remembered, in what particular points a frigate differs from some other
kind of ship.

It is not, however, necessary, in order to have clear ideas, that we
should know all the common properties of the things which we class
together. That would be to have our conception of the class complete as
well as clear. It is sufficient if we never class things together without
knowing exactly why we do so—without having ascertained exactly what
agreements we are about to include in our conception; and if, after having
thus fixed our conception, we never vary from it, never include in the
class any thing which has not those common properties, nor exclude from it
any thing which has. A clear conception means a determinate conception;
one which does not fluctuate, which is not one thing to-day and another
to-morrow, but remains fixed and invariable, except when, from the
progress of our knowledge, or the correction of some error, we consciously
add to it or alter it. A person of clear ideas is a person who always
knows in virtue of what properties his classes are constituted; what
attributes are connoted by his general names.

The principal requisites, therefore, of clear conceptions, are habits of
attentive observation, an extensive experience, and a memory which
receives and retains an exact image of what is observed. And in proportion
as any one has the habit of observing minutely and comparing carefully a
particular class of phenomena, and an accurate memory for the results of
the observation and comparison, so will his conceptions of that class of
phenomena be clear; provided he has the indispensable habit (naturally,
however, resulting from those other endowments), of never using general
names without a precise connotation.

As the clearness of our conceptions chiefly depends on the _carefulness_
and _accuracy_ of our observing and comparing faculties, so their
appropriateness, or rather the chance we have of hitting upon the
appropriate conception in any case, mainly depends on the _activity_ of
the same faculties. He who by habit, grounded on sufficient natural
aptitude, has acquired a readiness in accurately observing and comparing
phenomena, will perceive so many more agreements, and will perceive them
so much more rapidly than other people, that the chances are much greater
of his perceiving, in any instance, the agreement on which the important
consequences depend.

§ 6. It is of so much importance that the part of the process of
investigating truth, discussed in this chapter, should be rightly
understood, that I think it is desirable to restate the results we have
arrived at, in a somewhat different mode of expression.

We can not ascertain general truths, that is, truths applicable to
classes, unless we have formed the classes in such a manner that general
truths can be affirmed of them. In the formation of any class, there is
involved a conception of it as a class, that is, a conception of certain
circumstances as being those which characterize the class, and distinguish
the objects composing it from all other things. When we know exactly what
these circumstances are, we have a clear idea (or conception) of the
class, and of the meaning of the general name which designates it. The
primary condition implied in having this clear idea, is that the class be
really a class; that it correspond to a real distinction; that the things
it includes really do agree with one another in certain particulars, and
differ, in those same particulars, from all other things. A person without
clear ideas is one who habitually classes together, under the same general
names, things which have no common properties, or none which are not
possessed also by other things; or who, if the usage of other people
prevents him from actually misclassing things, is unable to state to
himself the common properties in virtue of which he classes them rightly.

But is it not the sole requisite of classification that the classes should
be real classes, framed by a legitimate mental process? Some modes of
classing things are more valuable than others for human uses, whether of
speculation or of practice; and our classifications are not well made,
unless the things which they bring together not only agree with each other
in something which distinguishes them from all other things, but agree
with each other and differ from other things in the very circumstances
which are of primary importance for the purpose (theoretical or practical)
which we have in view, and which constitutes the problem before us. In
other words, our conceptions, though they may be clear, are not
_appropriate_ for our purpose, unless the properties we comprise in them
are those which will help us toward what we wish to understand—_i.e._,
either those which go deepest into the nature of the things, if our object
be to understand that, or those which are most closely connected with the
particular property which we are endeavoring to investigate.

We can not, therefore, frame good general conceptions beforehand. That the
conception we have obtained is the one we want, can only be known when we
have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it; when we completely
understand the general character of the phenomena, or the conditions of
the particular property with which we concern ourselves. General
conceptions formed without this thorough knowledge, are Bacon’s “notiones
temerè à rebus abstractæ.” Yet such premature conceptions we must be
continually making up, in our progress to something better. They are an
impediment to the progress of knowledge, only when they are permanently
acquiesced in. When it has become our habit to group things in wrong
classes—in groups which either are not really classes, having no
distinctive points of agreement (absence of _clear_ ideas), or which are
not classes of which any thing important to our purpose can be predicated
(absence of _appropriate_ ideas); and when, in the belief that these badly
made classes are those sanctioned by nature, we refuse to exchange them
for others, and can not or will not make up our general conceptions from
any other elements; in that case all the evils which Bacon ascribes to his
“notiones temerè abstractæ” really occur. This was what the ancients did
in physics, and what the world in general does in morals and politics to
the present day.

It would thus, in my view of the matter, be an inaccurate mode of
expression to say, that obtaining appropriate conceptions is a condition
precedent to generalization. Throughout the whole process of comparing
phenomena with one another for the purpose of generalization, the mind is
trying to make up a conception; but the conception which it is trying to
make up is that of the really important point of agreement in the
phenomena. As we obtain more knowledge of the phenomena themselves, and of
the conditions on which their important properties depend, our views on
this subject naturally alter; and thus we advance from a less to a more
"appropriate" general conception, in the progress of our investigations.

We ought not, at the same time, to forget that the really important
agreement can not always be discovered by mere comparison of the very
phenomena in question, without the aid of a conception acquired elsewhere;
as in the case, so often referred to, of the planetary orbits.

The search for the agreement of a set of phenomena is in truth very
similar to the search for a lost or hidden object. At first we place
ourselves in a sufficiently commanding position, and cast our eyes round
us, and if we can see the object it is well; if not, we ask ourselves
mentally what are the places in which it may be hid, in order that we may
there search for it: and so on, until we imagine the place where it really
is. And here too we require to have had a previous conception, or
knowledge, of those different places. As in this familiar process, so in
the philosophical operation which it illustrates, we first endeavor to
find the lost object or recognize the common attribute, without
conjecturally invoking the aid of any previously acquired conception, or,
in other words, of any hypothesis. Having failed in this, we call upon our
imagination for some hypothesis of a possible place, or a possible point
of resemblance, and then look to see whether the facts agree with the
conjecture.

For such cases something more is required than a mind accustomed to
accurate observation and comparison. It must be a mind stored with general
conceptions, previously acquired, of the sorts which bear affinity to the
subject of the particular inquiry. And much will also depend on the
natural strength and acquired culture of what has been termed the
scientific imagination; on the faculty possessed of mentally arranging
known elements into new combinations, such as have not yet been observed
in nature, though not contradictory to any known laws.

But the variety of intellectual habits, the purposes which they serve, and
the modes in which they may be fostered and cultivated, are considerations
belonging to the Art of Education: a subject far wider than Logic, and
which this treatise does not profess to discuss. Here, therefore, the
present chapter may properly close.




                               Chapter III.


Of Naming, As Subsidiary To Induction.


§ 1. It does not belong to the present undertaking to dwell on the
importance of language as a medium of human intercourse, whether for
purposes of sympathy or of information. Nor does our design admit of more
than a passing allusion to that great property of names, on which their
functions as an intellectual instrument are, in reality, ultimately
dependent; their potency as a means of forming, and of riveting,
associations among our other ideas; a subject on which an able
thinker(210) has thus written:

“Names are impressions of sense, and as such take the strongest hold on
the mind, and of all other impressions can be most easily recalled and
retained in view. They therefore serve to give a point of attachment to
all the more volatile objects of thought and feeling. Impressions that
when passed might be dissipated forever, are, by their connection with
language, always within reach. Thoughts, of themselves, are perpetually
slipping out of the field of immediate mental vision; but the name abides
with us, and the utterance of it restores them in a moment. Words are the
custodiers of every product of mind less impressive than themselves. All
extensions of human knowledge, all new generalizations, are fixed and
spread, even unintentionally, by the use of words. The child growing up
learns, along with the vocables of his mother-tongue, that things which he
would have believed to be different are, in important points, the same.
Without any formal instruction, the language in which we grow up teaches
us all the common philosophy of the age. It directs us to observe and know
things which we should have overlooked; it supplies us with
classifications ready made, by which things are arranged (as far as the
light of by-gone generations admits) with the objects to which they bear
the greatest total resemblance. The number of general names in a language,
and the degree of generality of those names, afford a test of the
knowledge of the era, and of the intellectual insight which is the
birthright of any one born into it.”

It is not, however, of the functions of Names, considered generally, that
we have here to treat, but only of the manner and degree in which they are
directly instrumental to the investigation of truth; in other words, to
the process of induction.

§ 2. Observation and Abstraction, the operations which formed the subject
of the two foregoing chapters, are conditions indispensable to induction;
there can be no induction where they are not. It has been imagined that
Naming is also a condition equally indispensable. There are thinkers who
have held that language is not solely, according to a phrase generally
current, _an_ instrument of thought, but _the_ instrument; that names, or
something equivalent to them, some species of artificial signs, are
necessary to reasoning; that there could be no inference, and consequently
no induction, without them. But if the nature of reasoning was correctly
explained in the earlier part of the present work, this opinion must be
held to be an exaggeration, though of an important truth. If reasoning be
from particulars to particulars, and if it consist in recognizing one fact
as a mark of another, or a mark of a mark of another, nothing is required
to render reasoning possible, except senses and association; senses to
perceive that two facts are conjoined; association, as the law by which
one of those two facts raises up the idea of the other.(211) For these
mental phenomena, as well as for the belief or expectation which follows,
and by which we recognize as having taken place, or as about to take
place, that of which we have perceived a mark, there is evidently no need
of language. And this inference of one particular fact from another is a
case of induction. It is of this sort of induction that brutes are
capable; it is in this shape that uncultivated minds make almost all their
inductions, and that we all do so in the cases in which familiar
experience forces our conclusions upon us without any active process of
inquiry on our part, and in which the belief or expectation follows the
suggestion of the evidence with the promptitude and certainty of an
instinct.(212)

§ 3. But though inference of an inductive character is possible without
the use of signs, it could never, without them, be carried much beyond the
very simple cases which we have just described, and which form, in all
probability, the limit of the reasonings of those animals to whom
conventional language is unknown. Without language, or something
equivalent to it, there could only be as much reasoning from experience as
can take place without the aid of general propositions. Now, though in
strictness we may reason from past experience to a fresh individual case
without the intermediate stage of a general proposition, yet without
general propositions we should seldom remember what past experience we
have had, and scarcely ever what conclusions that experience will warrant.
The division of the inductive process into two parts, the first
ascertaining what is a mark of the given fact, the second whether in the
new case that mark exists, is natural, and scientifically indispensable.
It is, indeed, in a majority of cases, rendered necessary by mere distance
of time. The experience by which we are to guide our judgments may be
other people’s experience, little of which can be communicated to us
otherwise than by language; when it is our own, it is generally experience
long past; unless, therefore, it were recorded by means of artificial
signs, little of it (except in cases involving our intenser sensations or
emotions, or the subjects of our daily and hourly contemplation) would be
retained in the memory. It is hardly necessary to add, that when the
inductive inference is of any but the most direct and obvious nature—when
it requires several observations or experiments, in varying circumstances,
and the comparison of one of these with another—it is impossible to
proceed a step, without the artificial memory which words bestow. Without
words, we should, if we had often seen A and B in immediate and obvious
conjunction, expect B whenever we saw A; but to discover their conjunction
when not obvious, or to determine whether it is really constant or only
casual, and whether there is reason to expect it under any given change of
circumstances, is a process far too complex to be performed without some
contrivance to make our remembrance of our own mental operations accurate.
Now, language is such a contrivance. When that instrument is called to our
aid, the difficulty is reduced to that of making our remembrance of the
meaning of words accurate. This being secured, whatever passes through our
minds may be remembered accurately, by putting it carefully into words,
and committing the words either to writing or to memory.

The function of Naming, and particularly of General Names, in Induction,
may be recapitulated as follows. Every inductive inference which is good
at all, is good for a whole class of cases; and, that the inference may
have any better warrant of its correctness than the mere clinging together
of two ideas, a process of experimentation and comparison is necessary; in
which the whole class of cases must be brought to view, and some
uniformity in the course of nature evolved and ascertained, since the
existence of such a uniformity is required as a justification for drawing
the inference in even a single case. This uniformity, therefore, may be
ascertained once for all; and if, being ascertained, it can be remembered,
it will serve as a formula for making, in particular cases, all such
inferences as the previous experience will warrant. But we can only secure
its being remembered, or give ourselves even a chance of carrying in our
memory any considerable number of such uniformities, by registering them
through the medium of permanent signs; which (being, from the nature of
the case, signs not of an individual fact, but of a uniformity, that is,
of an indefinite number of facts similar to one another) are general
signs; universals; general names, and general propositions.

§ 4. And here I can not omit to notice an oversight committed by some
eminent thinkers; who have said that the cause of our using general names
is the infinite multitude of individual objects, which, making it
impossible to have a name for each, compels us to make one name serve for
many.

This is a very limited view of the function of general names. Even if
there were a name for every individual object, we should require general
names as much as we now do. Without them we could not express the result
of a single comparison, nor record any one of the uniformities existing in
nature; and should be hardly better off in respect to Induction than if we
had no names at all. With none but names of individuals (or, in other
words, proper names), we might, by pronouncing the name, suggest the idea
of the object, but we could not assert any proposition; except the
unmeaning ones formed by predicating two proper names one of another. It
is only by means of general names that we can convey any information,
predicate any attribute, even of an individual, much more of a class.
Rigorously speaking, we could get on without any other general names than
the abstract names of attributes; all our propositions might be of the
form “such an individual object possesses such an attribute,” or “such an
attribute is always (or never) conjoined with such another attribute.” In
fact, however, mankind have always given general names to objects as well
as attributes, and indeed before attributes: but the general names given
to objects imply attributes, derive their whole meaning from attributes;
and are chiefly useful as the language by means of which we predicate the
attributes which they connote.

It remains to be considered what principles are to be adhered to in giving
general names, so that these names, and the general propositions in which
they fill a place, may conduce most to the purposes of Induction.




                               Chapter IV.


Of The Requisites Of A Philosophical Language, And The Principles Of
Definition.


§ 1. In order that we may possess a language perfectly suitable for the
investigation and expression of general truths, there are two principal,
and several minor requisites. The first is, that every general name should
have a meaning, steadily fixed, and precisely determined. When, by the
fulfillment of this condition, such names as we possess are fitted for the
due performance of their functions, the next requisite, and the second in
order of importance, is that we should possess a name wherever one is
needed; wherever there is any thing to be designated by it, which it is of
importance to express.

The former of these requisites is that to which our attention will be
exclusively directed in the present chapter.

§ 2. Every general name, then, must have a certain and knowable meaning.
Now the meaning (as has so often been explained) of a general connotative
name, resides in the connotation; in the attribute on account of which,
and to express which, the name is given. Thus, the name animal being given
to all things which possess the attributes of sensation and voluntary
motion, the word connotes those attributes exclusively, and they
constitute the whole of its meaning. If the name be abstract, its
denotation is the same with the connotation of the corresponding concrete;
it designates directly the attribute, which the concrete term implies. To
give a precise meaning to general names is, then, to fix with steadiness
the attribute or attributes connoted by each concrete general name, and
denoted by the corresponding abstract. Since abstract names, in the order
of their creation, do not precede but follow concrete ones, as is proved
by the etymological fact that they are almost always derived from them; we
may consider their meaning as determined by, and dependent on, the meaning
of their concrete; and thus the problem of giving a distinct meaning to
general language, is all included in that of giving a precise connotation
to all concrete general names.

This is not difficult in the case of new names; of the technical terms
created by scientific inquirers for the purposes of science or art. But
when a name is in common use, the difficulty is greater; the problem in
this case not being that of choosing a convenient connotation for the
name, but of ascertaining and fixing the connotation with which it is
already used. That this can ever be a matter of doubt, is a sort of
paradox. But the vulgar (including in that term all who have not accurate
habits of thought) seldom know exactly what assertion they intend to make,
what common property they mean to express, when they apply the same name
to a number of different things. All which the name expresses with them,
when they predicate it of an object, is a confused feeling of resemblance
between that object and some of the other things which they have been
accustomed to denote by the name. They have applied the name Stone to
various objects previously seen; they see a new object, which appears to
them somewhat like the former, and they call it a stone, without asking
themselves in what respect it is like, or what mode or degree of
resemblance the best authorities, or even they themselves, require as a
warrant for using the name. This rough general impression of resemblance
is, however, made up of particular circumstances of resemblance; and into
these it is the business of the logician to analyze it; to ascertain what
points of resemblance among the different things commonly called by the
name, have produced in the common mind this vague feeling of likeness;
have given to the things the similarity of aspect, which has made them a
class, and has caused the same name to be bestowed upon them.

But though general names are imposed by the vulgar without any more
definite connotation than that of a vague resemblance; general
propositions come in time to be made, in which predicates are applied to
those names, that is, general assertions are made concerning the _whole_
of the things which are denoted by the name. And since by each of these
propositions some attribute, more or less precisely conceived, is of
course predicated, the ideas of these various attributes thus become
associated with the name, and in a sort of uncertain way it comes to
connote them; there is a hesitation to apply the name in any new case in
which any of the attributes familiarly predicated of the class do not
exist. And thus, to common minds, the propositions which they are in the
habit of hearing or uttering concerning a class make up in a loose way a
sort of connotation for the class name. Let us take, for instance, the
word Civilized. How few could be found, even among the most educated
persons, who would undertake to say exactly what the term Civilized
connotes. Yet there is a feeling in the minds of all who use it, that they
are using it with a meaning; and this meaning is made up, in a confused
manner, of every thing which they have heard or read that civilized men or
civilized communities are, or may be expected to be.

It is at this stage, probably, in the progress of a concrete name, that
the corresponding abstract name generally comes into use. Under the notion
that the concrete name must of course convey a meaning, or, in other
words, that there is some property common to all things which it denotes,
people give a name to this common property; from the concrete Civilized,
they form the abstract Civilization. But since most people have never
compared the different things which are called by the concrete name, in
such a manner as to ascertain what properties these things have in common,
or whether they have any; each is thrown back upon the marks by which he
himself has been accustomed to be guided in his application of the term;
and these, being merely vague hearsays and current phrases, are not the
same in any two persons, nor in the same person at different times. Hence
the word (as Civilization, for example) which professes to be the
designation of the unknown common property, conveys scarcely to any two
minds the same idea. No two persons agree in the things they predicate of
it; and when it is itself predicated of any thing, no other person knows,
nor does the speaker himself know with precision, what he means to assert.
Many other words which could be named, as the word _honor_, or the word
_gentleman_, exemplify this uncertainty still more strikingly.

It needs scarcely be observed, that general propositions of which no one
can tell exactly what they assert, can not possibly have been brought to
the test of a correct induction. Whether a name is to be used as an
instrument of thinking, or as a means of communicating the result of
thought, it is imperative to determine exactly the attribute or attributes
which it is to express; to give it, in short, a fixed and ascertained
connotation.

§ 3. It would, however, be a complete misunderstanding of the proper
office of a logician in dealing with terms already in use, if we were to
think that because a name has not at present an ascertained connotation,
it is competent to any one to give it such a connotation at his own
choice. The meaning of a term actually in use is not an arbitrary quantity
to be fixed, but an unknown quantity to be sought.

In the first place, it is obviously desirable to avail ourselves, as far
as possible, of the associations already connected with the name; not
enjoining the employment of it in a manner which conflicts with all
previous habits, and especially not so as to require the rupture of those
strongest of all associations between names, which are created by
familiarity with propositions in which they are predicated of one another.
A philosopher would have little chance of having his example followed, if
he were to give such a meaning to his terms as should require us to call
the North American Indians a civilized people, or the higher classes in
Europe savages; or to say that civilized people live by hunting, and
savages by agriculture. Were there no other reason, the extreme difficulty
of effecting so complete a revolution in speech would be more than a
sufficient one. The endeavor should be, that all generally received
propositions into which the term enters, should be at least as true after
its meaning is fixed, as they were before; and that the concrete name,
therefore, should not receive such a connotation as shall prevent it from
denoting things which, in common language, it is currently affirmed of.
The fixed and precise connotation which it receives should not be in
deviation from, but in agreement (as far as it goes) with, the vague and
fluctuating connotation which the term already had.

To fix the connotation of a concrete name, or the denotation of the
corresponding abstract, is to define the name. When this can be done
without rendering any received assertions inadmissible, the name can be
defined in accordance with its received use, which is vulgarly called
defining not the name but the thing. What is meant by the improper
expression of defining a thing (or rather a class of things—for nobody
talks of defining an individual), is to define the name, subject to the
condition that it shall denote those things. This, of course, supposes a
comparison of the things, feature by feature and property by property, to
ascertain what attributes they agree in; and not unfrequently an operation
strictly inductive, for the purpose of ascertaining some unobvious
agreement, which is the cause of the obvious agreements.

For, in order to give a connotation to a name, consistently with its
denoting certain objects, we have to make our selection from among the
various attributes in which those objects agree. To ascertain in what they
do agree is, therefore, the first logical operation requisite. When this
has been done as far as is necessary or practicable, the question arises,
which of these common attributes shall be selected to be associated with
the name. For if the class which the name denotes be a Kind, the common
properties are innumerable; and even if not, they are often extremely
numerous. Our choice is first limited by the preference to be given to
properties which are well known, and familiarly predicated of the class;
but even these are often too numerous to be all included in the
definition, and, besides, the properties most generally known may not be
those which serve best to mark out the class from all others. We should
therefore select from among the common properties (if among them any such
are to be found) those on which it has been ascertained by experience, or
proved by deduction, that many others depend; or at least which are sure
marks of them, and from whence, therefore, many others will follow by
inference. We thus see that to frame a good definition of a name already
in use, is not a matter of choice but of discussion, and discussion not
merely respecting the usage of language, but respecting the properties of
things, and even the origin of those properties. And hence every
enlargement of our knowledge of the objects to which the name is applied,
is liable to suggest an improvement in the definition. It is impossible to
frame a perfect set of definitions on any subject, until the theory of the
subject is perfect; and as science makes progress, its definitions are
also progressive.

§ 4. The discussion of Definitions, in so far as it does not turn on the
use of words but on the properties of things, Dr. Whewell calls the
Explication of Conceptions. The act of ascertaining, better than before,
in what particulars any phenomena which are classed together agree, he
calls in his technical phraseology, unfolding the general conception in
virtue of which they are so classed. Making allowance for what appears to
me the darkening and misleading tendency of this mode of expression,
several of his remarks are so much to the purpose, that I shall take the
liberty of transcribing them.

He observes,(213) that many of the controversies which have had an
important share in the formation of the existing body of science, have
“assumed the form of a battle of Definitions. For example, the inquiry
concerning the laws of falling bodies led to the question whether the
proper definition of a _uniform force_ is that it generates a velocity
proportional to the _space_ from rest, or to the _time_. The controversy
of the _vis viva_ was what was the proper definition of the _measure of
force_. A principal question in the classification of minerals is, what is
the definition of a _mineral species_. Physiologists have endeavored to
throw light on their subject by defining _organization_, or some similar
term.” Questions of the same nature were long open and are not yet
completely closed, respecting the definitions of Specific Heat, Latent
Heat, Chemical Combination, and Solution.

“It is very important for us to observe, that these controversies have
never been questions of insulated and _arbitrary_ definitions, as men seem
often tempted to imagine them to have been. In all cases there is a tacit
assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed by means of the
definition, and which gives it its importance. The dispute concerning the
definition thus acquires a real value, and becomes a question concerning
true and false. Thus, in the discussion of the question, What is a uniform
force? it was taken for granted that gravity is a uniform force. In the
debate of the _vis viva_, it was assumed that in the mutual action of
bodies the whole effect of the force is unchanged. In the zoological
definition of species (that it consists of individuals which have, or may
have, sprung from the same parents), it is presumed that individuals so
related resemble each other more than those which are excluded by such a
definition; or, perhaps, that species so defined have permanent and
definite differences. A definition of organization, or of some other term
which was not employed to express some principle, would be of no value.

“The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of a term, may be a
useful step in the explication of our conceptions; but this will be the
case then only when we have under our consideration some proposition in
which the term is employed. For then the question really is, how the
conception shall be understood and defined in order that the proposition
may be true.

“To unfold our conceptions by means of definitions has never been
serviceable to science, except when it has been associated with an
immediate use of the definitions. The endeavor to define a Uniform Force
was combined with the assertion that gravity is a uniform force; the
attempt to define Accelerating Force was immediately followed by the
doctrine that accelerating forces may be compounded; the process of
defining Momentum was connected with the principle that momenta gained and
lost are equal; naturalists would have given in vain the definition of
Species which we have quoted, if they had not also given the characters of
species so separated.... Definition may be the best mode of explaining our
conception, but that which alone makes it worth while to explain it in any
mode, is the opportunity of using it in the expression of truth. When a
definition is propounded to us as a useful step in knowledge, we are
always entitled to ask what principle it serves to enunciate.”

In giving, then, an exact connotation to the phrase, “a uniform force,”
the condition was understood, that the phrase should continue to denote
gravity. The discussion, therefore, respecting the definition, resolved
itself into this question, What is there of a uniform nature in the
motions produced by gravity? By observations and comparisons, it was found
that what was uniform in those motions was the ratio of the velocity
acquired to the time elapsed; equal velocities being added in equal times.
A uniform force, therefore, was defined a force which adds equal
velocities in equal times. So, again, in defining momentum. It was already
a received doctrine that, when two objects impinge upon one another, the
momentum lost by the one is equal to that gained by the other. This
proposition it was deemed necessary to preserve, not from the motive
(which operates in many other cases) that it was firmly fixed in popular
belief; for the proposition in question had never been heard of by any but
the scientifically instructed. But it was felt to contain a truth; even a
superficial observation of the phenomena left no doubt that in the
propagation of motion from one body to another, there was something of
which the one body gained precisely what the other lost; and the word
momentum had been invented to express this unknown something. The
settlement, therefore, of the definition of momentum, involved the
determination of the question, What is that of which a body, when it sets
another body in motion, loses exactly as much as it communicates? And when
experiment had shown that this _something_ was the product of the velocity
of the body by its mass, or quantity of matter, this became the definition
of momentum.

The following remarks,(214) therefore, are perfectly just: “The business
of definition is part of the business of discovery.... To define, so that
our definition shall have any scientific value, requires no small portion
of that sagacity by which truth is detected.... When it has been clearly
seen what ought to be our definition, it must be pretty well known what
truth we have to state. The definition, as well as the discovery, supposes
a decided step in our knowledge to have been made. The writers on Logic,
in the Middle Ages, made Definition the last stage in the progress of
knowledge; and in this arrangement at least, the history of science, and
the philosophy derived from the history, confirm their speculative views.”
For in order to judge finally how the name which denotes a class may best
be defined, we must know all the properties common to the class, and all
the relations of causation or dependence among those properties.

If the properties which are fittest to be selected as marks of other
common properties are also obvious and familiar, and especially if they
bear a great part in producing that general air of resemblance which was
the original inducement to the formation of the class, the definition will
then be most felicitous. But it is often necessary to define the class by
some property not familiarly known, provided that property be the best
mark of those which are known. M. De Blainville, for instance, founded his
definition of life on the process of decomposition and recomposition which
incessantly takes place in every living body, so that the particles
composing it are never for two instants the same. This is by no means one
of the most obvious properties of living bodies; it might escape
altogether the notice of an unscientific observer. Yet great authorities
(independently of M. De Blainville, who is himself a first-rate authority)
have thought that no other property so well answers the conditions
required for the definition.

§ 5. Having laid down the principles which ought for the most part to be
observed in attempting to give a precise connotation to a term in use, I
must now add, that it is not always practicable to adhere to those
principles, and that even when practicable, it is occasionally not
desirable.

Cases in which it is impossible to comply with all the conditions of a
precise definition of a name in agreement with usage, occur very
frequently. There is often no one connotation capable of being given to a
word, so that it shall still denote every thing it is accustomed to
denote; or that all the propositions into which it is accustomed to enter,
and which have any foundation in truth, shall remain true. Independently
of accidental ambiguities, in which the different meanings have no
connection with one another; it continually happens that a word is used in
two or more senses derived from each other, but yet radically distinct. So
long as a term is vague, that is, so long as its connotation is not
ascertained and permanently fixed, it is constantly liable to be applied
by _extension_ from one thing to another, until it reaches things which
have little, or even no, resemblance to those which were first designated
by it.

“Suppose,” says Dugald Stewart, in his _Philosophical Essays_,(215) “that
the letters A, B, C, D, E, denote a series of objects; that A possesses
some one quality in common with B; B a quality in common with C; C a
quality in common with D; D a quality in common with E; while at the same
time, no quality can be found which belongs in common to any _three_
objects in the series. Is it not conceivable, that the affinity between A
and B may produce a transference of the name of the first to the second;
and that, in consequence of the other affinities which connect the
remaining objects together, the same name may pass in succession from B to
C; from C to D; and from D to E? In this manner, a common appellation will
arise between A and E, although the two objects may, in their nature and
properties, be so widely distant from each other, that no stretch of
imagination can conceive how the thoughts were led from the former to the
latter. The transitions, nevertheless, may have been all so easy and
gradual, that, were they successfully detected by the fortunate ingenuity
of a theorist, we should instantly recognize, not only the verisimilitude,
but the truth of the conjecture: in the same way as we admit, with the
confidence of intuitive conviction, the certainty of the well-known
etymological process which connects the Latin preposition _e_ or _ex_ with
the English substantive _stranger_, the moment that the intermediate links
of the chain are submitted to our examination.”(216)

The applications which a word acquires by this gradual extension of it
from one set of objects to another, Stewart, adopting an expression from
Mr. Payne Knight, calls its _transitive_ applications; and after briefly
illustrating such of them as are the result of local or casual
associations, he proceeds as follows:(217)

“But although by far the greater part of the transitive or derivative
applications of words depend on casual and unaccountable caprices of the
feelings or the fancy, there are certain cases in which they open a very
interesting field of philosophical speculation. Such are those, in which
an analogous transference of the corresponding term may be remarked
universally, or very generally, in other languages; and in which, of
course, the uniformity of the result must be ascribed to the essential
principles of the human frame. Even in such cases, however, it will by no
means be always found, on examination, that the various applications of
the same term have arisen from any common quality or qualities in the
objects to which they relate. In the greater number of instances, they may
be traced to some natural and universal associations of ideas, founded in
the common faculties, common organs, and common condition of the human
race.... According to the different degrees of intimacy and strength in
the associations on which the _transitions_ of language are founded, very
different effects may be expected to arise. Where the association is
slight and casual, the several meanings will remain distinct from each
other, and will often, in process of time, assume the appearance of
capricious varieties in the use of the same arbitrary sign. _Where the
association is so natural and habitual as to become virtually
indissoluble, the transitive meanings will coalesce in one complex
conception; and every new transition will become a more comprehensive
generalization of the term in question._”

I solicit particular attention to the law of mind expressed in the last
sentence, and which is the source of the perplexity so often experienced
in detecting these transitions of meaning. Ignorance of that law is the
shoal on which some of the most powerful intellects which have adorned the
human race have been stranded. The inquiries of Plato into the definitions
of some of the most general terms of moral speculation are characterized
by Bacon as a far nearer approach to a true inductive method than is
elsewhere to be found among the ancients, and are, indeed, almost perfect
examples of the preparatory process of comparison and abstraction; but,
from being unaware of the law just mentioned, he often wasted the powers
of this great logical instrument on inquiries in which it could realize no
result, since the phenomena, whose common properties he so elaborately
endeavored to detect, had not really any common properties. Bacon himself
fell into the same error in his speculations on the nature of heat, in
which he evidently confounded under the name hot, classes of phenomena
which have no property in common. Stewart certainly overstates the matter
when he speaks of “a prejudice which has descended to modern times from
the scholastic ages, that when a word admits of a variety of
significations, these different significations must all be species of the
same genus, and must consequently include some essential idea common to
every individual to which the generic term can be applied;”(218) for both
Aristotle and his followers were well aware that there are such things as
ambiguities of language, and delighted in distinguishing them. But they
never suspected ambiguity in the cases where (as Stewart remarks) the
association on which the transition of meaning was founded is so natural
and habitual, that the two meanings blend together in the mind, and a real
transition becomes an apparent generalization. Accordingly they wasted
infinite pains in endeavoring to find a definition which would serve for
several distinct meanings at once; as in an instance noticed by Stewart
himself, that of “causation; the ambiguity of the word which, in the Greek
language corresponds to the English word _cause_, having suggested to them
the vain attempt of tracing the common idea which, in the case of any
_effect_, belongs to the _efficient_, to the _matter_, to the _form_, and
to the _end_. The idle generalities” (he adds) “we meet with in other
philosophers, about the ideas of the _good_, the _fit_, and the
_becoming_, have taken their rise from the same undue influence of popular
epithets on the speculations of the learned.”(219)

Among the words which have undergone so many successive transitions of
meaning that every trace of a property common to all the things they are
applied to, or at least common and also peculiar to those things, has been
lost, Stewart considers the word Beautiful to be one. And (without
attempting to decide a question which in no respect belongs to logic) I
can not but feel, with him, considerable doubt whether the word beautiful
connotes the same property when we speak of a beautiful color, a beautiful
face, a beautiful scene, a beautiful character, and a beautiful poem. The
word was doubtless extended from one of these objects to another on
account of a resemblance between them, or, more probably, between the
emotions they excited; and, by this progressive extension, it has at last
reached things very remote from those objects of sight to which there is
no doubt that it was first appropriated; and it is at least questionable
whether there is now any property common to all the things which,
consistently with usage, may be called beautiful, except the property of
agreeableness, which the term certainly does connote, but which can not be
all that people usually intend to express by it, since there are many
agreeable things which are never called beautiful. If such be the case, it
is impossible to give to the word Beautiful any fixed connotation, such
that it shall denote all the objects which in common use it now denotes,
but no others. A fixed connotation, however, it ought to have; for, so
long as it has not, it is unfit to be used as a scientific term, and is a
perpetual source of false analogies and erroneous generalizations.

This, then, constitutes a case in exemplification of our remark, that even
when there is a property common to all the things denoted by a name, to
erect that property into the definition and exclusive connotation of the
name is not always desirable. The various things called beautiful
unquestionably resemble one another in being agreeable; but to make this
the definition of beauty, and so extend the word Beautiful to all
agreeable things, would be to drop altogether a portion of meaning which
the word really, though indistinctly, conveys, and to do what depends on
us toward causing those qualities of the objects which the word
previously, though vaguely, pointed at, to be overlooked and forgotten. It
is better, in such a case, to give a fixed connotation to the term by
restricting, than by extending its use; rather excluding from the epithet
Beautiful some things to which it is commonly considered applicable, than
leaving out of its connotation any of the qualities by which, though
occasionally lost sight of, the general mind may have been habitually
guided in the commonest and most interesting applications of the term. For
there is no question that when people call any thing beautiful, they think
they are asserting more than that it is merely agreeable. They think they
are ascribing a peculiar _sort_ of agreeableness, analogous to that which
they find in some other of the things to which they are accustomed to
apply the same name. If, therefore, there be any peculiar sort of
agreeableness which is common though not to all, yet to the principal
things which are called beautiful, it is better to limit the denotation of
the term to those things, than to leave that kind of quality without a
term to connote it, and thereby divert attention from its peculiarities.

§ 6. The last remark exemplifies a rule of terminology, which is of great
importance, and which has hardly yet been recognized as a rule, but by a
few thinkers of the present century. In attempting to rectify the use of a
vague term by giving it a fixed connotation, we must take care not to
discard (unless advisedly, and on the ground of a deeper knowledge of the
subject) any portion of the connotation which the word, in however
indistinct a manner, previously carried with it. For otherwise language
loses one of its inherent and most valuable properties, that of being the
conservator of ancient experience; the keeper-alive of those thoughts and
observations of former ages, which may be alien to the tendencies of the
passing time. This function of language is so often overlooked or
undervalued, that a few observations on it appear to be extremely
required.

Even when the connotation of a term has been accurately fixed, and still
more if it has been left in the state of a vague unanalyzed feeling of
resemblance; there is a constant tendency in the word, through familiar
use, to part with a portion of its connotation. It is a well-known law of
the mind, that a word originally associated with a very complex cluster of
ideas, is far from calling up all those ideas in the mind, every time the
word is used; it calls up only one or two, from which the mind runs on by
fresh associations to another set of ideas, without waiting for the
suggestion of the remainder of the complex cluster. If this were not the
case, processes of thought could not take place with any thing like the
rapidity which we know they possess. Very often, indeed, when we are
employing a word in our mental operations, we are so far from waiting
until the complex idea which corresponds to the meaning of the word is
consciously brought before us in all its parts, that we run on to new
trains of ideas by the other associations which the mere word excites,
without having realized in our imagination any part whatever of the
meaning; thus using the word, and even using it well and accurately, and
carrying on important processes of reasoning by means of it, in an almost
mechanical manner; so much so, that some metaphysicians, generalizing from
an extreme case, have fancied that all reasoning is but the mechanical use
of a set of terms according to a certain form. We may discuss and settle
the most important interests of towns or nations, by the application of
general theorems or practical maxims previously laid down, without having
had consciously suggested to us, once in the whole process, the houses and
green fields, the thronged market-places and domestic hearths, of which
not only those towns and nations consist, but which the words town and
nation confessedly mean.

Since, then, general names come in this manner to be used (and even to do
a portion of their work well) without suggesting to the mind the whole of
their meaning, and often with the suggestion of a very small, or no part
at all of that meaning; we can not wonder that words so used come in time
to be no longer capable of suggesting any other of the ideas appropriated
to them, than those with which the association is most immediate and
strongest, or most kept up by the incidents of life; the remainder being
lost altogether; unless the mind, by often consciously dwelling on them,
keeps up the association. Words naturally retain much more of their
meaning to persons of active imagination, who habitually represent to
themselves things in the concrete, with the detail which belongs to them
in the actual world. To minds of a different description, the only
antidote to this corruption of language is predication. The habit of
predicating of the name, all the various properties which it originally
connoted, keeps up the association between the name and those properties.

But in order that it may do so, it is necessary that the predicates should
themselves retain their association with the properties which they
severally connote. For the propositions can not keep the meaning of the
words alive, if the meaning of the propositions themselves should die. And
nothing is more common than for propositions to be mechanically repeated,
mechanically retained in the memory, and their truth undoubtingly assented
to and relied on, while yet they carry no meaning distinctly home to the
mind; and while the matter of fact or law of nature which they originally
expressed is as much lost sight of, and practically disregarded, as if it
never had been heard of at all. In those subjects which are at the same
time familiar and complicated, and especially in those which are so in as
great a degree as moral and social subjects are, it is a matter of common
remark how many important propositions are believed and repeated from
habit, while no account could be given, and no sense is practically
manifested, of the truths which they convey. Hence it is, that the
traditional maxims of old experience, though seldom questioned, have often
so little effect on the conduct of life; because their meaning is never,
by most persons, really felt, until personal experience has brought it
home. And thus also it is that so many doctrines of religion, ethics, and
even politics, so full of meaning and reality to first converts, have
manifested (after the association of that meaning with the verbal formulas
has ceased to be kept up by the controversies which accompanied their
first introduction) a tendency to degenerate rapidly into lifeless dogmas;
which tendency, all the efforts of an education expressly and skillfully
directed to keeping the meaning alive, are barely sufficient to
counteract.

Considering, then, that the human mind, in different generations, occupies
itself with different things, and in one age is led by the circumstances
which surround it to fix more of its attention upon one of the properties
of a thing, in another age upon another; it is natural and inevitable that
in every age a certain portion of our recorded and traditional knowledge,
not being continually suggested by the pursuits and inquiries with which
mankind are at that time engrossed, should fall asleep, as it were, and
fade from the memory. It would be in danger of being totally lost, if the
propositions or formulas, the results of the previous experience, did not
remain, as forms of words it may be, but of words that once really
conveyed, and are still supposed to convey, a meaning: which meaning,
though suspended, may be historically traced, and when suggested, may be
recognized by minds of the necessary endowments as being still matter of
fact, or truth. While the formulas remain, the meaning may at any time
revive; and as, on the one hand, the formulas progressively lose the
meaning they were intended to convey, so, on the other, when this
forgetfulness has reached its height and begun to produce obvious
consequences, minds arise which from the contemplation of the formulas
rediscover the truth, when truth it was, which was contained in them, and
announce it again to mankind, not as a discovery, but as the meaning of
that which they have been taught, and still profess to believe.

Thus there is a perpetual oscillation in spiritual truths, and in
spiritual doctrines of any significance, even when not truths. Their
meaning is almost always in a process either of being lost or of being
recovered. Whoever has attended to the history of the more serious
convictions of mankind—of the opinions by which the general conduct of
their lives is, or as they conceive ought to be, more especially
regulated—is aware that even when recognizing verbally the same doctrines,
they attach to them at different periods a greater or a less quantity, and
even a different kind of meaning. The words in their original acceptation
connoted, and the propositions expressed, a complication of outward facts
and inward feelings, to different portions of which the general mind is
more particularly alive in different generations of mankind. To common
minds, only that portion of the meaning is in each generation suggested,
of which that generation possesses the counterpart in its own habitual
experience. But the words and propositions lie ready to suggest to any
mind duly prepared the remainder of the meaning. Such individual minds are
almost always to be found; and the lost meaning, revived by them, again by
degrees works its way into the general mind.

The arrival of this salutary reaction may, however, be materially retarded
by the shallow conceptions and incautious proceedings of mere logicians.
It sometimes happens that toward the close of the downward period, when
the words have lost part of their significance, and have not yet begun to
recover it, persons arise whose leading and favorite idea is the
importance of clear conceptions and precise thought, and the necessity,
therefore, of definite language. These persons, in examining the old
formulas, easily perceive that words are used in them without a meaning;
and if they are not the sort of persons who are capable of rediscovering
the lost signification, they naturally enough dismiss the formula, and
define the name without reference to it. In so doing they fasten down the
name to what it connotes in common use at the time when it conveys the
smallest quantity of meaning; and introduce the practice of employing it,
consistently and uniformly, according to that connotation. The word in
this way acquires an extent of denotation far beyond what it had before;
it becomes extended to many things to which it was previously, in
appearance capriciously, refused. Of the propositions in which it was
formerly used, those which were true in virtue of the forgotten part of
its meaning are now, by the clearer light which the definition diffuses,
seen not to be true according to the definition; which, however, is the
recognized and sufficiently correct expression of all that is perceived to
be in the mind of any one by whom the term is used at the present day. The
ancient formulas are consequently treated as prejudices; and people are no
longer taught as before, though not to understand them, yet to believe
that there is truth in them. They no longer remain in the general mind
surrounded by respect, and ready at any time to suggest their original
meaning. Whatever truths they contain are not only, in these
circumstances, rediscovered far more slowly, but, when rediscovered, the
prejudice with which novelties are regarded is now, in some degree at
least, against them, instead of being on their side.

An example may make these remarks more intelligible. In all ages, except
where moral speculation has been silenced by outward compulsion, or where
the feelings which prompt to it still continue to be satisfied by the
traditional doctrines of an established faith, one of the subjects which
have most occupied the minds of thinking persons is the inquiry, What is
virtue? or, What is a virtuous character? Among the different theories on
the subject which have, at different times, grown up and obtained partial
currency, every one of which reflected as in the clearest mirror the
express image of the age which gave it birth; there was one, according to
which virtue consists in a correct calculation of our own personal
interests, either in this world only, or also in another. To make this
theory plausible, it was of course necessary that the only beneficial
actions which people in general were accustomed to see, or were therefore
accustomed to praise, should be such as were, or at least might without
contradicting obvious facts be supposed to be, the result of a prudential
regard to self-interest; so that the words really connoted no more, in
common acceptation, than was set down in the definition.

Suppose, now, that the partisans of this theory had contrived to introduce
a consistent and undeviating use of the term according to this definition.
Suppose that they had seriously endeavored, and had succeeded in the
endeavor, to banish the word disinterestedness from the language; had
obtained the disuse of all expressions attaching odium to selfishness or
commendation to self-sacrifice, or which implied generosity or kindness to
be any thing but doing a benefit in order to receive a greater personal
advantage in return. Need we say that this abrogation of the old formulas
for the sake of preserving clear ideas and consistency of thought, would
have been a great evil? while the very inconsistency incurred by the
co-existence of the formulas with philosophical opinions which seemed to
condemn them as absurdities, operated as a stimulus to the re-examination
of the subject and thus the very doctrines originating in the oblivion
into which a part of the truth had fallen, were rendered indirectly, but
powerfully, instrumental to its revival.

The doctrine of the Coleridge school, that the language of any people
among whom culture is of old date, is a sacred deposit, the property of
all ages, and which no one age should consider itself empowered to
alter—borders indeed, as thus expressed, on an extravagance; but it is
grounded on a truth, frequently overlooked by that class of logicians who
think more of having a clear than of having a comprehensive meaning; and
who perceive that every age is adding to the truths which it has received
from its predecessors, but fail to see that a counter process of losing
truths already possessed, is also constantly going on, and requiring the
most sedulous attention to counteract it. Language is the depository of
the accumulated body of experience to which all former ages have
contributed their part, and which is the inheritance of all yet to come.
We have no right to prevent ourselves from transmitting to posterity a
larger portion of this inheritance than we may ourselves have profited by.
However much we may be able to improve on the conclusions of our
forefathers, we ought to be careful not inadvertently to let any of their
premises slip through our fingers. It may be good to alter the meaning of
a word, but it is bad to let any part of the meaning drop. Whoever seeks
to introduce a more correct use of a term with which important
associations are connected, should be required to possess an accurate
acquaintance with the history of the particular word, and of the opinions
which in different stages of its progress it served to express. To be
qualified to define the name, we must know all that has ever been known of
the properties of the class of objects which are, or originally were,
denoted by it. For if we give it a meaning according to which any
proposition will be false which has ever been generally held to be true,
it is incumbent on us to be sure that we know and have considered all
which those who believed the proposition understood by it.




                                Chapter V.


On The Natural History Of The Variations In The Meaning Of Terms.


§ 1. It is not only in the mode which has now been pointed out, namely by
gradual inattention to a portion of the ideas conveyed, that words in
common use are liable to shift their connotation. The truth is, that the
connotation of such words is perpetually varying; as might be expected
from the manner in which words in common use acquire their connotation. A
technical term, invented for purposes of art or science, has, from the
first, the connotation given to it by its inventor; but a name which is in
every one’s mouth before any one thinks of defining it, derives its
connotation only from the circumstances which are habitually brought to
mind when it is pronounced. Among these circumstances, the properties
common to the things denoted by the name, have naturally a principal
place; and would have the sole place, if language were regulated by
convention rather than by custom and accident. But besides these common
properties, which if they exist are _certainly_ present whenever the name
is employed, any other circumstance may _casually_ be found along with it,
so frequently as to become associated with it in the same manner, and as
strongly, as the common properties themselves. In proportion as this
association forms itself, people give up using the name in cases in which
those casual circumstances do not exist. They prefer using some other
name, or the same name with some adjunct, rather than employ an expression
which will call up an idea they do not want to excite. The circumstance
originally casual, thus becomes regularly a part of the connotation of the
word.

It is this continual incorporation of circumstances originally accidental,
into the permanent signification of words, which is the cause that there
are so few exact synonyms. It is this also which renders the dictionary
meaning of a word, by universal remark so imperfect an exponent of its
real meaning. The dictionary meaning is marked out in a broad, blunt way,
and probably includes all that was originally necessary for the correct
employment of the term; but in process of time so many collateral
associations adhere to words, that whoever should attempt to use them with
no other guide than the dictionary, would confound a thousand nice
distinctions and subtle shades of meaning which dictionaries take no
account of; as we notice in the use of a language in conversation or
writing by a foreigner not thoroughly master of it. The history of a word,
by showing the causes which determine its use, is in these cases a better
guide to its employment than any definition; for definitions can only show
its meaning at the particular time, or at most the series of its
successive meanings, but its history may show the law by which the
succession was produced. The word _gentleman_, for instance, to the
correct employment of which a dictionary would be no guide, originally
meant simply a man born in a certain rank. From this it came by degrees to
connote all such qualities or adventitious circumstances as were usually
found to belong to persons of that rank. This consideration at once
explains why in one of its vulgar acceptations it means any one who lives
without labor, in another without manual labor, and in its more elevated
signification it has in every age signified the conduct, character,
habits, and outward appearance, in whomsoever found, which, according to
the ideas of that age, belonged or were expected to belong to persons born
and educated in a high social position.

It continually happens that of two words, whose dictionary meanings are
either the same or very slightly different, one will be the proper word to
use in one set of circumstances, another in another, without its being
possible to show how the custom of so employing them originally grew up.
The accident that one of the words was used and not the other on a
particular occasion or in a particular social circle, will be sufficient
to produce so strong an association between the word and some specialty of
circumstances, that mankind abandon the use of it in any other case, and
the specialty becomes part of its signification. The tide of custom first
drifts the word on the shore of a particular meaning, then retires and
leaves it there.

An instance in point is the remarkable change which, in the English
language at least, has taken place in the signification of the word
_loyalty_. That word originally meant in English, as it still means in the
language from whence it came, fair, open dealing, and fidelity to
engagements; in that sense the quality it expressed was part of the ideal
chivalrous or knightly character. By what process, in England, the term
became restricted to the single case of fidelity to the throne, I am not
sufficiently versed in the history of courtly language to be able to
pronounce. The interval between a _loyal chevalier_ and a loyal subject is
certainly great. I can only suppose that the word was, at some period, the
favorite term at court to express fidelity to the oath of allegiance;
until at length those who wished to speak of any other, and as it was
probably deemed, inferior sort of fidelity, either did not venture to use
so dignified a term, or found it convenient to employ some other in order
to avoid being misunderstood.

§ 2. Cases are not unfrequent in which a circumstance, at first casually
incorporated into the connotation of a word which originally had no
reference to it, in time wholly supersedes the original meaning, and
becomes not merely a part of the connotation, but the whole of it. This is
exemplified in the word pagan, _paganus_; which originally, as its
etymology imports, was equivalent to _villager_; the inhabitant of a
_pagus_, or village. At a particular era in the extension of Christianity
over the Roman empire, the adherents of the old religion, and the
villagers or country people, were nearly the same body of individuals, the
inhabitants of the towns having been earliest converted; as in our own
day, and at all times, the greater activity of social intercourse renders
them the earliest recipients of new opinions and modes, while old habits
and prejudices linger longest among the country people; not to mention
that the towns were more immediately under the direct influence of the
Government, which at that time had embraced Christianity. From this casual
coincidence, the word _paganus_ carried with it, and began more and more
steadily to suggest, the idea of a worshiper of the ancient divinities;
until at length it suggested that idea so forcibly that people who did not
desire to suggest the idea avoided using the word. But when _paganus_ had
come to connote heathenism, the very unimportant circumstance, with
reference to that fact, of the place of residence, was soon disregarded in
the employment of the word. As there was seldom any occasion for making
separate assertions respecting heathens who lived in the country, there
was no need for a separate word to denote them; and pagan came not only to
mean heathen, but to mean that exclusively.

A case still more familiar to most readers is that of the word _villain_
or _villein_. This term, as every body knows, had in the Middle Ages a
connotation as strictly defined as a word could have, being the proper
legal designation for those persons who were the subjects of the less
onerous forms of feudal bondage. The scorn of the semi-barbarous military
aristocracy for these their abject dependants, rendered the act of
likening any person to this class of people a mark of the greatest
contumely; the same scorn led them to ascribe to the same people all
manner of hateful qualities, which doubtless also, in the degrading
situation in which they were held, were often not unjustly imputed to
them. These circumstances combined to attach to the term villain ideas of
crime and guilt, in so forcible a manner that the application of the
epithet even to those to whom it legally belonged became an affront, and
was abstained from whenever no affront was intended. From that time guilt
was part of the connotation; and soon became the whole of it, since
mankind were not prompted by any urgent motive to continue making a
distinction in their language between bad men of servile station and bad
men of any other rank in life.

These and similar instances in which the original signification of a term
is totally lost—another and an entirely distinct meaning being first
ingrafted upon the former, and finally substituted for it—afford examples
of the double movement which is always taking place in language: two
counter-movements, one of Generalization, by which words are perpetually
losing portions of their connotation, and becoming of less meaning and
more general acceptation; the other of Specialization, by which other, or
even these same words, are continually taking on fresh connotation;
acquiring additional meaning by being restricted in their employment to a
part only of the occasions on which they might properly be used before.
This double movement is of sufficient importance in the natural history of
language (to which natural history the artificial modifications ought
always to have some degree of reference), to justify our dwelling a little
longer on the nature of the twofold phenomenon, and the causes to which it
owes its existence.

§ 3. To begin with the movement of generalization. It might seem
unnecessary to dwell on the changes in the meaning of names which take
place merely from their being used ignorantly, by persons who, not having
properly mastered the received connotation of a word, apply it in a looser
and wider sense than belongs to it. This, however, is a real source of
alterations in the language; for when a word, from being often employed in
cases where one of the qualities which it connotes does not exist, ceases
to suggest that quality with certainty, then even those who are under no
mistake as to the proper meaning of the word, prefer expressing that
meaning in some other way, and leave the original word to its fate. The
word ’Squire, as standing for an owner of a landed estate; Parson, as
denoting not the rector of the parish, but clergymen in general; Artist,
to denote only a painter or sculptor; are cases in point. Such cases give
a clear insight into the process of the degeneration of languages in
periods of history when literary culture was suspended; and we are now in
danger of experiencing a similar evil through the superficial extension of
the same culture. So many persons without any thing deserving the name of
education have become writers by profession, that written language may
almost be said to be principally wielded by persons ignorant of the proper
use of the instrument, and who are spoiling it more and more for those who
understand it. Vulgarisms, which creep in nobody knows how, are daily
depriving the English language of valuable modes of expressing thought. To
take a present instance: the verb _transpire_ formerly conveyed very
expressively its correct meaning, viz., to _become known_ through
unnoticed channels—to exhale, as it were, into publicity through invisible
pores, like a vapor or gas disengaging itself. But of late a practice has
commenced of employing this word, for the sake of finery, as a mere
synonym of _to happen_: “the events which have _transpired_ in the
Crimea,” meaning the incidents of the war. This vile specimen of bad
English is already seen in the dispatches of noblemen and viceroys; and
the time is apparently not far distant when nobody will understand the
word if used in its proper sense. In other cases it is not the love of
finery, but simple want of education, which makes writers employ words in
senses unknown to genuine English. The use of “aggravating” for
“provoking,” in my boyhood a vulgarism of the nursery, has crept into
almost all newspapers, and into many books; and when the word is used in
its proper sense, as when writers on criminal law speak of aggravating and
extenuating circumstances, their meaning, it is probable, is already
misunderstood. It is a great error to think that these corruptions of
language do no harm. Those who are struggling with the difficulty (and who
know by experience how great it already is) of expressing one’s self
clearly with precision, find their resources continually narrowed by
illiterate writers, who seize and twist from its purpose some form of
speech which once served to convey briefly and compactly an unambiguous
meaning. It would hardly be believed how often a writer is compelled to a
circumlocution by the single vulgarism, introduced during the last few
years, of using the word _alone_ as an adverb, _only_ not being fine
enough for the rhetoric of ambitious ignorance. A man will say “to which I
am not alone bound by honor but also by law,” unaware that what he has
unintentionally said is, that he is _not alone_ bound, some other person
being bound with him. Formerly, if any one said, “I am not alone
responsible for this,” he was understood to mean (what alone his words
mean in correct English), that he is not the sole person responsible; but
if he now used such an expression, the reader would be confused between
that and two other meanings: that he is not _only responsible_ but
something more; or that he is responsible _not only for this_ but for
something besides. The time is coming when Tennyson’s Œnone could not say,
“I will not die alone,” lest she should be supposed to mean that she would
not only die but do something else.

The blunder of writing _predicate_ for _predict_ has become so widely
diffused that it bids fair to render one of the most useful terms in the
scientific vocabulary of Logic unintelligible. The mathematical and
logical term “to eliminate” is undergoing a similar destruction. All who
are acquainted either with the proper use of the word or with its
etymology know that to eliminate a thing is to thrust it out: but those
who know nothing about it, except that it is a fine-looking phrase, use it
in a sense precisely the reverse, to denote, not turning any thing out,
but bringing it in. They talk of _eliminating_ some truth, or other useful
result, from a mass of details.(220) A similar permanent deterioration in
the language is in danger of being produced by the blunders of
translators. The writers of telegrams, and the foreign correspondents of
newspapers, have gone on so long translating _demander_ by “to demand,”
without a suspicion that it means only to ask, that (the context generally
showing that nothing else is meant) English readers are gradually
associating the English word demand with simple asking, thus leaving the
language without a term to express a demand in its proper sense. In like
manner, “transaction,” the French word for a compromise, is translated
into the English word transaction; while, curiously enough, the inverse
change is taking place in France, where the word “compromis” has lately
begun to be used for expressing the same idea. If this continues, the two
countries will have exchanged phrases.

Independently, however, of the generalization of names through their
ignorant misuse, there is a tendency in the same direction consistently
with a perfect knowledge of their meaning; arising from the fact, that the
number of things known to us, and of which we feel a desire to speak,
multiply faster than the names for them. Except on subjects for which
there has been constructed a scientific terminology, with which
unscientific persons do not meddle, great difficulty is generally found in
bringing a new name into use; and independently of that difficulty, it is
natural to prefer giving to a new object a name which at least expresses
its resemblance to something already known, since by predicating of it a
name entirely new we at first convey no information. In this manner the
name of a species often becomes the name of a genus; as _salt_, for
example, or _oil_; the former of which words originally denoted only the
muriate of soda, the latter, as its etymology indicates, only olive-oil;
but which now denote large and diversified classes of substances
resembling these in some of their qualities, and connote only those common
qualities, instead of the whole of the distinctive properties of olive-oil
and sea-salt. The words _glass_ and _soap_ are used by modern chemists in
a similar manner, to denote genera of which the substances vulgarly so
called are single species. And it often happens, as in those instances,
that the term keeps its special signification in addition to its more
general one, and becomes ambiguous, that is, two names instead of one.

These changes, by which words in ordinary use become more and more
generalized, and less and less expressive, take place in a still greater
degree with the words which express the complicated phenomena of mind and
society. Historians, travelers, and in general those who speak or write
concerning moral and social phenomena with which they are not familiarly
acquainted, are the great agents in this modification of language. The
vocabulary of all except unusually instructed as well as thinking persons,
is, on such subjects, eminently scanty. They have a certain small set of
words to which they are accustomed, and which they employ to express
phenomena the most heterogeneous, because they have never sufficiently
analyzed the facts to which those words correspond in their own country,
to have attached perfectly definite ideas to the words. The first English
conquerors of Bengal, for example, carried with them the phrase _landed
proprietor_ into a country where the rights of individuals over the soil
were extremely different in degree, and even in nature, from those
recognized in England. Applying the term with all its English associations
in such a state of things; to one who had only a limited right they gave
an absolute right, from another because he had not an absolute right they
took away all right, drove whole classes of people to ruin and despair,
filled the country with banditti, created a feeling that nothing was
secure, and produced, with the best intentions, a disorganization of
society which had not been produced in that country by the most ruthless
of its barbarian invaders. Yet the usage of persons capable of so gross a
misapprehension determines the meaning of language; and the words they
thus misuse grow in generality, until the instructed are obliged to
acquiesce; and to employ those words (first freeing them from vagueness by
giving them a definite connotation) as generic terms, subdividing the
genera into species.

§ 4. While the more rapid growth of ideas than of names thus creates a
perpetual necessity for making the same names serve, even if imperfectly,
on a greater number of occasions; a counter-operation is going on, by
which names become on the contrary restricted to fewer occasions, by
taking on, as it were, additional connotation, from circumstances not
originally included in the meaning, but which have become connected with
it in the mind by some accidental cause. We have seen above, in the words
_pagan_ and _villain_, remarkable examples of the specialization of the
meaning of words from casual associations, as well as of the
generalization of it in a new direction, which often follows.

Similar specializations are of frequent occurrence in the history even of
scientific nomenclature. “It is by no means uncommon,” says Dr. Paris, in
his _Pharmacologia_,(221) “to find a word which is used to express general
characters subsequently become the name of a specific substance in which
such characters are predominant; and we shall find that some important
anomalies in nomenclature may be thus explained. The term Αρσενίκον, from
which the word Arsenic is derived, was an ancient epithet applied to those
natural substances which possessed strong and acrimonious properties; and
as the poisonous quality of arsenic was found to be remarkably powerful,
the term was especially applied to Orpiment, the form in which this metal
most usually occurred. So the term _Verbena_ (quasi _Herbena_) originally
denoted all those herbs that were held sacred on account of their being
employed in the rites of sacrifice, as we learn from the poets; but as
_one_ herb was usually adopted upon these occasions, the word Verbena came
to denote that particular herb _only_, and it is transmitted to us to this
day under the same title, viz., Verbena or Vervain, and indeed until
lately it enjoyed the medical reputation which its sacred origin conferred
upon it, for it was worn suspended around the neck as an amulet.
_Vitriol_, in the original application of the word, denoted _any_
crystalline body with a certain degree of transparency (_vitrum_); it is
hardly necessary to observe that the term is now appropriated to a
particular species: in the same manner, Bark, which is a general term, is
applied to express _one_ genus, and by way of eminence it has the article
_The_ prefixed, as _The_ bark; the same observation will apply to the word
Opium, which, in its primitive sense, signifies _any_ juice (ὀπὸς,
_Succus_), while it now only denotes _one_ species, viz., that of the
poppy. So, again, _Elaterium_ was used by Hippocrates to signify various
internal applications, especially purgatives, of a violent and drastic
nature (from the word ἐλαύνω, _agito_, _moveo_, _stimulo_), but by
succeeding authors it was exclusively applied to denote the active matter
which subsides from the juice of the wild cucumber. The word _Fecula_,
again, originally meant to imply _any_ substance which was derived by
spontaneous subsidence from a liquid (from _fæx_, the grounds or
settlement of _any_ liquor); afterward it was applied to Starch, which is
deposited in this manner by agitating the flour of wheat in water; and,
lastly, it has been applied to a peculiar vegetable principle, which, like
starch, is insoluble in cold, but completely soluble in boiling water,
with which it forms a gelatinous solution. This indefinite meaning of the
word _fecula_ has created numerous mistakes in pharmaceutic chemistry;
Elaterium, for instance, is said to be _fecula_, and, in the original
sense of the word, it is properly so called, inasmuch as it is procured
from a vegetable juice by spontaneous subsidence, but in the limited and
modern acceptation of the term it conveys an erroneous idea; for instead
of the active principle of the juice residing in _fecula_, it is a
peculiar proximate principle, _sui generis_, to which I have ventured to
bestow the name of _Elatin_. For the same reason, much doubt and obscurity
involve the meaning of the word _Extract_, because it is applied
_generally_ to any substance obtained by the evaporation of a vegetable
solution, and _specifically_ to a peculiar proximate principle, possessed
of certain characters, by which it is distinguished from every other
elementary body.”

A generic term is always liable to become thus limited to a single
species, or even individual, if people have occasion to think and speak of
that individual or species much oftener than of any thing else which is
contained in the genus. Thus by cattle, a stage-coachman will understand
horses; beasts, in the language of agriculturists, stands for oxen; and
birds, with some sportsmen, for partridges only. The law of language which
operates in these trivial instances is the very same in conformity to
which the terms Θεός, Deus, and God, were adopted from Polytheism by
Christianity, to express the single object of its own adoration. Almost
all the terminology of the Christian Church is made up of words originally
used in a much more general acceptation: _Ecclesia_, Assembly; _Bishop_,
Episcopus, Overseer; _Priest_, Presbyter, Elder; _Deacon_, Diaconus,
Administrator; _Sacrament_, a vow of allegiance; _Evangelium_, good
tidings; and some words, as _Minister_, are still used both in the general
and in the limited sense. It would be interesting to trace the progress by
which _author_ came, in its most familiar sense, to signify a writer, and
ποίητης, or maker, a poet.

Of the incorporation into the meaning of a term, of circumstances
accidentally connected with it at some particular period, as in the case
of Pagan, instances might easily be multiplied. Physician (φυσίκος, or
naturalist) became, in England, synonymous with a healer of diseases,
because until a comparatively late period medical practitioners were the
only naturalists. _Clerc_, or clericus, a scholar, came to signify an
ecclesiastic, because the clergy were for many centuries the only
scholars.

Of all ideas, however, the most liable to cling by association to any
thing with which they have ever been connected by proximity, are those of
our pleasures and pains, or of the things which we habitually contemplate
as sources of our pleasures or pains. The additional connotation,
therefore, which a word soonest and most readily takes on, is that of
agreeableness or painfulness, in their various kinds and degrees; of being
a good or bad thing; desirable or to be avoided; an object of hatred, of
dread, contempt, admiration, hope, or love. Accordingly there is hardly a
single name, expressive of any moral or social fact calculated to call
forth strong affections either of a favorable or of a hostile nature,
which does not carry with it decidedly and irresistibly a connotation of
those strong affections, or, at the least, of approbation or censure;
insomuch that to employ those names in conjunction with others by which
the contrary sentiments were expressed, would produce the effect of a
paradox, or even a contradiction in terms. The baneful influence of a
connotation thus acquired, on the prevailing habits of thought, especially
in morals and politics, has been well pointed out on many occasions by
Bentham. It gives rise to the fallacy of “question-begging names.” The
very property which we are inquiring whether a thing possesses or not, has
become so associated with the name of the thing as to be part of its
meaning, insomuch that by merely uttering the name we assume the point
which was to be made out; one of the most frequent sources of apparently
self-evident propositions.

Without any further multiplication of examples to illustrate the changes
which usage is continually making in the signification of terms, I shall
add, as a practical rule, that the logician, not being able to prevent
such transformations, should submit to them with a good grace when they
are irrevocably effected, and if a definition is necessary, define the
word according to its new meaning; retaining the former as a second
signification, if it is needed, and if there is any chance of being able
to preserve it either in the language of philosophy or in common use.
Logicians can not _make_ the meaning of any but scientific terms; that of
all other words is made by the collective human race. But logicians can
ascertain clearly what it is which, working obscurely, has guided the
general mind to a particular employment of a name; and when they have
found this, they can clothe it in such distinct and permanent terms, that
mankind shall see the meaning which before they only felt, and shall not
suffer it to be afterward forgotten or misapprehended.




                               Chapter VI.


The Principles Of A Philosophical Language Further Considered.


§ 1. We have, thus far, considered only one of the requisites of a
language adapted for the investigation of truth; that its terms shall each
of them convey a determinate and unmistakable meaning. There are, however,
as we have already remarked, other requisites; some of them important only
in the second degree, but one which is fundamental, and barely yields in
point of importance, if it yields at all, to the quality which we have
already discussed at so much length. That the language may be fitted for
its purposes, not only should every word perfectly express its meaning,
but there should be no important meaning without its word. Whatever we
have occasion to think of often, and for scientific purposes, ought to
have a name appropriated to it.

This requisite of philosophical language may be considered under three
different heads; that number of separate conditions being involved in it.

§ 2. First, there ought to be all such names, as are needful for making
such a record of individual observations that the words of the record
shall exactly show what fact it is which has been observed. In other
words, there should be an accurate Descriptive Terminology.

The only things which we can observe directly being our own sensations, or
other feelings, a complete descriptive language would be one in which
there should be a name for every variety of elementary sensation or
feeling. Combinations of sensations or feelings may always be described,
if we have a name for each of the elementary feelings which compose them;
but brevity of description, and clearness (which often depends very much
on brevity), are greatly promoted by giving distinctive names not to the
elements alone, but also to all combinations which are of frequent
recurrence. On this occasion I can not do better than quote from Dr.
Whewell(222) some of the excellent remarks which he has made on this
important branch of our subject.

“The meaning of [descriptive] technical terms can be fixed in the first
instance only by convention, and can be made intelligible only by
presenting to the senses that which the terms are to signify. The
knowledge of a color by its name can only be taught through the eye. No
description can convey to a hearer what we mean by _apple-green_ or
_French gray_. It might, perhaps, be supposed that, in the first example,
the term _apple_, referring to so familiar an object, sufficiently
suggests the color intended. But it may easily be seen that this is not
true; for apples are of many different hues of green, and it is only by a
conventional selection that we can appropriate the term to one special
shade. When this appropriation is once made, the term refers to the
sensation, and not to the parts of the term; for these enter into the
compound merely as a help to the memory, whether the suggestion be a
natural connection as in ‘apple-green,’ or a casual one as in ‘French
gray.’ In order to derive due advantage from technical terms of the kind,
they must be associated _immediately_ with the perception to which they
belong; and not connected with it through the vague usages of common
language. The memory must retain the sensation; and the technical word
must be understood as directly as the most familiar word, and more
distinctly. When we find such terms as _tin-white_ or _pinchbeck-brown_,
the metallic color so denoted ought to start up in our memory without
delay or search.

“This, which it is most important to recollect with respect to the simpler
properties of bodies, as color and form, is no less true with respect to
more compound notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a peculiar
meaning by convention; and the student, in order to use the word, must be
completely familiar with the convention, so that he has no need to frame
conjectures from the word itself. Such conjectures would always be
insecure, and often erroneous. Thus the term _papilionaceous_ applied to a
flower is employed to indicate, not only a resemblance to a butterfly, but
a resemblance arising from five petals of a certain-peculiar shape and
arrangement; and even if the resemblance were much stronger than it is in
such cases, yet, if it were produced in a different way, as, for example,
by one petal, or two only, instead of a ‘standard,’ two ‘wings,’ and a
‘keel’ consisting of two parts more or less united into one, we should be
no longer justified in speaking of it as a ‘papilionaceous’ flower.”

When, however, the thing named is, as in this last case, a combination of
simple sensations, it is not necessary, in order to learn the meaning of
the word, that the student should refer back to the sensations themselves;
it may be communicated to him through the medium of other words; the
terms, in short, may be defined. But the names of elementary sensations,
or elementary feelings of any sort, can not be defined; nor is there any
mode of making their signification known but by making the learner
experience the sensation, or referring him, through some known mark, to
his remembrance of having experienced it before. Hence it is only the
impressions on the outward senses, or those inward feelings which are
connected in a very obvious and uniform manner with outward objects, that
are really susceptible of an exact descriptive language. The countless
variety of sensations which arise, for instance, from disease, or from
peculiar physiological states, it would be in vain to attempt to name; for
as no one can judge whether the sensation I have is the same with his, the
name can not have, to us two, real community of meaning. The same may be
said, to a considerable extent, of purely mental feelings. But in some of
the sciences which are conversant with external objects, it is scarcely
possible to surpass the perfection to which this quality of a
philosophical language has been carried.

“The formation(223) of an exact and extensive descriptive language for
botany has been executed with a degree of skill and felicity, which,
before it was attained, could hardly have been dreamed of as attainable.
Every part of a plant has been named; and the form of every part, even the
most minute, has had a large assemblage of descriptive terms appropriated
to it, by means of which the botanist can convey and receive knowledge of
form and structure, as exactly as if each minute part were presented to
him vastly magnified. This acquisition was part of the Linnæan reform....
‘Tournefort,’ says Decandolle, ‘appears to have been the first who really
perceived the utility of fixing the sense of terms in such a way as always
to employ the same word in the same sense, and always to express the same
idea by the same words; but it was Linnæus who really created and fixed
this botanical language, and this is his fairest claim to glory, for by
this fixation of language he has shed clearness and precision over all
parts of the science.’

“It is not necessary here to give any detailed account of the terms of
botany. The fundamental ones have been gradually introduced, as the parts
of plants were more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the flower was
necessarily distinguished into the _calyx_, the _corolla_, the _stamens_,
and the _pistils_; the sections of the corolla were termed _petals_ by
Columna; those of the calyx were called _sepals_ by Necker. Sometimes
terms of greater generality were devised; as _perianth_, to include the
calyx and corolla, whether one or both of these were present; _pericarp_,
for the part inclosing the grain, of whatever kind it be, fruit, nut, pod,
etc. And it may easily be imagined, that descriptive terms may, by
definition and combination, become very numerous and distinct. Thus leaves
may be called _pinnatifid_, _pinnatipartite_, _pinnatisect_,
_pinnatilobate_, _palmatifid_, _palmatipartite_, etc., and each of these
words designates different combinations of the modes and extent of the
divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. In some cases,
arbitrary numerical relations are introduced into the definition: thus, a
leaf is called _bilobate_, when it is divided into two parts by a notch;
but if the notch go to the middle of its length, it is _bifid_; if it go
near the base of the leaf, it is _bipartite_; if to the base, it is
_bisect_. Thus, too, a pod of a cruciferous plant is a _siliqua_, if it is
four times as long as it is broad, but if it be shorter than this it is a
_silicula_. Such terms being established, the form of the very complex
leaf or frond of a fern (Hymenophyllum Wilsoni) is exactly conveyed by the
following phrase: ‘fronds rigid pinnate, pinnæ recurved subunilateral,
pinnatifid, the segments linear undivided or bifid, spinuloso-serrate.’

“Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with the like precision:
Color by means of a classified scale of colors.... This was done with most
precision by Werner, and his scale of colors is still the most usual
standard of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more exact terminology
with regard to other characters which are important in mineralogy, as
lustre, hardness. But Mohs improved upon this step by giving a numerical
scale of hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc spar 3, and so
on.... Some properties, as specific gravity, by their definition give at
once a numerical measure; and others, as crystalline form, require a very
considerable array of mathematical calculation and reasoning, to point out
their relations and gradations.”

§ 3. Thus far of Descriptive Terminology, or of the language requisite for
placing on record our observation of individual instances. But when we
proceed from this to Induction, or rather to that comparison of observed
instances which is the preparatory step toward it, we stand in need of an
additional and a different sort of general names.

Whenever, for purposes of Induction, we find it necessary to introduce (in
Dr. Whewell’s phraseology) some new general conception; that is, whenever
the comparison of a set of phenomena leads to the recognition in them of
some common circumstance, which, our attention not having been directed to
it on any former occasion, is to us a new phenomenon; it is of importance
that this new conception, or this new result of abstraction, should have a
name appropriated to it; especially if the circumstance it involves be one
which leads to many consequences, or which is likely to be found also in
other classes of phenomena. No doubt, in most cases of the kind, the
meaning might be conveyed by joining together several words already in
use. But when a thing has to be often spoken of, there are more reasons
than the saving of time and space, for speaking of it in the most concise
manner possible. What darkness would be spread over geometrical
demonstrations, if wherever the word _circle_ is used, the definition of a
circle were inserted instead of it. In mathematics and its applications,
where the nature of the processes demands that the attention should be
strongly concentrated, but does not require that it should be widely
diffused, the importance of concentration also in the expressions has
always been duly felt; and a mathematician no sooner finds that he shall
often have occasion to speak of the same two things together, than he at
once creates a term to express them whenever combined: just as, in his
algebraical operations, he substitutes for (_a_m + _b_n) p/q, or for
_a_/_b_ + _b_/_c_ + _c_/_d_ + etc., the single letter P, Q, or S; not
solely to shorten his symbolical expressions, but to simplify the purely
intellectual part of his operations, by enabling the mind to give its
exclusive attention to the relation between the quantity S and the other
quantities which enter into the equation, without being distracted by
thinking unnecessarily of the parts of which S is itself composed.

But there is another reason, in addition to that of promoting perspicuity,
for giving a brief and compact name to each of the more considerable
results of abstraction which are obtained in the course of our
intellectual phenomena. By naming them, we fix our attention upon them; we
keep them more constantly before the mind. The names are remembered, and
being remembered, suggest their definition; while if instead of specific
and characteristic names, the meaning had been expressed by putting
together a number of other names, that particular combination of words
already in common use for other purposes would have had nothing to make
itself remembered by. If we want to render a particular combination of
ideas permanent in the mind, there is nothing which clinches it like a
name specially devoted to express it. If mathematicians had been obliged
to speak of “that to which a quantity, in increasing or diminishing, is
always approaching nearer, so that the difference becomes less than any
assignable quantity, but to which it never becomes exactly equal,” instead
of expressing all this by the simple phrase, “the limit of a quantity,” we
should probably have long remained without most of the important truths
which have been discovered by means of the relation between quantities of
various kinds and their limits. If instead of speaking of _momentum_, it
had been necessary to say, “the product of the number of units of velocity
in the velocity by the number of units of mass in the mass,” many of the
dynamical truths now apprehended by means of this complex idea would
probably have escaped notice, for want of recalling the idea itself with
sufficient readiness and familiarity. And on subjects less remote from the
topics of popular discussion, whoever wishes to draw attention to some new
or unfamiliar distinction among things, will find no way so sure as to
invent or select suitable names for the express purpose of marking it.

A volume devoted to explaining what the writer means by civilization, does
not raise so vivid a conception of it as the single expression, that
Civilization is a different thing from Cultivation; the compactness of
that brief designation for the contrasted quality being an equivalent for
a long discussion. So, if we would impress forcibly upon the understanding
and memory the distinction between the two different conceptions of a
representative government, we can not more effectually do so than by
saying that Delegation is not Representation. Hardly any original thoughts
on mental or social subjects ever make their way among mankind, or assume
their proper importance in the minds even of their inventors, until
aptly-selected words or phrases have, as it were, nailed them down and
held them fast.

§ 4. Of the three essential parts of a philosophical language, we have now
mentioned two: a terminology suited for describing with precision the
individual facts observed; and a name for every common property of any
importance or interest, which we detect by comparing those facts;
including (as the concretes corresponding to those abstract terms) names
for the classes which we artificially construct in virtue of those
properties, or as many of them, at least, as we have frequent occasion to
predicate any thing of.

But there is a sort of classes, for the recognition of which no such
elaborate process is necessary; because each of them is marked out from
all others not by some one property, the detection of which may depend on
a difficult act of abstraction, but by its properties generally. I mean,
the Kinds of things, in the sense which, in this treatise, has been
specially attached to that term. By a Kind, it will be remembered, we mean
one of those classes which are distinguished from all others not by one or
a few definite properties, but by an unknown multitude of them; the
combination of properties on which the class is grounded, being a mere
index to an indefinite number of other distinctive attributes. The class
horse is a Kind, because the things which agree in possessing the
characters by which we recognize a horse, agree in a great number of other
properties, as we know, and, it can not be doubted, in many more than we
know. Animal, again, is a Kind, because no definition that could be given
of the name animal could either exhaust the properties common to all
animals, or supply premises from which the remainder of those properties
could be inferred. But a combination of properties which does not give
evidence of the existence of any other independent peculiarities, does not
constitute a Kind. White horse, therefore, is not a Kind; because horses
which agree in whiteness, do not agree in any thing else, except the
qualities common to all horses, and whatever may be the causes or effects
of that particular color.

On the principle that there should be a name for every thing which we have
frequent occasion to make assertions about, there ought evidently to be a
name for every Kind; for as it is the very meaning of a Kind that the
individuals composing it have an indefinite multitude of properties in
common, it follows that, if not with our present knowledge, yet with that
which we may hereafter acquire, the Kind is a subject to which there will
have to be applied many predicates. The third component element of a
philosophical language, therefore, is that there shall be a name for every
Kind. In other words, there must not only be a terminology, but also a
nomenclature.

The words Nomenclature and Terminology are employed by most authors almost
indiscriminately; Dr. Whewell being, as far as I am aware, the first
writer who has regularly assigned to the two words different meanings. The
distinction, however, which he has drawn between them being real and
important, his example is likely to be followed; and (as is apt to be the
case when such innovations in language are felicitously made) a vague
sense of the distinction is found to have influenced the employment of the
terms in common practice, before the expediency had been pointed out of
discriminating them philosophically. Every one would say that the reform
effected by Lavoisier and Guyton-Morveau in the language of chemistry
consisted in the introduction of a new nomenclature, not of a new
terminology. Linear, lanceolate, oval, or oblong, serrated, dentate, or
crenate leaves, are expressions forming part of the terminology of botany,
while the names “Viola odorata,” and “Ulex Europæus,” belong to its
nomenclature.

A nomenclature may be defined, the collection of the names of all the
Kinds with which any branch of knowledge is conversant; or more properly,
of all the lowest Kinds, or _infirmæ species_—those which may be
subdivided indeed, but not into Kinds, and which generally accord with
what in natural history are termed simply species. Science possesses two
splendid examples of a systematic nomenclature; that of plants and
animals, constructed by Linnæus and his successors, and that of chemistry,
which we owe to the illustrious group of chemists who flourished in France
toward the close of the eighteenth century. In these two departments, not
only has every known species, or lowest Kind, a name assigned to it, but
when new lowest Kinds are discovered, names are at once given to them on a
uniform principle. In other sciences the nomenclature is not at present
constructed on any system, either because the species to be named are not
numerous enough to require one (as in geometry, for example), or because
no one has yet suggested a suitable principle for such a system, as in
mineralogy; in which the want of a scientifically constructed nomenclature
is now the principal cause which retards the progress of the science.

§ 5. A word which carries on its face that it belongs to a nomenclature,
seems at first sight to differ from other concrete general names in
this—that its meaning does not reside in its connotation, in the
attributes implied in it, but in its denotation, that is, in the
particular group of things which it is appointed to designate; and can
not, therefore, be unfolded by means of a definition, but must be made
known in another way. This opinion, however, appears to me erroneous.
Words belonging to a nomenclature differ, I conceive, from other words
mainly in this, that besides the ordinary connotation, they have a
peculiar one of their own: besides connoting certain attributes, they also
connote that those attributes are distinctive of a Kind. The term
“peroxide of iron,” for example, belonging by its form to the systematic
nomenclature of chemistry, bears on its face that it is the name of a
peculiar Kind of substance. It moreover connotes, like the name of any
other class, some portion of the properties common to the class; in this
instance the property of being a compound of iron and the largest dose of
oxygen with which iron will combine. These two things, the fact of being
such a compound, and the fact of being a Kind, constitute the connotation
of the name peroxide of iron. When we say of the substance before us, that
it is the peroxide of iron, we thereby assert, first, that it is a
compound of iron and a maximum of oxygen, and next, that the substance so
composed is a peculiar Kind of substance.

Now, this second part of the connotation of any word belonging to a
nomenclature is as essential a portion of its meaning as the first part,
while the definition only declares the first; and hence the appearance
that the signification of such terms can not be conveyed by a definition:
which appearance, however, is fallacious. The name Viola odorata denotes a
Kind, of which a certain number of characters, sufficient to distinguish
it, are enunciated in botanical works. This enumeration of characters is
surely, as in other cases, a definition of the name. No, say some, it is
not a definition, for the name Viola odorata does not mean those
characters; it means that particular group of plants, and the characters
are selected from among a much greater number, merely as marks by which to
recognize the group. But to this I reply, that the name does not mean that
group, for it would be applied to that group no longer than while the
group is believed to be an _infima species_; if it were to be discovered
that several distinct Kinds have been confounded under this one name, no
one would any longer apply the name Viola odorata to the whole of the
group, but would apply it, if retained at all, to one only of the Kinds
retained therein. What is imperative, therefore, is not that the name
shall denote one particular collection of objects, but that it shall
denote a Kind, and a lowest Kind. The form of the name declares that,
happen what will, it is to denote an _infima species_; and that,
therefore, the properties which it connotes, and which are expressed in
the definition, are to be connoted by it no longer than while we continue
to believe that those properties, when found together, indicate a Kind,
and that the whole of them are found in no more than one Kind.

With the addition of this peculiar connotation, implied in the form of
every word which belongs to a systematic nomenclature; the set of
characters which is employed to discriminate each Kind from all other
Kinds (and which is a real definition) constitutes as completely as in any
other case the whole meaning of the term. It is no objection to say that
(as is often the case in natural history) the set of characters may be
changed, and another substituted as being better suited for the purpose of
distinction, while the word, still continuing to denote the same group or
things, is not considered to have changed its meaning. For this is no more
than may happen in the case of any other general name: we may, in
reforming its connotation, leave its denotation untouched; and it is
generally desirable to do so. The connotation, however, is not the less
for this the real meaning, for we at once apply the name wherever the
characters set down in the definition are found; and that which
exclusively guides us in applying the term, must constitute its
signification. If we find, contrary to our previous belief, that the
characters are not peculiar to one species, we cease to use the term
co-extensively with the characters; but then it is because the other
portion of the connotation fails; the condition that the class must be a
Kind. The connotation, therefore, is still the meaning; the set of
descriptive characters is a true definition; and the meaning is unfolded,
not indeed (as in other cases) by the definition alone, but by the
definition and the form of the word taken together.

§ 6. We have now analyzed what is implied in the two principal requisites
of a philosophical language; first, precision, or definiteness; and,
secondly, completeness. Any further remarks on the mode of constructing a
nomenclature must be deferred until we treat of Classification; the mode
of naming the Kinds of things being necessarily subordinate to the mode of
arranging those Kinds into larger classes. With respect to the minor
requisites of terminology, some of them are well stated and illustrated in
the “Aphorisms concerning the Language of Science,” included in Dr.
Whewell’s _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_. These, as being of
secondary importance in the peculiar point of view of Logic, I shall not
further refer to, but shall confine my observations to one more quality,
which, next to the two already treated of, appears to be the most valuable
which the language of science can possess. Of this quality a general
notion may be conveyed by the following aphorism:

Whenever the nature of the subject permits our reasoning processes to be,
without danger, carried on mechanically, the language should be
constructed on as mechanical principles as possible; while, in the
contrary case, it should be so constructed that there shall be the
greatest possible obstacles to a merely mechanical use of it.

I am aware that this maxim requires much explanation, which I shall at
once proceed to give. At first, as to what is meant by using a language
mechanically. The complete or extreme case of the mechanical use of
language, is when it is used without any consciousness of a meaning, and
with only the consciousness of using certain visible or audible marks in
conformity to technical rules previously laid down. This extreme case is
nowhere realized except in the figures of arithmetic, and still more the
symbols of algebra, a language unique in its kind, and approaching as
nearly to perfection, for the purposes to which it is destined, as can,
perhaps, be said of any creation of the human mind. Its perfection
consists in the completeness of its adaptation to a purely mechanical use.
The symbols are mere counters, without even the semblance of a meaning
apart from the convention which is renewed each time they are employed,
and which is altered at each renewal, the same symbol _a_ or _x_ being
used on different occasions to represent things which (except that, like
all things, they are susceptible of being numbered) have no property in
common. There is nothing, therefore, to distract the mind from the set of
mechanical operations which are to be performed upon the symbols, such as
squaring both sides of the equation, multiplying or dividing them by the
same or by equivalent symbols, and so forth. Each of these operations, it
is true, corresponds to a syllogism; represents one step of a
ratiocination relating not to the symbols, but to the things signified by
them. But as it has been found practicable to frame a technical form, by
conforming to which we can make sure of finding the conclusion of the
ratiocination, our end can be completely attained without our ever
thinking of any thing but the symbols. Being thus intended to work merely
as mechanism, they have the qualities which mechanism ought to have. They
are of the least possible bulk, so that they take up scarcely any room,
and waste no time in their manipulation; they are compact, and fit so
closely together that the eye can take in the whole at once of almost
every operation which they are employed to perform.

These admirable properties of the symbolical language of mathematics have
made so strong an impression on the minds of many thinkers, as to have led
them to consider the symbolical language in question as the ideal type of
philosophical language generally; to think that names in general, or (as
they are fond of calling them) signs, are fitted for the purposes of
thought in proportion as they can be made to approximate to the
compactness, the entire unmeaningness, and the capability of being used as
counters without a thought of what they represent, which are
characteristic of the _a_ and _b_, the _x_ and _y_, of algebra. This
notion has led to sanguine views of the acceleration of the progress of
science by means which, I conceive, can not possibly conduce to that end,
and forms part of that exaggerated estimate of the influence of signs,
which has contributed in no small degree to prevent the real laws of our
intellectual operations from being rightly understood.

In the first place, a set of signs by which we reason without
consciousness of their meaning, can be serviceable, at most, only in our
deductive operations. In our direct inductions we can not for a moment
dispense with a distinct mental image of the phenomena, since the whole
operation turns on a perception of the particulars in which those
phenomena agree and differ. But, further, this reasoning by counters is
only suitable to a very limited portion even of our deductive processes.
In our reasonings respecting numbers, the only general principles which we
ever have occasion to introduce are these, Things which are equal to the
same thing are equal to one another, and The sums or differences of equal
things are equal; with their various corollaries. Not only can no
hesitation ever arise respecting the applicability of these principles,
since they are true of all magnitudes whatever; but every possible
application of which they are susceptible, may be reduced to a technical
rule; and such, in fact, the rules of the calculus are. But if the symbols
represent any other things than mere numbers, let us say even straight or
curve lines, we have then to apply theorems of geometry not true of all
lines without exception, and to select those which are true of the lines
we are reasoning about. And how can we do this unless we keep completely
in mind what particular lines these are? Since additional geometrical
truths may be introduced into the ratiocination in any stage of its
progress, we can not suffer ourselves, during even the smallest part of
it, to use the names mechanically (as we use algebraical symbols) without
an image annexed to them. It is only after ascertaining that the solution
of a question concerning lines can be made to depend on a previous
question concerning numbers, or, in other words, after the question has
been (to speak technically) reduced to an equation, that the unmeaning
signs become available, and that the nature of the facts themselves to
which the investigation relates can be dismissed from the mind. Up to the
establishment of the equation, the language in which mathematicians carry
on their reasoning does not differ in character from that employed by
close reasoners on any other kind of subject.

I do not deny that every correct ratiocination, when thrown into the
syllogistic shape, is conclusive from the mere form of the expression,
provided none of the terms used be ambiguous; and this is one of the
circumstances which have led some writers to think that if all names were
so judiciously constructed and so carefully defined as not to admit of any
ambiguity, the improvement thus made in language would not only give to
the conclusions of every deductive science the same certainty with those
of mathematics, but would reduce all reasonings to the application of a
technical form, and enable their conclusiveness to be rationally assented
to after a merely mechanical process, as is undoubtedly the case in
algebra. But, if we except geometry, the conclusions of which are already
as certain and exact as they can be made, there is no science but that of
number, in which the practical validity of a reasoning can be apparent to
any person who has looked only at the reasoning itself. Whoever has
assented to what was said in the last Book concerning the case of the
Composition of Causes, and the still stronger case of the entire
supersession of one set of laws by another, is aware that geometry and
algebra are the only sciences of which the propositions are categorically
true; the general propositions of all other sciences are true only
hypothetically, supposing that no counteracting cause happens to
interfere. A conclusion, therefore, however correctly deduced, in point of
form, from admitted laws of nature, will have no other than an
hypothetical certainty. At every step we must assure ourselves that no
other law of nature has superseded, or intermingled its operation with,
those which are the premises of the reasoning; and how can this be done by
merely looking at the words? We must not only be constantly thinking of
the phenomena themselves, but we must be constantly studying them; making
ourselves acquainted with the peculiarities of every case to which we
attempt to apply our general principles.

The algebraic notation, considered as a philosophical language, is perfect
in its adaptation to the subjects for which it is commonly employed,
namely those of which the investigations have already been reduced to the
ascertainment of a relation between numbers. But, admirable as it is for
its own purpose, the properties by which it is rendered such are so far
from constituting it the ideal model of philosophical language in general,
that the more nearly the language of any other branch of science
approaches to it, the less fit that language is for its own proper
functions. On all other subjects, instead of contrivances to prevent our
attention from being distracted by thinking of the meaning of our signs,
we ought to wish for contrivances to make it impossible that we should
ever lose sight of that meaning even for an instant.

With this view, as much meaning as possible should be thrown into the
formation of the word itself; the aids of derivation and analogy being
made available to keep alive a consciousness of all that is signified by
it. In this respect those languages have an immense advantage which form
their compounds and derivatives from native roots, like the German, and
not from those of a foreign or dead language, as is so much the case with
English, French, and Italian; and the best are those which form them
according to fixed analogies, corresponding to the relations between the
ideas to be expressed. All languages do this more or less, but especially,
among modern European languages, the German; while even that is inferior
to the Greek, in which the relation between the meaning of a derivative
word and that of its primitive is in general clearly marked by its mode of
formation, except in the case of words compounded with prepositions, which
are often, in both those languages, extremely anomalous.

But all that can be done, by the mode of constructing words, to prevent
them from degenerating into sounds passing through the mind without any
distinct apprehension of what they signify, is far too little for the
necessity of the case. Words, however well constructed originally, are
always tending, like coins, to have their inscription worn off by passing
from hand to hand; and the only possible mode of reviving it is to be ever
stamping it afresh, by living in the habitual contemplation of the
phenomena themselves, and not resting in our familiarity with the words
that express them. If any one, having possessed himself of the laws of
phenomena as recorded in words, whether delivered to him originally by
others, or even found out by himself, is content from thenceforth to live
among these formulæ, to think exclusively of them, and of applying them to
cases as they arise, without keeping up his acquaintance with the
realities from which these laws were collected—not only will he
continually fail in his practical efforts, because he will apply his
formulæ without duly considering whether, in this case and in that, other
laws of nature do not modify or supersede them; but the formulæ themselves
will progressively lose their meaning to him, and he will cease at last
even to be capable of recognizing with certainty whether a case falls
within the contemplation of his formula or not. It is, in short, as
necessary, on all subjects not mathematical, that the things on which we
reason should be conceived by us in the concrete, and “clothed in
circumstances,” as it is in algebra that we should keep all
individualizing peculiarities sedulously out of view.

With this remark we close our observations on the Philosophy of Language.




                               Chapter VII.


Of Classification, As Subsidiary To Induction.


§ 1. There is, as has been frequently remarked in this work, a
classification of things, which is inseparable from the fact of giving
them general names. Every name which connotes an attribute, divides, by
that very fact, all things whatever into two classes, those which have the
attribute and those which have it not; those of which the name can be
predicated, and those of which it can not. And the division thus made is
not merely a division of such things as actually exist, or are known to
exist, but of all such as may hereafter be discovered, and even of all
which can be imagined.

On this kind of Classification we have nothing to add to what has
previously been said. The Classification which requires to be discussed as
a separate act of the mind, is altogether different. In the one, the
arrangement of objects in groups, and distribution of them into
compartments, is a mere incidental effect consequent on the use of names
given for another purpose, namely that of simply expressing some of their
qualities. In the other, the arrangement and distribution are the main
object, and the naming is secondary to, and purposely conforms itself to,
instead of governing, that more important operation.

Classification, thus regarded, is a contrivance for the best possible
ordering of the ideas of objects in our minds; for causing the ideas to
accompany or succeed one another in such a way as shall give us the
greatest command over our knowledge already acquired, and lead most
directly to the acquisition of more. The general problem of
Classification, in reference to these purposes, may be stated as follows:
To provide that things shall be thought of in such groups, and those
groups in such an order, as will best conduce to the remembrance and to
the ascertainment of their laws.

Classification thus considered, differs from classification in the wider
sense, in having reference to real objects exclusively, and not to all
that are imaginable: its object being the due co-ordination in our minds
of those things only, with the properties of which we have actually
occasion to make ourselves acquainted. But, on the other hand, it embraces
_all_ really existing objects. We can not constitute any one class
properly, except in reference to a general division of the whole of
nature; we can not determine the group in which any one object can most
conveniently be placed, without taking into consideration all the
varieties of existing objects, all at least which have any degree of
affinity with it. No one family of plants or animals could have been
rationally constituted, except as part of a systematic arrangement of all
plants or animals; nor could such a general arrangement have been properly
made, without first determining the exact place of plants and animals in a
general division of nature.

§ 2. There is no property of objects which may not be taken, if we please,
as the foundation for a classification or mental grouping of those
objects; and in our first attempts we are likely to select for that
purpose properties which are simple, easily conceived, and perceptible on
a first view, without any previous process of thought. Thus Tournefort’s
arrangement of plants was founded on the shape and divisions of the
corolla; and that which is commonly called the Linnæan (though Linnæus
also suggested another and more scientific arrangement) was grounded
chiefly on the number of the stamens and pistils.

But these classifications, which are at first recommended by the facility
they afford of ascertaining to what class any individual belongs, are
seldom much adapted to the ends of that Classification which is the
subject of our present remarks. The Linnæan arrangement answers the
purpose of making us think together of all those kinds of plants which
possess the same number of stamens and pistils; but to think of them in
that manner is of little use, since we seldom have any thing to affirm in
common of the plants which have a given number of stamens and pistils. If
plants of the class Pentandria, order Monogynia, agreed in any other
properties, the habit of thinking and speaking of the plants under a
common designation would conduce to our remembering those common
properties so far as they were ascertained, and would dispose us to be on
the lookout for such of them as were not yet known. But since this is not
the case, the only purpose of thought which the Linnæan classification
serves is that of causing us to remember, better than we should otherwise
have done, the exact number of stamens and pistils of every species of
plants. Now, as this property is of little importance or interest, the
remembering it with any particular accuracy is of no moment. And, inasmuch
as, by habitually thinking of plants in those groups, we are prevented
from habitually thinking of them in groups which have a greater number of
properties in common, the effect of such a classification, when
systematically adhered to, upon our habits of thought, must be regarded as
mischievous.

The ends of scientific classification are best answered, when the objects
are formed into groups respecting which a greater number of general
propositions can be made, and those propositions more important, than
could be made respecting any other groups into which the same things could
be distributed. The properties, therefore, according to which objects are
classified, should, if possible, be those which are causes of many other
properties; or, at any rate, which are sure marks of them. Causes are
preferable, both as being the surest and most direct of marks, and as
being themselves the properties on which it is of most use that our
attention should be strongly fixed. But the property which is the cause of
the chief peculiarities of a class, is unfortunately seldom fitted to
serve also as the diagnostic of the class. Instead of the cause, we must
generally select some of its more prominent effects, which may serve as
marks of the other effects and of the cause.

A classification thus formed is properly scientific or philosophical, and
is commonly called a Natural, in contradistinction to a Technical or
Artificial, classification or arrangement. The phrase Natural
Classification seems most peculiarly appropriate to such arrangements as
correspond, in the groups which they form, to the spontaneous tendencies
of the mind, by placing together the objects most similar in their general
aspect; in opposition to those technical systems which, arranging things
according to their agreement in some circumstance arbitrarily selected,
often throw into the same group objects which in the general aggregate of
their properties present no resemblance, and into different and remote
groups, others which have the closest similarity. It is one of the most
valid recommendations of any classification to the character of a
scientific one, that it shall be a natural classification in this sense
also; for the test of its scientific character is the number and
importance of the properties which can be asserted in common of all
objects included in a group; and properties on which the general aspect of
the things depends are, if only on that ground, important, as well as, in
most cases, numerous. But, though a strong recommendation, this
circumstance is not a _sine qua non_; since the most obvious properties of
things may be of trifling importance compared with others that are not
obvious. I have seen it mentioned as a great absurdity in the Linnæan
classification, that it places (which by-the-way it does not) the violet
by the side of the oak; it certainly dissevers natural affinities, and
brings together things quite as unlike as the oak and the violet are. But
the difference, apparently so wide, which renders the juxtaposition of
those two vegetables so suitable an illustration of a bad arrangement,
depends, to the common eye, mainly on mere size and texture; now if we
made it our study to adopt the classification which would involve the
least peril of similar _rapprochements_, we should return to the obsolete
division into trees, shrubs, and herbs, which though of primary importance
with regard to mere general aspect, yet (compared even with so petty and
unobvious a distinction as that into dicotyledons and monocotyledons)
answers to so few differences in the other properties of plants, that a
classification founded on it (independently of the indistinctness of the
lines of demarcation) would be as completely artificial and technical as
the Linnæan.

Our natural groups, therefore, must often be founded not on the obvious
but on the unobvious properties of things, when these are of greater
importance. But in such cases it is essential that there should be some
other property or set of properties, more readily recognizable by the
observer, which co-exist with, and may be received as marks of, the
properties which are the real groundwork of the classification. A natural
arrangement, for example, of animals, must be founded in the main on their
internal structure, but (as M. Comte remarks) it would be absurd that we
should not be able to determine the genus and species of an animal without
first killing it. On this ground, the preference, among zoological
classifications, is probably due to that of M. De Blainville, founded on
the differences in the external integuments; differences which correspond,
much more accurately than might be supposed, to the really important
varieties, both in the other parts of the structure, and in the habits and
history of the animals.

This shows, more strongly than ever, how extensive a knowledge of the
properties of objects is necessary for making a good classification of
them. And as it is one of the uses of such a classification that by
drawing attention to the properties on which it is founded, and which, if
the classification be good, are marks of many others, it facilitates the
discovery of those others; we see in what manner our knowledge of things,
and our classification of them, tend mutually and indefinitely to the
improvement of each other.

We said just now that the classification of objects should follow those of
their properties which indicate not only the most numerous, but also the
most important peculiarities. What is here meant by importance? It has
reference to the particular end in view; and the same objects, therefore,
may admit with propriety of several different classifications. Each
science or art forms its classification of things according to the
properties which fall within its special cognizance, or of which it must
take account in order to accomplish its peculiar practical end. A farmer
does not divide plants, like a botanist, into dicotyledonous and
monocotyledonous, but into useful plants and weeds. A geologist divides
fossils, not like a zoologist, into families corresponding to those of
living species, but into fossils of the paleozoic, mesozoic, and tertiary
periods, above the coal and below the coal, etc. Whales are or are not
fish according to the purpose for which we are considering them. “If we
are speaking of the internal structure and physiology of the animal, we
must not call them fish; for in these respects they deviate widely from
fishes; they have warm blood, and produce and suckle their young as land
quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent our speaking of the
_whale-fishery_, and calling such animals _fish_ on all occasions
connected with this employment; for the relations thus arising depend upon
the animal’s living in the water, and being caught in a manner similar to
other fishes. A plea that human laws which mention fish do not apply to
whales, would be rejected at once by an intelligent judge.”(224)

These different classifications are all good, for the purposes of their
own particular departments of knowledge or practice. But when we are
studying objects not for any special practical end, but for the sake of
extending our knowledge of the whole of their properties and relations, we
must consider as the most important attributes those which contribute
most, either by themselves or by their effects, to render the things like
one another, and unlike other things; which give to the class composed of
them the most marked individuality; which fill, as it were, the largest
space in their existence, and would most impress the attention of a
spectator who knew all their properties but was not specially interested
in any. Classes formed on this principle may be called, in a more emphatic
manner than any others, natural groups.

§ 3. On the subject of these groups Dr. Whewell lays down a theory,
grounded on an important truth, which he has, in some respects, expressed
and illustrated very felicitously, but also, as it appears to me, with
some admixture of error. It will be advantageous, for both these reasons,
to extract the statement of his doctrine in the very words he has used.

“Natural groups,” according to this theory,(225) are “given by Type, not
by Definition.” And this consideration accounts for that “indefiniteness
and indecision which we frequently find in the descriptions of such
groups, and which must appear so strange and inconsistent to any one who
does not suppose these descriptions to assume any deeper ground of
connection than an arbitrary choice of the botanist. Thus in the family of
the rose-tree, we are told that the _ovules_ are _very rarely_ erect, the
_stigmata usually_ simple. Of what use, it might be asked, can such loose
accounts be? To which the answer is, that they are not inserted in order
to distinguish the species, but in order to describe the family, and the
total relations of the ovules and the stigmata of the family are better
known by this general statement. A similar observation may be made with
regard to the Anomalies of each group, which occur so commonly, that Dr.
Lindley, in his _Introduction to the Natural System of Botany_, makes the
‘Anomalies’ an article in each family. Thus, part of the character of the
Rosaceæ is, that they have alternate _stipulate_ leaves, and that the
_albumen_ is _obliterated_; but yet in _Lowea_, one of the genera of this
family, the stipulæ are _absent_; and the albumen is _present_ in another,
_Neillia_. This implies, as we have already seen, that the artificial
character (or _diagnosis_, as Mr. Lindley calls it) is imperfect. It is,
though very nearly, yet not exactly, commensurate with the natural group;
and hence in certain cases this character is made to yield to the general
weight of natural affinities.

“These views—of classes determined by characters which can not be
expressed in words—of propositions which state, not what happens in all
cases, but only usually—of particulars which are included in a class,
though they transgress the definition of it, may probably surprise the
reader. They are so contrary to many of the received opinions respecting
the use of definitions, and the nature of scientific propositions, that
they will probably appear to many persons highly illogical and
unphilosophical. But a disposition to such a judgment arises in a great
measure from this, that the mathematical and mathematico-physical sciences
have, in a great degree, determined men’s views of the general nature and
form of scientific truth; while Natural History has not yet had time or
opportunity to exert its due influence upon the current habits of
philosophizing. The apparent indefiniteness and inconsistency of the
classifications and definitions of Natural History belongs, in a far
higher degree, to all other except mathematical speculations; and the
modes in which approximations to exact distinctions and general truths
have been made in Natural History, may be worthy our attention, even for
the light they throw upon the best modes of pursuing truth of all kinds.

“Though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no longer be of any
use as a regulative principle, classes are not therefore left quite loose,
without any certain standard or guide. The class is steadily fixed, though
not precisely limited; it is given, though not circumscribed; it is
determined, not by a boundary-line without, but by a central point within;
not by what it strictly excludes, but by what it eminently includes; by an
example, not by a precept; in short, instead of a Definition we have a
Type for our director.

“A Type is an example of any class, for instance a species of a genus,
which is considered as eminently possessing the character of the class.
All the species which have a greater affinity with this type-species than
with any others, form the genus, and are arranged about it, deviating from
it in various directions and different degrees. Thus a genus may consist
of several species which approach very near the type, and of which the
claim to a place with it is obvious; while there may be other species
which straggle farther from this central knot, and which yet are clearly
more connected with it than with any other. And even if there should be
some species of which the place is dubious, and which appear to be equally
bound to two generic types, it is easily seen that this would not destroy
the reality of the generic groups, any more than the scattered trees of
the intervening plain prevent our speaking intelligibly of the distinct
forests of two separate hills.

“The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of every family, is then,
one which possesses all the characters and properties of the genus in a
marked and prominent manner. The type of the Rose family has alternate
stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules not erect, has the
stigmata simple, and besides these features, which distinguish it from the
exceptions or varieties of its class, it has the features which make it
prominent in its class. It is one of those which possess clearly several
leading attributes; and thus, though we can not say of any one genus that
it _must_ be the type of the family, or of any one species that it _must_
be the type of the genus, we are still not wholly to seek; the type must
be connected by many affinities with most of the others of its group; it
must be near the centre of the crowd, and not one of the stragglers.”

In this passage (the latter part of which especially I can not help
noticing as an admirable example of philosophic style) Dr. Whewell has
stated very clearly and forcibly, but (I think) without making all
necessary distinctions, one of the principles of a Natural Classification.
What this principle is, what are its limits, and in what manner he seems
to me to have overstepped them, will appear when we have laid down another
rule of Natural Arrangement, which appears to me still more fundamental.

§ 4. The reader is by this time familiar with the general truth (which I
restate so often on account of the great confusion in which it is commonly
involved), that there are in nature distinctions of Kind; distinctions not
consisting in a given number of definite properties _plus_ the effects
which follow from those properties, but running through the whole nature,
through the attributes generally, of the things so distinguished. Our
knowledge of the properties of a Kind is never complete. We are always
discovering, and expecting to discover, new ones. Where the distinction
between two classes of things is not one of Kind, we expect to find their
properties alike, except where there is some reason for their being
different. On the contrary, when the distinction is in Kind, we expect to
find the properties different unless there be some cause for their being
the same. All knowledge of a Kind must be obtained by observation and
experiment upon the Kind itself; no inference respecting its properties
from the properties of things not connected with it by Kind, goes for more
than the sort of presumption usually characterized as an analogy, and
generally in one of its fainter degrees.

Since the common properties of a true Kind, and consequently the general
assertions which can be made respecting it, or which are certain to be
made hereafter as our knowledge extends, are indefinite and inexhaustible;
and since the very first principle of natural classification is that of
forming the classes so that the objects composing each may have the
greatest number of properties in common; this principle prescribes that
every such classification shall recognize and adopt into itself all
distinctions of Kind, which exist among the objects it professes to
classify. To pass over any distinctions of Kind, and substitute definite
distinctions, which, however considerable they may be, do not point to
ulterior unknown differences, would be to replace classes with more by
classes with fewer attributes in common; and would be subversive of the
Natural Method of Classification.

Accordingly all natural arrangements, whether the reality of the
distinction of Kinds was felt or not by their framers, have been led, by
the mere pursuit of their own proper end, to conform themselves to the
distinctions of Kind, so far as these have been ascertained at the time.
The species of Plants are not only real Kinds, but are probably, all of
them, real lowest Kinds, Infimæ Species; which, if we were to subdivide,
as of course it is open to us to do, into sub-classes, the subdivision
would necessarily be founded on _definite_ distinctions, not pointing
(apart from what may be known of their causes or effects) to any
difference beyond themselves.

In so far as a natural classification is grounded on real Kinds, its
groups are certainly not conventional: it is perfectly true that they do
not depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist. But it does not
follow, nor, I conceive, is it true, that these classes are determined by
a type, and not by characters. To determine them by a type would be as
sure a way of missing the Kind, as if we were to select a set of
characters arbitrarily. They are determined by characters, but these are
not arbitrary. The problem is, to find a few definite characters which
point to the multitude of indefinite ones. Kinds are Classes between which
there is an impassable barrier; and what we have to seek is, marks whereby
we may determine on which side of the barrier an object takes its place.
The characters which will best do this should be chosen: if they are also
important in themselves, so much the better. When we have selected the
characters, we parcel out the objects according to those characters, and
not, I conceive, according to resemblance to a type. We do not compose the
species Ranunculus acris, of all plants which bear a satisfactory degree
of resemblance to a model buttercup, but of those which possess certain
characters selected as marks by which we might recognize the possibility
of a common parentage; and the enumeration of those characters is the
definition of the species.

The question next arises, whether, as all Kinds must have a place among
the classes, so all the classes in a natural arrangement must be Kinds?
And to this I answer, certainly not. The distinctions of Kinds are not
numerous enough to make up the whole of a classification. Very few of the
genera of plants, or even of the families, can be pronounced with
certainty to be Kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular,
Dicotyledonous or Exogenous and Monocotyledonous or Endogenous plants, are
perhaps differences of kind; the lines of demarcation which divide those
classes seem (though even on this I would not pronounce positively) to go
through the whole nature of the plants. But the different species of a
genus, or genera of a family, usually have in common only a limited number
of characters. A Rose does not seem to differ from a Rubus, or the
Umbelliferæ from the Ranunculaceæ, in much else than the characters
botanically assigned to those genera or those families. Unenumerated
differences certainly do exist in some cases; there are families of plants
which have peculiarities of chemical composition, or yield products having
peculiar effects on the animal economy. The Cruciferæ and Fungi contain an
unusual proportion of nitrogen; the Labiatæ are the chief sources of
essential oils, the Solaneæ are very commonly narcotic, etc. In these and
similar cases there are possibly distinctions of Kind; but it is by no
means indispensable that there should be. Genera and Families may be
eminently natural, though marked out from one another by properties
limited in number; provided those properties are important, and the
objects contained in each genus or family resemble each other more than
they resemble any thing which is excluded from the genus or family.

After the recognition and definition, then, of the _infimæ species_, the
next step is to arrange those _infimæ species_ into larger groups: making
these groups correspond to Kinds wherever it is possible, but in most
cases without any such guidance. And in doing this it is true that we are
naturally and properly guided, in most cases at least, by resemblance to a
type. We form our groups round certain selected Kinds, each of which
serves as a sort of exemplar of its group. But though the groups are
suggested by types, I can not think that a group when formed is
_determined_ by the type; that in deciding whether a species belongs to
the group, a reference is made to the type, and not to the characters;
that the characters “can not be expressed in words.” This assertion is
inconsistent with Dr. Whewell’s own statement of the fundamental principle
of classification, namely, that “general assertions shall be possible.” If
the class did not possess any characters in common, what general
assertions would be possible respecting it? Except that they all resemble
each other more than they resemble any thing else, nothing whatever could
be predicated of the class.

The truth is, on the contrary, that every genus or family is framed with
distinct reference to certain characters, and is composed, first and
principally, of species which agree in possessing all those characters. To
these are added, as a sort of appendix, such other species, generally in
small number, as possess _nearly_ all the properties selected; wanting
some of them one property, some another, and which, while they agree with
the rest _almost_ as much as these agree with one another, do not resemble
in an equal degree any other group. Our conception of the class continues
to be grounded on the characters; and the class might be defined, those
things which _either_ possess that set of characters, _or_ resemble the
things that do so, more than they resemble any thing else.

And this resemblance itself is not, like resemblance between simple
sensations, an ultimate fact, unsusceptible of analysis. Even the inferior
degree of resemblance is created by the possession of common characters.
Whatever resembles the genus Rose more than it resembles any other genus,
does so because it possesses a greater number of the characters of that
genus than of the characters of any other genus. Nor can there be any real
difficulty in representing, by an enumeration of characters, the nature
and degree of the resemblance which is strictly sufficient to include any
object in the class. There are always some properties common to all things
which are included. Others there often are, to which some things, which
are nevertheless included, are exceptions. But the objects which are
exceptions to one character are not exceptions to another; the resemblance
which fails in some particulars must be made up for in others. The class,
therefore, is constituted by the possession of _all_ the characters which
are universal, and _most_ of those which admit of exceptions. If a plant
had the ovules erect, the stigmata divided, possessed the albumen, and was
without stipules, it possibly would not be classed among the Rosaceæ. But
it may want any one, or more than one of these characters, and not be
excluded. The ends of a scientific classification are better answered by
including it. Since it agrees so nearly, in its known properties, with the
sum of the characters of the class, it is likely to resemble that class
more than any other in those of its properties which are still
undiscovered.

Not only, therefore, are natural groups, no less than any artificial
classes, determined by characters; they are constituted in contemplation
of, and by reason of, characters. But it is in contemplation not of those
characters only which are rigorously common to all the objects included in
the group, but of the entire body of characters, all of which are found in
most of those objects, and most of them in all. And hence our conception
of the class, the image in our minds which is representative of it, is
that of a specimen complete in all the characters; most naturally a
specimen which, by possessing them all in the greatest degree in which
they are ever found, is the best fitted to exhibit clearly, and in a
marked manner, what they are. It is by a mental reference to this
standard, not instead of, but in illustration of, the definition of the
class, that we usually and advantageously determine whether any individual
or species belongs to the class or not. And this, as it seems to me, is
the amount of truth contained in the doctrine of Types.

We shall see presently that where the classification is made for the
express purpose of a special inductive inquiry, it is not optional, but
necessary for fulfilling the conditions of a correct Inductive Method,
that we should establish a type-species or genus, namely, the one which
exhibits in the most eminent degree the particular phenomenon under
investigation. But of this hereafter. It remains, for completing the
theory of natural groups, that a few words should be said on the
principles of the nomenclature adapted to them.

§ 5. A Nomenclature in science is, as we have said, a system of the names
of Kinds. These names, like other class-names, are defined by the
enumeration of the characters distinctive of the class. The only merit
which a set of names can have beyond this, is to convey, by the mode of
their construction, as much information as possible: so that a person who
knows the thing, may receive all the assistance which the name can give in
remembering what he knows; while he who knows it not, may receive as much
knowledge respecting it as the case admits of, by merely being told its
name.

There are two modes of giving to the name of a Kind this sort of
significance. The best, but which unfortunately is seldom practicable, is
when the word can be made to indicate, by its formation, the very
properties which it is designed to connote. The name of a Kind does not,
of course, connote all the properties of the Kind, since these are
inexhaustible, but such of them as are sufficient to distinguish it; such
as are sure marks of all the rest. Now, it is very rarely that one
property, or even any two or three properties, can answer this purpose. To
distinguish the common daisy from all other species of plants would
require the specification of many characters. And a name can not, without
being too cumbrous for use, give indication, by its etymology or mode of
construction, of more than a very small number of these. The possibility,
therefore, of an ideally perfect Nomenclature, is probably confined to the
one case in which we are happily in possession of something approaching to
it—the Nomenclature of elementary Chemistry. The substances, whether
simple or compound, with which chemistry is conversant, are Kinds, and, as
such, the properties which distinguish each of them from the rest are
innumerable; but in the case of compound substances (the simple ones are
not numerous enough to require a systematic nomenclature), there is one
property, the chemical composition, which is of itself sufficient to
distinguish the Kind; and is (with certain reservations not yet thoroughly
understood) a sure mark of all the other properties of the compound. All
that was needful, therefore, was to make the name of every compound
express, on the first hearing, its chemical composition; that is, to form
the name of the compound, in some uniform manner, from the names of the
simple substances which enter into it as elements. This was done, most
skillfully and successfully, by the French chemists, though their
nomenclature has become inadequate to the convenient expression of the
very complicated compounds now known to chemists. The only thing left
unexpressed by them was the exact proportion in which the elements were
combined; and even this, since the establishment of the atomic theory, it
has been found possible to express by a simple adaptation of their
phraseology.

But where the characters which must be taken into consideration, in order
sufficiently to designate the Kind, are too numerous to be all signified
in the derivation of the name, and where no one of them is of such
preponderant importance as to justify its being singled out to be so
indicated, we may avail ourselves of a subsidiary resource. Though we can
not indicate the distinctive properties of the Kind, we may indicate its
nearest natural affinities, by incorporating into its name the name of the
proximate natural group of which it is one of the species. On this
principle is founded the admirable binary nomenclature of botany and
zoology. In this nomenclature the name of every species consists of the
name of the genus, or natural group next above it, with a word added to
distinguish the particular species. The last portion of the compound name
is sometimes taken from some _one_ of the peculiarities in which that
species differs from others of the genus; as Clematis _integrifolia_,
Potentilla _alba_, Viola _palustris_, Artemisia _vulgaris_; sometimes from
a circumstance of an historical nature, as Narcissus _poeticus_,
Potentilla _tormentilla_ (indicating that the plant is that which was
formerly known by the latter name), Exacum _Candollii_ (from the fact that
De Candolle was its first discoverer); and sometimes the word is purely
conventional, as Thlaspi _bursapastoris_, Ranunculus _thora_; it is of
little consequence which; since the second, or, as it is usually called,
the specific name, could at most express, independently of convention, no
more than a very small portion of the connotation of the term. But by
adding to this the name of the superior genus, we may make the best amends
we can for the impossibility of so contriving the name as to express all
the distinctive characters of the Kind. We make it, at all events, express
as many of those characters as are common to the proximate natural group
in which the Kind is included. If even those common characters are so
numerous or so little familiar as to require a further extension of the
same resource, we might, instead of a binary, adopt a ternary
nomenclature, employing not only the name of the genus, but that of the
next natural group in order of generality above the genus, commonly called
the Family. This was done in the mineralogical nomenclature proposed by
Professor Mohs. “The names framed by him were not composed of two, but of
three elements, designating respectively the Species, the Genus, and the
Order; thus he has such species as _Rhombohedral Lime Haloide_,
_Octohedral Fluor Haloide_, _Prismatic Hal Baryte_.”(226) The binary
construction, however, has been found sufficient in botany and zoology,
the only sciences in which this general principle has hitherto been
successfully adopted in the construction of a nomenclature.

Besides the advantage which this principle of nomenclature possesses, in
giving to the names of species the greatest quantity of independent
significance which the circumstances of the case admit of, it answers the
further end of immensely economizing the use of names, and preventing an
otherwise intolerable burden on the memory. When the names of species
become extremely numerous, some artifice (as Dr. Whewell(227) observes)
becomes absolutely necessary to make it possible to recollect or apply
them. “The known species of plants, for example, were ten thousand in the
time of Linnæus, and are now probably sixty thousand. It would be useless
to endeavor to frame and employ separate names for each of these species.
The division of the objects into a subordinated system of classification
enables us to introduce a Nomenclature which does not require this
enormous number of names. Each of the genera has its name, and the species
are marked by the addition of some epithet to the name of the genus. In
this manner about seventeen hundred generic names, with a moderate number
of specific names, were found by Linnæus sufficient to designate with
precision all the species of vegetables known at his time.” And though the
number of generic names has since greatly increased, it has not increased
in any thing like the proportion of the multiplication of known species.




                              Chapter VIII.


Of Classification By Series.


§ 1. Thus far, we have considered the principles of scientific
classification so far only as relates to the formation of natural groups;
and at this point most of those who have attempted a theory of natural
arrangement, including, among the rest, Dr. Whewell, have stopped. There
remains, however, another, and a not less important portion of the theory,
which has not yet, as far as I am aware, been systematically treated of by
any writer except M. Comte. This is, the arrangement of the natural groups
into a natural series.(228)

The end of Classification, as an instrument for the investigation of
nature, is (as before stated) to make us think of those objects together
which have the greatest number of important common properties; and which,
therefore, we have oftenest occasion, in the course of our inductions, for
taking into joint consideration. Our ideas of objects are thus brought
into the order most conducive to the successful prosecution of inductive
inquiries generally. But when the purpose is to facilitate some particular
inductive inquiry, more is required. To be instrumental to that purpose,
the classification must bring those objects together, the simultaneous
contemplation of which is likely to throw most light upon the particular
subject. That subject being the laws of some phenomenon or some set of
connected phenomena; the very phenomenon or set of phenomena in question
must be chosen as the groundwork of the classification.

The requisites of a classification intended to facilitate the study of a
particular phenomenon, are, first to bring into one class all Kinds of
things which exhibit that phenomenon, in whatever variety of forms or
degrees; and, secondly, to arrange those Kinds in a series according to
the degree in which they exhibit it, beginning with those which exhibit
most of it, and terminating with those which exhibit least. The principal
example, as yet, of such a classification, is afforded by comparative
anatomy and physiology, from which, therefore, our illustrations shall be
taken.

§ 2. The object being supposed to be, the investigation of the laws of
animal life; the first step, after forming the most distinct conception of
the phenomenon itself, possible in the existing state of our knowledge, is
to erect into one great class (that of animals) all the known Kinds of
beings where that phenomenon presents itself; in however various
combinations with other properties, and in however different degrees. As
some of these Kinds manifest the general phenomenon of animal life in a
very high degree, and others in an insignificant degree, barely sufficient
for recognition; we must, in the next place, arrange the various Kinds in
a series, following one another according to the degrees in which they
severally exhibit the phenomenon; beginning therefore with man, and ending
with the most imperfect kinds of zoophytes.

This is merely saying that we should put the instances, from which the law
is to be inductively collected, into the order which is implied in one of
the four Methods of Experimental Inquiry discussed in the preceding Book;
the fourth Method, that of Concomitant Variations. As formerly remarked,
this is often the only method to which recourse can be had, with assurance
of a true conclusion, in cases in which we have but limited means of
effecting, by artificial experiments, a separation of circumstances
usually conjoined. The principle of the method is, that facts which
increase or diminish together, and disappear together, are either cause
and effect, or effects of a common cause. When it has been ascertained
that this relation really subsists between the variations, a connection
between the facts themselves may be confidently laid down, either as a law
of nature or only as an empirical law, according to circumstances.

That the application of this Method must be preceded by the formation of
such a series as we have described, is too obvious to need being pointed
out; and the mere arrangement of a set of objects in a series, according
to the degrees in which they exhibit some fact of which we are seeking the
law, is too naturally suggested by the necessities of our inductive
operations, to require any lengthened illustration here. But there are
cases in which the arrangement required for the special purpose becomes
the determining principle of the classification of the same objects for
general purposes. This will naturally and properly happen, when those laws
of the objects which are sought in the special inquiry enact so principal
a part in the general character and history of those objects—exercise so
much influence in determining all the phenomena of which they are either
the agents or the theatre—that all other differences existing among the
objects are fittingly regarded as mere modifications of the one phenomenon
sought; effects determined by the co-operation of some incidental
circumstance with the laws of that phenomenon. Thus in the case of
animated beings, the differences between one class of animals and another
may reasonably be considered as mere modifications of the general
phenomenon, animal life; modifications arising either from the different
degrees in which that phenomenon is manifested in different animals, or
from the intermixture of the effects of incidental causes peculiar to the
nature of each, with the effects produced by the general laws of life;
those laws still exercising a predominant influence over the result. Such
being the case, no other inductive inquiry respecting animals can be
successfully carried on, except in subordination to the great inquiry into
the universal laws of animal life; and the classification of animals best
suited to that one purpose, is the most suitable to all the other purposes
of zoological science.

§ 3. To establish a classification of this sort, or even to apprehend it
when established, requires the power of recognizing the essential
similarity of a phenomenon, in its minuter degrees and obscurer forms,
with what is called the _same_ phenomenon in the greatest perfection of
its development; that is, of identifying with each other all phenomena
which differ only in degree, and in properties which we suppose to be
caused by difference of degree. In order to recognize this identity, or,
in other words, this exact similarity of quality, the assumption of a
type-species is indispensable. We must consider as the type of the class,
that among the Kinds included in it, which exhibits the properties
constitutive of the class, in the highest degree; conceiving the other
varieties as instances of degeneracy, as it were, from that type;
deviations from it by inferior intensity of the characteristic property or
properties. For every phenomenon is best studied (_cæteris paribus_) where
it exists in the greatest intensity. It is there that the effects which
either depend on it, or depend on the same causes with it, will also exist
in the greatest degree. It is there, consequently, and only there, that
those effects of it, or joint effects with it, can become fully known to
us, so that we may learn to recognize their smaller degrees, or even their
mere rudiments, in cases in which the direct study would have been
difficult or even impossible. Not to mention that the phenomenon in its
higher degrees may be attended by effects or collateral circumstances
which in its smaller degrees do not occur at all, requiring for their
production in any sensible amount a greater degree of intensity of the
cause than is there met with. In man, for example (the species in which
both the phenomenon of animal and that of organic life exist in the
highest degree), many subordinate phenomena develop themselves in the
course of his animated existence, which the inferior varieties of animals
do not show. The knowledge of these properties may nevertheless be of
great avail toward the discovery of the conditions and laws of the general
phenomenon of life, which is common to man with those inferior animals.
And they are, even, rightly considered as properties of animated nature
itself; because they may evidently be affiliated to the general laws of
animated nature; because we may fairly presume that some rudiments or
feeble degrees of those properties would be recognized in all animals by
more perfect organs, or even by more perfect instruments, than ours; and
because those may be correctly termed properties of a class, which a thing
exhibits exactly in proportion as it belongs to the class, that is, in
proportion as it possesses the main attributes constitutive of the class.

§ 4. It remains to consider how the internal distribution of the series
may most properly take place; in what manner it should be divided into
Orders, Families, and Genera.

The main principle of division must of course be natural affinity; the
classes formed must be natural groups; and the formation of these has
already been sufficiently treated of. But the principles of natural
grouping must be applied in subordination to the principle of a natural
series. The groups must not be so constituted as to place in the same
group things which ought to occupy different points of the general scale.
The precaution necessary to be observed for this purpose is, that the
_primary_ divisions must be grounded not on all distinctions
indiscriminately, but on those which correspond to variations in the
degree of the main phenomenon. The series of Animated Nature should be
broken into parts at the points where the variation in the degree of
intensity of the main phenomenon (as marked by its principal characters,
Sensation, Thought, Voluntary Motion, etc.) begins to be attended by
conspicuous changes in the miscellaneous properties of the animal. Such
well-marked changes take place, for example, where the class Mammalia
ends; at the points where Fishes are separated from Insects, Insects from
Mollusca, etc. When so formed, the primary natural groups will compose the
series by mere juxtaposition, without redistribution; each of them
corresponding to a definite portion of the scale. In like manner each
family should, if possible, be so subdivided, that one portion of it shall
stand higher and the other lower, though of course contiguous, in the
general scale; and only when this is impossible is it allowable to ground
the remaining subdivisions on characters having no determinable connection
with the main phenomenon.

Where the principal phenomenon so far transcends in importance all other
properties on which a classification could be grounded, as it does in the
case of animated existence, any considerable deviation from the rule last
laid down is in general sufficiently guarded against by the first
principle of a natural arrangement, that of forming the groups according
to the most important characters. All attempts at a scientific
classification of animals, since first their anatomy and physiology were
successfully studied, have been framed with a certain degree of
instinctive reference to a natural series, and have accorded in many more
points than they have differed, with the classification which would most
naturally have been grounded on such a series. But the accordance has not
always been complete; and it still is often a matter of discussion, which
of several classifications best accords with the true scale of intensity
of the main phenomenon. Cuvier, for example, has been justly criticised
for having formed his natural groups, with an undue degree of reference to
the mode of alimentation, a circumstance directly connected only with
organic life, and not leading to the arrangement most appropriate for the
purposes of an investigation of the laws of animal life, since both
carnivorous and herbivorous or frugivorous animals are found at almost
every degree in the scale of animal perfection. Blainville’s
classification has been considered by high authorities to be free from
this defect; as representing correctly, by the mere order of the principal
groups, the successive degeneracy of animal nature from its highest to its
most imperfect exemplification.

§ 5. A classification of any large portion of the field of nature in
conformity to the foregoing principles, has hitherto been found
practicable only in one great instance, that of animals. In the case even
of vegetables, the natural arrangement has not been carried beyond the
formation of natural groups. Naturalists have found, and probably will
continue to find it impossible to form those groups into any series, the
terms of which correspond to real gradations in the phenomenon of
vegetative or organic life. Such a difference of degree may be traced
between the class of Vascular Plants and that of Cellular, which includes
lichens, algæ, and other substances whose organization is simpler and more
rudimentary than that of the higher order of vegetables, and which
therefore approach nearer to mere inorganic nature. But when we rise much
above this point, we do not find any sufficient difference in the degree
in which different plants possess the properties of organization and life.
The dicotyledons are of more complex structure, and somewhat more perfect
organization, than the monocotyledons; and some dicotyledonous families,
such as the Compositæ, are rather more complex in their organization than
the rest. But the differences are not of a marked character, and do not
promise to throw any particular light upon the conditions and laws of
vegetable life and development. If they did, the classification of
vegetables would have to be made, like that of animals, with reference to
the scale or series indicated.

Although the scientific arrangements of organic nature afford as yet the
only complete example of the true principles of rational classification,
whether as to the formation of groups or of series, those principles are
applicable to all cases in which mankind are called upon to bring the
various parts of any extensive subject into mental co-ordination. They are
as much to the point when objects are to be classed for purposes of art or
business, as for those of science. The proper arrangement, for example, of
a code of laws, depends on the same scientific conditions as the
classifications in natural history; nor could there be a better
preparatory discipline for that important function, than the study of the
principles of a natural arrangement, not only in the abstract, but in
their actual application to the class of phenomena for which they were
first elaborated, and which are still the best school for learning their
use. Of this the great authority on codification, Bentham, was perfectly
aware; and his early _Fragment on Government_, the admirable introduction
to a series of writings unequaled in their department, contains clear and
just views (as far as they go) on the meaning of a natural arrangement,
such as could scarcely have occurred to any one who lived anterior to the
age of Linnæus and Bernard de Jussieu.





                                 Book V.


ON FALLACIES.


    “Errare non modo affirmando et negando, sed etiam sentiendo, et in
    tacitâ hominum cogitatione contingit.”—HOBBES, _Computatio sive
    Logica_, chap. v.

    “Il leur semble qu’il n’y a qu’à douter par fantaisie, et qu’il
    n’y a qu’à dire en général que notre nature est infirme; que notre
    esprit est plein d’aveuglement: qu’il faut avoir un grand soin de
    se défaire de ses préjugés, et autres choses semblables. Ils
    pensent que cela suffit pour ne plus se laisser séduire à ses
    sens, et pour ne plus se tromper du tout. Il ne suffit pas de dire
    que l’esprit est foible, il faut lui faire sentir ses foiblesses.
    Ce n’est pas assez de dire qu’il est sujet à l’erreur, il faut lui
    découvrir en quoi consistent ses erreurs.”—MALEBRANCHE, _Recherche
    de la Vérité_.




                                Chapter I.


Of Fallacies In General.


§ 1. It is a maxim of the school-men, that “contrariorum eadem est
scientia:” we never really know what a thing is, unless we are also able
to give a sufficient account of its opposite. Conformably to this maxim,
one considerable section, in most treatises on Logic, is devoted to the
subject of Fallacies; and the practice is too well worthy of observance,
to allow of our departing from it. The philosophy of reasoning, to be
complete, ought to comprise the theory of bad as well as of good
reasoning.

We have endeavored to ascertain the principles by which the sufficiency of
any proof can be tested, and by which the nature and amount of evidence
needful to prove any given conclusion can be determined beforehand. If
these principles were adhered to, then although the number and value of
the truths ascertained would be limited by the opportunities, or by the
industry, ingenuity, and patience, of the individual inquirer, at least
error would not be embraced instead of truth. But the general consent of
mankind, founded on their experience, vouches for their being far indeed
from even this negative kind of perfection in the employment of their
reasoning powers.

In the conduct of life—in the practical business of mankind—wrong
inferences, incorrect interpretations of experience, unless after much
culture of the thinking faculty, are absolutely inevitable; and with most
people, after the highest degree of culture they ever attain, such
erroneous inferences, producing corresponding errors in conduct, are
lamentably frequent. Even in the speculations to which eminent intellects
have systematically devoted themselves, and in reference to which the
collective mind of the scientific world is always at hand to aid the
efforts and correct the aberrations of individuals, it is only from the
more perfect sciences, from those of which the subject-matter is the least
complicated, that opinions not resting on a correct induction have at
length, generally speaking, been expelled. In the departments of inquiry
relating to the more complex phenomena of nature, and especially those of
which the subject is man, whether as a moral and intellectual, a social,
or even as a physical being; the diversity of opinions still prevalent
among instructed persons, and the equal confidence with which those of the
most contrary ways of thinking cling to their respective tenets, are proof
not only that right modes of philosophizing are not yet generally adopted
on those subjects, but that wrong ones are; that inquirers have not only
in general missed the truth, but have often embraced error; that even the
most cultivated portion of our species have not yet learned to abstain
from drawing conclusions which the evidence does not warrant.

The only complete safeguard against reasoning ill, is the habit of
reasoning well; familiarity with the principles of correct reasoning, and
practice in applying those principles. It is, however, not unimportant to
consider what are the most common modes of bad reasoning; by what
appearances the mind is most likely to be seduced from the observance of
true principles of induction; what, in short, are the most common and most
dangerous varieties of Apparent Evidence, whereby persons are misled into
opinions for which there does not exist evidence really conclusive.

A catalogue of the varieties of apparent evidence which are not real
evidence, is an enumeration of Fallacies. Without such an enumeration,
therefore, the present work would be wanting in an essential point. And
while writers who included in their theory of reasoning nothing more than
ratiocination, have in consistency with this limitation, confined their
remarks to the fallacies which have their seat in that portion of the
process of investigation; we, who profess to treat of the whole process,
must add to our directions for performing it rightly, warnings against
performing it wrongly in any of its parts: whether the ratiocinative or
the experimental portion of it be in fault, or the fault lie in dispensing
with ratiocination and induction altogether.

§ 2. In considering the sources of unfounded inference, it is unnecessary
to reckon the errors which arise, not from a wrong method, nor even from
ignorance of the right one, but from a casual lapse, through hurry or
inattention, in the application of the true principles of induction. Such
errors, like the accidental mistakes in casting up a sum, do not call for
philosophical analysis or classification; theoretical considerations can
throw no light upon the means of avoiding them. In the present treatise
our attention is required, not to mere inexpertness in performing the
operation in the right way (the only remedies for which are increased
attention and more sedulous practice), but to the modes of performing it
in a way fundamentally wrong; the conditions under which the human mind
persuades itself that it has sufficient grounds for a conclusion which it
has not arrived at by any of the legitimate methods of induction—which it
has not, even carelessly or overhastily, endeavored to test by those
legitimate methods.

§ 3. There is another branch of what may be called the Philosophy of
Error, which must be mentioned here, though only to be excluded from our
subject. The sources of erroneous opinions are twofold, moral and
intellectual. Of these, the moral do not fall within the compass of this
work. They may be classed under two general heads: Indifference to the
attainment of truth, and Bias; of which last the most common case is that
in which we are biased by our wishes; but the liability is almost as great
to the undue adoption of a conclusion which is disagreeable to us, as of
one which is agreeable, if it be of a nature to bring into action any of
the stronger passions. Persons of timid character are the more predisposed
to believe any statement, the more it is calculated to alarm them. Indeed
it is a psychological law, deducible from the most general laws of the
mental constitution of man, that any strong passion renders us credulous
as to the existence of objects suitable to excite it.

But the moral causes of opinions, though with most persons the most
powerful of all, are but remote causes; they do not act directly, but by
means of the intellectual causes; to which they bear the same relation
that the circumstances called, in the theory of medicine, _predisposing_
causes, bear to _exciting_ causes. Indifference to truth can not, in and
by itself, produce erroneous belief; it operates by preventing the mind
from collecting the proper evidences, or from applying to them the test of
a legitimate and rigid induction; by which omission it is exposed
unprotected to the influence of any species of apparent evidence which
offers itself spontaneously, or which is elicited by that smaller quantity
of trouble which the mind may be willing to take. As little is Bias a
direct source of wrong conclusions. We can not believe a proposition only
by wishing, or only by dreading, to believe it. The most violent
inclination to find a set of propositions true, will not enable the
weakest of mankind to believe them without a vestige of intellectual
grounds—without any, even apparent, evidence. It acts indirectly, by
placing the intellectual grounds of belief in an incomplete or distorted
shape before his eyes. It makes him shrink from the irksome labor of a
rigorous induction, when he has a misgiving that its result may be
disagreeable; and in such examination as he does institute, it makes him
exert that which _is_ in a certain measure voluntary, his attention,
unfairly, giving a larger share of it to the evidence which seems
favorable to the desired conclusion, a smaller to that which seems
unfavorable. It operates, too, by making him look out eagerly for reasons,
or apparent reasons, to support opinions which are conformable, or resist
those which are repugnant, to his interests or feelings; and when the
interests or feelings are common to great numbers of persons, reasons are
accepted and pass current, which would not for a moment be listened to in
that character if the conclusion had nothing more powerful than its
reasons to speak in its behalf. The natural or acquired partialities of
mankind are continually throwing up philosophical theories, the sole
recommendation of which consists in the premises they afford for proving
cherished doctrines, or justifying favorite feelings; and when any one of
these theories has been so thoroughly discredited as no longer to serve
the purpose, another is always ready to take its place. This propensity,
when exercised in favor of any widely-spread persuasion or sentiment, is
often decorated with complimentary epithets; and the contrary habit of
keeping the judgment in complete subordination to evidence, is stigmatized
by various hard names, as skepticism, immorality, coldness,
hard-heartedness, and similar expressions according to the nature of the
case. But though the opinions of the generality of mankind, when not
dependent on mere habit and inculcation, have their root much more in the
inclinations than in the intellect, it is a necessary condition to the
triumph of the moral bias that it should first pervert the understanding.
Every erroneous inference, though originating in moral causes, involves
the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient evidence as
sufficient; and whoever was on his guard against all kinds of inconclusive
evidence which can be mistaken for conclusive, would be in no danger of
being led into error even by the strongest bias. There are minds so
strongly fortified on the intellectual side, that they could not blind
themselves to the light of truth, however really desirous of doing so;
they could not, with all the inclination in the world, pass off upon
themselves bad arguments for good ones. If the sophistry of the intellect
could be rendered impossible, that of the feelings, having no instrument
to work with, would be powerless. A comprehensive classification of all
those things which, not being evidence, are liable to appear such to the
understanding, will, therefore, of itself include all errors of judgment
arising from moral causes, to the exclusion only of errors of practice
committed against better knowledge.

To examine, then, the various kinds of apparent evidence which are not
evidence at all, and of apparently conclusive evidence which do not really
amount to conclusiveness, is the object of that part of our inquiry into
which we are about to enter.

The subject is not beyond the compass of classification and comprehensive
survey. The things, indeed, which are not evidence of any given
conclusion, are manifestly endless, and this negative property, having no
dependence on any positive ones, can not be made the groundwork of a real
classification. But the things which, not being evidence, are susceptible
of being mistaken for it, are capable of a classification having reference
to the positive property which they possess of appearing to be evidence.
We may arrange them, at our choice, on either of two principles; according
to the cause which makes them appear to be evidence, not being so; or
according to the particular kind of evidence which they simulate. The
Classification of Fallacies which will be attempted in the ensuing
chapter, is founded on these considerations jointly.




                               Chapter II.


Classification Of Fallacies.


§ 1. In attempting to establish certain general distinctions which shall
mark out from one another the various kinds of Fallacious Evidence, we
propose to ourselves an altogether different aim from that of several
eminent thinkers, who have given, under the name of Political or other
Fallacies, a mere enumeration of a certain number of erroneous opinions;
false general propositions which happen to be often met with; _loci
communes_ of bad arguments on some particular subject. Logic is not
concerned with the false opinions which people happen to entertain, but
with the manner in which they come to entertain them. The question is not,
what facts have at any time been erroneously supposed to be proof of
certain other facts, but what property in the facts it was which led any
one to this mistaken supposition.

When a fact is supposed, though incorrectly, to be evidentiary of, or a
mark of, some other fact, there must be a cause of the error; the supposed
evidentiary fact must be connected in some particular manner with the fact
of which it is deemed evidentiary—must stand in some particular relation
to it, without which relation it would not be regarded in that light. The
relation may either be one resulting from the simple contemplation of the
two facts side by side with one another, or it may depend on some process
of mind, by which a previous association has been established between
them. Some peculiarity of relation, however, there must be; the fact which
can, even by the wildest aberration, be supposed to prove another fact,
must stand in some special position with regard to it; and if we could
ascertain and define that special position, we should perceive the origin
of the error.

We can not regard one fact as evidentiary of another, unless we believe
that the two are always, or in the majority of cases, conjoined. If we
believe A to be evidentiary of B, if when we see A we are inclined to
infer B from it, the reason is because we believe that wherever A is, B
also either always or for the most part exists, either as an antecedent, a
consequent, or a concomitant. If when we see A we are inclined not to
expect B—if we believe A to be evidentiary of the absence of B—it is
because we believe that where A is, B either is never, or at least seldom,
found. Erroneous conclusions, in short, no less than correct conclusions,
have an invariable relation to a general formula, either expressed or
tacitly implied. When we infer some fact from some other fact which does
not really prove it, we either have admitted, or, if we maintained
consistency, ought to admit, some groundless general proposition
respecting the conjunction of the two phenomena.

For every property, therefore, in facts, or in our mode of considering
facts, which leads us to believe that they are habitually conjoined when
they are not, or that they are not when in reality they are, there is a
corresponding kind of Fallacy; and an enumeration of fallacies would
consist in a specification of those properties in facts, and those
peculiarities in our mode of considering them, which give rise to this
erroneous opinion.

§ 2. To begin, then; the supposed connection, or repugnance, between the
two facts, may either be a conclusion from evidence (that is, from some
other proposition or propositions), or may be admitted without any such
ground; admitted, as the phrase is, on its own evidence; embraced as
self-evident, as an axiomatic truth. This gives rise to the first great
distinction, that between Fallacies of Inference and Fallacies of Simple
Inspection. In the latter division must be included not only all cases in
which a proposition is believed and held for true, literally without any
extrinsic evidence, either of specific experience or general reasoning;
but those more frequent cases in which simple inspection creates a
_presumption_ in favor of a proposition; not sufficient for belief, but
sufficient to cause the strict principles of a regular induction to be
dispensed with, and creating a predisposition to believe it on evidence
which would be seen to be insufficient if no such presumption existed.
This class, comprehending the whole of what may be termed Natural
Prejudices, and which I shall call indiscriminately Fallacies of Simple
Inspection or Fallacies _a priori_, shall be placed at the head of our
list.

Fallacies of Inference, or erroneous conclusions from supposed evidence,
must be subdivided according to the nature of the apparent evidence from
which the conclusions are drawn; or (what is the same thing) according to
the particular kind of sound argument which the fallacy in question
simulates. But there is a distinction to be first drawn, which does not
answer to any of the divisions of sound arguments, but arises out of the
nature of bad ones. We may know exactly what our evidence is, and yet draw
a false conclusion from it; we may conceive precisely what our premises
are, what alleged matters of fact, or general principles, are the
foundation of our inference; and yet, because the premises are false, or
because we have inferred from them what they will not support, our
conclusion may be erroneous. But a case, perhaps even more frequent, is
that in which the error arises from not conceiving our premises with due
clearness, that is (as shown in the preceding Book(229)), with due fixity:
forming one conception of our evidence when we collect or receive it, and
another when we make use of it; or unadvisedly, and in general
unconsciously, substituting, as we proceed, different premises in the
place of those with which we set out, or a different conclusion for that
which we undertook to prove. This gives existence to a class of fallacies
which may be justly termed (in a phrase borrowed from Bentham) Fallacies
of Confusion; comprehending, among others, all those which have their
source in language, whether arising from the vagueness or ambiguity of our
terms, or from casual associations with them.

When the fallacy is not one of Confusion, that is, when the proposition
believed, and the evidence on which it is believed, are steadily
apprehended and unambiguously expressed, there remain to be made two cross
divisions. The Apparent Evidence may be either particular facts, or
foregone generalizations; that is, the process may simulate either simple
Induction or Deduction; and again, the evidence, whether consisting of
supposed facts or of general propositions, may be false in itself, or,
being true, may fail to bear out the conclusion attempted to be founded on
it. This gives us first, Fallacies of Induction and Fallacies of
Deduction, and then a subdivision of each of these, according as the
supposed evidence is false, or true but inconclusive.

Fallacies of Induction, where the facts on which the induction proceeds
are erroneous, may be termed Fallacies of Observation. The term is not
strictly accurate, or, rather, not accurately co-extensive with the class
of fallacies which I propose to designate by it. Induction is not always
grounded on facts immediately observed, but sometimes on facts inferred;
and when these last are erroneous, the error may not be, in the literal
sense of the term, an instance of bad observation, but of bad inference.
It will be convenient, however, to make only one class of all the
inductions of which the error lies in not sufficiently ascertaining the
facts on which the theory is grounded; whether the cause of failure be
malobservation, or simple non-observation, and whether the malobservation
be direct, or by means of intermediate marks which do not prove what they
are supposed to prove. And in the absence of any comprehensive term to
denote the ascertainment, by whatever means, of the facts on which an
induction is grounded, I will venture to retain for this class of
fallacies, under the explanation now given, the title of Fallacies of
Observation.

The other class of inductive fallacies, in which the facts are correct,
but the conclusion not warranted by them, are properly denominated
Fallacies of Generalization; and these, again, fall into various
subordinate classes or natural groups, some of which will be enumerated in
their proper place.

When we now turn to Fallacies of Deduction, namely those modes of
incorrect argumentation in which the premises, or some of them, are
general propositions, and the argument a ratiocination; we may of course
subdivide these also into two species similar to the two preceding,
namely, those which proceed on false premises, and those of which the
premises, though true, do not support the conclusion. But of these
species, the first must necessarily fall under some one of the heads
already enumerated. For the error must be either in those premises which
are general propositions, or in those which assert individual facts. In
the former case it is an Inductive Fallacy, of one or the other class; in
the latter it is a Fallacy of Observation; unless, in either case, the
erroneous premise has been assumed on simple inspection, in which case the
fallacy is _a priori_. Or, finally, the premises, of whichever kind they
are, may never have been conceived in so distinct a manner as to produce
any clear consciousness by what means they were arrived at; as in the case
of what is called reasoning in a circle; and then the fallacy is one of
Confusion.

There remain, therefore, as the only class of fallacies having properly
their seat in deduction, those in which the premises of the ratiocination
do not bear out its conclusion; the various cases, in short, of vicious
argumentation, provided against by the rules of the syllogism. We shall
call these, Fallacies of Ratiocination.

§ 3. We must not, however, expect to find that men’s actual errors always,
or even commonly, fall so unmistakably under some one of these classes, as
to be incapable of being referred to any other. Erroneous arguments do not
admit of such a sharply cut division as valid arguments do. An argument
fully stated, with all its steps distinctly set out, in language not
susceptible of misunderstanding, must, if it be erroneous, be so in some
one of these five modes unequivocally; or indeed of the first four, since
the fifth, on such a supposition, would vanish. But it is not in the
nature of bad reasoning to express itself thus unambiguously. When a
sophist, whether he is imposing on himself or attempting to impose on
others, can be constrained to throw his sophistry into so distinct a form,
it needs, in a large proportion of cases, no further exposure.

In all arguments, everywhere but in the schools, some of the links are
suppressed; _a fortiori_ when the arguer either intends to deceive, or is
a lame and inexpert thinker, little accustomed to bring his reasoning
processes to any test; and it is in those steps of the reasoning which are
made in this tacit and half-conscious, or even wholly unconscious manner,
that the error oftenest lurks. In order to detect the fallacy, the
proposition thus silently assumed must be supplied; but the reasoner, most
likely, has never really asked himself what he was assuming; his confuter,
unless permitted to extort it from him by the Socratic mode of
interrogation, must himself judge what the suppressed premise ought to be
in order to support the conclusion. And hence, in the words of Archbishop
Whately, “it must be often a matter of doubt, or, rather, of arbitrary
choice, not only to which genus each _kind_ of fallacy should be referred,
but even to which kind to refer any one _individual_ fallacy; for since,
in any course of argument, _one_ premise is usually suppressed, it
frequently happens in the case of a fallacy, that the hearers are left to
the alternative of supplying _either_ a premise which is _not true_, or
_else_, one which _does not prove_ the conclusion; _e.g._, if a man
expatiates on the distress of the country, and thence argues that the
government is tyrannical, we must suppose him to assume _either_ that
‘every distressed country is under a tyranny,’ which is a manifest
falsehood, _or_ merely that ‘every country under a tyranny is distressed,’
which, however true, proves nothing, the middle term being undistributed.”
The former would be ranked, in our distribution, among fallacies of
generalization, the latter among those of ratiocination. “Which are we to
suppose the speaker meant us to understand? Surely” (if he understood
himself) “just whichever each of his hearers might happen to prefer: some
might assent to the false premise; others allow the unsound syllogism.”

Almost all fallacies, therefore, might in strictness be brought under our
fifth class, Fallacies of Confusion. A fallacy can seldom be absolutely
referred to any of the other classes; we can only say, that if all the
links were filled up which should be capable of being supplied in a valid
argument, it would either stand thus (forming a fallacy of one class), or
thus (a fallacy of another); or at furthest we may say, that the
conclusion is most _likely_ to have originated in a fallacy of such and
such a class. Thus, in the illustration just quoted, the error committed
may be traced with most probability to a fallacy of generalization; that
of mistaking an uncertain mark, or piece of evidence, for a certain one;
concluding from an effect to some one of its possible causes, when there
are others which would have been equally capable of producing it.

Yet, though the five classes run into each other, and a particular error
often seems to be arbitrarily assigned to one of them rather than to any
of the rest, there is considerable use in so distinguishing them. We shall
find it convenient to set apart, as Fallacies of Confusion, those of which
confusion is the most obvious characteristic; in which no other cause can
be assigned for the mistake committed, than neglect or inability to state
the question properly, and to apprehend the evidence with definiteness and
precision. In the remaining four classes I shall place not only the cases
in which the evidence is clearly seen to be what it is, and yet a wrong
conclusion drawn from it, but also those in which, although there be
confusion, the confusion is not the sole cause of the error, but there is
some shadow of a ground for it in the nature of the evidence itself. And
in distributing these cases of partial confusion among the four classes, I
shall, when there can be any hesitation as to the precise seat of the
fallacy, suppose it to be in that part of the process in which, from the
nature of the case, and the tendencies of the human mind, an error would
in the particular circumstances be the most probable.

After these observations we shall proceed, without further preamble, to
consider the five classes in their order.




                               Chapter III.


Fallacies Of Simple Inspection; Or _A Priori_ Fallacies.


§ 1. The tribe of errors of which we are to treat in the first instance,
are those in which no actual inference takes place at all; the proposition
(it can not in such cases be called a conclusion) being embraced, not as
proved, but as requiring no proof; as a self-evident truth; or else as
having such intrinsic verisimilitude, that external evidence not in itself
amounting to proof, is sufficient in aid of the antecedent presumption.

An attempt to treat this subject comprehensively would be a transgression
of the bounds prescribed to this work, since it would necessitate the
inquiry which, more than any other, is the grand question of what is
called metaphysics, viz., What are the propositions which may reasonably
be received without proof? That there must be some such propositions all
are agreed, since there can not be an infinite series of proof, a chain
suspended from nothing. But to determine what these propositions are, is
the _opus magnum_ of the more recondite mental philosophy. Two principal
divisions of opinion on the subject have divided the schools of philosophy
from its first dawn. The one recognizes no ultimate premises but the facts
of our subjective consciousness; our sensations, emotions, intellectual
states of mind, and volitions. These, and whatever by strict rules of
induction can be derived from these, it is possible, according to this
theory, for us to know; of all else we must remain in ignorance. The
opposite school hold that there are other existences, suggested indeed to
our minds by these subjective phenomena, but not inferable from them, by
any process either of deduction or of induction; which, however, we must,
by the constitution of our mental nature, recognize as realities; and
realities, too, of a higher order than the phenomena of our consciousness,
being the efficient causes and necessary substrata of all Phenomena. Among
these entities they reckon Substances, whether matter or spirit; from the
dust under our feet to the soul, and from that to Deity. All these,
according to them, are preternatural or supernatural beings, having no
likeness in experience, though experience is entirely a manifestation of
their agency. Their existence, together with more or less of the laws to
which they conform in their operations, are, on this theory, apprehended
and recognized as real by the mind itself intuitively; experience (whether
in the form of sensation or of mental feeling) having no other part in the
matter than as affording facts which are consistent with these necessary
postulates of reason, and which are explained and accounted for by them.

As it is foreign to the purpose of the present treatise to decide between
these conflicting theories, we are precluded from inquiring into the
existence, or defining the extent and limits, of knowledge _a priori_, and
from characterizing the kind of correct assumption which the fallacy of
incorrect assumption, now under consideration, simulates. Yet since it is
allowed on both sides that such assumptions are often made improperly, we
may find it practicable, without entering into the ultimate metaphysical
grounds of the discussion, to state some speculative propositions, and
suggest some practical cautions, respecting the forms in which such
unwarranted assumptions are most likely to be made.

§ 2. In the cases in which, according to the thinkers of the ontological
school, the mind apprehends, by intuition, things, and the laws of things,
not cognizable by our sensitive faculty; those intuitive, or supposed
intuitive, perceptions are undistinguishable from what the opposite school
are accustomed to call ideas of the mind. When they themselves say that
they perceive the things by an immediate act of a faculty given for that
purpose by their Creator, it would be said of them by their opponents that
they find an idea or conception in their own minds, and from the idea or
conception, infer the existence of a corresponding objective reality. Nor
would this be an unfair statement, but a mere version into other words of
the account given by many of themselves; and one to which the more
clear-sighted of them might, and generally do, without hesitation,
subscribe. Since, therefore, in the cases which lay the strongest claims
to be examples of knowledge _a priori_, the mind proceeds from the idea of
a thing to the reality of the thing itself, we can not be surprised by
finding that illicit assumptions _a priori_ consist in doing the same
thing erroneously; in mistaking subjective facts for objective, laws of
the percipient mind for laws of the perceived object, properties of the
ideas or conceptions for properties of the things conceived.

Accordingly, a large proportion of the erroneous thinking which exists in
the world proceeds on a tacit assumption, that the same order must obtain
among the objects in nature which obtains among our ideas of them. That if
we always think of two things together, the two things must always exist
together. That if one thing makes us think of another as preceding or
following it, that other must precede it or follow it in actual fact. And
conversely, that when we can not conceive two things together they can not
exist together, and that their combination may, without further evidence,
be rejected from the list of possible occurrences.

Few persons, I am inclined to think, have reflected on the great extent to
which this fallacy has prevailed, and prevails, in the actual beliefs and
actions of mankind. For a first illustration of it we may refer to a large
class of popular superstitions. If any one will examine in what
circumstances most of those things agree, which in different ages and by
different portions of the human race have been considered as omens or
prognostics of some interesting event, whether calamitous or fortunate;
they will be found very generally characterized by this peculiarity, that
they cause the mind to _think_ of that, of which they are therefore
supposed to forbode the actual occurrence. “Talk of the devil and he will
appear,” has passed into a proverb. Talk of the devil, that is, raise the
idea, and the reality will follow. In times when the appearance of that
personage in a visible form was thought to be no unfrequent occurrence, it
has doubtless often happened to persons of vivid imagination and
susceptible nerves, that talking of the devil has caused them to fancy
they saw him; as even in our more incredulous days, listening to ghost
stories predisposes us to see ghosts; and thus, as a prop to the _a
priori_ fallacy, there might come to be added an auxiliary fallacy of
malobservation, with one of false generalization grounded on it. Fallacies
of different orders often herd or cluster together in this fashion, one
smoothing the way for another. But the origin of the superstition is
evidently that which we have assigned. In like manner, it has been
universally considered unlucky to speak of misfortune.

The day on which any calamity happened has been considered an unfortunate
day, and there has been a feeling everywhere, and in some nations a
religious obligation, against transacting any important business on that
day. For on such a day our thoughts are likely to be of misfortune. For a
similar reason, any untoward occurrence in commencing an undertaking has
been considered ominous of failure; and often, doubtless, has really
contributed to it by putting the persons engaged in the enterprise more or
less out of spirits; but the belief has equally prevailed where the
disagreeable circumstance was, independently of superstition, too
insignificant to depress the spirits by any influence of its own. All know
the story of Cæsar’s accidentally stumbling in the act of landing on the
African coast; and the presence of mind with which he converted the
direful presage into a favorable one by exclaiming, “Africa, I embrace
thee.” Such omens, it is true, were often conceived as warnings of the
future, given by a friendly or a hostile deity; but this very superstition
grew out of a pre-existing tendency; the god was supposed to send, as an
indication of what was to come, something which people were already
disposed to consider in that light. So in the case of lucky or unlucky
names. Herodotus tells us how the Greeks, on the way to Mycale, were
encouraged in their enterprise by the arrival of a deputation from Samos,
one of the members of which was named Hegesistratus, the leader of armies.

Cases may be pointed out in which something which could have no real
effect but to make persons _think_ of misfortune, was regarded not merely
as a prognostic, but as something approaching to an actual cause of it.
The εὐφήμει of the Greeks, and _favete linguis_, or _bona verba quæso_, of
the Romans, evince the care with which they endeavored to repress the
utterance of any word expressive or suggestive of ill fortune; not from
notions of delicate politeness, to which their general mode of conduct and
feeling had very little reference, but from _bona fide_ alarm lest the
event so suggested to the imagination should in fact occur. Some vestige
of a similar superstition has been known to exist among uneducated persons
even in our own day: it is thought an unchristian thing to talk of, or
suppose, the death of any person while he is alive. It is known how
careful the Romans were to avoid, by an indirect mode of speech, the
utterance of any word directly expressive of death or other calamity; how
instead of _mortuus est_ they said _vixit_; and “be the event fortunate or
_otherwise_” instead of _adverse_. The name Maleventum, of which Salmasius
so sagaciously detected the Thessalian origin (Μαλόεις, Μαλοέντος), they
changed into the highly propitious denomination, Beneventum; Egesta into
Segesta; and Epidamnus, a name so interesting in its associations to the
reader of Thucydides, they exchanged for Dyrrhachium, to escape the perils
of a word suggestive of _damnum_ or detriment.

“If a hare cross the highway,” says Sir Thomas Browne,(230) “there are few
above threescore that are not perplexed thereat; which notwithstanding is
but an augurial terror, according to that received expression,
_Inauspicatum dat iter oblatus lepus_. And the ground of the conceit was
probably no greater than this, that a fearful animal passing by us
portended unto us something to be feared; as upon the like consideration
the meeting of a fox presaged some future imposture.” Such superstitions
as these last must be the result of study; they are too recondite for
natural or spontaneous growth. But when the attempt was once made to
construct a science of predictions, any association, though ever so faint
or remote, by which an object could be connected in however far-fetched a
manner with ideas either of prosperity or of danger and misfortune, was
enough to determine its being classed among good or evil omens.

An example of rather a different kind from any of these, but falling under
the same principle, is the famous attempt on which so much labor and
ingenuity were expended by the alchemists, to make gold potable. The
motive to this was a conceit that potable gold could be no other than the
universal medicine; and why gold? Because it was so precious. It must have
all marvelous properties as a physical substance, because the mind was
already accustomed to marvel at it.

From a similar feeling, “every substance,” says Dr. Paris,(231) “whose
origin is involved in mystery, has at different times been eagerly applied
to the purposes of medicine. Not long since, one of those showers which
are now known to consist of the excrements of insects, fell in the north
of Italy; the inhabitants regarded it as manna, or some supernatural
panacea, and they swallowed it with such avidity, that it was only by
extreme address that a small quantity was obtained for a chemical
examination.” The superstition, in this instance, though doubtless partly
of a religious character, probably in part also arose from the prejudice
that a wonderful thing must of course have wonderful properties.

§ 3. The instances of _a priori_ fallacy which we have hitherto cited
belong to the class of vulgar errors, and do not now, nor in any but a
rude age ever could, impose upon minds of any considerable attainments.
But those to which we are about to proceed, have been, and still are, all
but universally prevalent among thinkers. The same disposition to give
objectivity to a law of the mind—to suppose that what is true of our ideas
of things must be true of the things themselves—exhibits itself in many of
the most accredited modes of philosophical investigation, both on physical
and on metaphysical subjects. In one of its most undisguised
manifestations, it embodies itself in two maxims, which lay claim to
axiomatic truth: Things which we can not think of together, can not
co-exist; and Things which we can not help thinking of together, must
co-exist. I am not sure that the maxims were ever expressed in these
precise words, but the history both of philosophy and of popular opinions
abounds with exemplifications of both forms of the doctrine.

To begin with the latter of them: Things which we can not think of except
together, must exist together. This is assumed in the generally received
and accredited mode of reasoning which concludes that A must accompany B
in point of fact, because “it is involved in the idea.” Such thinkers do
not reflect that the idea, being a result of abstraction, ought to conform
to the facts, and can not make the facts conform to it. The argument is at
most admissible as an appeal to authority; a surmise, that what is now
part of the idea, must, before it became so, have been found by previous
inquirers in the facts. Nevertheless, the philosopher who more than all
others made professions of rejecting authority, Descartes, constructed his
system on this very basis. His favorite device for arriving at truth, even
in regard to outward things, was by looking into his own mind for it.
“Credidi me,” says his celebrated maxim, “pro regulâ generali sumere
posse, omne id quod valdè dilucidè et distinctè concipiebam, verum esse;”
whatever can be very clearly conceived must certainly exist; that is, as
he afterward explains it, if the idea includes existence. And on this
ground he infers that geometrical figures really exist, because they can
be distinctly conceived. Whenever existence is “involved in an idea,” a
thing conformable to the idea must really exist; which is as much as to
say, whatever the idea contains must have its equivalent in the thing; and
what we are not able to leave out of the idea can not be absent from the
reality.(232) This assumption pervades the philosophy not only of
Descartes, but of all the thinkers who received their impulse mainly from
him, in particular the two most remarkable among them, Spinoza and
Leibnitz, from whom the modern German metaphysical philosophy is
essentially an emanation. I am indeed disposed to think that the fallacy
now under consideration has been the cause of two-thirds of the bad
philosophy, and especially of the bad metaphysics, which the human mind
has never ceased to produce. Our general ideas contain nothing but what
has been put into them, either by our passive experience, or by our active
habits of thought; and the metaphysicians in all ages, who have attempted
to construct the laws of the universe by reasoning from our supposed
necessities of thought, have always proceeded, and only could proceed, by
laboriously finding in their own minds what they themselves had formerly
put there, and evolving from their ideas of things what they had first
involved in those ideas. In this way all deeply-rooted opinions and
feelings are enabled to create apparent demonstrations of their truth and
reasonableness, as it were, out of their own substance.

The other form of the fallacy: Things which we can not think of together
can not exist together—including as one of its branches, that what we can
not think of as existing can not exist at all—may thus be briefly
expressed: Whatever is inconceivable must be false.

Against this prevalent doctrine I have sufficiently argued in a former
Book,(233) and nothing is required in this place but examples. It was long
held that Antipodes were impossible because of the difficulty which was
found in conceiving persons with their heads in the same direction as our
feet. And it was one of the received arguments against the Copernican
system, that we can not conceive so great a void space as that system
supposes to exist in the celestial regions. When men’s imaginations had
always been used to conceive the stars as firmly set in solid spheres,
they naturally found much difficulty in imagining them in so different,
and, as it doubtless appeared to them, so precarious a situation. But they
had no right to mistake the limitation (whether natural, or, as it in fact
proved, only artificial) of their own faculties, for an inherent
limitation of the possible modes of existence in the universe.

It may be said in objection, that the error in these cases was in the
minor premise, not the major; an error of fact, not of principle; that it
did not consist in supposing that what is inconceivable can not be true,
but in supposing antipodes to be inconceivable, when present experience
proves that they can be conceived. Even if this objection were allowed,
and the proposition that what is inconceivable can not be true were
suffered to remain unquestioned as a speculative truth, it would be a
truth on which no practical consequence could ever be founded, since, on
this showing, it is impossible to affirm of any proposition, not being a
contradiction in terms, that it is inconceivable. Antipodes were really,
not fictitiously, inconceivable to our ancestors: they are indeed
conceivable to us; and as the limits of our power of conception have been
so largely extended, by the extension of our experience and the more
varied exercise of our imagination, so may posterity find many
combinations perfectly conceivable to them which are inconceivable to us.
But, as beings of limited experience, we must always and necessarily have
limited conceptive powers; while it does not by any means follow that the
same limitation obtains in the possibilities of Nature, nor even in her
actual manifestations.

Rather more than a century and a half ago it was a scientific maxim,
disputed by no one, and which no one deemed to require any proof, that “a
thing can not act where it is not.”(234) With this weapon the Cartesians
waged a formidable war against the theory of gravitation, which, according
to them, involving so obvious an absurdity, must be rejected _in limine_:
the sun could not possibly act upon the earth, not being there. It was not
surprising that the adherents of the old systems of astronomy should urge
this objection against the new; but the false assumption imposed equally
on Newton himself, who, in order to turn the edge of the objection,
imagined a subtle ether which filled up the space between the sun and the
earth, and by its intermediate agency was the proximate cause of the
phenomena of gravitation. “It is inconceivable,” said Newton, in one of
his letters to Dr. Bentley,(235) “that inanimate brute matter should,
without the mediation of something else, which is not material, operate
upon and affect other matter _without mutual contact_.... That gravity
should be innate, inherent, and essential to matter, so that one body may
act on another, at a distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of
any thing else, by and through which their action and force may be
conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity, that I
believe no man, who in philosophical matters has a competent faculty of
thinking, can ever fall into it.” This passage should be hung up in the
cabinet of every cultivator of science who is ever tempted to pronounce a
fact impossible because it appears to him inconceivable. In our own day
one would be more tempted, though with equal injustice, to reverse the
concluding observation, and consider the seeing any absurdity at all in a
thing so simple and natural, to be what really marks the absence of “a
competent faculty of thinking.” No one now feels any difficulty in
conceiving gravity to be, as much as any other property is, “inherent and
essential to matter,” nor finds the comprehension of it facilitated in the
smallest degree by the supposition of an ether (though some recent
inquirers do give this as an explanation of it); nor thinks it at all
incredible that the celestial bodies can and do act where they, in actual
bodily presence, are not. To us it is not more wonderful that bodies
should act upon one another “without mutual contact,” than that they
should do so when in contact; we are familiar with both these facts, and
we find them equally inexplicable, but equally easy to believe. To Newton,
the one, because his imagination was familiar with it, appeared natural
and a matter of course, while the other, for the contrary reason, seemed
too absurd to be credited.

It is strange that any one, after such a warning, should rely implicitly
on the evidence _a priori_ of such propositions as these, that matter can
not think; that space, or extension, is infinite; that nothing can be made
out of nothing (_ex nihilo nihil fit_). Whether these propositions are
true or not this is not the place to determine, nor even whether the
questions are soluble by the human faculties. But such doctrines are no
more self-evident truths, than the ancient maxim that a thing can not act
where it is not, which probably is not now believed by any educated person
in Europe.(236) Matter can not think; why? because we _can not conceive_
thought to be annexed to any arrangement of material particles. Space is
infinite, because having never known any part of it which had not other
parts beyond it, we _can not conceive_ an absolute termination. _Ex nihilo
nihil fit_, because having never known any physical product without a
pre-existing physical material, we _can not_, or think we can not,
_imagine_ a creation out of nothing. But these things may in themselves be
as conceivable as gravitation without an intervening medium, which Newton
thought too great an absurdity for any person of a competent faculty of
philosophical thinking to admit: and even supposing them not conceivable,
this, for aught we know, may be merely one of the limitations of our very
limited minds, and not in nature at all.

No writer has more directly identified himself with the fallacy now under
consideration, or has embodied it in more distinct terms, than Leibnitz.
In his view, unless a thing was not merely conceivable, but even
explainable, it could not exist in nature. All _natural_ phenomena,
according to him, must be susceptible of being accounted for _a priori_.
The only facts of which no explanation could be given but the will of God,
were miracles properly so called. “Je reconnais,” says he,(237) “qu’il
n’est pas permis de nier ce qu’on n’entend pas; mais j’ajoute qu’on a
droit de nier (au moins dans l’ordre naturel) ce que absolument n’est
point intelligible ni explicable. Je soutiens aussi ... qu’enfin la
conception des créatures n’est pas la mesure du pouvoir de Dieu, mais que
leur conceptivité, ou force de concevoir, est la mesure du pouvoir de la
nature, tout ce qui est conforme à l’ordre naturel pouvant être conçu ou
entendu par quelque créature.”

Not content with assuming that nothing can be true which we are unable to
conceive, scientific inquirers have frequently given a still further
extension to the doctrine, and held that, even of things not altogether
inconceivable, that which we can conceive with the greatest ease is
likeliest to be true. It was long an admitted axiom, and is not yet
entirely discredited, that “nature always acts by the simplest means,”
_i.e._, by those which are most easily conceivable.(238) A large
proportion of all the errors ever committed in the investigation of the
laws of nature, have arisen from the assumption that the most familiar
explanation or hypothesis must be the truest.

One of the most instructive facts in scientific history is the pertinacity
with which the human mind clung to the belief that the heavenly bodies
must move in circles, or be carried round by the revolution of spheres;
merely because those were in themselves the simplest suppositions: though,
to make them accord with the facts which were ever contradicting them more
and more, it became necessary to add sphere to sphere and circle to
circle, until the original simplicity was converted into almost
inextricable complication.

§ 4. We pass to another _a priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, allied to
the former, and originating, as that does, in the tendency to presume an
exact correspondence between the laws of the mind and those of things
external to it. The fallacy may be enunciated in this general
form—Whatever can be thought of apart exists apart: and its most
remarkable manifestation consists in the personification of abstractions.
Mankind in all ages have had a strong propensity to conclude that wherever
there is a name, there must be a distinguishable separate entity
corresponding to the name; and every complex idea which the mind has
formed for itself by operating upon its conceptions of individual things,
was considered to have an outward objective reality answering to it. Fate,
Chance, Nature, Time, Space, were real beings, nay, even gods. If the
analysis of qualities in the earlier part of this work be correct, names
of qualities and names of substances stand for the very same sets of facts
or phenomena; _whiteness_ and _a white thing_ are only different phrases,
required by convenience for speaking of the same external fact under
different relations. Not such, however, was the notion which this verbal
distinction suggested of old, either to the vulgar or to the scientific.
Whiteness was an entity, inhering or sticking in the white substance: and
so of all other qualities. So far was this carried, that even concrete
general terms were supposed to be, not names of indefinite numbers of
individual substances, but names of a peculiar kind of entities termed
Universal Substances. Because we can think and speak of man in general,
that is, of all persons in so far as possessing the common attributes of
the species, without fastening our thoughts permanently on some one
individual person; therefore man in general was supposed to be, not an
aggregate of individual persons, but an abstract or universal man,
distinct from these.

It may be imagined what havoc metaphysicians trained in these habits made
with philosophy, when they came to the largest generalizations of all.
_Substantiæ Secundæ_ of any kind were bad enough, but such Substantiæ
Secundæ as τὸ ὄν, for example, and τὸ ἔν, standing for peculiar entities
supposed to be inherent in all things which _exist_, or in all which are
said to be _one_, were enough to put an end to all intelligible
discussion; especially since, with a just perception that the truths which
philosophy pursues are _general_ truths, it was soon laid down that these
general substances were the only subjects of science, being immutable,
while individual substances cognizable by the senses, being in a perpetual
flux, could not be the subject of real knowledge. This misapprehension of
the import of general language constitutes Mysticism, a word so much
oftener written and spoken than understood. Whether in the Vedas, in the
Platonists, or in the Hegelians, mysticism is neither more nor less than
ascribing objective existence to the subjective creations of our own
faculties, to ideas or feelings of the mind; and believing that by
watching and contemplating these ideas of its own making, it can read in
them what takes place in the world without.

§ 5. Proceeding with the enumeration of _a priori_ fallacies, and
endeavoring to arrange them with as much reference as possible to their
natural affinities, we come to another, which is also nearly allied to the
fallacy preceding the last, standing in the same relation to one variety
of it as the fallacy last mentioned does to the other. This, too,
represents nature as under incapacities corresponding to those of our
intellect; but instead of only asserting that nature can not do a thing
because we can not conceive it done, goes the still greater length of
averring that nature does a particular thing, on the sole ground that we
can see no reason why she should not. Absurd as this seems when so plainly
stated, it is a received principle among scientific authorities for
demonstrating _a priori_ the laws of physical phenomena. A phenomenon must
follow a certain law, because we see no reason why it should deviate from
that law in one way rather than in another. This is called the Principle
of the Sufficient Reason;(239) and by means of it philosophers often
flatter themselves that they are able to establish, without any appeal to
experience, the most general truths of experimental physics.

Take, for example, two of the most elementary of all laws, the law of
inertia and the first law of motion. A body at rest can not, it is
affirmed, begin to move unless acted upon by some external force; because,
if it did, it must either move up or down, forward or backward, and so
forth; but if no outward force acts upon it, there can be _no reason_ for
its moving up rather than down, or down rather than up, etc., _ergo_, it
will not move at all.

This reasoning I conceive to be entirely fallacious, as indeed Dr. Brown,
in his treatise on Cause and Effect, has shown with great acuteness and
justness of thought. We have before remarked, that almost every fallacy
may be referred to different genera by different modes of filling up the
suppressed steps; and this particular one may, at our option, be brought
under _petitio principii_. It supposes that nothing can be a “sufficient
reason” for a body’s moving in one particular direction, except some
external force. But this is the very thing to be proved. Why not some
_internal_ force? Why not the law of the thing’s own nature? Since these
philosophers think it necessary to prove the law of inertia, they of
course do not suppose _it_ to be self-evident; they must, therefore, be of
opinion that previously to all proof, the supposition of a body’s moving
by internal impulse is an admissible hypothesis; but if so, why is not the
hypothesis also admissible, that the internal impulse acts naturally in
some one particular direction, not in another? If spontaneous motion might
have been the law of matter, why not spontaneous motion toward the sun,
toward the earth, or toward the zenith? Why not, as the ancients supposed,
toward a particular place in the universe, appropriated to each particular
kind of substance? Surely it is not allowable to say that spontaneity of
motion is credible in itself, but not credible if supposed to take place
in any determinate direction.

Indeed, if any one chose to assert that all bodies when uncontrolled set
out in a direct line toward the North Pole, he might equally prove his
point by the principle of the Sufficient Reason. By what right is it
assumed that a state of rest is the particular state which can not be
deviated from without special cause? Why not a state of motion, and of
some particular sort of motion? Why may we not say that the natural state
of a horse left to himself is to amble, because otherwise he must either
trot, gallop, or stand still, and because we know no reason why he should
do one of these rather than another? If this is to be called an unfair use
of the “sufficient reason,” and the other a fair one, there must be a
tacit assumption that a state of rest is more natural to a horse than a
state of ambling. If this means that it is the state which the animal will
assume when left to himself, that is the very point to be proved; and if
it does not mean this, it can only mean that a state of rest is the
simplest state, and therefore the most likely to prevail in nature, which
is one of the fallacies or natural prejudices we have already examined.

So again of the First Law of Motion; that a body once moving will, if left
to itself, continue to move uniformly in a straight line. An attempt is
made to prove this law by saying, that if not, the body must deviate
either to the right or to the left, and that there is no reason why it
should do one more than the other. But who could know, antecedently to
experience, whether there was a reason or not? Might it not be the nature
of bodies, or of some particular bodies, to deviate toward the right? or
if the supposition is preferred, toward the east, or south? It was long
thought that bodies, terrestrial ones at least, had a natural tendency to
deflect downward; and there is no shadow of any thing objectionable in the
supposition, except that it is not true. The pretended proof of the law of
motion is even more manifestly untenable than that of the law of inertia,
for it is flagrantly inconsistent; it assumes that the continuance of
motion in the direction first taken is more natural than deviation either
to the right or to the left, but denies that one of these can possibly be
more natural than the other. All these fancies of the possibility of
knowing what is natural or not natural by any other means than experience,
are, in truth, entirely futile. The real and only proof of the laws of
motion, or of any other law of the universe, is experience; it is simply
that no other suppositions explain or are consistent with the facts of
universal nature.

Geometers have, in all ages, been open to the imputation of endeavoring to
prove the most general facts of the outward world by sophistical
reasoning, in order to avoid appeals to the senses. Archimedes, says
Professor Playfair,(240) established some of the elementary propositions
of statics by a process in which he “borrows no principle from experiment,
but establishes his conclusion entirely by reasoning _a priori_. He
assumes, indeed, that equal bodies, at the ends of the equal arms of a
lever, will balance one another; and also that a cylinder or
parallelopiped of homogeneous matter, will be balanced about its centre of
magnitude. These, however, are not inferences from experience; they are,
properly speaking, conclusions deduced from the principle of the
Sufficient Reason.” And to this day there are few geometers who would not
think it far more scientific to establish these or any other premises in
this way, than to rest their evidence on that familiar experience which in
the case in question might have been so safely appealed to.

§ 6. Another natural prejudice, of most extensive prevalence, and which
had a great share in producing the errors fallen into by the ancients in
their physical inquiries, was this: That the differences in nature must
correspond to our received distinctions: that effects which we are
accustomed, in popular language, to call by different names, and arrange
in different classes, must be of different natures, and have different
causes. This prejudice, so evidently of the same origin with those already
treated of, marks more especially the earliest stage of science, when it
has not yet broken loose from the trammels of every-day phraseology. The
extraordinary prevalence of the fallacy among the Greek philosophers may
be accounted for by their generally knowing no other language than their
own; from which it was a consequence that their ideas followed the
accidental or arbitrary combinations of that language, more completely
than can happen among the moderns to any but illiterate persons. They had
great difficulty in distinguishing between things which their language
confounded, or in putting mentally together things which it distinguished;
and could hardly combine the objects in nature, into any classes but those
which were made for them by the popular phrases of their own country; or
at least could not help fancying those classes to be natural and all
others arbitrary and artificial. Accordingly, scientific investigation
among the Greek schools of speculation and their followers in the Middle
Ages, was little more than a mere sifting and analyzing of the notions
attached to common language. They thought that by determining the meaning
of words, they could become acquainted with facts. “They took for
granted,” says Dr. Whewell,(241) “that philosophy must result from the
relations of those notions which are involved in the common use of
language, and they proceeded to seek it by studying such notions.” In his
next chapter, Dr. Whewell has so well illustrated and exemplified this
error, that I shall take the liberty of quoting him at some length.

“The propensity to seek for principles in the common usages of language
may be discerned at a very early period. Thus we have an example of it in
a saying which is reported of Thales, the founder of Greek philosophy.
When he was asked, ‘What is the _greatest_ thing?’ he replied ‘_Place_;
for all other things are _in_ the world, but the world is _in_ it.’ In
Aristotle we have the consummation of this mode of speculation. The usual
point from which he starts in his inquiries is, that _we say_ thus or thus
in common language. Thus, when he has to discuss the question whether
there be, in any part of the universe, a void, or space in which there is
nothing, he inquires first in how many senses we say that one thing is
_in_ another. He enumerates many of these; we say the part is in the
whole, as the finger is _in_ the hand; again we say, the species is in the
genus, as man is included _in_ animal; again, the government of Greece is
_in_ the king; and various other senses are described and exemplified, but
of all these _the most proper_ is when we say a thing is _in_ a vessel,
and generally _in place_. He next examines what _place_ is, and comes to
this conclusion, that ‘if about a body there be another body including it,
it is in place, and if not, not.’ A body moves when it changes its place;
but he adds, that if water be in a vessel, the vessel being at rest, the
parts of the water may still move, for they are included by each other; so
that while the whole does not change its place, the parts may change their
place in a circular order. Proceeding then to the question of a _void_, he
as usual examines the different senses in which the term is used, and
adopts as the most proper, _place without matter_, with no useful result.

“Again, in a question concerning mechanical action, he says, ‘When a man
moves a stone by pushing it with a stick, _we_ say both that the man moves
the stone, and that the stick moves the stone, but the latter _more
properly_.’

“Again, we find the Greek philosophers applying themselves to extract
their dogmas from the most general and abstract notions which they could
detect; for example, from the conception of the Universe as One or as Many
things. They tried to determine how far we may, or must, combine with
these conceptions that of a whole, of parts, of number, of limits, of
place, of beginning or end, of full or void, of rest or motion, of cause
and effect, and the like. The analysis of such conceptions with such a
view, occupies, for instance, almost the whole of Aristotle’s Treatise on
the Heavens.”

The following paragraph merits particular attention: “Another mode of
reasoning, very widely applied in these attempts, was the _doctrine of
contrarieties_, in which it was assumed that adjectives or substances
which are in common language, or in some abstract mode of conception,
opposed to each other, must point at some fundamental antithesis in
nature, which it is important to study. Thus Aristotle says that the
Pythagoreans, from the contrasts which number suggests, collected ten
principles—Limited and Unlimited, Odd and Even, One and Many, Right and
Left, Male and Female, Rest and Motion, Straight and Curved, Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, Square and Oblong.... Aristotle himself deduced
the doctrine of four elements and other dogmas by oppositions of the same
kind.”

Of the manner in which, from premises obtained in this way, the ancients
attempted to deduce laws of nature, an example is given in the same work a
few pages further on. “Aristotle decides that there is no void on such
arguments as this. In a void there could be no difference of up and down;
for as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none in a
privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation of
matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down, which it
is in their nature to do. It is easily seen” (Dr. Whewell very justly
adds) “that such a mode of reasoning elevates the familiar forms of
language, and the intellectual connections of terms, to a supremacy over
facts; making truth depend upon whether terms are or are not privative,
and whether we say that bodies fall _naturally_.”

The propensity to assume that the same relations obtain between objects
themselves, which obtain between our ideas of them, is here seen in the
extreme stage of its development. For the mode of philosophizing,
exemplified in the foregoing instances, assumes no less than that the
proper way of arriving at knowledge of nature, is to study nature itself
subjectively; to apply our observation and analysis not to the facts, but
to the common notions entertained of the facts.

Many other equally striking examples may be given of the tendency to
assume that things which for the convenience of common life are placed in
different classes, must differ in every respect. Of this nature was the
universal and deeply-rooted prejudice of antiquity and the Middle Ages,
that celestial and terrestrial phenomena must be essentially different,
and could in no manner or degree depend on the same laws. Of the same
kind, also, was the prejudice against which Bacon contended, that nothing
produced by nature could be successfully imitated by man: “Calorem solis
et ignis toto genere differre; ne scilicet homines putent se per opera
ignis, aliquid simile iis quæ in Natura fiunt, educere et formare posse;”
and again, “Compositionem tantum opus Hominis, Mistionem vero opus solius
Naturæ esse: ne scilicet homines sperent aliquam ex arte Corporum
naturalium generationem aut transformationem.”(242) The grand distinction
in the ancient scientific speculations, between natural and violent
motions, though not without a plausible foundation in the appearances
themselves, was doubtless greatly recommended to adoption by its
conformity to this prejudice.

§ 7. From the fundamental error of the scientific inquirers of antiquity,
we pass, by a natural association, to a scarcely less fundamental one of
their great rival and successor, Bacon. It has excited the surprise of
philosophers that the detailed system of inductive logic, which this
extraordinary man labored to construct, has been turned to so little
direct use by subsequent inquirers, having neither continued, except in a
few of its generalities, to be recognized as a theory, nor having
conducted in practice to any great scientific results. But this, though
not unfrequently remarked, has scarcely received any plausible
explanation; and some, indeed, have preferred to assert that all rules of
induction are useless, rather than suppose that Bacon’s rules are grounded
on an insufficient analysis of the inductive process. Such, however, will
be seen to be the fact, as soon as it is considered, that Bacon entirely
overlooked Plurality of Causes. All his rules tacitly imply the
assumption, so contrary to all we now know of nature, that a phenomenon
can not have more than one cause.

When he is inquiring into what he terms the forma _calidi aut frigidi,
gravis aut levis, sicci aut humidi_, and the like, he never for an instant
doubts that there is some one thing, some invariable condition or set of
conditions, which is present in all cases of heat, or cold, or whatever
other phenomenon he is considering; the only difficulty being to find what
it is; which accordingly he tries to do by a process of elimination,
rejecting or excluding, by negative instances, whatever is not the _forma_
or cause, in order to arrive at what is. But, that this _forma_ or cause
is _one_ thing, and that it is the same in all hot objects, he has no more
doubt of, than another person has that there is always some cause _or
other_. In the present state of knowledge it could not be necessary, even
if we had not already treated so fully of the question, to point out how
widely this supposition is at variance with the truth. It is particularly
unfortunate for Bacon that, falling into this error, he should have fixed
almost exclusively upon a class of inquiries in which it was especially
fatal; namely, inquiries into the causes of the sensible qualities of
objects. For his assumption, groundless in every case, is false in a
peculiar degree with respect to those sensible qualities. In regard to
scarcely any of them has it been found possible to trace any unity of
cause, any set of conditions invariably accompanying the quality. The
conjunctions of such qualities with one another constitute the variety of
Kinds, in which, as already remarked, it has not been found possible to
trace any law. Bacon was seeking for what did not exist. The phenomenon of
which he sought for the one cause has oftenest no cause at all, and when
it has, depends (as far as hitherto ascertained) on an unassignable
variety of distinct causes.

And on this rock every one must split, who represents to himself as the
first and fundamental problem of science to ascertain what is the cause of
a given effect, rather than what are the effects of a given cause. It was
shown, in an early stage of our inquiry into the nature of Induction,(243)
how much more ample are the resources which science commands for the
latter than for the former inquiry, since it is upon the latter only that
we can throw any direct light by means of experiment; the power of
artificially producing an effect, implying a previous knowledge of at
least one of its causes. If we discover the causes of effects, it is
generally by having previously discovered the effects of causes; the
greatest skill in devising crucial instances for the former purpose may
only end, as Bacon’s physical inquiries did, in no result at all. Was it
that his eagerness to acquire the power of producing for man’s benefit
effects of practical importance to human life, rendering him impatient of
pursuing that end by a circuitous route, made even him, the champion of
experiment, prefer the direct mode, though one of mere observation, to the
indirect, in which alone experiment was possible? Or had even Bacon not
entirely cleared his mind from the notion of the ancients, that “rerum
cognoscere _causas_” was the sole object of philosophy, and that to
inquire into the _effects_ of things belonged to servile and mechanical
arts?

It is worth remarking that, while the only efficient mode of cultivating
speculative science was missed from an undue contempt of manual
operations, the false speculative views thus engendered gave in their turn
a false direction to such practical and mechanical aims as were suffered
to exist. The assumption universal among the ancients and in the Middle
Ages, that there were _principles_ of heat and cold, dryness and moisture,
etc., led directly to a belief in alchemy; in a transmutation of
substances, a change from one Kind into another. Why should it not be
possible to make gold? Each of the characteristic properties of gold has
its _forma_, its essence, its set of conditions, which if we could
discover, and learn how to realize, we could superinduce that particular
property upon any other substance, upon wood, or iron, or lime, or clay.
If, then, we could effect this with respect to every one of the essential
properties of the precious metal, we should have converted the other
substance into gold. Nor did this, if once the premises were granted,
appear to transcend the real powers of mankind. For daily experience
showed that almost every one of the distinctive sensible properties of any
object, its consistence, its color, its taste, its smell, its shape,
admitted of being totally changed by fire, or water, or some other
chemical agent. The _formæ_ of all those qualities seeming, therefore, to
be within human power either to produce or to annihilate, not only did the
transmutation of substances appear abstractedly possible, but the
employment of the power, at our choice, for practical ends, seemed by no
means hopeless.(244)

A prejudice, universal in the ancient world, and from which Bacon was so
far from being free, that it pervaded and vitiated the whole practical
part of his system of logic, may with good reason be ranked high in the
order of Fallacies of which we are now treating.

§ 8. There remains one _a priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, the most
deeply-rooted, perhaps, of all which we have enumerated; one which not
only reigned supreme in the ancient world, but still possesses almost
undisputed dominion over many of the most cultivated minds; and some of
the most remarkable of the numerous instances by which I shall think it
necessary to exemplify it, will be taken from recent thinkers. This is,
that the conditions of a phenomenon must, or at least probably will,
resemble the phenomenon itself.

Conformably to what we have before remarked to be of frequent occurrence,
this fallacy might without much impropriety have been placed in a
different class, among Fallacies of Generalization; for experience does
afford a certain degree of countenance to the assumption. The cause does,
in very many cases, resemble its effect; like produces like. Many
phenomena have a direct tendency to perpetuate their own existence, or to
give rise to other phenomena similar to themselves. Not to mention forms
actually moulded on one another, as impressions on wax and the like, in
which the closest resemblance between the effect and its cause is the very
law of the phenomenon; all motion tends to continue itself, with its own
velocity, and in its own original direction; and the motion of one body
tends to set others in motion, which is indeed the most common of the
modes in which the motions of bodies originate. We need scarcely refer to
contagion, fermentation, and the like; or to the production of effects by
the growth or expansion of a germ or rudiment resembling on a smaller
scale the completed phenomenon, as in the growth of a plant or animal from
an embryo, that embryo itself deriving its origin from another plant or
animal of the same kind. Again, the thoughts or reminiscences, which are
effects of our past sensations, resemble those sensations; feelings
produce similar feelings by way of sympathy; acts produce similar acts by
involuntary or voluntary imitation. With so many appearances in its favor,
no wonder if a presumption naturally grew up, that causes must
_necessarily_ resemble their effects, and that like could _only_ be
produced by like.

This principle of fallacy has usually presided over the fantastical
attempts to influence the course of nature by conjectural means, the
choice of which was not directed by previous observation and experiment.
The guess almost always fixed upon some means which possessed features of
real or apparent resemblance to the end in view. If a charm was wanted, as
by Ovid’s Medea, to prolong life, all long-lived animals, or what were
esteemed such, were collected and brewed into a broth:


           nec defuit illic
    Squamea Cinyphii tenuis membrana chelydri
    Vivacisque jecur cervi: quibus insuper addit
    Ora caputque novem cornicis sæcula passæ.


A similar notion was embodied in the celebrated medical theory called the
“Doctrine of Signatures,” “which is no less,” says Dr. Paris,(245) “than a
belief that every natural substance which possesses any medicinal virtue
indicates by an obvious and well-marked external character the disease for
which it is a remedy, or the object for which it should be employed.” This
outward character was generally some feature of resemblance, real or
fantastical, either to the effect it was supposed to produce, or to the
phenomenon over which its power was thought to be exercised. “Thus the
lungs of a fox must be a specific for asthma, because that animal is
remarkable for its strong powers of respiration. Turmeric has a brilliant
yellow color, which indicates that it has the power of curing the
jaundice; for the same reason, poppies must relieve diseases of the head;
Agaricus those of the bladder; _Cassia fistula_ the affections of the
intestines, and Aristolochia the disorders of the uterus: the polished
surface and stony hardness which so eminently characterize the seeds of
the Lithospermum officinale (common gromwell) were deemed a certain
indication of their efficacy in calculous and gravelly disorders; for a
similar reason, the roots of the Saxifraga granulata (white saxifrage)
gained reputation in the cure of the same disease; and the Euphrasia
(eye-bright) acquired fame, as an application in complaints of the eye,
because it exhibits a black spot in its corolla resembling the pupil. The
blood-stone, the Heliotropium of the ancients, from the occasional small
specks or points of a blood-red color exhibited on its green surface, is
even at this very day employed in many parts of England and Scotland to
stop a bleeding from the nose; and nettle tea continues a popular remedy
for the cure of _Urticaria_. It is also asserted that some substances bear
the _signatures_ of the humors, as the petals of the red rose that of the
blood, and the roots of rhubarb and the flowers of saffron that of the
bile.”

The early speculations respecting the chemical composition of bodies were
rendered abortive by no circumstance more than by their invariably taking
for granted that the properties of the elements must resemble those of the
compounds which were formed from them.

To descend to more modern instances; it was long thought, and was stoutly
maintained by the Cartesians and even by Leibnitz against the Newtonian
system (nor did Newton himself, as we have seen, contest the assumption,
but eluded it by an arbitrary hypothesis), that nothing (of a physical
nature at least) could account for motion, except previous motion; the
impulse or impact of some other body. It was very long before the
scientific world could prevail upon itself to admit attraction and
repulsion (_i.e._, spontaneous tendencies of particles to approach or
recede from one another) as ultimate laws, no more requiring to be
accounted for than impulse itself, if indeed the latter were not, in
truth, resolvable into the former. From the same source arose the
innumerable hypotheses devised to explain those classes of motion which
appeared more mysterious than others because there was no obvious mode of
attributing them to impulse, as for example the voluntary motions of the
human body. Such were the interminable systems of vibrations propagated
along the nerves, or animal spirits rushing up and down between the
muscles and the brain; which, if the facts could have been proved, would
have been an important addition to our knowledge of physiological laws;
but the mere invention, or arbitrary supposition of them, could not unless
by the strongest delusion be supposed to render the phenomena of animal
life more comprehensible, or less mysterious. Nothing, however, seemed
satisfactory, but to make out that motion was caused by motion; by
something like itself. If it was not one kind of motion, it must be
another. In like manner it was supposed that the physical qualities of
objects must arise from some similar quality, or perhaps only some quality
bearing the same name, in the particles or atoms of which the objects were
composed; that a sharp taste, for example, must arise from sharp
particles. And reversing the inference, the effects produced by a
phenomenon must, it was supposed, resemble in their physical attributes
the phenomenon itself. The influences of the planets were supposed to be
analogous to their visible peculiarities: Mars, being of a red color,
portended fire and slaughter; and the like.

Passing from physics to metaphysics, we may notice among the most
remarkable fruits of this _a priori_ fallacy two closely analogous
theories, employed in ancient and modern times to bridge over the chasm
between the world of mind and that of matter; the _species sensibiles_ of
the Epicureans, and the modern doctrine of perception by means of ideas.
These theories are indeed, probably, indebted for their existence not
solely to the fallacy in question, but to that fallacy combined with
another natural prejudice already adverted to, that a thing can not act
where it is not. In both doctrines it is assumed that the phenomenon which
takes place _in us_ when we see or touch an object, and which we regard as
an effect of that object, or rather of its presence to our organs, must of
necessity resemble very closely the outward object itself. To fulfill this
condition, the Epicureans supposed that objects were constantly projecting
in all directions impalpable images of themselves, which entered at the
eyes and penetrated to the mind; while modern metaphysicians, though they
rejected this hypothesis, agreed in deeming it necessary to suppose that
not the thing itself, but a mental image or representation of it, was the
direct object of perception. Dr. Reid had to employ a world of argument
and illustration to familiarize people with the truth, that the sensations
or impressions on our minds need not necessarily be copies of, or bear any
resemblance to, the causes which produce them; in opposition to the
natural prejudice which led people to assimilate the action of bodies upon
our senses, and through them upon our minds, to the transfer of a given
form from one object to another by actual moulding. The works of Dr. Reid
are even now the most effectual course of study for detaching the mind
from the prejudice of which this was an example. And the value of the
service which he thus rendered to popular philosophy is not much
diminished, although we may hold, with Brown, that he went too far in
imputing the “ideal theory” as an actual tenet, to the generality of the
philosophers who preceded him, and especially to Locke and Hume; for if
they did not themselves consciously fall into the error, unquestionably
they often led their readers into it.

The prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble the
phenomenon, is occasionally exaggerated, at least verbally, into a still
more palpable absurdity; the conditions of the thing are spoken of as if
they _were_ the very thing itself. In Bacon’s model inquiry, which
occupies so great a space in the _Novum Organum_, the _inquisitio in
formam calidi_, the conclusion which he favors is that heat is a kind of
motion; meaning of course not the feeling of heat, but the conditions of
the feeling; meaning, therefore, only that wherever there is heat, there
must first be a particular kind of motion; but he makes no distinction in
his language between these two ideas, expressing himself as if heat, and
the conditions of heat, were one and the same thing. So the elder Darwin,
in the beginning of his _Zoonomia_, says, “The word _idea_ has various
meanings in the writers of metaphysics; it is here used simply for those
notions of external things which our organs of sense bring us acquainted
with originally” (thus far the proposition, though vague, is
unexceptionable in meaning), “and is defined a contraction, a motion, or
configuration, of the fibres which constitute the immediate organ of
sense.” Our _notions_, a configuration of the fibres! What kind of
logician must he be who thinks that a phenomenon is _defined_ to _be_ the
condition on which he supposes it to depend? Accordingly he says soon
after, not that our ideas are caused by, or consequent on, certain organic
phenomena, but “our ideas _are_ animal motions of the organs of sense.”
And this confusion runs through the four volumes of the _Zoonomia_; the
reader never knows whether the writer is speaking of the effect, or of its
supposed cause; of the idea, a state of mental consciousness, or of the
state of the nerves and brain which he considers it to presuppose.

I have given a variety of instances in which the natural prejudice, that
causes and their effects must resemble one another, has operated in
practice so as to give rise to serious errors. I shall now go further, and
produce from writings even of the present or very recent times, instances
in which this prejudice is laid down as an established principle. M.
Victor Cousin, in the last of his celebrated lectures on Locke, enunciates
the maxim in the following unqualified terms: “Tout ce qui est vrai de
l’effet, est vrai de la cause.” A doctrine to which, unless in some
peculiar and technical meaning of the words cause and effect, it is not to
be imagined that any person would literally adhere; but he who could so
write must be far enough from seeing that the very reverse might be the
effect; that there is nothing impossible in the supposition that no one
property which is true of the effect might be true of the cause. Without
going quite so far in point of expression, Coleridge, in his _Biographia
Literaria_,(246) affirms as an “evident truth,” that “the law of causality
holds only between homogeneous things, _i.e._, things having some common
property,” and therefore “can not extend from one world into another, its
opposite;” hence, as mind and matter have no common property, mind can not
act upon matter, nor matter upon mind. What is this but the _a priori_
fallacy of which we are speaking? The doctrine, like many others of
Coleridge, is taken from Spinoza, in the first book of whose _Ethica_ (_De
Deo_) it stands as the Third Proposition, “Quæ res nihil commune inter se
habent, earum una alterius causa esse non potest,” and is there proved
from two so-called axioms, equally gratuitous with itself; but Spinoza
ever systematically consistent, pursued the doctrine to its inevitable
consequence, the materiality of God.

The same conception of impossibility led the ingenious and subtle mind of
Leibnitz to his celebrated doctrine of a pre-established harmony. He, too,
thought that mind could not act upon matter, nor matter upon mind, and
that the two, therefore, must have been arranged by their Maker like two
clocks, which, though unconnected with one another, strike simultaneously,
and always point to the same hour. Malebranche’s equally famous theory of
Occasional Causes was another form of the same conception; instead of
supposing the clocks originally arranged to strike together, he held that
when the one strikes, God interposes, and makes the other strike in
correspondence with it.

Descartes, in like manner, whose works are a rich mine of almost every
description of _a priori_ fallacy, says that the Efficient Cause must at
least have all the perfections of the effect, and for this singular
reason: “Si enim ponamus aliquid in ideâ reperiri quod non fuerit in ejus
causâ, hoc igitur habet a nihilo;” of which it is scarcely a parody to
say, that if there be pepper in the soup there must be pepper in the cook
who made it, since otherwise the pepper would be without a cause. A
similar fallacy is committed by Cicero, in his second book _De Finibus_,
where, speaking in his own person against the Epicureans, he charges them
with inconsistency in saying that the pleasures of the mind had their
origin from those of the body, and yet that the former were more valuable,
as if the effect could surpass the cause. “Animi voluptas oritur propter
voluptatem corporis, et major est animi voluptas quam corporis? ita fit ut
gratulator, lætior sit quam is cui gratulatur.” Even that, surely, is not
an impossibility; a person’s good fortune has often given more pleasure to
others than it gave to the person himself.

Descartes, with no less readiness, applies the same principle the converse
way, and infers the nature of the effects from the assumption that they
must, in this or that property or in all their properties, resemble their
cause. To this class belong his speculations, and those of so many others
after him, tending to infer the order of the universe, not from
observation, but by _a priori_ reasoning from supposed qualities of the
Godhead. This sort of inference was probably never carried to a greater
length than it was in one particular instance by Descartes, when, as a
proof of one of his physical principles, that the quantity of motion in
the universe is invariable, he had recourse to the immutability of the
Divine Nature. Reasoning of a very similar character is, however, nearly
as common now as it was in his time, and does duty largely as a means of
fencing off disagreeable conclusions. Writers have not yet ceased to
oppose the theory of divine benevolence to the evidence of physical facts,
to the principle of population for example. And people seem in general to
think that they have used a very powerful argument, when they have said,
that to suppose some proposition true, would be a reflection on the
goodness or wisdom of the Deity. Put into the simplest possible terms,
their argument is, “If it had depended on me, I would not have made the
proposition true, therefore it is not true.” Put into other words, it
stands thus: “God is perfect, therefore (what I think) perfection must
obtain in nature.” But since in reality every one feels that nature is
very far from perfect, the doctrine is never applied consistently. It
furnishes an argument which (like many others of a similar character)
people like to appeal to when it makes for their own side. Nobody is
convinced by it, but each appears to think that it puts religion on his
side of the question, and that it is a useful weapon of offense for
wounding an adversary.

Although several other varieties of _a priori_ fallacy might probably be
added to those here specified, these are all against which it seems
necessary to give any special caution. Our object is to open, without
attempting or affecting to exhaust, the subject. Having illustrated,
therefore, this first class of Fallacies at sufficient length, I shall
proceed to the second.




                               Chapter IV.


Fallacies Of Observation.


§ 1. From the Fallacies which are properly Prejudices, or presumptions
antecedent to, and superseding, proof, we pass to those which lie in the
incorrect performance of the proving process. And as Proof, in its widest
extent, embraces one or more, or all, of three processes, Observation,
Generalization, and Deduction, we shall consider in their order the errors
capable of being committed in these three operations. And first, of the
first mentioned.

A fallacy of misobservation may be either negative or positive; either
Non-observation or Mal-observation. It is non-observation, when all the
error consists in overlooking, or neglecting, facts or particulars which
ought to have been observed. It is mal-observation, when something is not
simply unseen, but seen wrong; when the fact or phenomenon, instead of
being recognized for what it is in reality, is mistaken for something
else.

§ 2. Non-observation may either take place by overlooking instances, or by
overlooking some of the circumstances of a given instance. If we were to
conclude that a fortune-teller was a true prophet, from not adverting to
the cases in which his predictions had been falsified by the event, this
would be non-observation of instances; but if we overlooked or remained
ignorant of the fact that in cases where the predictions had been
fulfilled, he had been in collusion with some one who had given him the
information on which they were grounded, this would be non-observation of
circumstances.

The former case, in so far as the act of induction from insufficient
evidence is concerned, does not fall under this second class of Fallacies,
but under the third, Fallacies of Generalization. In every such case,
however, there are two defects or errors instead of one; there is the
error of treating the insufficient evidence as if it were sufficient,
which is a Fallacy of the third class; and there is the insufficiency
itself; the not having better evidence; which, when such evidence, or, in
other words, when other instances, were to be had, is Non-observation; and
the erroneous inference, so far as it is to be attributed to this cause,
is a Fallacy of the second class.

It belongs not to our purpose to treat of non-observation as arising from
casual inattention, from general slovenliness of mental habits, want of
due practice in the use of the observing faculties, or insufficient
interest in the subject. The question pertinent to logic is—Granting the
want of complete competency in the observer, on what point is that
insufficiency on his part likely to lead him wrong? or rather, what sorts
of instances, or of circumstances in any given instance, are most likely
to escape the notice of observers generally; of mankind at large.

§ 3. First, then, it is evident that when the instances on one side of a
question are more likely to be remembered and recorded than those on the
other; especially if there be any strong motive to preserve the memory of
the first, but not of the latter; these last are likely to be overlooked,
and escape the observation of the mass of mankind. This is the recognized
explanation of the credit given, in spite of reason and evidence, to many
classes of impostors; to quack-doctors, and fortune-tellers in all ages;
to the “cunning man” of modern times, and the oracles of old. Few have
considered the extent to which this fallacy operates in practice, even in
the teeth of the most palpable negative evidence. A striking example of it
is the faith which the uneducated portion of the agricultural classes, in
this and other countries, continue to repose in the prophecies as to
weather supplied by almanac-makers; though every season affords to them
numerous cases of completely erroneous prediction; but as every season
also furnishes some cases in which the prediction is fulfilled, this is
enough to keep up the credit of the prophet, with people who do not
reflect on the number of instances requisite for what we have called, in
our inductive terminology, the Elimination of Chance; since a certain
number of casual coincidences not only may but will happen, between any
two unconnected events.

Coleridge, in one of the essays in the _Friend_, has illustrated the
matter we are now considering, in discussing the origin of a proverb,
“which, differently worded, is to be found in all the languages of
Europe,” viz., “Fortune favors fools.” He ascribes it partly to the
“tendency to exaggerate all effects that seem disproportionate to their
visible cause, and all circumstances that are in any way strongly
contrasted with our notions of the persons under them.” Omitting some
explanations which would refer the error to mal-observation, or to the
other species of non-observation (that of circumstances), I take up the
quotation further on. “Unforeseen coincidences may have greatly helped a
man, yet if they have done for him only what possibly from his own
abilities he might have effected for himself, his good luck will excite
less attention, and the instances be less remembered. That clever men
should attain their objects seems natural, and we neglect the
circumstances that perhaps produced that success of themselves without the
intervention of skill or foresight; but we dwell on the fact and remember
it, as something strange, when the same happens to a weak or ignorant man.
So too, though the latter should fail in his undertakings from
concurrences that might have happened to the wisest man, yet his failure
being no more than might have been expected and accounted for from his
folly, it lays no hold on our attention, but fleets away among the other
undistinguished waves in which the stream of ordinary life murmurs by us,
and is forgotten. Had it been as true as it was notoriously false, that
those all-embracing discoveries, which have shed a dawn of _science_ on
the _art_ of chemistry, and give no obscure promise of some one great
constitutive law, in the light of which dwell dominion and the power of
prophecy; if these discoveries, instead of having been, as they really
were, preconcerted by meditation, and evolved out of his own intellect,
had occurred by a set of lucky _accidents_ to the illustrious father and
founder of philosophic alchemy; if they had presented themselves to
Professor Davy exclusively in consequence of his _luck_ in possessing a
particular galvanic battery; if this battery, as far as Davy was
concerned, had itself been an _accident_, and not (as in point of fact it
was) desired and obtained by him for the purpose of insuring the testimony
of experience to his principles, and in order to bind down material nature
under the inquisition of reason, and force from her, as by torture,
unequivocal answers to _prepared_ and _preconceived_ questions—yet still
they would not have been talked of or described as instances of _luck_,
but as the natural results of his admitted genius and known skill. But
should an accident have disclosed similar discoveries to a mechanic at
Birmingham or Sheffield, and if the man should grow rich in consequence,
and partly by the envy of his neighbors and partly with good reason, be
considered by them as a man _below par_ in the general powers of his
understanding; then, ‘Oh, what a lucky fellow! Well, Fortune _does_ favor
fools—that’s for certain! It is always so!’ And forthwith the exclaimer
relates half a dozen similar instances. Thus accumulating the one sort of
facts and never collecting the other, we do, as poets in their diction,
and quacks of all denominations do in their reasoning, put a part for the
whole.”

This passage very happily sets forth the manner in which, under the loose
mode of induction which proceeds _per enumerationem simplicem_, not
seeking for instances of such a kind as to be decisive of the question,
but generalizing from any which occur, or rather which are remembered,
opinions grow up with the apparent sanction of experience, which have no
foundation in the laws of nature at all. “Itaque recte respondit ille” (we
may say with Bacon(247)), “qui cum suspensa tabula in templo ei
monstraretur eorum, qui vota solverant, quod naufragii periculo elapsi
sint, atque interrogando premeretur, anne tum quidem Deorum numen
agnosceret, quæsivit denuo, _At ubi sunt illi depicti qui post vota
nuncupata perierunt_? Eadem ratio est fere omnis superstitionis, ut in
Astrologicis, in Somniis, Ominibus, Nemesibus, et hujusmodi; in quibus,
homines delectati hujusmodi vanitatibus, advertunt eventus, ubi implentur;
ast ubi fallunt, licet multo frequentius, tamen negligunt, et prætereunt.”
And he proceeds to say that, independently of the love of the marvelous,
or any other bias in the inclinations, there is a natural tendency in the
intellect itself to this kind of fallacy; since the mind is more moved by
affirmative instances, though negative ones are of most use in philosophy:
“Is tamen humano intellectui error est proprius et perpetuus, ut magis
moveatur et excitetur Affirmativis quam Negativis; cum rite et ordine
æquum se utrique præbere debeat; quin contra, in omni Axiomate vero
constituendo, major vis est instantiæ negativæ.”

But the greatest of all causes of non-observation is a preconceived
opinion. This it is which, in all ages, has made the whole race of
mankind, and every separate section of it, for the most part unobservant
of all facts, however abundant, even when passing under their own eyes,
which are contradictory to any first appearance, or any received tenet. It
is worth while to recall occasionally to the oblivious memory of mankind
some of the striking instances in which opinions that the simplest
experiment would have shown to be erroneous, continued to be entertained
because nobody ever thought of trying that experiment. One of the most
remarkable of these was exhibited in the Copernican controversy. The
opponents of Copernicus argued that the earth did not move, because if it
did, a stone let fall from the top of a high tower would not reach the
ground at the foot of the tower, but at a little distance from it, in a
contrary direction to the earth’s course; in the same manner (said they)
as, if a ball is let drop from the mast-head while the ship is in full
sail, it does not fall exactly at the foot of the mast, but nearer to the
stern of the vessel. The Copernicans would have silenced these objectors
at once if they had _tried_ dropping a ball from the mast-head, since they
would have found that it does fall exactly at the foot, as the theory
requires; but no; they admitted the spurious fact, and struggled vainly to
make out a difference between the two cases. “The ball was no _part_ of
the ship—and the motion forward was not _natural_, either to the ship or
to the ball. The stone, on the other hand, let fall from the top of the
tower, was a _part_ of the earth; and therefore, the diurnal and annular
revolutions which were _natural_ to the earth, were also _natural_ to the
stone; the stone would, therefore, retain the same motion with the tower,
and strike the ground precisely at the bottom of it.”(248)

Other examples, scarcely less striking, are recorded by Dr. Whewell,(249)
where imaginary laws of nature have continued to be received as real,
merely because no person had steadily looked at facts which almost every
one had the opportunity of observing. “A vague and loose mode of looking
at facts very easily observable, left men for a long time under the belief
that a body ten times as heavy as another falls ten times as fast; that
objects immersed in water are always magnified, without regard to the form
of the surface; that the magnet exerts an irresistible force; that crystal
is always found associated with ice; and the like. These and many others
are examples how blind and careless man can be even in observation of the
plainest and commonest appearances; and they show us that the mere
faculties of perception, although constantly exercised upon innumerable
objects, may long fail in leading to any exact knowledge.”

If even on physical facts, and these of the most obvious character, the
observing faculties of mankind can be to this degree the passive slaves of
their preconceived impressions, we need not be surprised that this should
be so lamentably true as all experience attests it to be, on things more
nearly connected with their stronger feelings—on moral, social, and
religious subjects. The information which an ordinary traveler brings back
from a foreign country, as the result of the evidence of his senses, is
almost always such as exactly confirms the opinions with which he set out.
He has had eyes and ears for such things only as he expected to see. Men
read the sacred books of their religion, and pass unobserved therein
multitudes of things utterly irreconcilable with even their own notions of
moral excellence. With the same authorities before them, different
historians, alike innocent of intentional misrepresentation, see only what
is favorable to Protestants or Catholics, royalists or republicans,
Charles I. or Cromwell; while others, having set out with the
preconception that extremes must be in the wrong, are incapable of seeing
truth and justice when these are wholly on one side.

The influence of a preconceived theory is well exemplified in the
superstitions of barbarians respecting the virtues of medicaments and
charms. The negroes, among whom coral, as of old among ourselves, is worn
as an amulet, affirm, according to Dr. Paris,(250) that its color “is
always affected by the state of health of the wearer, it becoming paler in
disease.” On a matter open to universal observation, a general proposition
which has not the smallest vestige of truth is received as a result of
experience; the preconceived opinion preventing, it would seem, any
observation whatever on the subject.

§ 4. For illustration of the first species of non-observation, that of
Instances, what has now been stated may suffice. But there may also be
non-observation of some material circumstances, in instances which have
not been altogether overlooked—nay, which may be the very instances on
which the whole superstructure of a theory has been founded. As, in the
cases hitherto examined, a general proposition was too rashly adopted, on
the evidence of particulars, true indeed, but insufficient to support it;
so in the cases to which we now turn, the particulars themselves have been
imperfectly observed, and the singular propositions on which the
generalization is grounded, or some at least of those singular
propositions, are false.

Such, for instance, was one of the mistakes committed in the celebrated
phlogistic theory; a doctrine which accounted for combustion by the
extrication of a substance called phlogiston, supposed to be contained in
all combustible matter. The hypothesis accorded tolerably well with
superficial appearances; the ascent of flame naturally suggests the escape
of a substance; and the visible residuum of ashes, in bulk and weight,
generally falls extremely short of the combustible material. The error
was, non-observation of an important portion of the actual residue,
namely, the gaseous products of combustion. When these were at last
noticed and brought into account, it appeared to be a universal law, that
all substances gain instead of losing weight by undergoing combustion; and
after the usual attempt to accommodate the old theory to the new fact by
means of an arbitrary hypothesis (that phlogiston had the quality of
positive levity instead of gravity), chemists were conducted to the true
explanation, namely, that instead of a substance separated, there was, on
the contrary, a substance absorbed.

Many of the absurd practices which have been deemed to possess medicinal
efficacy, have been indebted for their reputation to non-observance of
some accompanying circumstance which was the real agent in the cures
ascribed to them. Thus, of the sympathetic powder of Sir Kenelm Digby:
“Whenever any wound had been inflicted, this powder was applied to the
weapon that had inflicted it, which was, moreover, covered with ointment,
and dressed two or three times a day. The wound itself, in the mean time,
was directed to be brought together, and carefully bound up with clean
linen rags, but, _above all, to be let alone_ for seven days, at the end
of which period the bandages were removed, when the wound was generally
found perfectly united. The triumph of the cure was decreed to the
mysterious agency of the sympathetic powder which had been so assiduously
applied to the weapon, whereas it is hardly necessary to observe that the
promptness of the cure depended on the total exclusion of air from the
wound, and upon the sanative operations of nature not having received any
disturbance from the officious interference of art. The result, beyond all
doubt, furnished the first hint which led surgeons to the improved
practice of healing wounds by what is technically called the _first
intention_.”(251) “In all records,” adds Dr. Paris, of “extraordinary
cures performed by mysterious agents, there is a great desire to conceal
the remedies and other curative means which were simultaneously
administered with them; thus Oribasius commends in high terms a necklace
of Pæony root for the cure of epilepsy; but we learn that he always took
care to accompany its use with copious evacuations, although he assigns to
them no share of credit in the cure. In later times we have a good
specimen of this species of deception, presented to us in a work on
scrofula by Mr. Morley, written, as we are informed, for the sole purpose
of restoring the much-injured character and use of the Vervain; in which
the author directs the root of this plant to be tied with a yard of white
satin ribbon around the neck, where it is to remain until the patient is
cured; but mark—during this interval he calls to his aid the most active
medicines in the materia medica.”(252)

In other cases, the cures really produced by rest, regimen, and amusement
have been ascribed to the medicinal, or occasionally to the supernatural,
means which were put in requisition. “The celebrated John Wesley, while he
commemorates the triumph of sulphur and supplication over his bodily
infirmity, forgets to appreciate the resuscitating influence of four
months’ repose from his apostolic labors; and such is the disposition of
the human mind to place confidence in the operation of mysterious agents,
that we find him more disposed to attribute his cure to a brown paper
plaster of egg and brimstone, than to Dr. Fothergill’s salutary
prescription of country air, rest, asses’ milk, and horse exercise.”(253)

In the following example, the circumstance overlooked was of a somewhat
different character. “When the yellow fever raged in America, the
practitioners trusted exclusively to the copious use of mercury; at first
this plan was deemed so universally efficacious, that, in the enthusiasm
of the moment, it was triumphantly proclaimed that death never took place
after the mercury had evinced its effect upon the system: all this was
very true, but it furnished no proof of the efficacy of that metal, since
the disease in its aggravated form was so rapid in its career, that it
swept away its victims long before the system could be brought under
mercurial influence, while in its milder shape it passed off equally well
without any assistance from art.”(254)

In these examples the circumstance overlooked was cognizable by the
senses. In other cases, it is one the knowledge of which could only be
arrived at by reasoning; but the fallacy may still be classed under the
head to which, for want of a more appropriate name, we have given the
appellation Fallacies of Non-observation. It is not the nature of the
faculties which ought to have been employed, but the non-employment of
them, which constitutes this Natural Order of Fallacies. Wherever the
error is negative, not positive; wherever it consists especially in
_overlooking_, in being ignorant or unmindful of some fact which, if known
and attended to, would have made a difference in the conclusion arrived
at; the error is properly placed in the Class which we are considering. In
this Class, there is not, as in all other fallacies there is, a positive
misestimate of evidence actually had. The conclusion would be just, if the
portion which is seen of the case were the whole of it; but there is
another portion overlooked, which vitiates the result.

For instance, there is a remarkable doctrine which has occasionally found
a vent in the public speeches of unwise legislators, but which only in one
instance that I am aware of has received the sanction of a philosophical
writer, namely, M. Cousin, who in his preface to the _Gorgias_ of Plato,
contending that punishment must have some other and higher justification
than the prevention of crime, makes use of this argument—that if
punishment were only for the sake of example, it would be indifferent
whether we punished the innocent or the guilty, since the punishment,
considered as an example, is equally efficacious in either case. Now we
must, in order to go along with this reasoning, suppose, that the person
who feels himself under temptation, observing somebody punished, concludes
himself to be in danger of being punished likewise, and is terrified
accordingly. But it is forgotten that if the person punished is supposed
to be innocent, or even if there be any doubt of his guilt, the spectator
will reflect that his own danger, whatever it may be, is not contingent on
his guiltiness, but threatens him equally if he remains innocent, and how,
therefore, is he deterred from guilt by the apprehension of such
punishment? M. Cousin supposes that people will be dissuaded from guilt by
whatever renders the condition of the guilty more perilous, forgetting
that the condition of the innocent (also one of the elements in the
calculation) is, in the case supposed, made perilous in precisely an equal
degree. This is a fallacy of overlooking; or of non-observation, within
the intent of our classification.

Fallacies of this description are the great stumbling-block to correct
thinking in political economy. The economical workings of society afford
numerous cases in which the effects of a cause consist of two sets of
phenomena: the one immediate, concentrated, obvious to all eyes, and
passing, in common apprehension, for the whole effect; the other widely
diffused, or lying deeper under the surface, and which is exactly contrary
to the former. Take, for instance, the common notion so plausible at the
first glance, of the encouragement given to industry by lavish
expenditure. A, who spends his whole income, and even his capital, in
expensive living, is supposed to give great employment to labor. B, who
lives on a small portion, and invests the remainder in the funds, is
thought to give little or no employment. For every body sees the gains
which are made by A’s tradesmen, servants, and others, while his money is
spending. B’s savings, on the contrary, pass into the hands of the person
whose stock he purchased, who with it pays a debt he owed to some banker,
who lends it again to some merchant or manufacturer; and the capital being
laid out in hiring spinners and weavers, or carriers and the crews of
merchant vessels, not only gives immediate employment to at least as much
industry as A employs during the whole of his career, but coming back with
increase by the sale of the goods which have been manufactured or
imported, forms a fund for the employment of the same and perhaps a
greater quantity of labor in perpetuity. But the observer does not see,
and therefore does not consider, what becomes of B’s money; he does see
what is done with A’s; he observes the amount of industry which A’s
profusion feeds; he observes not the far greater quantity which it
prevents from being fed; and thence the prejudice, universal to the time
of Adam Smith, that prodigality encourages industry, and parsimony is a
discouragement to it.

The common argument against free trade was a fallacy of the same nature.
The purchaser of British silk encourages British industry; the purchaser
of Lyons silk encourages only French; the former conduct is patriotic, the
latter ought to be prevented by law. The circumstance is overlooked, that
the purchaser of any foreign commodity necessarily causes, directly or
indirectly, the export of an equivalent value of some article of home
production (beyond what would otherwise be exported), either to the same
foreign country or to some other; which fact, though from the complication
of the circumstances it can not always be verified by specific
observation, no observation can possibly be brought to contradict, while
the evidence of reasoning on which it rests is irrefragable. The fallacy
is, therefore, the same as in the preceding case, that of seeing a part
only of the phenomena, and imagining that part to be the whole; and may be
ranked among Fallacies of Non-observation.

§ 5. To complete the examination of the second of our five classes, we
have now to speak of Mal-observation; in which the error does not lie in
the fact that something is unseen, but that something seen is seen wrong.

Perception being infallible evidence of whatever is really perceived, the
error now under consideration can be committed no otherwise than by
mistaking for conception what is, in fact, inference. We have formerly
shown how intimately the two are blended in almost every thing which is
called observation, and still more in every Description.(255) What is
actually on any occasion perceived by our senses being so minute in
amount, and generally so unimportant a portion of the state of facts which
we wish to ascertain or to communicate; it would be absurd to say that
either in our observations, or in conveying their result to others, we
ought not to mingle inference with fact; all that can be said is, that
when we do so we ought to be aware of what we are doing, and to know what
part of the assertion rests on consciousness, and is therefore
indisputable, what part on inference, and is therefore questionable.

One of the most celebrated examples of a universal error produced by
mistaking an inference for the direct evidence of the senses, was the
resistance made, on the ground of common sense, to the Copernican system.
People fancied they _saw_ the sun rise and set, the stars revolve in
circles round the pole. We now know that they saw no such thing; what they
really saw was a set of appearances, equally reconcilable with the theory
they held and with a totally different one. It seems strange that such an
instance as this of the testimony of the senses pleaded with the most
entire conviction in favor of something which was a mere inference of the
judgment, and, as it turned out, a false inference, should not have opened
the eyes of the bigots of common sense, and inspired them with a more
modest distrust of the competency of mere ignorance to judge the
conclusions of cultivated thought.

In proportion to any person’s deficiency of knowledge and mental
cultivation is, generally, his inability to discriminate between his
inferences and the perceptions on which they were grounded. Many a
marvelous tale, many a scandalous anecdote, owes its origin to this
incapacity. The narrator relates, not what he saw or heard, but the
impression which he derived from what he saw or heard, and of which
perhaps the greater part consisted of inference, though the whole is
related, not as inference but as matter of fact. The difficulty of
inducing witnesses to restrain within any moderate limits the intermixture
of their inferences with the narrative of their perceptions, is well known
to experienced cross-examiners; and still more is this the case when
ignorant persons attempt to describe any natural phenomenon. “The simplest
narrative,” says Dugald Stewart,(256) “of the most illiterate observer
involves more or less of hypothesis; nay, in general, it will be found
that, in proportion to his ignorance, the greater is the number of
conjectural principles involved in his statements. A village apothecary
(and, if possible, in a still greater degree, an experienced nurse) is
seldom able to describe the plainest case, without employing a phraseology
of which every word is a theory: whereas a simple and genuine
specification of the phenomena which mark a particular disease; a
specification unsophisticated by fancy, or by preconceived opinions, may
be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind trained by long and
successful study to the most difficult of all arts, that of the faithful
_interpretation_ of nature.”

The universality of the confusion between perceptions and the inferences
drawn from them, and the rarity of the power to discriminate the one from
the other, ceases to surprise us when we consider that in the far greater
number of instances the actual perceptions of our senses are of no
importance or interest to us except as marks from which we infer something
beyond them. It is not the color and superficial extension perceived by
the eye that are important to us, but the object, of which those visible
appearances testify the presence; and where the sensation itself is
indifferent, as it generally is, we have no motive to attend particularly
to it, but acquire a habit of passing it over without distinct
consciousness, and going on at once to the inference. So that to know what
the sensation actually was, is a study in itself, to which painters, for
example, have to train themselves by special and long-continued discipline
and application. In things farther removed from the dominion of the
outward senses, no one who has not great experience in psychological
analysis is competent to break this intense association; and when such
analytic habits do not exist in the requisite degree, it is hardly
possible to mention any of the habitual judgments of mankind on subjects
of a high degree of abstraction, from the being of a God and the
immortality of the soul down to the multiplication table, which are not,
or have not been, considered as matter of direct intuition. So strong is
the tendency to ascribe an intuitive character to judgments which are mere
inferences, and often false ones. No one can doubt that many a deluded
visionary has actually believed that he was directly inspired from Heaven,
and that the Almighty had conversed with him face to face; which yet was
only, on his part, a conclusion drawn from appearances to his senses, or
feelings in his internal consciousness, which afforded no warrant for any
such belief. A caution, therefore, against this class of errors, is not
only needful but indispensable; though to determine whether, on any of the
great questions of metaphysics, such errors are actually committed,
belongs not to this place, but, as I have so often said, to a different
science.




                                Chapter V.


Fallacies Of Generalization.


§ 1. The class of Fallacies of which we are now to speak, is the most
extensive of all; embracing a greater number and variety of unfounded
inferences than any of the other classes, and which it is even more
difficult to reduce to sub-classes or species. If the attempt made in the
preceding books to define the principles of well-grounded generalization
has been successful, all generalizations not conformable to those
principles might, in a certain sense, be brought under the present class;
when, however, the rules are known and kept in view, but a casual lapse
committed in the application of them, this is a blunder, not a fallacy. To
entitle an error of generalization to the latter epithet, it must be
committed on principle; there must lie in it some erroneous general
conception of the inductive process; the legitimate mode of drawing
conclusions from observation and experiment must be fundamentally
misconceived.

Without attempting any thing so chimerical as an exhaustive classification
of all the misconceptions which can exist on the subject, let us content
ourselves with noting, among the cautions which might be suggested, a few
of the most useful and needful.

§ 2. In the first place, there are certain kinds of generalization which,
if the principles already laid down be correct, _must_ be groundless;
experience can not afford the necessary conditions for establishing them
by a correct induction. Such, for instance, are all inferences from the
order of nature existing on the earth, or in the solar system, to that
which may exist in remote parts of the universe; where the phenomena, for
aught we know, may be entirely different, or may succeed one another
according to different laws, or even according to no fixed law at all.
Such, again, in matters dependent on causation, are all universal
negatives, all propositions that assert impossibility. The non-existence
of any given phenomenon, however uniformly experience may as yet have
testified to the fact, proves at most that no cause, adequate to its
production, has yet manifested itself; but that no such causes exist in
nature can only be inferred if we are so foolish as to suppose that we
know all the forces in nature. The supposition would at least be premature
while our acquaintance with some even of those which we do know is so
extremely recent. And however much our knowledge of nature may hereafter
be extended, it is not easy to see how that knowledge could ever be
complete, or how, if it were, we could ever be assured of its being so.

The only laws of nature which afford sufficient warrant for attributing
impossibility (even with reference to the existing order of nature, and to
our own region of the universe) are, first, those of number and extension,
which are paramount to the laws of the succession of phenomena, and not
exposed to the agency of counteracting causes; and, secondly, the
universal law of causality itself. That no valuation in any effect or
consequent will take place while the whole of the antecedents remain the
same, may be affirmed with full assurance. But, that the addition of some
new antecedent might not entirely alter and subvert the accustomed
consequent, or that antecedents competent to do this do not exist in
nature, we are in no case empowered positively to conclude.

§ 3. It is next to be remarked that all generalizations which profess,
like the theories of Thales, Democritus, and others of the early Greek
speculators, to resolve all things into some one element, or like many
modern theories, to resolve phenomena radically different into the same,
are necessarily false. By radically different phenomena I mean impressions
on our senses which differ in quality, and not merely in degree. On this
subject what appeared necessary was said in the chapter on the Limits to
the Explanation of Laws of Nature; but as the fallacy is even in our own
times a common one, I shall touch on it somewhat further in this place.

When we say that the force which retains the planets in their orbits is
resolved into gravity, or that the force which makes substances combine
chemically is resolved into electricity, we assert in the one case what
is, and in the other case what might, and probably will ultimately, be a
legitimate result of induction. In both these cases motion is resolved
into motion. The assertion is, that a case of motion, which was supposed
to be special, and to follow a distinct law of its own, conforms to and is
included in the general law which regulates another class of motions. But,
from these and similar generalizations, countenance and currency have been
given to attempts to resolve, not motion into motion, but heat into
motion, light into motion, sensation itself into motion; states of
consciousness into states of the nervous system, as in the ruder forms of
the materialist philosophy; vital phenomena into mechanical or chemical
processes, as in some schools of physiology.

Now I am far from pretending that it may not be capable of proof, or that
it is not an important addition to our knowledge if proved, that certain
motions in the particles of bodies are the _conditions_ of the production
of heat or light; that certain assignable physical modifications of the
nerves may be the conditions not only of our sensations or emotions, but
even of our thoughts; that certain mechanical and chemical conditions may,
in the order of nature, be sufficient to determine to action the
physiological laws of life. All I insist upon, in common with every
thinker who entertains any clear idea of the logic of science, is, that it
shall not be supposed that by proving these things one step would be made
toward a real explanation of heat, light, or sensation; or that the
generic peculiarity of those phenomena can be in the least degree evaded
by any such discoveries, however well established. Let it be shown, for
instance, that the most complex series of physical causes and effects
succeed one another in the eye and in the brain to produce a sensation of
color; rays falling on the eye, refracted, converging, crossing one
another, making an inverted image on the retina, and after this a
motion—let it be a vibration, or a rush of nervous fluid, or whatever else
you are pleased to suppose, along the optic nerve—a propagation of this
motion to the brain itself, and as many more different motions as you
choose; still, at the end of these motions, there is something which is
not motion, there is a feeling or sensation of color. Whatever number of
motions we may be able to interpolate, and whether they be real or
imaginary, we shall still find, at the end of the series, a motion
antecedent and a color consequent. The mode in which any one of the
motions produces the next, may possibly be susceptible of explanation by
some general law of motion: but the mode in which the last motion produces
the sensation of color, can not be explained by any law of motion; it is
the law of color: which is, and must always remain, a peculiar thing.
Where our consciousness recognizes between two phenomena an inherent
distinction; where we are sensible of a difference which is not merely of
degree, and feel that no adding one of the phenomena to itself would
produce the other; any theory which attempts to bring either under the
laws of the other must be false; though a theory which merely treats the
one as a cause or condition of the other, may possibly be true.

§ 4. Among the remaining forms of erroneous generalization, several of
those most worthy of and most requiring notice have fallen under our
examination in former places, where, in investigating the rules of correct
induction, we have had occasion to advert to the distinction between it
and some common mode of the incorrect. In this number is what I have
formerly called the natural Induction of uninquiring minds, the induction
of the ancients, which proceeds _per enumerationem simplicem_: “This,
that, and the other A are B, I can not think of any A which is not B,
therefore every A is B.” As a final condemnation of this rude and slovenly
mode of generalization, I will quote Bacon’s emphatic denunciation of it;
the most important part, as I have more than once ventured to assert, of
the permanent service rendered by him to philosophy. “Inductio quæ
procedit per enumerationem simplicem, res puerilis est, et precario
concludit” (concludes only _by your leave_, or provisionally), “et
periculo exponitur ab instantiâ contradictoriâ, et plerumque secundum
pauciora quam par est, et _ex his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronunciat_.
At Inductio quæ ad inventionem et demonstrationem Scientiarum et Artium
erit utilis, Naturam separare debet, per rejectiones et exclusiones
debitas; ac deinde post negativas tot quot sufficiunt, super affirmativas
concludere.”

I have already said that the mode of Simple Enumeration is still the
common and received method of Induction in whatever relates to man and
society. Of this a very few instances, more by way of memento than of
instruction, may suffice. What, for example, is to be thought of all the
“common-sense” maxims for which the following may serve as the universal
formula, “Whatsoever has never been, will never be.” As for example:
negroes have never been as civilized as whites sometimes are, therefore it
is impossible they should be so. Women, as a class, are supposed not to
have hitherto been equal in intellect to men, therefore they are
necessarily inferior. Society can not prosper without this or the other
institution; _e.g._, in Aristotle’s time, without slavery; in later times,
without an established priesthood, without artificial distinctions of
rank, etc. One poor person in a thousand, educated, while the nine hundred
and ninety-nine remain uneducated, has usually aimed at raising himself
out of his class, therefore education makes people dissatisfied with the
condition of a laborer. Bookish men, taken from speculative pursuits and
set to work on something they know nothing about, have generally been
found or thought to do it ill; therefore philosophers are unfit for
business, etc., etc. All these are inductions by simple enumeration.
Reasons having some reference to the canons of scientific investigation
have been attempted to be given, however unsuccessfully, for some of these
propositions; but to the multitude of those who parrot them, the
_enumeratio simplex, ex __ his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronuncians_, is
the sole evidence. Their fallacy consists in this, that they are
inductions without elimination: there has been no real comparison of
instances, nor even ascertainment of the material facts in any given
instance. There is also the further error, of forgetting that such
generalizations, even if well established, could not be ultimate truths,
but must be results of laws much more elementary; and therefore, until
deduced from such, could at most be admitted as empirical laws, holding
good within the limits of space and time by which the particular
observations that suggested the generalization were bounded.

This error, of placing mere empirical laws, and laws in which there is no
direct evidence of causation, on the same footing of certainty as laws of
cause and effect, an error which is at the root of perhaps the greater
number of bad inductions, is exemplified only in its grossest form in the
kind of generalizations to which we have now referred. These, indeed, do
not possess even the degree of evidence which pertains to a
well-ascertained empirical law; but admit of refutation on the empirical
ground itself, without ascending to casual laws. A little reflection,
indeed, will show that mere negations can only form the ground of the
lowest and least valuable kind of empirical law. A phenomenon has never
been noticed; this only proves that the conditions of that phenomenon have
not yet occurred in experience, but does not prove that they may not occur
hereafter. There is a better kind of empirical law than this, namely, when
a phenomenon which is observed presents within the limits of observation a
series of gradations, in which a regularity, or something like a
mathematical law, is perceptible; from which, therefore, something may be
rationally presumed as to those terms of the series which are beyond the
limits of observation. But in negation there are no gradations, and no
series; the generalizations, therefore, which deny the possibility of any
given condition of man and society merely because it has never yet been
witnessed, can not possess this higher degree of validity even as
empirical laws. What is more, the minuter examination which that higher
order of empirical laws presupposes, being applied to the subject-matter
of these, not only does not confirm but actually refutes them. For in
reality the past history of Man and Society, instead of exhibiting them as
immovable, unchangeable, incapable of ever presenting new phenomena, shows
them, on the contrary, to be, in many most important particulars, not only
changeable, but actually undergoing a progressive change. The empirical
law, therefore, best expressive, in most cases, of the genuine result of
observation, would be, not that such and such a phenomenon will continue
unchanged, but that it will continue to change in some particular manner.

Accordingly, while almost all generalizations relating to Man and Society,
antecedent to the last fifty or sixty years, have erred in the gross way
which we have attempted to characterize, namely, by implicitly assuming
that nature and society will forever revolve in the same orbit, and
exhibit essentially the same phenomena; which is also the vulgar error of
the ostentatiously practical, the votaries of so-called common sense, in
our day, especially in Great Britain; the more thinking minds of the
present age, having applied a more minute analysis to the past records of
our race, have for the most part adopted a contrary opinion, that the
human species is in a state of necessary progression, and that from the
terms of the series which are past we may infer positively those which are
yet to come. Of this doctrine, considered as a philosophical tenet, we
shall have occasion to speak more fully in the concluding Book. If not, in
all its forms, free from error, it is at least free from the gross and
error which we previously exemplified. But, in all except the most
eminently philosophical minds, it is infected with precisely the same
_kind_ of fallacy as that is. For we must remember that even this other
and better generalization, the progressive change in the condition of the
human species, is, after all, but an empirical law; to which, too, it is
not difficult to point out exceedingly large exceptions; and even if these
could be got rid of, either by disputing the facts or by explaining and
limiting the theory, the general objection remains valid against the
supposed law, as applicable to any other than what, in our third book,
were termed Adjacent Cases. For not only is it no ultimate, but not even a
causal law. Changes do indeed take place in human affairs, but every one
of those changes depends on determinate causes; the “progressiveness of
the species” is not a cause, but a summary expression for the general
result of all the causes. So soon as, by a quite different sort of
induction, it shall be ascertained what causes have produced these
successive changes, from the beginning of history, in so far as they have
really taken place, and by what causes of a contrary tendency they have
been occasionally checked or entirely counteracted, we may then be
prepared to predict the future with reasonable foresight; we may be in
possession of the real _law_ of the future; and may be able to declare on
what circumstances the continuance of the same onward movement will
eventually depend. But this it is the error of many of the more advanced
thinkers, in the present age, to overlook; and to imagine that the
empirical law collected from a mere comparison of the condition of our
species at different past times, is a real law, is _the_ law of its
changes, not only past but also to come. The truth is, that the causes on
which the phenomena of the moral world depend, are in every age, and
almost in every country, combined in some different proportion; so that it
is scarcely to be expected that the general result of them all should
conform very closely, in its details at least, to any uniformly
progressive series. And all generalizations which affirm that mankind have
a tendency to grow better or worse, richer or poorer, more cultivated or
more barbarous, that population increases faster than subsistence, or
subsistence than population, that inequality of fortune has a tendency to
increase or to break down, and the like, propositions of considerable
value as empirical laws within certain (but generally rather narrow)
limits, are in reality true or false according to times and circumstances.

What we have said of empirical generalizations from times past to times
still to come, holds equally true of similar generalizations from present
times to times past; when persons whose acquaintance with moral and social
facts is confined to their own age, take the men and the things of that
age for the type of men and things in general, and apply without scruple
to the interpretation of the events of history, the empirical laws which
represent sufficiently for daily guidance the common phenomena of human
nature at that time and in that particular state of society. If examples
are wanted, almost every historical work, until a very recent period,
abounded in them. The same may be said of those who generalize empirically
from the people of their own country to the people of other countries, as
if human beings felt, judged, and acted everywhere in the same manner.

§ 5. In the foregoing instances, the distinction is confounded between
empirical laws, which express merely the customary order of the succession
of effects, and the laws of causation on which the effects depend. There
may, however, be incorrect generalization when this mistake is not
committed; when the investigation takes its proper direction, that of
causes, and the result erroneously obtained purports to be a really causal
law.

The most vulgar form of this fallacy is that which is commonly called
_post hoc, ergo propter hoc_, or, _cum hoc, ergo propter hoc_. As when it
was inferred that England owed her industrial pre-eminence to her
restrictions on commerce; as when the old school of financiers, and some
speculative writers, maintained that the national debt was one of the
causes of national prosperity; as when the excellence of the Church, of
the Houses of Lords and Commons, of the procedure of the law courts, etc.,
were inferred from the mere fact that the country had prospered under
them. In such cases as these, if it can be rendered probable by other
evidence that the supposed causes have some tendency to produce the effect
ascribed to them, the fact of its having been produced, though only in one
instance, is of some value as a verification by specific experience; but
in itself it goes scarcely any way at all toward establishing such a
tendency, since, admitting the effect, a hundred other antecedents could
show an equally strong title of _that_ kind to be considered as the cause.

In these examples we see bad generalization _a posteriori_, or empiricism
properly so called; causation inferred from casual conjunction, without
either due elimination, or any presumption arising from known properties
of the supposed agent. But bad generalization _a priori_ is fully as
common; which is properly called false theory; conclusions drawn, by way
of deduction, from properties of some one agent which is known or supposed
to be present, all other co-existing agents being overlooked. As the
former is the error of sheer ignorance, so the latter is especially that
of semi-instructed minds; and is mainly committed in attempting to explain
complicated phenomena by a simpler theory than their nature admits of. As
when one school of physicians sought for the universal principle of all
disease in “lentor and morbid viscidity of the blood,” and imputing most
bodily derangements to mechanical obstructions, thought to cure them by
mechanical remedies;(257) while another, the chemical school,
“acknowledged no source of disease but the presence of some hostile acid
or alkali, or some deranged condition in the chemical composition of the
fluid or solid parts,” and conceived, therefore, that “all remedies must
act by producing chemical changes in the body.” We find Tournefort busily
engaged in testing every vegetable juice, in order to discover in it some
traces of an acid or alkaline ingredient, which might confer upon it
medicinal activity. The fatal errors into which such an hypothesis was
liable to betray the practitioner, received an awful illustration in the
history of the memorable fever that raged at Leyden in the year 1699, and
which consigned two-thirds of the population of that city to an untimely
grave; an event which in a great measure depended upon the Professor
Sylvius de la Boe, who having just embraced the chemical doctrines of Van
Helmont, assigned the origin of the distemper to a prevailing acid, and
declared that its cure could alone [only] be effected by the copious
administration of absorbent and testaceous medicines.(258)

These aberrations in medical theory have their exact parallels in
politics. All the doctrines which ascribe absolute goodness to particular
forms of government, particular social arrangements, and even to
particular modes of education, without reference to the state of
civilization and the various distinguishing characters of the society for
which they are intended, are open to the same objection—that of assuming
one class of influencing circumstances to be the paramount rulers of
phenomena which depend in an equal or greater degree on many others. But
on these considerations it is the less necessary that we should now dwell,
as they will occupy our attention more largely in the concluding Book.

§ 6. The last of the modes of erroneous generalization to which I shall
advert, is that to which we may give the name of False Analogies. This
Fallacy stands distinguished from those already treated of by the
peculiarity that it does not even simulate a complete and conclusive
induction, but consists in the misapplication of an argument which is at
best only admissible as an inconclusive presumption, where real proof is
unattainable.

An argument from analogy, is an inference that what is true in a certain
case is true in a case known to be somewhat similar, but not known to be
exactly parallel, that is, to be similar in all the material
circumstances. An object has the property B: another object is not known
to have that property, but resembles the first in a property A, not known
to be connected with B; and the conclusion to which the analogy points, is
that this object has the property B also. As, for example, that the
planets are inhabited, because the earth is so. The planets resemble the
earth in describing elliptical orbits round the sun, in being attracted by
it and by one another, in being nearly spherical, revolving on their axes,
etc.; and, as we have now reason to believe from the revelations of the
spectroscope, are composed, in great part at least, of similar materials;
but it is not known that any of these properties, or all of them together,
are the conditions on which the possession of inhabitants is dependent, or
are marks of those conditions. Nevertheless, so long as we do not know
what the conditions are, they _may_ be connected by some law of nature
with those common properties; and to the extent of that possibility the
planets are more likely to be inhabited than if they did not resemble the
earth at all. This non-assignable and generally small increase of
probability, beyond what would otherwise exist, is all the evidence which
a conclusion can derive from analogy. For if we have the slightest reason
to suppose any real connection between the two properties A and B, the
argument is no longer one of analogy. If it had been ascertained (I
purposely put an absurd supposition) that there was a connection by
causation between the fact of revolving on an axis and the existence of
animated beings, or if there were any reasonable ground for even
suspecting such a connection, a probability would arise of the existence
of inhabitants in the planets, which might be of any degree of strength,
up to a complete induction; but we should then infer the fact from the
ascertained or presumed law of causation, and not from the analogy of the
earth.

The name analogy, however, is sometimes employed by extension to denote
those arguments of an inductive character but not amounting to a real
induction, which are employed to strengthen the argument drawn from a
simple resemblance. Though A, the property common to the two cases, can
not be shown to be the cause or effect of B, the analogical reasoner will
endeavor to show that there is some less close degree of connection
between them; that A is one of a set of conditions from which, when all
united, B would result; or is an occasional effect of some cause which has
been known also to produce B; and the like. Any of which things, if shown,
would render the existence of B by so much more probable, than if there
had not been even that amount of known connection between B and A.

Now an error or fallacy of analogy may occur in two ways. Sometimes it
consists in employing an argument of either of the above kinds with
correctness indeed, but overrating its probative force. This very common
aberration is sometimes supposed to be particularly incident to persons
distinguished for their imagination; but in reality it is the
characteristic intellectual vice of those whose imaginations are barren,
either from want of exercise, natural defect, or the narrowness of their
range of ideas. To such minds objects present themselves clothed in but
few properties; and as, therefore, few analogies between one object and
another occur to them, they almost invariably overrate the degree of
importance of those few: while one whose fancy takes a wider range,
perceives and remembers so many analogies tending to conflicting
conclusions, that he is much less likely to lay undue stress on any of
them. We always find that those are the greatest slaves to metaphorical
language who have but one set of metaphors.

But this is only one of the modes of error in the employment of arguments
of analogy. There is another, more properly deserving the name of fallacy;
namely, when resemblance in one point is inferred from resemblance in
another point, though there is not only no evidence to connect the two
circumstances by way of causation, but the evidence tends positively to
disconnect them. This is properly the Fallacy of False Analogies.

As a first instance, we may cite that favorite argument in defense of
absolute power, drawn from the analogy of paternal government in a family,
which government, however much in need of control, is not and can not be
controlled by the children themselves, while they remain children.
Paternal government, says the argument, works well; therefore, despotic
government in a state will work well. I waive, as not pertinent in this
place, all that could be said in qualification of the alleged excellence
of paternal government. However this might be, the argument from the
family to the state would not the less proceed on a false analogy;
implying that the beneficial working of parental government depends, in
the family, on the only point which it has in common with political
despotism, namely, irresponsibility. Whereas it depends, when real, not on
that but on two other circumstances of the case, the affection of the
parent for the children, and the superiority of the parent in wisdom and
experience; neither of which properties can be reckoned on, or are at all
likely to exist, between a political despot and his subjects; and when
either of these circumstances fails even in the family, and the influence
of the irresponsibility is allowed to work uncorrected, the result is any
thing but good government. This, therefore, is a false analogy.

Another example is the not uncommon _dictum_ that bodies politic have
youth, maturity, old age, and death, like bodies natural; that after a
certain duration of prosperity, they tend spontaneously to decay. This
also is a false analogy, because the decay of the vital powers in an
animated body can be distinctly traced to the natural progress of those
very changes of structure which, in their earlier stages, constitutes its
growth to maturity; while in the body politic the progress of those
changes can not, generally speaking, have any effect but the still further
continuance of growth: it is the stoppage of that progress, and the
commencement of retrogression, that alone would constitute decay. Bodies
politic die, but it is of disease, or violent death; they have no old age.

The following sentence from Hooker’s _Ecclesiastical Polity_ is an
instance of a false analogy from physical bodies to what are called bodies
politic. “As there could be in natural bodies no motion of any thing
unless there were some which moveth all things, and continueth immovable;
even so in politic societies there must be some unpunishable, or else no
man shall suffer punishment.” There is a double fallacy here, for not only
the analogy, but the premise from which it is drawn, is untenable. The
notion that there must be something immovable which moves all other
things, is the old scholastic error of a _primum mobile_.

The following instance I quote from Archbishop Whately’s _Rhetoric_: “It
would be admitted that a great and permanent diminution in the quantity of
some useful commodity, such as corn, or coal, or iron, throughout the
world, would be a serious and lasting loss; and again, that if the fields
and coal-mines yielded regularly double quantities, with the same labor,
we should be so much the richer; hence it might be inferred, that if the
quantity of gold and silver in the world were diminished one-half, or were
doubled, like results would follow; the utility of these metals, for the
purposes of coin, being very great. Now there are many points of
resemblance and many of difference, between the precious metals on the one
hand, and corn, coal, etc., on the other; but the important circumstance
to the supposed argument is, that the _utility_ of gold and silver (as
coin, which is far the chief) _depends on their value_, which is regulated
by their scarcity; or rather, to speak strictly, by the difficulty of
obtaining them; whereas, if corn and coal were ten times as abundant
(_i.e._, more easily obtained), a bushel of either would still be as
useful as now. But if it were twice as easy to procure gold as it is, a
sovereign would be twice as large; if only half as easy, it would be of
the size of a half-sovereign, and this (besides the trifling circumstance
of the cheapness or dearness of gold ornaments) would be all the
difference. The analogy, therefore, fails in the point essential to the
argument.”

The same author notices, after Bishop Copleston, the case of False Analogy
which consists in inferring from the similarity in many respects between
the metropolis of a country and the heart of the animal body, that the
increased size of the metropolis is a disease.

Some of the false analogies on which systems of physics were confidently
grounded in the time of the Greek philosophers, are such as we now call
fanciful, not that the resemblances are not often real, but that it is
long since any one has been inclined to draw from them the inferences
which were then drawn. Such, for instance, are the curious speculations of
the Pythagoreans on the subject of numbers. Finding that the distances of
the planets bore, or seemed to bear, to one another a proportion not
varying much from that of the divisions of the monochord, they inferred
from it the existence of an inaudible music, that of the spheres; as if
the music of a harp had depended solely on the numerical proportions, and
not on the material, nor even on the existence of any material, any
strings at all. It has been similarly imagined that certain combinations
of numbers, which were found to prevail in some natural phenomena, must
run through the whole of nature: as that there must be four elements,
because there are four possible combinations of hot and cold, wet and dry;
that there must be seven planets, because there were seven metals, and
even because there were seven days of the week. Kepler himself thought
that there could be only six planets, because there were only five regular
solids. With these we may class the reasonings, so common in the
speculations of the ancients, founded on a supposed _perfection_ in
nature; meaning by nature the customary order of events as they take place
of themselves without human interference. This also is a rude guess at an
analogy supposed to pervade all phenomena, however dissimilar. Since what
was thought to be perfection appeared to obtain in some phenomena, it was
inferred (in opposition to the plainest evidence) to obtain in all. “We
always suppose that which is better to take place in nature, if it be
possible,” says Aristotle; and the vaguest and most heterogeneous
qualities being confounded together under the notion of being _better_,
there was no limit to the wildness of the inferences. Thus, because the
heavenly bodies were “perfect,” they must move in circles and uniformly.
For “they” (the Pythagoreans) “would not allow,” says Geminus,(259) “of
any such disorder among divine and eternal things, as that they should
sometimes move quicker and sometimes slower, and sometimes stand still;
for no one would tolerate such anomaly in the movements even of a man, who
was decent and orderly. The occasions of life, however, are often reasons
for men going quicker or slower; but in the incorruptible nature of the
stars, it is not possible that any cause can be alleged of quickness or
slowness.” It is seeking an argument of analogy very far, to suppose that
the stars must observe the rules of decorum in gait and carriage
prescribed for themselves by the long-bearded philosophers satirized by
Lucian.

As late as the Copernican controversy it was urged as an argument in favor
of the true theory of the solar system, that it placed the fire, the
noblest element, in the centre of the universe. This was a remnant of the
notion that the order of nature must be perfect, and that perfection
consisted in conformity to rules of precedency in dignity, either real or
conventional. Again, reverting to numbers: certain numbers were _perfect_,
therefore those numbers must obtain in the great phenomena of nature. Six
was a perfect number, that is, equal to the sum of all its factors; an
additional reason why there must be exactly six planets. The Pythagoreans,
on the other hand, attributed perfection to the number ten; but agreed in
thinking that the perfect number must be somehow realized in the heavens;
and knowing only of nine heavenly bodies, to make up the enumeration, they
asserted “that there was an _antichthon_, or counter-earth, on the other
side of the sun, invisible to us.”(260) Even Huygens was persuaded that
when the number of the heavenly bodies had reached twelve, it could not
admit of any further increase. Creative power could not go beyond that
sacred number.

Some curious instances of false analogy are to be found in the arguments
of the Stoics to prove the equality of all crimes, and the equal
wretchedness of all who had not realized their idea of perfect virtue.
Cicero, toward the end of his Fourth Book, _De Finibus_, states some of
these as follows: “Ut, inquit, in fidibus plurimis, si nulla earum ita
contenta numeris sit, ut concentum servare possit, omnes æque incontentæ
sunt; sic peccata, quia discrepant, æque discrepant; paria sunt igitur.”
To which Cicero himself aptly answers, “æque contingit omnibus fidibus, ut
incontentæ sint; illud non continuo, ut æque incontentæ.” The Stoic
resumes: “Ut enim, inquit, gubernator æque peccat, si palearum navem
evertit, et si auri; item æque peccat qui parentem, et qui servum, injuriâ
verberat;” assuming, that because the magnitude of the interest at stake
makes no difference in the mere defect of skill, it can make none in the
moral defect: a false analogy. Again, “Quis ignorat, si plures ex alto
emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad respirandum, qui ad summam jam
aquam appropinquant, sed nihilo magis respirare posse, quam eos, qui sunt
in profundo? Nihil ergo adjuvat procedere, et progredi in virtute,
quominus miserrimus sit, antequam ad eam pervenerit, quoniam in aquâ nihil
adjuvat: et quoniam catuli, qui jam despecturi sunt, cæci æque, et ii qui
modo nati; Platonem quoque necesse est, quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam,
æque cæcum animo, ac Phalarim fuisse.” Cicero, in his own person, combats
these false analogies by other analogies tending to an opposite
conclusion. “Ista similia non sunt, Cato.... Illa sunt similia; hebes
acies est cuipiam oculorum: corpore alius languescit: hi curatione
adhibitâ levantur in dies: alter valet plus quotidie: alter videt. Hi
similes sunt omnibus, qui virtuti student; levantur vitiis, levantur
erroribus.”

§ 7. In these and all other arguments drawn from remote analogies, and
from metaphors, which are cases of analogy, it is apparent (especially
when we consider the extreme facility of raising up contrary analogies and
conflicting metaphors) that, so far from the metaphor or analogy proving
any thing, the applicability of the metaphor is the very thing to be made
out. It has to be shown that in the two cases asserted to be analogous,
the same law is really operating; that between the known resemblance and
the inferred one there is some connection by means of causation. Cicero
and Cato might have bandied opposite analogies forever; it rested with
each of them to prove by just induction, or at least to render probable,
that the case resembled the one set of analogous cases and not the other,
in the circumstances on which the disputed question really hinged.
Metaphors, for the most part, therefore, assume the proposition which they
are brought to prove: their use is, to aid the apprehension of it; to make
clearly and vividly comprehended what it is that the person who employs
the metaphor is proposing to make out; and sometimes also, by what media
he proposes to do so. For an apt metaphor, though it can not prove, often
suggests the proof.

For instance, when D’Alembert (I believe) remarked that in certain
governments only two creatures find their way to the highest places, the
eagle and the serpent, the metaphor not only conveys with great vividness
the assertion intended, but contributes toward substantiating it, by
suggesting, in a lively manner, the means by which the two opposite
characters thus typified effect their rise. When it is said that a certain
person misunderstands another because the lesser of two objects can not
comprehend the greater, the application of what is true in the literal
sense of the word _comprehend_, to its metaphorical sense, points to the
fact which is the ground and justification of the assertion, viz., that
one mind can not thoroughly understand another unless it can contain it in
itself, that is, unless it possesses all that is contained in the other.
When it is urged as an argument for education, that if the soil is left
uncultivated, weeds will spring up, the metaphor, though no proof, but a
statement of the thing to be proved, states it in terms which, by
suggesting a parallel case, put the mind upon the track of the real proof.
For, the reason why weeds grow in an uncultivated soil, is that the seeds
of worthless products exist everywhere, and can germinate and grow in
almost all circumstances, while the reverse is the case with those which
are valuable; and this being equally true of mental products, this mode of
conveying an argument, independently of its rhetorical advantages, has a
logical value; since it not only suggests the grounds of the conclusion,
but points to another case in which those grounds have been found, or at
least deemed to be, sufficient.

On the other hand, when Bacon, who is equally conspicuous in the use and
abuse of figurative illustration, says that the stream of time has brought
down to us only the least valuable part of the writings of the ancients,
as a river carries froth and straws floating on its surface, while more
weighty objects sink to the bottom; this, even if the assertion
illustrated by it were true, would be no good illustration, there being no
parity of cause. The levity by which substances float on a stream, and the
levity which is synonymous with worthlessness, have nothing in common
except the name; and (to show how little value there is in the metaphor)
we need only change the word into _buoyancy_, to turn the semblance of
argument involved in Bacon’s illustration against himself.

A metaphor, then, is not to be considered as an argument, but as an
assertion that an argument exists; that a parity subsists between the case
from which the metaphor is drawn and that to which it is applied. This
parity may exist though the two cases be apparently very remote from one
another; the only resemblance existing between them may be a resemblance
of relations, an analogy in Ferguson’s and Archbishop Whately’s sense: as
in the preceding instance, in which an illustration from agriculture was
applied to mental cultivation.

§ 8. To terminate the subject of Fallacies of Generalization, it remains
to be said, that the most fertile source of them is bad classification:
bringing together in one group, and under one name, things which have no
common properties, or none but such as are too unimportant to allow
general propositions of any considerable value to be made respecting the
class. The misleading effect is greatest, when a word which in common use
expresses some definite fact, is extended by slight links of connection to
cases in which that fact does not exist, but some other or others, only
slightly resembling it. Thus Bacon,(261) in speaking of the _Idola_ or
Fallacies arising from notions _temere et inæqualiter à rebus abstractæ_,
exemplifies them by the notion of Humidum or Wet, so familiar in the
physics of antiquity and of the Middle Ages. “Invenietur verbum istud,
Humidum, nihil aliud quam nota confusa diversarum actionum, quæ nullam
constantiam aut reductionem patiuntur. Significat enim, et quod circa
aliud corpus facile se circumfundit; et quod in se est indeterminabile,
nec consistere potest; et quod facile cedit undique; et quod facile se
dividit et dispergit; et quod facile se unit et colligit; et quod facile
fluit, et in motu ponitur; et quod alteri corpori facile adhæret, idque
madefacit; et quod facile reducitur in liquidum, sive colliquatur, cum
antea consisteret. Itaque quum ad hujus nominis prædicationem et
impositionem ventum sit; si alia accipias, flamma humida est; si alia
accipias, aer humidus non est; si alia, pulvis minutus humidus est; si
alia, vitrum humidum est: ut facile appareat, istam notionem ex aquâ
tantum, et communibus et vulgaribus liquoribus, absque ullâ debitâ
verificatione, temere abstractam esse.”

Bacon himself is not exempt from a similar accusation when inquiring into
the nature of heat: where he occasionally proceeds like one who, seeking
for the cause of hardness, after examining that quality in iron, flint,
and diamond, should expect to find that it is something which can be
traced also in hard water, a hard knot, and a hard heart.

The word κίνησις in the Greek philosophy, and the words Generation and
Corruption, both then and long afterward, denoted such a multitude of
heterogeneous phenomena, that any attempt at philosophizing in which those
words were used was almost as necessarily abortive as if the word _hard_
had been taken to denote a class including all the things mentioned above.
Κίνησις, for instance, which properly signified motion, was taken to
denote not only all motion but even all change: ἀλλοίωσις being recognized
as one of the modes of κίνησις. The effect was, to connect with every form
of ἀλλοίωσις or change, ideas drawn from motion in the proper and literal
sense, and which had no real connection with any other kind of κίνησις
than that. Aristotle and Plato labored under a continual embarrassment
from this misuse of terms. But if we proceed further in this direction we
shall encroach upon the Fallacy of Ambiguity, which belongs to a different
class, the last in order of our classification, Fallacies of Confusion.




                               Chapter VI.


Fallacies Of Ratiocination.


§ 1. We have now, in our progress through the classes of Fallacies,
arrived at those to which, in the common books of logic, the appellation
is in general exclusively appropriated; those which have their seat in the
ratiocinative or deductive part of the investigation of truth. Of these
fallacies it is the less necessary for us to insist at any length, as they
have been most satisfactorily treated in a work familiar to almost all, in
this country at least, who feel any interest in these speculations,
Archbishop Whately’s _Logic_. Against the more obvious forms of this class
of fallacies, the rules of the syllogism are a complete protection. Not
(as we have so often said) that ratiocination can not be good unless it be
in the form of a syllogism; but that, by showing it in that form, we are
sure to discover if it be bad, or at least if it contain any fallacy of
this class.

§ 2. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination, we ought perhaps to include the
errors committed in processes which have the appearance only, not the
reality, of an inference from premises; the fallacies connected with the
conversion and æquipollency of propositions. I believe errors of this
description to be far more frequently committed than is generally
supposed, or than their extreme obviousness might seem to admit of. For
example, the simple conversion of a universal affirmative proposition, All
A are B, therefore all B are A, I take to be a very common form of error:
though committed, like many other fallacies, oftener in the silence of
thought than in express words, for it can scarcely be clearly enunciated
without being detected. And so with another form of fallacy, not
substantially different from the preceding: the erroneous conversion of an
hypothetical proposition. The proper converse of an hypothetical
proposition is this: If the consequent be false, the antecedent is false;
but this, If the consequent be true, the antecedent is true, by no means
holds good, but is an error corresponding to the simple conversion of a
universal affirmative. Yet hardly any thing is more common than for
people, in their private thoughts, to draw this inference. As when the
conclusion is accepted, which it so often is, for proof of the premises.
That the premises can not be true if the conclusion is false, is the
unexceptionable foundation of the legitimate mode of reasoning called
_reductio ad absurdum_. But people continually think and express
themselves, as if they also believed that the premises can not be false if
the conclusion is true. The truth, or supposed truth, of the inferences
which follow from a doctrine, often enables it to find acceptance in spite
of gross absurdities in it. How many philosophical systems which had
scarcely any intrinsic recommendation, have been received by thoughtful
men because they were supposed to lend additional support to religion,
morality, some favorite view of politics, or some other cherished
persuasion: not merely because their wishes were thereby enlisted on its
side, but because its leading to what they deemed sound conclusions
appeared to them a strong presumption in favor of its truth: though the
presumption, when viewed in its true light, amounted only to the absence
of that particular evidence of falsehood, which would have resulted from
its leading by correct inference to something already known to be false.

Again, the very frequent error in conduct, of mistaking reverse of wrong
for right, is the practical form of a logical error with respect to the
Opposition of Propositions. It is committed for want of the habit of
distinguishing the _contrary_ of a proposition from the _contradictory_ of
it, and of attending to the logical canon, that contrary propositions,
though they can not both be true, may both be false. If the error were to
express itself in words, it would run distinctly counter to this canon. It
generally, however, does not so express itself, and to compel it to do so
is the most effectual method of detecting and exposing it.

§ 3. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination are to be ranked, in the first
place, all the cases of vicious syllogism laid down in the books. These
generally resolve themselves into having more than three terms to the
syllogism, either avowedly, or in the covert mode of an undistributed
middle term, or an _illicit process_ of one of the two extremes. It is
not, indeed, very easy fully to convict an argument of falling under any
one of these vicious cases in particular; for the reason already more than
once referred to, that the premises are seldom formally set out: if they
were, the fallacy would impose upon nobody; and while they are not, it is
almost always to a certain degree optional in what manner the suppressed
link shall be filled up. The rules of the syllogism are rules for
compelling a person to be aware of the whole of what he must undertake to
defend if he persists in maintaining his conclusion. He has it almost
always in his power to make his syllogism good by introducing a false
premise; and hence it is scarcely ever possible decidedly to affirm that
any argument involves a bad syllogism: but this detracts nothing from the
value of the syllogistic rules, since it is by them that a reasoner is
compelled distinctly to make his election what premises he is prepared to
maintain. The election made, there is generally so little difficulty in
seeing whether the conclusion follows from the premises set out, that we
might without much logical impropriety have merged this fourth class of
fallacies in the fifth, or Fallacies of Confusion.

§ 4. Perhaps, however, the commonest, and certainly the most dangerous
fallacies of this class, are those which do not lie in a single syllogism,
but slip in between one syllogism and another in a chain of argument, and
are committed by _changing the premises_. A proposition is proved, or an
acknowledged truth laid down, in the first part of an argumentation, and
in the second a further argument is founded not on the same proposition,
but on some other, resembling it sufficiently to be mistaken for it.
Instances of this fallacy will be found in almost all the argumentative
discourses of unprecise thinkers; and we need only here advert to one of
the obscurer forms of it, recognized by the school-men as the fallacy _à
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter_. This is committed when, in the
premises, a proposition is asserted with a qualification, and the
qualification lost sight of in the conclusion; or oftener, when a
limitation or condition, though not asserted, is necessary to the truth of
the proposition, but is forgotten when that proposition comes to be
employed as a premise. Many of the bad arguments in vogue belong to this
class of error. The premise is some admitted truth, some common maxim, the
reasons or evidence for which have been forgotten, or are not thought of
at the time, but if they had been thought of would have shown the
necessity of so limiting the premise that it would no longer have
supported the conclusion drawn from it.

Of this nature is the fallacy in what is called, by Adam Smith and others,
the Mercantile Theory in Political Economy. That theory sets out from the
common maxim, that whatever brings in money enriches; or that every one is
rich in proportion to the quantity of money he obtains. From this it is
concluded that the value of any branch of trade, or of the trade of the
country altogether, consists in the balance of money it brings in; that
any trade which carries more money out of the country than it draws into
it is a losing trade; that therefore money should be attracted into the
country and kept there, by prohibitions and bounties; and a train of
similar corollaries. All for want of reflecting that if the riches of an
individual are in proportion to the quantity of money he can command, it
is because that is the measure of his power of purchasing money’s worth;
and is therefore subject to the proviso that he is not debarred from
employing his money in such purchases. The premise, therefore, is only
true _secundum quid_; but the theory assumes it to be true absolutely, and
infers that increase of money is increase of riches, even when produced by
means subversive of the condition under which alone money can be riches.

A second instance is, the argument by which it used to be contended,
before the commutation of tithe, that tithes fell on the landlord, and
were a deduction from rent; because the rent of tithe-free land was always
higher than that of land of the same quality, and the same advantages of
situation, subject to tithe. Whether it be true or not that a tithe falls
on rent, a treatise on Logic is not the place to examine; but it is
certain that this is no proof of it. Whether the proposition be true or
false, tithe-free land must, by the necessity of the case, pay a higher
rent. For if tithes do not fall on rent, it must be because they fall on
the consumer; because they raise the price of agricultural produce. But if
the produce be raised in price, the farmer of tithe-free as well as the
farmer of tithed land gets the benefit. To the latter the rise is but a
compensation for the tithe he pays; to the first, who pays none, it is
clear gain, and therefore enables him, and if there be freedom of
competition, forces him, to pay so much more rent to his landlord. The
question remains, to what class of fallacies this belongs. The premise is,
that the owner of tithed land receives less rent than the owner of
tithe-free land; the conclusion is, that therefore he receives less than
he himself would receive if tithe were abolished. But the premise is only
true conditionally; the owner of tithed land receives less than what the
owner of tithe-free land is enabled to receive _when other lands are
tithed_; while the conclusion is applied to a state of circumstances in
which that condition fails, and in which, by consequence, the premise will
not be true. The fallacy, therefore, is _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_.

A third example is the opposition sometimes made to legitimate
interferences of government in the economical affairs of society, grounded
on a misapplication of the maxim, that an individual is a better judge
than the government of what is for his own pecuniary interest. This
objection was urged to Mr. Wakefield’s principle of colonization; the
concentration of the settlers, by fixing such a price on unoccupied land
as may preserve the most desirable proportion between the quantity of land
in culture and the laboring population. Against this it was argued, that
if individuals found it for their advantage to occupy extensive tracts of
land, they, being better judges of their own interest than the legislature
(which can only proceed on general rules), ought not to be restrained from
doing so. But in this argument it was forgotten that the fact of a
person’s taking a large tract of land is evidence only that it is his
interest to take as much as other people, but not that it might not be for
his interest to content himself with less, if he could be assured that
other people would do so too; an assurance which nothing but a government
regulation can give. If all other people took much, and he only a little,
he would reap none of the advantages derived from the concentration of the
population and the consequent possibility of procuring labor for hire, but
would have placed himself, without equivalent, in a situation of voluntary
inferiority. The proposition, therefore, that the quantity of land which
people will take when left to themselves is that which is most for their
interest to take, is true only _secundum quid_: it is only their interest
while they have no guarantee for the conduct of one another. But the
arrangement disregards the limitation, and takes the proposition for true
_simpliciter_.

One of the conditions oftenest dropped, when what would otherwise be a
true proposition is employed as a premise for proving others, is the
condition of _time_. It is a principle of political economy that prices,
profits, wages, etc., “always find their level;” but this is often
interpreted as if it meant that they are always, or generally, _at_ their
level, while the truth is, as Coleridge epigrammatically expresses it,
that they are always _finding_ their level, “which might be taken as a
paraphrase or ironical definition of a storm.”

Under the same head of fallacy (_à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_) might be placed all the errors which are vulgarly called
misapplications of abstract truths; that is, where a principle, true (as
the common expression is) _in the abstract_, that is, all modifying causes
being supposed absent, is reasoned on as if it were true absolutely, and
no modifying circumstance could ever by possibility exist. This very
common form of error it is not requisite that we should exemplify here, as
it will be particularly treated of hereafter in its application to the
subjects on which it is most frequent and most fatal, those of politics
and society.(262)




                               Chapter VII.


Fallacies Of Confusion.


§ 1. Under this fifth and last class it is convenient to arrange all those
fallacies in which the source of error is not so much a false estimate of
the probative force of known evidence, as an indistinct, indefinite, and
fluctuating conception of what the evidence is.

At the head of these stands that multitudinous body of fallacious
reasonings in which the source of error is the ambiguity of terms: when
something which is true if a word be used in a particular sense, is
reasoned on as if it were true in another sense. In such a case there is
not a mal-estimation of evidence, because there is not properly any
evidence to the point at all; there is evidence, but to a different point,
which from a confused apprehension of the meaning of the terms used, is
supposed to be the same. This error will naturally be oftener committed in
our ratiocinations than in our direct inductions, because in the former we
are deciphering our own or other people’s notes, while in the latter we
have the things themselves present, either to the senses or to the memory.
Except, indeed, when the induction is not from individual cases to a
generality, but from generalities to a still higher generalization; in
that case the fallacy of ambiguity may affect the inductive process as
well as the ratiocinative. It occurs in ratiocination in two ways: when
the middle term is ambiguous, or when one of the terms of the syllogism is
taken in one sense in the premises, and in another sense in the
conclusion.

Some good exemplifications of this fallacy are given by Archbishop
Whately. “One case,” says he, “which may be regarded as coming under the
head of Ambiguous Middle, is (what I believe logical writers mean by
‘_Fallacia Figuræ Dictionis_’) the fallacy built on the grammatical
structure of language, from men’s usually taking for granted that
_paronymous_ (or _conjugate_) words, _i.e._, those belonging to each
other, as the substantive, adjective, verb, etc., of the same root, have a
precisely corresponding meaning; which is by no means universally the
case. Such a fallacy could not indeed be even exhibited in strict logical
form, which would preclude even the attempt at it, since it has two middle
terms in sound as well as sense. But nothing is more common in practice
than to vary continually the terms employed, with a view to grammatical
convenience; nor is there any thing unfair in such a practice, as long as
the _meaning_ is preserved unaltered; _e.g._, ‘murder should be punished
with death; this man is a murderer, therefore he deserves to die,’ etc.
Here we proceed on the assumption (in this case just) that to commit
murder, and to be a murderer—to deserve death, and to be one who ought to
die, are, respectively, equivalent expressions; and it would frequently
prove a heavy inconvenience to be debarred this kind of liberty; but the
abuse of it gives rise to the Fallacy in question; _e.g._, _projectors_
are unfit to be trusted; this man has formed a _project_, therefore he is
unfit to be trusted: here the sophist proceeds on the hypothesis that he
who forms a _project_ must be a _projector_: whereas the bad sense that
commonly attaches to the latter word, is not at all implied in the former.
This fallacy may often be considered as lying not in the Middle, but in
one of the terms of the Conclusion; so that the conclusion drawn shall not
be, in reality, at all warranted by the premises, though it will appear to
be so, by means of the grammatical affinity of the words; _e.g._, to be
acquainted with the guilty is a _presumption_ of guilt; this man is so
acquainted, therefore we may _presume_ that he is guilty: this argument
proceeds on the supposition of an exact correspondence between _presume_
and _presumption_, which, however, does not really exist; for
‘presumption’ is commonly used to express a kind of _slight suspicion_;
whereas, ‘to presume’ amounts to actual belief. There are innumerable
instances of a non-correspondence in paronymous words, similar to that
above instanced; as between _art_ and _artful_, _design_ and _designing_,
_faith_ and _faithful_, etc.; and the more slight the variation of the
meaning, the more likely is the fallacy to be successful; for when the
words have become so widely removed in sense as ‘pity’ and ‘pitiful,’
every one would perceive such a fallacy, nor would it be employed but in
jest.(263)

“The present Fallacy is nearly allied to, or rather, perhaps, may be
regarded as a branch of, that founded on _etymology_—viz., when a term is
used, at one time in its customary, and at another in its etymological
sense. Perhaps no example of this can be found that is more extensively
and mischievously employed than in the case of the word _representative_:
assuming that its right meaning must correspond exactly with the strict
and original sense of the verb ‘represent,’ the sophist persuades the
multitude that a member of the House of Commons is bound to be guided in
all points by the opinion of his constituents; and, in short, to be merely
their _spokesman_; whereas law and custom, which in this case may be
considered as fixing the meaning of the term, require no such thing, but
enjoin the representative to act according to the best of his _own_
judgment, and on his own responsibility.”

The following are instances of great practical importance, in which
arguments are habitually founded on a verbal ambiguity.

The mercantile public are frequently led into this fallacy by the phrase
“scarcity of money.” In the language of commerce, “money” has two
meanings: _currency_, or the circulating medium; and _capital seeking
investment_, especially investment on loan. In this last sense the word is
used when the “money market” is spoken of, and when the “value of money”
is said to be high or low, the rate of interest being meant. The
consequence of this ambiguity is, that as soon as scarcity of money in the
latter of these senses begins to be felt—as soon as there is difficulty of
obtaining loans, and the rate of interest is high—it is concluded that
this must arise from causes acting upon the quantity of money in the other
and more popular sense; that the circulating medium must have diminished
in quantity, or ought to be increased. I am aware that, independently of
the double meaning of the term, there are in the facts themselves some
peculiarities, giving an apparent support to this error; but the ambiguity
of the language stands on the very threshold of the subject, and
intercepts all attempts to throw light upon it.

Another ambiguous expression which continually meets us in the political
controversies of the present time, especially in those which relate to
organic changes, is the phrase “influence of property”—which is sometimes
used for the influence of respect for superior intelligence or gratitude
for the kind offices which persons of large property have it so much in
their power to bestow; at other times for the influence of fear; fear of
the worst sort of power, which large property also gives to its possessor,
the power of doing mischief to dependents. To confound these two, is the
standing fallacy of ambiguity brought against those who seek to purify the
electoral system from corruption and intimidation. Persuasive influence,
acting through the conscience of the voter, and carrying his heart and
mind with it, is beneficial—therefore (it is pretended) coercive
influence, which compels him to forget that he is a moral agent, or to act
in opposition to his moral convictions, ought not to be placed under
restraint.

Another word which is often turned into an instrument of the fallacy of
ambiguity, is Theory. In its most proper acceptation, theory means the
completed result of philosophical induction from experience. In that
sense, there are erroneous as well as true theories, for induction may be
incorrectly performed, but theory of some sort is the necessary result of
knowing any thing of a subject, and having put one’s knowledge into the
form of general propositions for the guidance of practice. In this, the
proper sense of the word, Theory is the explanation of practice. In
another and a more vulgar sense, theory means any mere fiction of the
imagination, endeavoring to conceive how a thing may possibly have been
produced, instead of examining how it was produced. In this sense only are
theory and theorists unsafe guides; but because of this, ridicule or
discredit is attempted to be attached to theory in its proper sense, that
is, to legitimate generalization, the end and aim of all philosophy; and a
conclusion is represented as worthless, just because that has been done
which, if done correctly, constitutes the highest worth that a principle
for the guidance of practice can possess, namely, to comprehend in a few
words the real law on which a phenomenon depends, or some property or
relation which is universally true of it.

“The Church” is sometimes understood to mean the clergy alone, sometimes
the whole body of believers, or at least of communicants. The declamations
respecting the inviolability of church property are indebted for the
greater part of their apparent force to this ambiguity. The clergy, being
called the church, are supposed to be the real owners of what is called
church property; whereas they are in truth only the managing members of a
much larger body of proprietors, and enjoy on their own part a mere
usufruct, not extending beyond a life interest.

The following is a Stoical argument taken from Cicero, _De Finibus_, book
the third: “Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est. Quod autem laudabile est,
omne honestum est. Bonum igitur quod est, honestum est.” Here the
ambiguous word is _laudabile_, which in the minor premise means any thing
which mankind are accustomed, on good grounds, to admire or value; as
beauty, for instance, or good fortune: but in the major, it denotes
exclusively moral qualities. In much the same manner the Stoics endeavored
logically to justify as philosophical truths, their figurative and
rhetorical expressions of ethical sentiment: as that the virtuous man is
alone free, alone beautiful, alone a king, etc. Whoever has virtue has
Good (because it has been previously determined not to call any thing else
good); but, again, Good necessarily includes freedom, beauty, and even
kingship, all these being good things; therefore whoever has virtue has
all these.

The following is an argument of Descartes to prove, in his _a priori_
manner, the being of a God. The conception, says he, of an infinite Being
proves the real existence of such a being. For if there is not really any
such being, _I_ must have made the conception; but if I could make it, I
can also unmake it; which evidently is not true; therefore there must be,
externally to myself, an archetype, from which the conception was derived.
In this argument (which, it may be observed, would equally prove the real
existence of ghosts and of witches) the ambiguity is in the pronoun _I_,
by which, in one place, is to be understood my _will_, in another the
_laws of my nature_. If the conception, existing as it does in my mind,
had no original without, the conclusion would unquestionably follow that
_I_ made it; that is, the laws of my nature must have somehow evolved it:
but that my _will_ made it, would not follow. Now when Descartes afterward
adds that I can not unmake the conception, he means that I can not get rid
of it by an act of my will: which is true, but is not the proposition
required. I can as much unmake this conception as I can any other: no
conception which I have once had, can I ever dismiss by mere volition; but
what some of the laws of my nature have produced, other laws, or those
same laws in other circumstances, may, and often do, subsequently efface.

Analogous to this are some of the ambiguities in the free-will
controversy; which, as they will come under special consideration in the
concluding Book, I only mention _memoriæ causâ_. In that discussion, too,
the word _I_ is often shifted from one meaning to another, at one time
standing for my volitions, at another time for the actions which are the
consequences of them, or the mental dispositions from which they proceed.
The latter ambiguity is exemplified in an argument of Coleridge (in his
_Aids to Reflection_), in support of the freedom of the will. It is not
true, he says, that a man is governed by motives; “the man makes the
motive, not the motive the man;” the proof being that “what is a strong
motive to one man is no motive at all to another.” The premise is true,
but only amounts to this, that different persons have different degrees of
susceptibility to the same motive; as they have also to the same
intoxicating liquid, which, however, does not prove that they are free to
be drunk or not drunk, whatever quantity of the fluid they may drink. What
is proved is, that certain mental conditions in the person himself must
co-operate, in the production of the act, with the external inducement;
but those mental conditions also are the effect of causes; and there is
nothing in the argument to prove that they can arise without a cause—that
a spontaneous determination of the will, without any cause at all, ever
takes place, as the free-will doctrine supposes.

The double use, in the free-will controversy, of the word Necessity, which
sometimes stands only for Certainty, at other times for Compulsion;
sometimes for what _can not_ be prevented, at other times only for what we
have reason to be assured _will_ not; we shall have occasion hereafter to
pursue to some of its ulterior consequences.

A most important ambiguity, both in common and in metaphysical language,
is thus pointed out by Archbishop Whately in the Appendix to his Logic:
“_Same_ (as well as _One_, _Identical_, and other words derived from them)
is used frequently in a sense very different from its primary one, as
applicable to a _single_ object; being employed to denote great
_similarity_. When several objects are undistinguishably alike, _one
single description_ will apply equally to any of them; and thence they are
said to be all of _one and the same_ nature, appearance, etc. As, _e.g._,
when we say ‘this house is built of the _same_ stone with such another,’
we only mean that the stones are undistinguishable in their qualities; not
that the one building was pulled down, and the other constructed with the
materials. Whereas _sameness_, in the primary sense, does not even
necessarily imply similarity; for if we say of any man that he is greatly
altered since such a time, we understand, and indeed imply by the very
expression, that he is _one person_, though different in several
qualities. It is worth observing also, that Same, in the secondary sense,
admits, according to popular usage, of degrees: we speak of two things
being _nearly_ the same, but not entirely: personal identity does not
admit of degrees. Nothing, perhaps, has contributed more to the error of
Realism than inattention to this ambiguity. When several persons are said
to have _one and the same_ opinion, thought, or idea, many men,
overlooking the true simple statement of the case, which is, that they are
_all thinking alike_, look for something more abstruse and mystical, and
imagine there must be some _One Thing_, in the primary sense, though not
an individual which is present at once in the mind of each of these
persons; and thence readily sprung Plato’s theory of Ideas, each of which
was, according to him, one real, eternal object, existing entire and
complete in each of the individual objects that are known by one name.”

It is, indeed, not a matter of inference, but of authentic history, that
Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, and the Aristotelian doctrine (in this respect
similar to the Platonic) of substantial forms and second substances, grew
up in the precise way here pointed out; from the supposed necessity of
finding, in things which were said to have the _same_ nature, or the
_same_ qualities, something which was the _same_ in the very sense in
which a man is the same as himself. All the idle speculations respecting
τὸ ὄν, τὸ ἕν, τὸ ὅμοιον, and similar abstractions, so common in the
ancient and in some modern schools of thought, sprang from the same
source. The Aristotelian logicians saw, however, one case of the
ambiguity, and provided against it with their peculiar felicity in the
invention of technical language, when they distinguished things which
differed both _specie_ and _numero_, from those which differed _numero
tantum_, that is, which were exactly alike (in some particular respect at
least) but were distinct individuals. An extension of this distinction to
the two meanings of the word Same, namely, things which are the same
_specie tantum_, and a thing which is the same _numero_ as well as
_specie_, would have prevented the confusion which has been a source of so
much darkness and such an abundance of positive error in metaphysical
philosophy.

One of the most singular examples of the length to which a thinker of
eminence may be led away by an ambiguity of language, is afforded by this
very case. I refer to the famous argument by which Bishop Berkeley
flattered himself that he had forever put an end to “skepticism, atheism,
and irreligion.” It is briefly as follows: I thought of a thing yesterday;
I ceased to think of it; I think of it again to-day. I had, therefore, in
my mind yesterday an _idea_ of the object; I have also an idea of it
to-day; this idea is evidently not another, but the very same idea. Yet an
intervening time elapsed in which I had it not. Where was the idea during
this interval? It must have been somewhere; it did not cease to exist;
otherwise the idea I had yesterday could not be the _same_ idea; no more
than the man I see alive to-day can be the same whom I saw yesterday if
the man has died in the mean while. Now an idea can not be conceived to
exist anywhere except in a mind; and hence there must exist a Universal
Mind, in which all ideas have their permanent residence during the
intervals of their conscious presence in our own minds.

It is evident that Berkeley here confounded sameness _numero_ with
sameness _specie_, that is, with exact resemblance, and assumed the former
where there was only the latter; not perceiving that when we say we have
the same thought to-day which we had yesterday, we do not mean the same
individual thought, but a thought exactly similar: as we say that we have
the same illness which we had last year, meaning only the same sort of
illness.

In one remarkable instance the scientific world was divided into two
furiously hostile parties by an ambiguity of language affecting a branch
of science which, more completely than most others, enjoys the advantage
of a precise and well-defined terminology. I refer to the famous dispute
respecting the vis viva, the history of which is given at large in
Professor Playfair’s Dissertation. The question was, whether the _force_
of a moving body was proportional (its mass being given) to its velocity
simply, or to the square of its velocity: and the ambiguity was in the
word Force. “One of the effects,” says Playfair, “produced by a moving
body is proportional to the square of the velocity, while another is
proportional to the velocity simply:” from whence clearer thinkers were
subsequently led to establish a double measure of the efficiency of a
moving power, one being called _vis viva_, and the other _momentum_. About
the facts, both parties were from the first agreed: the only question was,
with which of the two effects the term _force_ should be, or could most
conveniently be, associated. But the disputants were by no means aware
that this was all; they thought that force was one thing, the production
of effects another; and the question, by which set of effects the force
which produced both the one and the other should be measured, was supposed
to be a question not of terminology, but of fact.

The ambiguity of the word Infinite is the real fallacy in the amusing
logical puzzle of Achilles and the Tortoise, a puzzle which has been too
hard for the ingenuity or patience of many philosophers, and which no less
a thinker than Sir William Hamilton considered as insoluble; as a sound
argument, though leading to a palpable falsehood. The fallacy, as Hobbes
hinted, lies in the tacit assumption that whatever is infinitely divisible
is infinite; but the following solution (to the invention of which I have
no claim) is more precise and satisfactory.

The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet
if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never overtake him. For
suppose them to be at first separated by an interval of a thousand feet:
when Achilles has run these thousand feet, the tortoise will have got on a
hundred; when Achilles has run those hundred, the tortoise will have run
ten, and so on forever: therefore Achilles may run forever without
overtaking the tortoise.

Now the “forever,” in the conclusion, means, for any length of time that
can be supposed; but in the premises, “ever” does not mean any _length_ of
time; it means any _number of subdivisions_ of time. It means that we may
divide a thousand feet by ten, and that quotient again by ten, and so on
as often as we please; that there never needs be an end to the
subdivisions of the distance, nor consequently to those of the time in
which it is performed. But an unlimited number of subdivisions may be made
of that which is itself limited. The argument proves no other infinity of
duration than may be embraced within five minutes. As long as the five
minutes are not expired, what remains of them may be divided by ten, and
again by ten, as often as we like, which is perfectly compatible with
their being only five minutes altogether. It proves, in short, that to
pass through this finite space requires a time which is infinitely
divisible, but not an infinite time; the confounding of which distinction
Hobbes had already seen to be the gist of the fallacy.

The following ambiguities of the word _right_ (in addition to the obvious
and familiar one of _a_ right and the _adjective_ right) are extracted
from a forgotten paper of my own, in a periodical:

“Speaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all
persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in another
sense, to have a right to do a thing is the opposite of having _no_ right
to do it, _i.e._, of being under a moral obligation to forbear doing it.
In this sense, to say that you have a right to do a thing, means that you
may do it without any breach of duty on your part; that other persons not
only ought not to hinder you, but have no cause to think worse of you for
doing it. This is a perfectly distinct proposition from the preceding. The
right which you have by virtue of a duty incumbent upon other persons, is
obviously quite a different thing from a right consisting in the absence
of any duty incumbent upon yourself. Yet the two things are perpetually
confounded. Thus, a man will say he has a right to publish his opinions;
which may be true in this sense, that it would be a breach of duty in any
other person to interfere and prevent the publication: but he assumes
thereupon that, in publishing his opinions, he himself violates no duty;
which may either be true or false, depending, as it does, on his having
taken due pains to satisfy himself, first, that the opinions are true, and
next, that their publication in this manner, and at this particular
juncture, will probably be beneficial to the interests of truth on the
whole.

“The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right of any kind, with a
right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.
People will say, for example, that they have a right to good government,
which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their governors to
govern them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to have admitted
their right or liberty to turn out their governors, and perhaps to punish
them, for having failed in the performance of this duty; which, far from
being the same thing, is by no means universally true, but depends on an
immense number of varying circumstances,” requiring to be conscientiously
weighed before adopting or acting on such a resolution. This last example
is (like others which have been cited) a case of fallacy within fallacy;
it involves not only the second of the two ambiguities pointed out, but
the first likewise.

One not unusual form of the Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms is known
technically as the Fallacy of Composition and Division; when the same term
is collective in the premises, distributive in the conclusion, or _vicè __
versa_; or when the middle term is collective in one premise, distributive
in the other. As if one were to say (I quote from Archbishop Whately),
“All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles: A B C is an
angle of a triangle; therefore A B C is equal to two right angles....
There is no fallacy more common, or more likely to deceive, than the one
now before us. The form in which it is most usually employed is to
establish some truth, separately, concerning _each single_ member of a
certain class, and thence to infer the same of the _whole collectively_.”
As in the argument one sometimes hears, to prove that the world could do
without great men. If Columbus (it is said) had never lived, America would
still have been discovered, at most only a few years later; if Newton had
never lived, some other person would have discovered the law of
gravitation; and so forth. Most true: these things would have been done,
but in all probability not till some one had again been found with the
qualities of Columbus or Newton. Because any one great man might have had
his place supplied by other great men, the argument concludes that all
great men could have been dispensed with. The term “great men” is
distributive in the premises and collective in the conclusion.

“Such also is the fallacy which probably operates on most adventurers in
lotteries; _e.g._, ‘the gaining of a high prize is no uncommon occurrence;
and what is no uncommon occurrence may reasonably be expected; therefore
the gaining of a high prize may reasonably be expected;’ the conclusion,
when applied to the individual (as in practice it is), must be understood
in the sense of ‘reasonably expected _by a certain individual_;’ therefore
for the major premise to be true, the middle term must be understood to
mean, ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one _particular_ person;’ whereas
for the minor (which has been placed first) to be true, you must
understand it of ‘no uncommon occurrence to _some one or other_;’ and thus
you will have the Fallacy of Composition.

“This is a Fallacy with which men are extremely apt to deceive
_themselves_; for when a multitude of particulars are presented to the
mind, many are too weak or too indolent to take a comprehensive view of
them, but confine their attention to each single point, by turns; and then
decide, infer, and act accordingly; _e.g._, the imprudent spendthrift,
finding that he is able to afford this, _or_ that, _or_ the other expense,
forgets that _all of them together_ will ruin him.” The debauchee destroys
his health by successive acts of intemperance, because no _one_ of those
acts would be of itself sufficient to do him any serious harm. A sick
person reasons with himself, “one, and another, and another, of my
symptoms do not prove that I have a fatal disease;” and practically
concludes that all taken together do not prove it.

§ 2. We have now sufficiently exemplified one of the principal Genera in
this Order of Fallacies; where, the source of error being the ambiguity of
terms, the premises are verbally what is required to support the
conclusion, but not really so. In the second great Fallacy of Confusion
they are neither verbally nor really sufficient, though, from their
multiplicity and confused arrangement, and still oftener from defect of
memory, they are not seen to be what they are. The fallacy I mean is that
of Petitio Principii, or begging the question; including the more complex
and not uncommon variety of it, which is termed Reasoning in a Circle.

Petitio Principii, as defined by Archbishop Whately, is the fallacy “in
which the premise either appears manifestly to be the same as the
conclusion, or is actually proved from the conclusion, or is such as would
naturally and properly so be proved.” By the last clause I presume is
meant, that it is not susceptible of any other proof; for otherwise, there
would be no fallacy. To deduce from a proposition propositions from which
it would itself more naturally be deduced, is often an allowable deviation
from the usual didactic order; or at most, what, by an adaptation of a
phrase familiar to mathematicians, may be called a logical
_inelegance_.(264)

The employment of a proposition to prove that on which it is itself
dependent for proof, by no means implies the degree of mental imbecility
which might at first be supposed. The difficulty of comprehending how this
fallacy could possibly be committed, disappears when we reflect that all
persons, even the instructed, hold a great number of opinions without
exactly recollecting how they came by them. Believing that they have at
some former time verified them by sufficient evidence, but having
forgotten what the evidence was, they may easily be betrayed into deducing
from them the very propositions which are alone capable of serving as
premises for their establishment. “As if,” says Archbishop Whately, “one
should attempt to prove the being of a God from the authority of Holy
Writ;” which might easily happen to one with whom both doctrines, as
fundamental tenets of his religious creed, stand on the same ground of
familiar and traditional belief.

Arguing in a circle, however, is a stronger case of the fallacy, and
implies more than the mere passive reception of a premise by one who does
not remember how it is to be proved. It implies an actual attempt to prove
two propositions reciprocally from one another; and is seldom resorted to,
at least in express terms, by any person in his own speculations, but is
committed by those who, being hard pressed by an adversary, are forced
into giving reasons for an opinion of which, when they began to argue,
they had not sufficiently considered the grounds. As in the following
example from Archbishop Whately: “Some mechanicians attempt to prove (what
they ought to lay down as a probable but doubtful hypothesis)(265) that
every particle of matter gravitates equally: ‘why?’ ‘because those bodies
which contain more particles ever gravitate more strongly, _i.e._, are
heavier:’ ‘but (it may be urged) those which are heaviest are not always
more bulky;’ ‘no, but they contain more particles, though more closely
condensed:’ ‘how do you know that?’ ‘because they are heavier:’ ‘how does
that prove it?’ ‘because all particles of matter gravitating equally, that
mass which is specifically the heavier must needs have the more of them in
the same space.’ ” It appears to me that the fallacious reasoner, in his
private thoughts, would not be likely to proceed beyond the first step. He
would acquiesce in the sufficiency of the reason first given, “bodies
which contain more particles are heavier.” It is when he finds this
questioned, and is called upon to prove it, without knowing how, that he
tries to establish his premise by supposing proved what he is attempting
to prove by it. The most effectual way, in fact, of exposing a petitio
principii, when circumstances allow of it, is by challenging the reasoner
to prove his premises; which if he attempts to do, he is necessarily
driven into arguing in a circle.

It is not uncommon, however, for thinkers, and those not of the lowest
description, to be led even in their own thoughts, not indeed into
formally proving each of two propositions from the other, but into
admitting propositions which can only be so proved. In the preceding
example the two together form a complete and consistent, though
hypothetical, explanation of the facts concerned. And the tendency to
mistake mutual coherency for truth—to trust one’s safety to a strong chain
though it has no point of support—is at the bottom of much which, when
reduced to the strict forms of argumentation, can exhibit itself no
otherwise than as reasoning in a circle. All experience bears testimony to
the enthralling effect of neat concatenation in a system of doctrines, and
the difficulty with which people admit the persuasion that any thing which
holds so well together can possibly fall.

Since every case where a conclusion which can only be proved from certain
premises is used for the proof of those premises, is a case of _petitio
principii_, that fallacy includes a very great proportion of all incorrect
reasoning. It is necessary, for completing our view of the fallacy, to
exemplify some of the disguises under which it is accustomed to mask
itself, and to escape exposure.

A proposition would not be admitted by any person in his senses as a
corollary from itself, unless it were expressed in language which made it
seem different. One of the commonest modes of so expressing it, is to
present the proposition itself in abstract terms, as a proof of the same
proposition expressed in concrete language. This is a very frequent mode,
not only of pretended proof, but of pretended explanation; and is parodied
when Molière (_Le Malade Imaginaire_) makes one of his absurd physicians
say,


      Mihi a docto doctore,
      Demandatur causam et rationem quare
    Opium facit dormire.
      A quoi respondeo,
      Quia est in eo
      Virtus dormitiva,
    Cujus est natura
      Sensus assoupire.


The words Nature and Essence are grand instruments of this mode of begging
the question, as in the well-known argument of the scholastic theologians,
that the mind thinks always, because the _essence_ of the mind is to
think. Locke had to point out, that if by essence is here meant some
property which must manifest itself by actual exercise at all times, the
premise is a direct assumption of the conclusion; while if it only means
that to think is the distinctive property of a mind, there is no
connection between the premise and the conclusion, since it is not
necessary that a distinctive property should be perpetually in action.

The following is one of the modes in which these abstract terms, Nature
and Essence, are used as instruments of this fallacy. Some particular
properties of a thing are selected, more or less arbitrarily, to be termed
its nature or essence; and when this has been done, these properties are
supposed to be invested with a kind of indefeasibleness; to have become
paramount to all the other properties of the thing, and incapable of being
prevailed over or counteracted by them. As when Aristotle, in a passage
already cited, “decides that there is no void on such arguments as this:
in a void there could be no difference of up and down; for as in nothing
there are no differences, so there are none in a privation or negation;
but a void is merely a privation or negation of matter; therefore, in a
void, bodies could not move up and down, which it is in their _nature_ to
do.”(266) In other words, it is in the _nature_ of bodies to move up and
down, _ergo_ any physical fact which supposes them not so to move, can not
be authentic. This mode of reasoning, by which a bad generalization is
made to overrule all facts which contradict it, is Petitio Principii in
one of its most palpable forms.

None of the modes of assuming what should be proved are in more frequent
use than what are termed by Bentham “question-begging appellatives;” names
which beg the question under the disguise of stating it. The most potent
of these are such as have a laudatory or vituperative character. For
instance, in politics, the word Innovation. The dictionary meaning of this
term being merely “a change to something new,” it is difficult for the
defenders even of the most salutary improvement to deny that it is an
innovation; yet the word having acquired in common usage a vituperative
connotation in addition to its dictionary meaning, the admission is always
construed as a large concession to the disadvantage of the thing proposed.

The following passage from the argument in refutation of the Epicureans,
in the second book of Cicero, “De Finibus,” affords a fine example of this
sort of fallacy: “Et quidem illud ipsum non nimium probo (et tantum
patior) philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. An potest cupiditas
finiri? tollenda est, atque extrahenda radicitus. Quis est enim, in quo
sit cupiditas, quin recte cupidus dici possit? Ergo et avarus erit, sed
finite: adulter, verum habebit modum: et luxuriosus eodem modo. Qualis
ista philosophia est, quæ non interitum afferat pravitatis, sed sit
contenta mediocritate vitiorum?” The question was, whether certain
desires, when kept within bounds, are vices or not; and the argument
decides the point by applying to them a word (_cupiditas_) which _implies_
vice. It is shown, however, in the remarks which follow, that Cicero did
not intend this as a serious argument, but as a criticism on what he
deemed an inappropriate expression. “Rem ipsam prorsus probo: elegantiam
desidero. Appellet hæc _desideria naturæ_; cupiditatis nomen servet alio,”
etc. But many persons, both ancient and modern, have employed this, or
something equivalent to it, as a real and conclusive argument. We may
remark that the passage respecting _cupiditas_ and _cupidus_ is also an
example of another fallacy already noticed, that of Paronymous Terms.

Many more of the arguments of the ancient moralists, and especially of the
Stoics, fall within the definition of Petitio Principii. In the “De
Finibus,” for example, which I continue to quote as being probably the
best extant exemplification at once of the doctrines and the methods of
the schools of philosophy existing at that time; of what value as
arguments are such pleas as those of Cato in the third book: That if
virtue were not happiness, it could not be a thing to _boast_ of: That if
death or pain were evils, it would be impossible not to fear them, and it
could not, therefore, be laudable to despise them, etc. In one way of
viewing these arguments, they may be regarded as appeals to the authority
of the general sentiment of mankind which had stamped its approval upon
certain actions and characters by the phrases referred to; but that such
could have been the meaning intended is very unlikely, considering the
contempt of the ancient philosophers for vulgar opinion. In any other
sense they are clear cases of Petitio Principii, since the word laudable,
and the idea of boasting, imply principles of conduct; and practical
maxims can only be proved from speculative truths, namely, from the
properties of the subject-matter, and can not, therefore, be employed to
prove those properties. As well might it be argued that a government is
good because we ought to support it, or that there is a God because it is
our duty to pray to him.

It is assumed by all the disputants in the “De Finibus” as the foundation
of the inquiry into the _summum bonum_, that “sapiens semper beatus est.”
Not simply that wisdom gives the best chance of happiness, or that wisdom
consists in knowing what happiness is, and by what things it is promoted;
these propositions would not have been enough for them; but that the sage
always is, and must of necessity be, happy. The idea that wisdom could be
consistent with unhappiness, was always rejected as inadmissible: the
reason assigned by one of the interlocutors, near the beginning of the
third book, being, that if the wise could be unhappy, there was little use
in pursuing wisdom. But by unhappiness they did not mean pain or
suffering; to that it was granted that the wisest person was liable in
common with others: he was happy, because in possessing wisdom he had the
most valuable of all possessions, the most to be sought and prized of all
things, and to possess the most valuable thing was to be the most happy.
By laying it down, therefore, at the commencement of the inquiry, that the
sage must be happy, the disputed question respecting the _summum bonum_
was in fact begged; with the further assumption, that pain and suffering,
so far as they can co-exist with wisdom, are not unhappiness, and are no
evil.

The following are additional instances of Petitio Principii, under more or
less of disguise.

Plato, in the _Sophistes_, attempts to prove that things may exist which
are incorporeal, by the argument that justice and wisdom are incorporeal,
and justice and wisdom must be something. Here, if by _something_ be
meant, as Plato did in fact mean, a thing capable of existing in and by
itself, and not as a quality of some other thing, he begs the question in
asserting that justice and wisdom must be something; if he means any thing
else, his conclusion is not proved. This fallacy might also be classed
under ambiguous middleterm; _something_, in the one premise, meaning some
substance, in the other merely some object of thought, whether substance
or attribute.

It was formerly an argument employed in proof of what is now no longer a
popular doctrine, the infinite divisibility of matter, that every portion
of matter however small, must at least have an upper and an under surface.
Those who used this argument did not see that it assumed the very point in
dispute, the impossibility of arriving at a minimum of thickness; for if
there be a minimum, its upper and under surface will of course be one; it
will be itself a surface, and no more. The argument owes its very
considerable plausibility to this, that the premise does actually seem
more obvious than the conclusion, though really identical with it. As
expressed in the premise, the proposition appeals directly and in concrete
language to the incapacity of the human imagination for conceiving a
minimum. Viewed in this light, it becomes a case of the _a priori_ fallacy
or natural prejudice, that whatever can not be conceived can not exist.
Every fallacy of Confusion (it is almost unnecessary to repeat) will, if
cleared up, become a fallacy of some other sort; and it will be found of
deductive or ratiocinative fallacies generally, that when they mislead,
there is mostly, as in this case, a fallacy of some other description
lurking under them, by virtue of which chiefly it is that the verbal
juggle, which is the outside or body of this kind of fallacy, passes
undetected.

Euler’s Algebra, a book otherwise of great merit, but full, to
overflowing, of logical errors in respect to the foundation of the
science, contains the following argument to prove that _minus_ multiplied
by _minus_ gives _plus_, a doctrine the opprobrium of all mere
mathematicians, and which Euler had not a glimpse of the true method of
proving. He says _minus_ multiplied by _minus_ can not give _minus_; for
_minus_ multiplied by _plus_ gives _minus_, and _minus_ multiplied by
_minus_ can not give the same product as _minus_ multiplied by _plus_. Now
one is obliged to ask, why minus multiplied by minus must give any product
at all? and if it does, why its product can not be the same as that of
minus multiplied by plus? for this would seem, at the first glance, not
more absurd than that minus by minus should give the same as plus by plus,
the proposition which Euler prefers to it. The premise requires proof, as
much as the conclusion; nor can it be proved, except by that more
comprehensive view of the nature of multiplication, and of algebraic
processes in general, which would also supply a far better proof of the
mysterious doctrine which Euler is here endeavoring to demonstrate.

A striking instance of reasoning in a circle is that of some ethical
writers, who first take for their standard of moral truth what, being the
general, they deem to be the natural or instinctive sentiments and
perceptions of mankind, and then explain away the numerous instances of
divergence from their assumed standard, by representing them as cases in
which the perceptions are unhealthy. Some particular mode of conduct or
feeling is affirmed to be _unnatural_; why? because it is abhorrent to the
universal and natural sentiments of mankind. Finding no such sentiment in
yourself, you question the fact; and the answer is (if your antagonist is
polite), that you are an exception, a peculiar case. But neither (say you)
do I find in the people of some other country, or of some former age, any
such feeling of abhorrence; “ay, but their feelings were sophisticated and
unhealthy.”

One of the most notable specimens of reasoning in a circle is the doctrine
of Hobbes, Rousseau, and others, which rests the obligations by which
human beings are bound as members of society, on a supposed social
compact. I waive the consideration of the fictitious nature of the compact
itself; but when Hobbes, through the whole Leviathan, elaborately deduces
the obligation of obeying the sovereign, not from the necessity or utility
of doing so, but from a promise supposed to have been made by our
ancestors, on renouncing savage life and agreeing to establish political
society, it is impossible not to retort by the question, Why are we bound
to keep a promise made for us by others? or why bound to keep a promise at
all? No satisfactory ground can be assigned for the obligation, except the
mischievous consequences of the absence of faith and mutual confidence
among mankind. We are, therefore, brought round to the interests of
society, as the ultimate ground of the obligation of a promise; and yet
those interests are not admitted to be a sufficient justification for the
existence of government and law. Without a promise it is thought that we
should not be bound to that which is implied in all modes of living in
society, namely, to yield a general obedience to the laws therein
established; and so necessary is the promise deemed, that if none has
actually been made, some additional safety is supposed to be given to the
foundations of society by feigning one.

§ 3. Two principal subdivisions of the class of Fallacies of Confusion
having been disposed of; there remains a third, in which the confusion is
not, as in the Fallacy of Ambiguity, in misconceiving the import of the
premises, nor, as in Petitio Principii, in forgetting what the premises
are, but in mistaking the conclusion which is to be proved. This is the
fallacy of Ignoratio Elenchi, in the widest sense of the phrase; also
called by Archbishop Whately the Fallacy of Irrelevant Conclusion. His
examples and remarks are highly worthy of citation.

“Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion, substituted
for the one of which proof is required; sometimes the particular for the
universal; sometimes a proposition with different terms; and various are
the contrivances employed to effect and to conceal this substitution, and
to make the conclusion which the sophist has drawn, answer practically the
same purpose as the one he ought to have established. We say, ‘practically
the same purpose,’ because it will very often happen that some _emotion_
will be excited, some sentiment impressed on the mind (by a dexterous
employment of this fallacy), such as shall bring men into the
_disposition_ requisite for your purpose; though they may not have
assented to, or even stated distinctly in their own minds, the
_proposition_ which it was your business to establish. Thus if a sophist
has to defend one who has been guilty of some _serious_ offense, which he
wishes to extenuate, though he is unable distinctly to prove that it is
not such, yet if he can succeed in _making the audience laugh_ at some
casual matter, he has gained practically the same point. So also if any
one has pointed out the extenuating circumstances in some particular case
of offense, so as to show that it differs widely from the generality of
the same class, the sophist, if he finds himself unable to disprove these
circumstances, may do away the force of them, by simply _referring the
action to that very class_, which no one can deny that it belongs to, and
the very name of which will excite a feeling of disgust sufficient to
counteract the extenuation; _e.g._, let it be a case of peculation, and
that many _mitigating_ circumstances have been brought forward which can
not be denied; the sophistical opponent will reply, ‘Well, but after all,
the man is a _rogue_, and there is an end of it;’ now in reality this was
(by hypothesis) never the question; and the mere assertion of what was
never denied _ought_ not, in fairness, to be regarded as decisive; but,
practically, the odiousness of the word, arising in great measure from the
association of those very circumstances which belong to most of the class,
but which we have supposed to be _absent_ in _this particular_ instance,
excites precisely that feeling of disgust which, in effect, destroys the
force of the defense. In like manner we may refer to this head all cases
of improper appeal to the passions, and every thing else which is
mentioned by Aristotle as extraneous to the matter in hand (ἔξω τοῦ
πράγματος).”

Again, “instead of proving that ‘this prisoner has committed an atrocious
fraud,’ you prove that the fraud he is accused of is atrocious; instead of
proving (as in the well-known tale of Cyrus and the two coats) that the
taller boy had a right to force the other boy to exchange coats with him,
you prove that the exchange would have been advantageous to both; instead
of proving that the poor ought to be relieved in this way rather than in
that, you prove that the poor ought to be relieved; instead of proving
that the irrational agent—whether a brute or a madman—can never be
deterred from any act by apprehension of punishment (as, for instance, a
dog from sheep-biting, by fear of being beaten), you prove that the
beating of one dog does not operate as an _example_ to _other_ dogs, etc.

“It is evident that Ignoratio Elenchi may be employed as well for the
apparent refutation of your opponent’s proposition, as for the apparent
establishment of your own; for it is substantially the same thing, to
prove what was not denied or to disprove what was not asserted. The latter
practice is not less common, and it is more offensive, because it
frequently amounts to a personal affront, in attributing to a person
opinions, etc., which he perhaps holds in abhorrence. Thus, when in a
discussion one party vindicates, on the ground of general expediency, a
particular instance of resistance to government in a case of intolerable
oppression, the opponent may gravely maintain, ‘that we ought not to do
evil that good may come;’ a proposition which of course had never been
denied, the point in dispute being, ‘whether resistance in this particular
case _were_ doing evil or not.’ Or again, by way of disproving the
assertion of the right of private judgment in religion, one may hear a
grave argument to prove that ‘it is impossible every one can be _right in
his judgment_.’ ”

The works of controversial writers are seldom free from this fallacy. The
attempts, for instance, to disprove the population doctrines of Malthus,
have been mostly cases of _ignoratio elenchi_. Malthus has been supposed
to be refuted if it could be shown that in some countries or ages
population has been nearly stationary; as if he had asserted that
population always increases in a given ratio, or had not expressly
declared that it increases only in so far as it is not restrained by
prudence, or kept down by poverty and disease. Or, perhaps, a collection
of facts is produced to prove that in some one country the people are
better off with a dense population than they are in another country with a
thin one; or that the people have become more numerous and better off at
the same time. As if the assertion were that a dense population could not
possibly be well off; as if it were not part of the very doctrine, and
essential to it, that where there is a more abundant production there may
be a greater population without any increase of poverty, or even with a
diminution of it.

The favorite argument against Berkeley’s theory of the non-existence of
matter, and the most popularly effective, next to a “grin”(267)—an
argument, moreover, which is not confined to “coxcombs,” nor to men like
Samuel Johnson, whose greatly overrated ability certainly did not lie in
the direction of metaphysical speculation, but is the stock argument of
the Scotch school of metaphysicians—is a palpable Ignoratio Elenchi. The
argument is perhaps as frequently expressed by gesture as by words, and
one of its commonest forms consists in knocking a stick against the
ground. This short and easy confutation overlooks the fact, that in
denying matter, Berkeley did not deny any thing to which our senses bear
witness, and therefore can not be answered by any appeal to them. His
skepticism related to the supposed substratum, or hidden cause of the
appearances perceived by our senses; the evidence of which, whatever may
be thought of its conclusiveness, is certainly not the evidence of sense.
And it will always remain a signal proof of the want of metaphysical
profundity of Reid, Stewart, and, I am sorry to add, of Brown, that they
should have persisted in asserting that Berkeley, if he believed his own
doctrine, was bound to walk into the kennel, or run his head against a
post. As if persons who do not recognize an occult cause of their
sensations could not possibly believe that a fixed order subsists among
the sensations themselves. Such a want of comprehension of the distinction
between a thing and its sensible manifestation, or, in metaphysical
language, between the noumenon and the phenomenon, would be impossible to
even the dullest disciple of Kant or Coleridge.

It would be easy to add a greater number of examples of this fallacy, as
well as of the others which I have attempted to characterize. But a more
copious exemplification does not seem to be necessary; and the intelligent
reader will have little difficulty in adding to the catalogue from his own
reading and experience. We shall, therefore, here close our exposition of
the general principles of logic, and proceed to the supplementary inquiry
which is necessary to complete our design.





                                 Book VI.


ON THE LOGIC OF THE MORAL SCIENCES.


    “Si l’homme peut prédire, avec une assurance presque entière, les
    phénomènes dont il connaît les lois; si lors même qu’elles lui
    sont inconnues, il peut, d’après l’expérience, prévoir avec une
    grande probabilité les événements de l’avenir; pourquoi
    regarderait-on comme une entreprise chimérique, celle de tracer
    avec quelque vraisemblance le tableau des destinées futures de
    l’espèce humaine, d’après les résultats de son histoire? Le seul
    fondement de croyance dans les sciences naturelles, est cette
    idée, que les lois générales, connues ou ignorées, qui règlent les
    phénomènes de l’univers, sont nécessaires et constantes; et par
    quelle raison ce principe serait-il moins vrai pour le
    développement des facultés intellectuelles et morales de l’homme,
    que pour les autres opérations de la nature? Enfin, puisque des
    opinions formées d’après l’expérience ... sont la seule règle de
    la conduite des hommes les plus sages, pourquoi interdirait-on au
    philosophe d’appuyer ses conjectures sur cette même base, pourvu
    qu’il ne leur attribue pas une certitude supérieure à celle qui
    peut naître du nombre, de la constance, de l’exactitude des
    observations?”—CONDORCET, _Esquisse d’un Tableau Historique des
    Progrès de l’Esprit Humain_.




                                Chapter I.


Introductory Remarks.


§ 1. Principles of Evidence and Theories of Method are not to be
constructed _a priori_. The laws of our rational faculty, like those of
every other natural agency, are only learned by seeing the agent at work.
The earlier achievements of science were made without the conscious
observance of any Scientific Method; and we should never have known by
what process truth is to be ascertained, if we had not previously
ascertained many truths. But it was only the easier problems which could
be thus resolved: natural sagacity, when it tried its strength against the
more difficult ones, either failed altogether, or, if it succeeded here
and there in obtaining a solution, had no sure means of convincing others
that its solution was correct. In scientific investigation, as in all
other works of human skill, the way of obtaining the end is seen as it
were instinctively by superior minds in some comparatively simple case,
and is then, by judicious generalization, adapted to the variety of
complex cases. We learn to do a thing in difficult circumstances, by
attending to the manner in which we have spontaneously done the same thing
in easier ones.

This truth is exemplified by the history of the various branches of
knowledge which have successively, in the ascending order of their
complication, assumed the character of sciences; and will doubtless
receive fresh confirmation from those of which the final scientific
constitution is yet to come, and which are still abandoned to the
uncertainties of vague and popular discussion. Although several other
sciences have emerged from this state at a comparatively recent date, none
now remain in it except those which relate to man himself, the most
complex and most difficult subject of study on which the human mind can be
engaged.

Concerning the physical nature of man, as an organized being—though there
is still much uncertainty and much controversy, which can only be
terminated by the general acknowledgment and employment of stricter rules
of induction than are commonly recognized—there is, however, a
considerable body of truths which all who have attended to the subject
consider to be fully established; nor is there now any radical
imperfection in the method observed in the department of science by its
most distinguished modern teachers. But the laws of Mind, and, in even a
greater degree, those of Society, are so far from having attained a
similar state of even partial recognition, that it is still a controversy
whether they are capable of becoming subjects of science in the strict
sense of the term: and among those who are agreed on this point, there
reigns the most irreconcilable diversity on almost every other. Here,
therefore, if anywhere, the principles laid down in the preceding Books
may be expected to be useful.

If on matters so much the most important with which human intellect can
occupy itself a more general agreement is ever to exist among thinkers; if
what has been pronounced “the proper study of mankind” is not destined to
remain the only subject which Philosophy can not succeed in rescuing from
Empiricism; the same process through which the laws of many simpler
phenomena have by general acknowledgment been placed beyond dispute, must
be consciously and deliberately applied to those more difficult inquiries.
If there are some subjects on which the results obtained have finally
received the unanimous assent of all who have attended to the proof, and
others on which mankind have not yet been equally successful; on which the
most sagacious minds have occupied themselves from the earliest date, and
have never succeeded in establishing any considerable body of truths, so
as to be beyond denial or doubt; it is by generalizing the methods
successfully followed in the former inquiries, and adapting them to the
latter, that we may hope to remove this blot on the face of science. The
remaining chapters are an endeavor to facilitate this most desirable
object.

§ 2. In attempting this, I am not unmindful how little can be done toward
it in a mere treatise on Logic, or how vague and unsatisfactory all
precepts of Method must necessarily appear when not practically
exemplified in the establishment of a body of doctrine. Doubtless, the
most effectual mode of showing how the sciences of Ethics and Politics may
be constructed would be to construct them: a task which, it needs scarcely
be said, I am not about to undertake. But even if there were no other
examples, the memorable one of Bacon would be sufficient to demonstrate,
that it is sometimes both possible and useful to point out the way, though
without being one’s self prepared to adventure far into it. And if more
were to be attempted, this at least is not a proper place for the attempt.

In substance, whatever can be done in a work like this for the Logic of
the Moral Sciences, has been or ought to have been accomplished in the
five preceding Books; to which the present can be only a kind of
supplement or appendix, since the methods of investigation applicable to
moral and social science must have been already described, if I have
succeeded in enumerating and characterizing those of science in general.
It remains, however, to examine which of those methods are more especially
suited to the various branches of moral inquiry; under what peculiar
facilities or difficulties they are there employed; how far the
unsatisfactory state of those inquiries is owing to a wrong choice of
methods, how far to want of skill in the application of right ones; and
what degree of ultimate success may be attained or hoped for by a better
choice or more careful employment of logical processes appropriate to the
case. In other words, whether moral sciences exist, or can exist; to what
degree of perfection they are susceptible of being carried; and by what
selection or adaptation of the methods brought to view in the previous
part of this work that degree of perfection is attainable.

At the threshold of this inquiry we are met by an objection, which, if not
removed, would be fatal to the attempt to treat human conduct as a subject
of science. Are the actions of human beings, like all other natural
events, subject to invariable laws? Does that constancy of causation,
which is the foundation of every scientific theory of successive
phenomena, really obtain among them? This is often denied; and for the
sake of systematic completeness, if not from any very urgent practical
necessity, the question should receive a deliberate answer in this place.
We shall devote to the subject a chapter apart.




                               Chapter II.


Of Liberty And Necessity.


§ 1. The question, whether the law of causality applies in the same strict
sense to human actions as to other phenomena, is the celebrated
controversy concerning the freedom of the will; which, from at least as
far back as the time of Pelagius, has divided both the philosophical and
the religious world. The affirmative opinion is commonly called the
doctrine of Necessity, as asserting human volitions and actions to be
necessary and inevitable. The negative maintains that the will is not
determined, like other phenomena, by antecedents, but determines itself;
that our volitions are not, properly speaking, the effects of causes, or
at least have no causes which they uniformly and implicitly obey.

I have already made it sufficiently apparent that the former of these
opinions is that which I consider the true one; but the misleading terms
in which it is often expressed, and the indistinct manner in which it is
usually apprehended, have both obstructed its reception, and perverted its
influence when received. The metaphysical theory of free-will, as held by
philosophers (for the practical feeling of it, common in a greater or less
degree to all mankind, is in no way inconsistent with the contrary
theory), was invented because the supposed alternative of admitting human
actions to be _necessary_ was deemed inconsistent with every one’s
instinctive consciousness, as well as humiliating to the pride and even
degrading to the moral nature of man. Nor do I deny that the doctrine, as
sometimes held, is open to these imputations; for the misapprehension in
which I shall be able to show that they originate, unfortunately is not
confined to the opponents of the doctrine, but is participated in by many,
perhaps we might say by most, of its supporters.

§ 2. Correctly conceived, the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity is
simply this: that, given the motives which are present to an individual’s
mind, and given likewise the character and disposition of the individual,
the manner in which he will act might be unerringly inferred; that if we
knew the person thoroughly, and knew all the inducements which are acting
upon him, we could foretell his conduct with as much certainty as we can
predict any physical event. This proposition I take to be a mere
interpretation of universal experience, a statement in words of what every
one is internally convinced of. No one who believed that he knew
thoroughly the circumstances of any case, and the characters of the
different persons concerned, would hesitate to foretell how all of them
would act. Whatever degree of doubt he may in fact feel, arises from the
uncertainty whether he really knows the circumstances, or the character of
some one or other of the persons, with the degree of accuracy required;
but by no means from thinking that if he did know these things, there
could be any uncertainty what the conduct would be. Nor does this full
assurance conflict in the smallest degree with what is called our feeling
of freedom. We do not feel ourselves the less free, because those to whom
we are intimately known are well assured how we shall will to act in a
particular case. We often, on the contrary, regard the doubt what our
conduct will be, as a mark of ignorance of our character, and sometimes
even resent it as an imputation. The religious metaphysicians who have
asserted the freedom of the will, have always maintained it to be
consistent with divine foreknowledge of our actions: and if with divine,
then with any other foreknowledge. We may be free, and yet another may
have reason to be perfectly certain what use we shall make of our freedom.
It is not, therefore, the doctrine that our volitions and actions are
invariable consequents of our antecedent states of mind, that is either
contradicted by our consciousness, or felt to be degrading.

But the doctrine of causation, when considered as obtaining between our
volitions and their antecedents, is almost universally conceived as
involving more than this. Many do not believe, and very few practically
feel, that there is nothing in causation but invariable, certain, and
unconditional sequence. There are few to whom mere constancy of succession
appears a sufficiently stringent bond of union for so peculiar a relation
as that of cause and effect. Even if the reason repudiates, the
imagination retains, the feeling of some more intimate connection, of some
peculiar tie, or mysterious constraint exercised by the antecedent over
the consequent. Now this it is which, considered as applying to the human
will, conflicts with our consciousness, and revolts our feelings. We are
certain that, in the case of our volitions, there is not this mysterious
constraint. We know that we are not compelled, as by a magical spell, to
obey any particular motive. We feel, that if we wished to prove that we
have the power of resisting the motive, we could do so (that wish being,
it needs scarcely be observed, a _new antecedent_); and it would be
humiliating to our pride, and (what is of more importance) paralyzing to
our desire of excellence, if we thought otherwise. But neither is any such
mysterious compulsion now supposed, by the best philosophical authorities,
to be exercised by any other cause over its effect. Those who think that
causes draw their effects after them by a mystical tie, are right in
believing that the relation between volitions and their antecedents is of
another nature. But they should go farther, and admit that this is also
true of all other effects and their antecedents. If such a tie is
considered to be involved in the word Necessity, the doctrine is not true
of human actions; but neither is it then true of inanimate objects. It
would be more correct to say that matter is not bound by necessity, than
that mind is so.

That the free-will metaphysicians, being mostly of the school which
rejects Hume’s and Brown’s analysis of Cause and Effect, should miss their
way for want of the light which that analysis affords, can not surprise
us. The wonder is, that the necessitarians, who usually admit that
philosophical theory, should in practice equally lose sight of it. The
very same misconception of the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity,
which prevents the opposite party from recognizing its truth, I believe to
exist more or less obscurely in the minds of most necessitarians, however
they may in words disavow it. I am much mistaken if they habitually feel
that the necessity which they recognize in actions is but uniformity of
order, and capability of being predicted. They have a feeling as if there
were at bottom a stronger tie between the volitions and their causes; as
if, when they asserted that the will is governed by the balance of
motives, they meant something more cogent than if they had only said, that
whoever knew the motives, and our habitual susceptibilities to them, could
predict how we should will to act. They commit, in opposition to their own
scientific system, the very same mistake which their adversaries commit in
obedience to theirs; and in consequence do really in some instances suffer
those depressing consequences which their opponents erroneously impute to
the doctrine itself.

§ 3. I am inclined to think that this error is almost wholly an effect of
the associations with a word, and that it would be prevented, by
forbearing to employ, for the expression of the simple fact of causation,
so extremely inappropriate a term as Necessity. That word, in its other
acceptations, involves much more than mere uniformity of sequence: it
implies irresistibleness. Applied to the will, it only means that, the
given cause will be followed by the effect, subject to all possibilities
of counteraction by other causes; but in common use it stands for the
operation of those causes exclusively which are supposed too powerful to
be counteracted at all. When we say that all human actions take place of
necessity, we only mean that they will certainly happen if nothing
prevents; when we say that dying of want, to those who can not get food,
is a necessity, we mean that it will certainly happen whatever may be done
to prevent it. The application of the same term to the agencies on which
human actions depend, as is used to express those agencies of nature which
are really uncontrollable, can not fail, when habitual, to create a
feeling of uncontrollableness in the former also. This, however, is a mere
illusion. There are physical sequences which we call necessary, as death
for want of food or air; there are others which, though as much cases of
causation as the former, are not said to be necessary, as death from
poison, which an antidote, or the use of the stomach-pump, will sometimes
avert. It is apt to be forgotten by people’s feelings, even if remembered
by their understandings, that human actions are in this last predicament:
they are never (except in some cases of mania) ruled by any one motive
with such absolute sway that there is no room for the influence of any
other. The causes, therefore, on which action depends, are never
uncontrollable; and any given effect is only necessary provided that the
causes tending to produce it are not controlled. That whatever happens,
could not have happened otherwise, unless something had taken place which
was capable of preventing it, no one surely needs hesitate to admit. But
to call this by the name Necessity is to use the term in a sense so
different from its primitive and familiar meaning, from that which it
bears in the common occasions of life, as to amount almost to a play upon
words. The associations derived from the ordinary sense of the term will
adhere to it in spite of all we can do; and though the doctrine of
Necessity, as stated by most who hold it, is very remote from fatalism, it
is probable that most necessitarians are fatalists, more or less, in their
feelings.

A fatalist believes, or half believes (for nobody is a consistent
fatalist), not only that whatever is about to happen will be the
infallible result of the causes which produce it (which is the true
necessitarian doctrine), but moreover that there is no use in struggling
against it; that it will happen, however we may strive to prevent it. Now,
a necessitarian, believing that our actions follow from our characters,
and that our characters follow from our organization, our education, and
our circumstances, is apt to be, with more or less of consciousness on his
part, a fatalist as to his own actions, and to believe that his nature is
such, or that his education and circumstances have so moulded his
character, that nothing can now prevent him from feeling and acting in a
particular way, or at least that no effort of his own can hinder it. In
the words of the sect which in our own day has most perseveringly
inculcated and most perversely misunderstood this great doctrine, his
character is formed _for_ him, and not _by_ him; therefore his wishing
that it had been formed differently is of no use; he has no power to alter
it. But this is a grand error. He has, to a certain extent, a power to
alter his character. Its being, in the ultimate resort, formed for him, is
not inconsistent with its being, in part, formed _by_ him as one of the
intermediate agents. His character is formed by his circumstances
(including among these his particular organization); but his own desire to
mould it in a particular way, is one of those circumstances, and by no
means one of the least influential. We can not, indeed, directly will to
be different from what we are. But neither did those who are supposed to
have formed our characters directly will that we should be what we are.
Their will had no direct power except over their own actions. They made us
what they did make us, by willing, not the end, but the requisite means;
and we, when our habits are not too inveterate, can, by similarly willing
the requisite means, make ourselves different. If they could place us
under the influence of certain circumstances, we, in like manner, can
place ourselves under the influence of other circumstances. We are exactly
as capable of making our own character, _if we will_, as others are of
making it for us.

Yes (answers the Owenite), but these words, “if we will,” surrender the
whole point: since the will to alter our own character is given us, not by
any efforts of ours, but by circumstances which we can not help, it comes
to us either from external causes, or not at all. Most true: if the
Owenite stops here, he is in a position from which nothing can expel him.
Our character is formed by us as well as for us; but the wish which
induces us to attempt to form it is formed for us; and how? Not, in
general, by our organization, nor wholly by our education, but by our
experience; experience of the painful consequences of the character we
previously had; or by some strong feeling of admiration or aspiration,
accidentally aroused. But to think that we have no power of altering our
character, and to think that we shall not use our power unless we desire
to use it, are very different things, and have a very different effect on
the mind. A person who does not wish to alter his character, can not be
the person who is supposed to feel discouraged or paralyzed by thinking
himself unable to do it. The depressing effect of the fatalist doctrine
can only be felt where there _is_ a wish to do what that doctrine
represents as impossible. It is of no consequence what we think forms our
character, when we have no desire of our own about forming it; but it is
of great consequence that we should not be prevented from forming such a
desire by thinking the attainment impracticable, and that if we have the
desire, we should know that the work is not so irrevocably done as to be
incapable of being altered.

And indeed, if we examine closely, we shall find that this feeling, of our
being able to modify our own character _if we wish_, is itself the feeling
of moral freedom which we are conscious of. A person feels morally free
who feels that his habits or his temptations are not his masters, but he
theirs; who, even in yielding to them, knows that he could resist; that
were he desirous of altogether throwing them off, there would not be
required for that purpose a stronger desire than he knows himself to be
capable of feeling. It is of course necessary, to render our consciousness
of freedom complete, that we should have succeeded in making our character
all we have hitherto attempted to make it; for if we have wished and not
attained, we have, to that extent, not power over our own character; we
are not free. Or at least, we must feel that our wish, if not strong
enough to alter our character, is strong enough to conquer our character
when the two are brought into conflict in any particular case of conduct.
And hence it is said with truth, that none but a person of confirmed
virtue is completely free.

The application of so improper a term as Necessity to the doctrine of
cause and effect in the matter of human character, seems to me one of the
most signal instances in philosophy of the abuse of terms, and its
practical consequences one of the most striking examples of the power of
language over our associations. The subject will never be generally
understood until that objectionable term is dropped. The free-will
doctrine, by keeping in view precisely that portion of the truth which the
word Necessity puts out of sight, namely the power of the mind to
co-operate in the formation of its own character, has given to its
adherents a practical feeling much nearer to the truth than has generally
(I believe) existed in the minds of necessitarians. The latter may have
had a stronger sense of the importance of what human beings can do to
shape the characters of one another; but the free-will doctrine has, I
believe, fostered in its supporters a much stronger spirit of
self-culture.

§ 4. There is still one fact which requires to be noticed (in addition to
the existence of a power of self-formation) before the doctrine of the
causation of human actions can be freed from the confusion and
misapprehensions which surround it in many minds. When the will is said to
be determined by motives, a motive does not mean always, or solely, the
anticipation of a pleasure or of a pain. I shall not here inquire whether
it be true that, in the commencement, all our voluntary actions are mere
means consciously employed to obtain some pleasure or avoid some pain. It
is at least certain that we gradually, through the influence of
association, come to desire the means without thinking of the end; the
action itself becomes an object of desire, and is performed without
reference to any motive beyond itself. Thus far, it may still be objected
that, the action having through association become pleasurable, we are, as
much as before, moved to act by the anticipation of a pleasure, namely,
the pleasure of the action itself. But granting this, the matter does not
end here. As we proceed in the formation of habits, and become accustomed
to will a particular act or a particular course of conduct because it is
pleasurable, we at last continue to will it without any reference to its
being pleasurable. Although, from some change in us or in our
circumstances, we have ceased to find any pleasure in the action, or
perhaps to anticipate any pleasure as the consequence of it, we still
continue to desire the action, and consequently to do it. In this manner
it is that habits of hurtful excess continue to be practiced although they
have ceased to be pleasurable; and in this manner also it is that the
habit of willing to persevere in the course which he has chosen, does not
desert the moral hero, even when the reward, however real, which he
doubtless receives from the consciousness of well-doing, is any thing but
an equivalent for the sufferings he undergoes, or the wishes which he may
have to renounce.

A habit of willing is commonly called a purpose; and among the causes of
our volitions, and of the actions which flow from them, must be reckoned
not only likings and aversions, but also purposes. It is only when our
purposes have become independent of the feelings of pain or pleasure from
which they originally took their rise, that we are said to have a
confirmed character. “A character,” says Novalis, “is a completely
fashioned will:” and the will, once so fashioned, may be steady and
constant, when the passive susceptibilities of pleasure and pain are
greatly weakened or materially changed.

With the corrections and explanations now given, the doctrine of the
causation of our volitions by motives, and of motives by the desirable
objects offered to us, combined with our particular susceptibilities of
desire, may be considered, I hope, as sufficiently established for the
purposes of this treatise.(268)




                               Chapter III.


That There Is, Or May Be, A Science Of Human Nature.


§ 1. It is a common notion, or at least it is implied in many common modes
of speech, that the thoughts, feelings, and actions of sentient beings are
not a subject of science, in the same strict sense in which this is true
of the objects of outward nature. This notion seems to involve some
confusion of ideas, which it is necessary to begin by clearing up.

Any facts are fitted, in themselves, to be a subject of science which
follow one another according to constant laws, although those laws may not
have been discovered, nor even be discoverable by our existing resources.
Take, for instance, the most familiar class of meteorological phenomena,
those of rain and sunshine. Scientific inquiry has not yet succeeded in
ascertaining the order of antecedence and consequence among these
phenomena, so as to be able, at least in our regions of the earth, to
predict them with certainty, or even with any high degree of probability.
Yet no one doubts that the phenomena depend on laws, and that these must
be derivative laws resulting from known ultimate laws, those of heat,
electricity, vaporization, and elastic fluids. Nor can it be doubted that
if we were acquainted with all the antecedent circumstances, we could,
even from those more general laws, predict (saving difficulties of
calculation) the state of the weather at any future time. Meteorology,
therefore, not only has in itself every natural requisite for being, but
actually is, a science; though, from the difficulty of observing the facts
on which the phenomena depend (a difficulty inherent in the peculiar
nature of those phenomena), the science is extremely imperfect; and were
it perfect, might probably be of little avail in practice, since the data
requisite for applying its principles to particular instances would rarely
be procurable.

A case may be conceived, of an intermediate character, between the
perfection of science and this its extreme imperfection. It may happen
that the greater causes, those on which the principal part of the
phenomena depends, are within the reach of observation and measurement; so
that if no other causes intervened, a complete explanation could be given
not only of the phenomena in general, but of all the variations and
modifications which it admits of. But inasmuch as other, perhaps many
other causes, separately insignificant in their effects, co-operate or
conflict in many or in all cases with those greater causes, the effect,
accordingly, presents more or less of aberration from what would be
produced by the greater causes alone. Now if these minor causes are not so
constantly accessible, or not accessible at all, to accurate observation,
the principal mass of the effect may still, as before, be accounted for,
and even predicted; but there will be variations and modifications which
we shall not be competent to explain thoroughly, and our predictions will
not be fulfilled accurately, but only approximately.

It is thus, for example, with the theory of the tides. No one doubts that
Tidology (as Dr. Whewell proposes to call it) is really a science. As much
of the phenomena as depends on the attraction of the sun and moon is
completely understood, and may, in any, even unknown, part of the earth’s
surface, be foretold with certainty; and the far greater part of the
phenomena depends on those causes. But circumstances of a local or casual
nature, such as the configuration of the bottom of the ocean, the degree
of confinement from shores, the direction of the wind, etc., influence, in
many or in all places, the height and time of the tide; and a portion of
these circumstances being either not accurately knowable, not precisely
measurable, or not capable of being certainly foreseen, the tide in known
places commonly varies from the calculated result of general principles by
some difference that we can not explain, and in unknown ones may vary from
it by a difference that we are not able to foresee or conjecture.
Nevertheless, not only is it certain that these variations depend on
causes, and follow their causes by laws of unerring uniformity; not only,
therefore, is tidology a science, like meteorology, but it is, what
hitherto at least meteorology is not, a science largely available in
practice. General laws may be laid down respecting the tides, predictions
may be founded on those laws, and the result will in the main, though
often not with complete accuracy, correspond to the predictions.

And this is what is or ought to be meant by those who speak of sciences
which are not _exact_ sciences. Astronomy was once a science, without
being an exact science. It could not become exact until not only the
general course of the planetary motions, but the perturbations also, were
accounted for, and referred to their causes. It has become an exact
science, because its phenomena have been brought under laws comprehending
the whole of the causes by which the phenomena are influenced, whether in
a great or only in a trifling degree, whether in all or only in some
cases, and assigning to each of those causes the share of effect which
really belongs to it. But in the theory of the tides the only laws as yet
accurately ascertained are those of the causes which affect the phenomenon
in all cases, and in a considerable degree; while others which affect it
in some cases only, or, if in all, only in a slight degree, have not been
sufficiently ascertained and studied to enable us to lay down their laws;
still less to deduce the completed law of the phenomenon, by compounding
the effects of the greater with those of the minor causes. Tidology,
therefore, is not yet an exact science; not from any inherent incapacity
of being so, but from the difficulty of ascertaining with complete
precision the real derivative uniformities. By combining, however, the
exact laws of the greater causes, and of such of the minor ones as are
sufficiently known, with such empirical laws or such approximate
generalizations respecting the miscellaneous variations as can be obtained
by specific observation, we can lay down general propositions which will
be true in the main, and on which, with allowance for the degree of their
probable inaccuracy, we may safely ground our expectations and our
conduct.

§ 2. The science of human nature is of this description. It falls far
short of the standard of exactness now realized in Astronomy; but there is
no reason that it should not be as much a science as Tidology is, or as
Astronomy was when its calculations had only mastered the main phenomena,
but not the perturbations.

The phenomena with which this science is conversant being the thoughts,
feelings, and actions of human beings, it would have attained the ideal
perfection of a science if it enabled us to foretell how an individual
would think, feel, or act throughout life, with the same certainty with
which astronomy enables us to predict the places and the occultations of
the heavenly bodies. It needs scarcely be stated that nothing approaching
to this can be done. The actions of individuals could not be predicted
with scientific accuracy, were it only because we can not foresee the
whole of the circumstances in which those individuals will be placed. But
further, even in any given combination of (present) circumstances, no
assertion, which is both precise and universally true, can be made
respecting the manner in which human beings will think, feel, or act. This
is not, however, because every person’s modes of thinking, feeling, and
acting do not depend on causes; nor can we doubt that if, in the case of
any individual, our data could be complete, we even now know enough of the
ultimate laws by which mental phenomena are determined, to enable us in
many cases to predict, with tolerable certainty, what, in the greater
number of supposable combinations of circumstances, his conduct or
sentiments would be. But the impressions and actions of human beings are
not solely the result of their present circumstances, but the joint result
of those circumstances and of the characters of the individuals; and the
agencies which determine human character are so numerous and diversified
(nothing which has happened to the person throughout life being without
its portion of influence), that in the aggregate they are never in any two
cases exactly similar. Hence, even if our science of human nature were
theoretically perfect, that is, if we could calculate any character as we
can calculate the orbit of any planet, _from given data_; still, as the
data are never all given, nor ever precisely alike in different cases, we
could neither make positive predictions, nor lay down universal
propositions.

Inasmuch, however, as many of those effects which it is of most importance
to render amenable to human foresight and control are determined, like the
tides, in an incomparably greater degree by general causes, than by all
partial causes taken together; depending in the main on those
circumstances and qualities which are common to all mankind, or at least
to large bodies of them, and only in a small degree on the idiosyncrasies
of organization or the peculiar history of individuals; it is evidently
possible with regard to all such effects, to make predictions which will
_almost_ always be verified, and general propositions which are almost
always true. And whenever it is sufficient to know how the great majority
of the human race, or of some nation or class of persons, will think,
feel, and act, these propositions are equivalent to universal ones. For
the purposes of political and social science this _is_ sufficient. As we
formerly remarked,(269) an approximate generalization is, in social
inquiries, for most practical purposes equivalent to an exact one; that
which is only probable when asserted of individual human beings
indiscriminately selected, being certain when affirmed of the character
and collective conduct of masses.

It is no disparagement, therefore, to the science of Human Nature, that
those of its general propositions which descend sufficiently into detail
to serve as a foundation for predicting phenomena in the concrete, are for
the most part only approximately true. But in order to give a genuinely
scientific character to the study, it is indispensable that these
approximate generalizations, which in themselves would amount only to the
lowest kind of empirical laws, should be connected deductively with the
laws of nature from which they result; should be resolved into the
properties of the causes on which the phenomena depend. In other words,
the science of Human Nature may be said to exist in proportion as the
approximate truths, which compose a practical knowledge of mankind, can be
exhibited as corollaries from the universal laws of human nature on which
they rest; whereby the proper limits of those approximate truths would be
shown, and we should be enabled to deduce others for any new state of
circumstances, in anticipation of specific experience.

The proposition now stated is the text on which the two succeeding
chapters will furnish the comment.




                               Chapter IV.


Of The Laws Of Mind.


§ 1. What the Mind is, as well as what Matter is, or any other question
respecting Things in themselves, as distinguished from their sensible
manifestations, it would be foreign to the purposes of this treatise to
consider. Here, as throughout our inquiry, we shall keep clear of all
speculations respecting the mind’s own nature, and shall understand by the
laws of mind those of mental Phenomena; of the various feelings or states
of consciousness of sentient beings. These, according to the
classification we have uniformly followed, consist of Thoughts, Emotions,
Volitions, and Sensations; the last being as truly states of Mind as the
three former. It is usual, indeed, to speak of sensations as states of
body, not of mind. But this is the common confusion, of giving one and the
same name to a phenomenon and to the approximate cause or conditions of
the phenomenon. The immediate antecedent of a sensation is a state of
body, but the sensation itself is a state of mind. If the word Mind means
any thing, it means that which feels. Whatever opinion we hold respecting
the fundamental identity or diversity of matter and mind, in any case the
distinction between mental and physical facts, between the internal and
the external world, will always remain, as a matter of classification; and
in that classification, sensations, like all other feelings, must be
ranked as mental phenomena. The mechanism of their production, both in the
body itself and in what is called outward nature, is all that can with any
propriety be classed as physical.

The phenomena of mind, then, are the various feelings of our nature, both
those improperly called physical and those peculiarly designated as
mental; and by the laws of mind, I mean the laws according to which those
feelings generate one another.

§ 2. All states of mind are immediately caused either by other states of
mind, or by states of body. When a state of mind is produced by a state of
mind, I call the law concerned in the case a law of Mind. When a state of
mind is produced directly by a state of body, the law is a law of Body,
and belongs to physical science.

With regard to those states of mind which are called sensations, all are
agreed that these have for their immediate antecedents, states of body.
Every sensation has for its proximate cause some affection of the portion
of our frame called the nervous system, whether this affection originates
in the action of some external object, or in some pathological condition
of the nervous organization itself. The laws of this portion of our
nature—the varieties of our sensations, and the physical conditions on
which they proximately depend—manifestly belong to the province of
Physiology.

Whether the remainder of our mental states are similarly dependent on
physical conditions, is one of the _vexatæ questiones_ in the science of
human nature. It is still disputed whether our thoughts, emotions, and
volitions are generated through the intervention of material mechanism;
whether we have organs of thought and of emotion, in the same sense in
which we have organs of sensation. Many eminent physiologists hold the
affirmative. These contend that a thought (for example) is as much the
result of nervous agency, as a sensation; that some particular state of
our nervous system, in particular of that central portion of it called the
brain, invariably precedes, and is presupposed by, every state of our
consciousness. According to this theory, one state of mind is never really
produced by another: all are produced by states of body. When one thought
seems to call up another by association, it is not really a thought which
recalls a thought; the association did not exist between the two thoughts,
but between the two states of the brain or nerves which preceded the
thoughts: one of those states recalls the other, each being attended in
its passage by the particular state of consciousness which is consequent
on it. On this theory the uniformities of succession among states of mind
would be mere derivative uniformities, resulting from the laws of
succession of the bodily states which cause them. There would be no
original mental laws, no Laws of Mind in the sense in which I use the
term, at all; and mental science would be a mere branch, though the
highest and most recondite branch, of the science of physiology. M. Comte,
accordingly, claims the scientific cognizance of moral and intellectual
phenomena exclusively for physiologists; and not only denies to
Psychology, or Mental Philosophy properly so called, the character of a
science, but places it, in the chimerical nature of its objects and
pretensions, almost on a par with astrology.

But, after all has been said which can be said, it remains incontestable
that there exist uniformities of succession among states of mind, and that
these can be ascertained by observation and experiment. Further, that
every mental state has a nervous state for its immediate antecedent and
proximate cause, though extremely probable, can not hitherto be said to be
proved, in the conclusive manner in which this can be proved of
sensations; and even were it certain, yet every one must admit that we are
wholly ignorant of the characteristics of these nervous states; we know
not, and at present have no means of knowing, in what respect one of them
differs from another; and our only mode of studying their successions or
co-existences must be by observing the successions and co-existences of
the mental states, of which they are supposed to be the generators or
causes. The successions, therefore, which obtain among mental phenomena,
do not admit of being deduced from the physiological laws of our nervous
organization; and all real knowledge of them must continue, for a long
time at least, if not always, to be sought in the direct study, by
observation and experiment, of the mental successions themselves. Since,
therefore, the order of our mental phenomena must be studied in those
phenomena, and not inferred from the laws of any phenomena more general,
there is a distinct and separate Science of Mind.

The relations, indeed, of that science to the science of physiology must
never be overlooked or undervalued. It must by no means be forgotten that
the laws of mind may be derivative laws resulting from laws of animal
life, and that their truth, therefore, may ultimately depend on physical
conditions; and the influence of physiological states or physiological
changes in altering or counteracting the mental successions, is one of the
most important departments of psychological study. But, on the other hand,
to reject the resource of psychological analysis, and construct the theory
of the mind solely on such data as physiology at present affords, seems to
me as great an error in principle, and an even more serious one in
practice. Imperfect as is the science of mind, I do not scruple to affirm
that it is in a considerably more advanced state than the portion of
physiology which corresponds to it; and to discard the former for the
latter appears, to me an infringement of the true canons of inductive
philosophy, which must produce, and which does produce, erroneous
conclusions in some very important departments of the science of human
nature.

§ 3. The subject, then, of Psychology is the uniformities of succession,
the laws, whether ultimate or derivative, according to which one mental
state succeeds another; is caused by, or at least, is caused to follow,
another. Of these laws some are general, others more special. The
following are examples of the most general laws:

First. Whenever any state of consciousness has once been excited in us, no
matter by what cause, an inferior degree of the same state of
consciousness, a state of consciousness resembling the former, but
inferior in intensity, is capable of being reproduced in us, without the
presence of any such cause as excited it at first. Thus, if we have once
seen or touched an object, we can afterward think of the object though it
be absent from our sight or from our touch. If we have been joyful or
grieved at some event, we can think of or remember our past joy or grief,
though no new event of a happy or painful nature has taken place. When a
poet has put together a mental picture of an imaginary object, a Castle of
Indolence, a Una, or a Hamlet, he can afterward think of the ideal object
he has created, without any fresh act of intellectual combination. This
law is expressed by saying, in the language of Hume, that every mental
_impression_ has its _idea_.

Secondly. These ideas, or secondary mental states, are excited by our
impressions, or by other ideas, according to certain laws which are called
Laws of Association. Of these laws the first is, that similar ideas tend
to excite one another. The second is, that when two impressions have been
frequently experienced (or even thought of) either simultaneously or in
immediate succession, then whenever one of these impressions, or the idea
of it, recurs, it tends to excite the idea of the other. The third law is,
that greater intensity in either or both of the impressions is equivalent,
in rendering them excitable by one another, to a greater frequency of
conjunction. These are the laws of ideas, on which I shall not enlarge in
this place, but refer the reader to works professedly psychological, in
particular to Mr. James Mill’s _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human
Mind_, where the principal laws of association, along with many of their
applications, are copiously exemplified, and with a masterly hand.(270)

These simple or elementary Laws of Mind have been ascertained by the
ordinary methods of experimental inquiry; nor could they have been
ascertained in any other manner. But a certain number of elementary laws
having thus been obtained, it is a fair subject of scientific inquiry how
far those laws can be made to go in explaining the actual phenomena. It is
obvious that complex laws of thought and feeling not only may, but must,
be generated from these simple laws. And it is to be remarked, that the
case is not always one of Composition of Causes: the effect of concurring
causes is not always precisely the sum of the effects of those causes when
separate, nor even always an effect of the same kind with them. Reverting
to the distinction which occupies so prominent a place in the theory of
induction, the laws of the phenomena of mind are sometimes analogous to
mechanical, but sometimes also to chemical laws. When many impressions or
ideas are operating in the mind together, there sometimes takes place a
process of a similar kind to chemical combination. When impressions have
been so often experienced in conjunction, that each of them calls up
readily and instantaneously the ideas of the whole group, those ideas
sometimes melt and coalesce into one another, and appear not several
ideas, but one; in the same manner as, when the seven prismatic colors are
presented to the eye in rapid succession, the sensation produced is that
of white. But as in this last case it is correct to say that the seven
colors when they rapidly follow one another _generate_ white, but not that
they actually _are_ white; so it appears to me that the Complex Idea,
formed by the blending together of several simpler ones, should, when it
really appears simple (that is, when the separate elements are not
consciously distinguishable in it), be said to _result from_, or _be
generated by_, the simple ideas, not to _consist_ of them. Our idea of an
orange really _consists_ of the simple ideas of a certain color, a certain
form, a certain taste and smell, etc., because we can, by interrogating
our consciousness, perceive all these elements in the idea. But we can not
perceive, in so apparently simple a feeling as our perception of the shape
of an object by the eye, all that multitude of ideas derived from other
senses, without which it is well ascertained that no such visual
perception would ever have had existence; nor, in our idea of Extension,
can we discover those elementary ideas of resistance, derived from our
muscular frame, in which it has been conclusively shown that the idea
originates. These, therefore, are cases of mental chemistry; in which it
is proper to say that the simple ideas generate, rather than that they
compose, the complex ones.

With respect to all the other constituents of the mind, its beliefs, its
abstruser conceptions, its sentiments, emotions, and volitions, there are
some (among whom are Hartley and the author of the _Analysis_) who think
that the whole of these are generated from simple ideas of sensation, by a
chemistry similar to that which we have just exemplified. These
philosophers have made out a great part of their case, but I am not
satisfied that they have established the whole of it. They have shown that
there is such a thing as mental chemistry; that the heterogeneous nature
of a feeling A, considered in relation to B and C, is no conclusive
argument against its being generated from B and C. Having proved this,
they proceed to show, that where A is found, B and C were, or may have
been present, and why, therefore, they ask, should not A have been
generated from B and C? But even if this evidence were carried to the
highest degree of completeness which it admits of; if it were shown (which
hitherto it has not, in all cases, been) that certain groups of associated
ideas not only might have been, but actually were, present whenever the
more recondite mental feeling was experienced; this would amount only to
the Method of Agreement, and could not prove causation until confirmed by
the more conclusive evidence of the Method of Difference. If the question
be whether Belief is a mere case of close association of ideas, it would
be necessary to examine experimentally if it be true that any ideas
whatever, provided they are associated with the required degree of
closeness, give rise to belief. If the inquiry be into the origin of moral
feelings, the feeling for example of moral reprobation, it is necessary to
compare all the varieties of actions or states of mind which are ever
morally disapproved, and see whether in all these cases it can be shown,
or reasonably surmised, that the action or state of mind had become
connected by association, in the disapproving mind, with some particular
class of hateful or disgusting ideas; and the method employed is, thus
far, that of Agreement. But this is not enough. Supposing this proved, we
must try further by the Method of Difference, whether this particular kind
of hateful or disgusting ideas, when it becomes associated with an action
previously indifferent, will render that action a subject of moral
disapproval. If this question can be answered in the affirmative, it is
shown to be a law of the human mind, that an association of that
particular description is the generating cause of moral reprobation. That
all this is the case has been rendered extremely probable, but the
experiments have not been tried with the degree of precision necessary for
a complete and absolutely conclusive induction.(271)

It is further to be remembered, that even if all which this theory of
mental phenomena contends for could be proved, we should not be the more
enabled to resolve the laws of the more complex feelings into those of the
simpler ones. The generation of one class of mental phenomena from
another, whenever it can be made out, is a highly interesting fact in
psychological chemistry; but it no more supersedes the necessity of an
experimental study of the generated phenomenon, than a knowledge of the
properties of oxygen and sulphur enables us to deduce those of sulphuric
acid without specific observation and experiment. Whatever, therefore, may
be the final issue of the attempt to account for the origin of our
judgments, our desires, or our volitions, from simpler mental phenomena,
it is not the less imperative to ascertain the sequences of the complex
phenomena themselves, by special study in conformity to the canons of
Induction. Thus, in respect to Belief, psychologists will always have to
inquire what beliefs we have by direct consciousness, and according to
what laws one belief produces another; what are the laws in virtue of
which one thing is recognized by the mind, either rightly or erroneously,
as evidence of another thing. In regard to Desire, they will have to
examine what objects we desire naturally, and by what causes we are made
to desire things originally indifferent, or even disagreeable to us; and
so forth. It may be remarked that the general laws of association prevail
among these more intricate states of mind, in the same manner as among the
simpler ones. A desire, an emotion, an idea of the higher order of
abstraction, even our judgments and volitions, when they have become
habitual, are called up by association, according to precisely the same
laws as our simple ideas.

§ 4. In the course of these inquiries, it will be natural and necessary to
examine how far the production of one state of mind by another is
influenced by any assignable state of body. The commonest observation
shows that different minds are susceptible in very different degrees to
the action of the same psychological causes. The idea, for example, of a
given desirable object will excite in different minds very different
degrees of intensity of desire. The same subject of meditation, presented
to different minds, will excite in them very unequal degrees of
intellectual action. These differences of mental susceptibility in
different individuals may be, first, original and ultimate facts; or,
secondly, they may be consequences of the previous mental history of those
individuals; or, thirdly and lastly, they may depend on varieties of
physical organization. That the previous mental history of the individuals
must have some share in producing or in modifying the whole of their
mental character, is an inevitable consequence of the laws of mind; but
that differences of bodily structure also co-operate, is the opinion of
all physiologists, confirmed by common experience. It is to be regretted
that hitherto this experience, being accepted in the gross, without due
analysis, has been made the groundwork of empirical generalizations most
detrimental to the progress of real knowledge.

It is certain that the natural differences which really exist in the
mental predispositions or susceptibilities of different persons are often
not unconnected with diversities in their organic constitution. But it
does not therefore follow that these organic differences must in all cases
influence the mental phenomena directly and immediately. They often affect
them through the medium of their psychological causes. For example, the
idea of some particular pleasure may excite in different persons, even
independently of habit or education, very different strengths of desire,
and this may be the effect of their different degrees or kinds of nervous
susceptibility; but these organic differences, we must remember, will
render the pleasurable sensation itself more intense in one of these
persons than in the other; so that the idea of the pleasure will also be
an intenser feeling, and will, by the operation of mere mental laws,
excite an intenser desire, without its being necessary to suppose that the
desire itself is directly influenced by the physical peculiarity. As in
this, so in many cases, such differences in the kind or in the intensity
of the physical sensations as must necessarily result from differences of
bodily organization, will of themselves account for many differences not
only in the degree, but even in the kind, of the other mental phenomena.
So true is this, that even different _qualities_ of mind, different types
of mental character, will naturally be produced by mere differences of
intensity in the sensations generally; as is well pointed out in the able
essay on Dr. Priestley, by Mr. Martineau, mentioned in a former chapter:

“The sensations which form the elements of all knowledge are received
either simultaneously or successively: when several are received
simultaneously, as the smell, the taste, the color, the form, etc., of a
fruit, their association together constitutes our idea of an _object_;
when received successively, their association makes up the idea of an
_event_. Any thing, then, which favors the associations of synchronous
ideas will tend to produce a knowledge of objects, a perception of
qualities; while any thing which favors association in the successive
order, will tend to produce a knowledge of events, of the order of
occurrences, and of the connection of cause and effect: in other words, in
the one case a perceptive mind, with a discriminate feeling of the
pleasurable and painful properties of things, a sense of the grand and the
beautiful will be the result: in the other, a mind attentive to the
movements and phenomena, a ratiocinative and philosophic intellect. Now it
is an acknowledged principle, that all sensations experienced during the
presence of any vivid impression become strongly associated with it, and
with each other; and does it not follow that the synchronous feelings of a
sensitive constitution (_i.e._, the one which has vivid impressions) will
be more intimately blended than in a differently formed mind? If this
suggestion has any foundation in truth, it leads to an inference not
unimportant; that where nature has endowed an individual with great
original susceptibility, he will probably be distinguished by fondness for
natural history, a relish for the beautiful and great, and moral
enthusiasm; where there is but a mediocrity of sensibility, a love of
science, of abstract truth, with a deficiency of taste and of fervor, is
likely to be the result.”

We see from this example, that when the general laws of mind are more
accurately known, and, above all, more skillfully applied to the detailed
explanation of mental peculiarities, they will account for many more of
those peculiarities than is ordinarily supposed. Unfortunately the
reaction of the last and present generation against the philosophy of the
eighteenth century has produced a very general neglect of this great
department of analytical inquiry; of which, consequently, the recent
progress has been by no means proportional to its early promise. The
majority of those who speculate on human nature prefer dogmatically to
assume that the mental differences which they perceive, or think they
perceive, among human beings, are ultimate facts, incapable of being
either explained or altered, rather than take the trouble of fitting
themselves, by the requisite processes of thought, for referring those
mental differences to the outward causes by which they are for the most
part produced, and on the removal of which they would cease to exist. The
German school of metaphysical speculation, which has not yet lost its
temporary predominance in European thought, has had this among many other
injurious influences; and at the opposite extreme of the psychological
scale, no writer, either of early or of recent date, is chargeable in a
higher degree with this aberration from the true scientific spirit, than
M. Comte.

It is certain that, in human beings at least, differences in education and
in outward circumstances are capable of affording an adequate explanation
of by far the greatest portion of character; and that the remainder may be
in great part accounted for by physical differences in the sensations
produced in different individuals by the same external or internal cause.
There are, however, some mental facts which do not seem to admit of these
modes of explanation. Such, to take the strongest case, are the various
instincts of animals, and the portion of human nature which corresponds to
those instincts. No mode has been suggested, even by way of hypothesis, in
which these can receive any satisfactory, or even plausible, explanation
from psychological causes alone; and there is great reason to think that
they have as positive, and even as direct and immediate, a connection with
physical conditions of the brain and nerves as any of our mere sensations
have. A supposition which (it is perhaps not superfluous to add) in no way
conflicts with the indisputable fact that these instincts may be modified
to any extent, or entirely conquered, in human beings, and to no
inconsiderable extent even in some of the domesticated animals, by other
mental influences, and by education.

Whether organic causes exercise a direct influence over any other classes
of mental phenomena, is hitherto as far from being ascertained as is the
precise nature of the organic conditions even in the case of instincts.
The physiology, however, of the brain and nervous system is in a state of
such rapid advance, and is continually bringing forth such new and
interesting results, that if there be really a connection between mental
peculiarities and any varieties cognizable by our senses in the structure
of the cerebral and nervous apparatus, the nature of that connection is
now in a fair way of being found out. The latest discoveries in cerebral
physiology appear to have proved that any such connection which may exist
is of a radically different character from that contended for by Gall and
his followers, and that, whatever may hereafter be found to be the true
theory of the subject, phrenology at least is untenable.




                                Chapter V.


Of Ethology, Or The Science Of The Formation Of Character.


§ 1. The laws of mind as characterized in the preceding chapter, compose
the universal or abstract portion of the philosophy of human nature; and
all the truths of common experience, constituting a practical knowledge of
mankind, must, to the extent to which they are truths, be results or
consequences of these. Such familiar maxims, when collected _a posteriori_
from observation of life, occupy among the truths of the science the place
of what, in our analysis of Induction, have so often been spoken of under
the title of Empirical Laws.

An Empirical Law (it will be remembered) is a uniformity, whether of
succession or of co-existence, which holds true in all instances within
our limits of observation, but is not of a nature to afford any assurance
that it would hold beyond those limits; either because the consequent is
not really the effect of the antecedent, but forms part along with it of a
chain of effects flowing from prior causes not yet ascertained, or because
there is ground to believe that the sequence (though a case of causation)
is resolvable into simpler sequences, and, depending therefore on a
concurrence of several natural agencies, is exposed to an unknown
multitude of possibilities of counteraction. In other words, an empirical
law is a generalization, of which, not content with finding it true, we
are obliged to ask, why is it true? knowing that its truth is not
absolute, but dependent on some more general conditions, and that it can
only be relied on in so far as there is ground of assurance that those
conditions are realized.

Now, the observations concerning human affairs collected from common
experience are precisely of this nature. Even if they were universally and
exactly true within the bounds of experience, which they never are, still
they are not the ultimate laws of human action; they are not the
principles of human nature, but results of those principles under the
circumstances in which mankind have happened to be placed. When the
Psalmist “said in his haste that all men are liars,” he enunciated what in
some ages and countries is borne out by ample experience; but it is not a
law of man’s nature to lie; though it is one of the consequences of the
laws of human nature, that lying is nearly universal when certain external
circumstances exist universally, especially circumstances productive of
habitual distrust and fear. When the character of the old is asserted to
be cautious, and of the young impetuous, this, again, is but an empirical
law; for it is not because of their youth that the young are impetuous,
nor because of their age that the old are cautious. It is chiefly, if not
wholly, because the old, during their many years of life, have generally
had much experience of its various evils, and having suffered or seen
others suffer much from incautious exposure to them, have acquired
associations favorable to circumspection; while the young, as well from
the absence of similar experience as from the greater strength of the
inclinations which urge them to enterprise, engage themselves in it more
readily. Here, then, is the _explanation_ of the empirical law; here are
the conditions which ultimately determine whether the law holds good or
not. If an old man has not been oftener than most young men in contact
with danger and difficulty, he will be equally incautious; if a youth has
not stronger inclinations than an old man, he probably will be as little
enterprising. The empirical law derives whatever truth it has from the
causal laws of which it is a consequence. If we know those laws, we know
what are the limits to the derivative law; while, if we have not yet
accounted for the empirical law—if it rests only on observation—there is
no safety in applying it far beyond the limits of time, place, and
circumstance in which the observations were made.

The really scientific truths, then, are not these empirical laws, but the
causal laws which explain them. The empirical laws of those phenomena
which depend on known causes, and of which a general theory can therefore
be constructed, have, whatever may be their value in practice, no other
function in science than that of verifying the conclusions of theory.
Still more must this be the case when most of the empirical laws amount,
even within the limits of observation, only to approximate
generalizations.

§ 2. This, however, is not, so much as is sometimes supposed, a
peculiarity of the sciences called moral. It is only in the simplest
branches of science that empirical laws are ever exactly true; and not
always in those. Astronomy, for example, is the simplest of all the
sciences which explain, in the concrete, the actual course of natural
events. The causes or forces on which astronomical phenomena depend, are
fewer in number than those which determine any other of the great
phenomena of nature. Accordingly, as each effect results from the conflict
of but few causes, a great degree of regularity and uniformity might be
expected to exist among the effects; and such is really the case: they
have a fixed order, and return in cycles. But propositions which should
express, with absolute correctness, all the successive positions of a
planet until the cycle is completed, would be of almost unmanageable
complexity, and could be obtained from theory alone. The generalizations
which can be collected on the subject from direct observation, even such
as Kepler’s law, are mere approximations; the planets, owing to their
perturbations by one another, do not move in exact ellipses. Thus even in
astronomy, perfect exactness in the mere empirical laws is not to be
looked for; much less, then, in more complex subjects of inquiry.

The same example shows how little can be inferred against the universality
or even the simplicity of the ultimate laws, from the impossibility of
establishing any but approximate empirical laws of the effects. The laws
of causation according to which a class of phenomena are produced may be
very few and simple, and yet the effects themselves may be so various and
complicated that it shall be impossible to trace any regularity whatever
completely through them. For the phenomena in question may be of an
eminently modifiable character; insomuch that innumerable circumstances
are capable of influencing the effect, although they may all do it
according to a very small number of laws. Suppose that all which passes in
the mind of man is determined by a few simple laws; still, if those laws
be such that there is not one of the facts surrounding a human being, or
of the events which happen to him, that does not influence in some mode or
degree his subsequent mental history, and if the circumstances of
different human beings are extremely different, it will be no wonder if
very few propositions can be made respecting the details of their conduct
or feelings, which will be true of all mankind.

Now, without deciding whether the ultimate laws of our mental nature are
few or many, it is at least certain that they are of the above
description. It is certain that our mental states, and our mental
capacities and susceptibilities, are modified, either for a time or
permanently, by every thing which happens to us in life. Considering,
therefore, how much these modifying causes differ in the case of any two
individuals, it would be unreasonable to expect that the empirical laws of
the human mind, the generalizations which can be made respecting the
feelings or actions of mankind without reference to the causes that
determine them, should be any thing but approximate generalizations. They
are the common wisdom of common life, and as such are invaluable;
especially as they are mostly to be applied to cases not very dissimilar
to those from which they were collected. But when maxims of this sort,
collected from Englishmen, come to be applied to Frenchmen, or when those
collected from the present day are applied to past or future generations,
they are apt to be very much at fault. Unless we have resolved the
empirical law into the laws of the causes on which it depends, and
ascertained that those causes extend to the case which we have in view,
there can be no reliance placed in our inferences. For every individual is
surrounded by circumstances different from those of every other
individual; every nation or generation of mankind from every other nation
or generation: and none of these differences are without their influence
in forming a different type of character. There is, indeed, also a certain
general resemblance; but peculiarities of circumstances are continually
constituting exceptions even to the propositions which are true in the
great majority of cases.

Although, however, there is scarcely any mode of feeling or conduct which
is, in the absolute sense, common to all mankind; and though the
generalizations which assert that any given variety of conduct or feeling
will be found universally (however nearly they may approximate to truth
within given limits of observation), will be considered as scientific
propositions by no one who is at all familiar with scientific
investigation; yet all modes of feeling and conduct met with among mankind
have causes which produce them; and in the propositions which assign those
causes will be found the explanation of the empirical laws, and the
limiting principle of our reliance on them. Human beings do not all feel
and act alike in the same circumstances; but it is possible to determine
what makes one person, in a given position, feel or act in one way,
another in another; how any given mode of feeling and conduct, compatible
with the general laws (physical and mental) of human nature, has been, or
may be, formed. In other words, mankind have not one universal character,
but there exist universal laws of the Formation of Character. And since it
is by these laws, combined with the facts of each particular case, that
the whole of the phenomena of human action and feeling are produced, it is
on these that every rational attempt to construct the science of human
nature in the concrete, and for practical purposes, must proceed.

§ 3. The laws, then, of the formation of character being the principal
object of scientific inquiry into human nature, it remains to determine
the method of investigation best fitted for ascertaining them. And the
logical principles according to which this question is to be decided, must
be those which preside over every other attempt to investigate the laws of
very complex phenomena. For it is evident that both the character of any
human being, and the aggregate of the circumstances by which that
character has been formed, are facts of a high order of complexity. Now to
such cases we have seen that the Deductive Method, setting out from
general laws, and verifying their consequences by specific experience, is
alone applicable. The grounds of this great logical doctrine have formerly
been stated; and its truth will derive additional support from a brief
examination of the specialties of the present case.

There are only two modes in which laws of nature can be
ascertained—deductively and experimentally; including under the
denomination of experimental inquiry, observation as well as artificial
experiment. Are the laws of the formation of character susceptible of a
satisfactory investigation by the method of experimentation? Evidently
not; because, even if we suppose unlimited power of varying the experiment
(which is abstractedly possible, though no one but an Oriental despot has
that power, or, if he had, would probably be disposed to exercise it), a
still more essential condition is wanting—the power of performing any of
the experiments with scientific accuracy.

The instances requisite for the prosecution of a directly experimental
inquiry into the formation of character, would be a number of human beings
to bring up and educate, from infancy to mature age. And to perform any
one of these experiments with scientific propriety, it would be necessary
to know and record every sensation or impression received by the young
pupil from a period long before it could speak; including its own notions
respecting the sources of all those sensations and impressions. It is not
only impossible to do this completely, but even to do so much of it as
should constitute a tolerable approximation. One apparently trivial
circumstance which eluded our vigilance might let in a train of
impressions and associations sufficient to vitiate the experiment as an
authentic exhibition of the effects flowing from given causes. No one who
has sufficiently reflected on education is ignorant of this truth; and
whoever has not, will find it most instructively illustrated in the
writings of Rousseau and Helvetius on that great subject.

Under this impossibility of studying the laws of the formation of
character by experiments purposely contrived to elucidate them, there
remains the resource of simple observation. But if it be impossible to
ascertain the influencing circumstances with any approach to completeness
even when we have the shaping of them ourselves, much more impossible is
it when the cases are further removed from our observation, and altogether
out of our control. Consider the difficulty of the very first step—of
ascertaining what actually is the character of the individual, in each
particular case that we examine. There is hardly any person living
concerning some essential part of whose character there are not
differences of opinion even among his intimate acquaintances; and a single
action, or conduct continued only for a short time, goes a very little way
toward ascertaining it. We can only make our observations in a rough way
and _en masse_; not attempting to ascertain completely in any given
instance, what character has been formed, and still less by what causes;
but only observing in what state of previous circumstances it is found
that certain marked mental qualities or deficiencies _oftenest_ exist.
These conclusions, besides that they are mere approximate generalizations,
deserve no reliance, even as such, unless the instances are sufficiently
numerous to eliminate not only chance, but every assignable circumstance
in which a number of the cases examined may happen to have resembled one
another. So numerous and various, too, are the circumstances which form
individual character, that the consequence of any particular combination
is hardly ever some definite and strongly marked character, always found
where that combination exists, and not otherwise. What is obtained, even
after the most extensive and accurate observation, is merely a comparative
result; as, for example, that in a given number of Frenchmen, taken
indiscriminately, there will be found more persons of a particular mental
tendency, and fewer of the contrary tendency, than among an equal number
of Italians or English, similarly taken; or thus: of a hundred Frenchmen
and an equal number of Englishmen, fairly selected, and arranged according
to the degree in which they possess a particular mental characteristic,
each number, 1, 2, 3, etc., of the one series, will be found to possess
more of that characteristic than the corresponding number of the other.
Since, therefore, the comparison is not one of kinds, but of ratios and
degrees; and since, in proportion as the differences are slight, it
requires a greater number of instances to eliminate chance, it can not
often happen to any one to know a sufficient number of cases with the
accuracy requisite for making the sort of comparison last mentioned; less
than which, however, would not constitute a real induction. Accordingly,
there is hardly one current opinion respecting the characters of nations,
classes, or descriptions of persons, which is universally acknowledged as
indisputable.(272)

And finally, if we could even obtain by way of experiment a much more
satisfactory assurance of these generalizations than is really possible,
they would still be only empirical laws. They would show, indeed, that
there was some connection between the type of character formed and the
circumstances existing in the case; but not what the precise connection
was, nor to which of the peculiarities of those circumstances the effect
was really owing. They could only, therefore, be received as results of
causation, requiring to be resolved into the general laws of the causes:
until the determination of which, we could not judge within what limits
the derivative laws might serve as presumptions in cases yet unknown, or
even be depended on as permanent in the very cases from which they were
collected. The French people had, or were supposed to have, a certain
national character; but they drive out their royal family and aristocracy,
alter their institutions, pass through a series of extraordinary events
for the greater part of a century, and at the end of that time their
character is found to have undergone important changes. A long list of
mental and moral differences are observed, or supposed to exist between
men and women; but at some future and, it may be hoped, not distant
period, equal freedom and an equally independent social position come to
be possessed by both, and their differences of character are either
removed or totally altered.

But if the differences which we think we observe between French and
English, or between men and women, can be connected with more general
laws; if they be such as might be expected to be produced by the
differences of government, former customs, and physical peculiarities in
the two nations, and by the diversities of education, occupations,
personal independence, and social privileges, and whatever original
differences there may be in bodily strength and nervous sensibility
between the two sexes; then, indeed, the coincidence of the two kinds of
evidence justifies us in believing that we have both reasoned rightly and
observed rightly. Our observation, though not sufficient as proof, is
ample as verification. And having ascertained not only the empirical laws,
but the causes, of the peculiarities, we need be under no difficulty in
judging how far they may be expected to be permanent, or by what
circumstances they would be modified or destroyed.

§ 4. Since then it is impossible to obtain really accurate propositions
respecting the formation of character from observation and experiment
alone, we are driven perforce to that which, even if it had not been the
indispensable, would have been the most perfect, mode of investigation,
and which it is one of the principal aims of philosophy to extend; namely,
that which tries its experiments not on the complex facts, but on the
simple ones of which they are compounded; and after ascertaining the laws
of the causes, the composition of which gives rise to the complex
phenomena, then considers whether these will not explain and account for
the approximate generalizations which have been framed empirically
respecting the sequences of those complex phenomena. The laws of the
formation of character are, in short, derivative laws, resulting from the
general laws of mind, and are to be obtained by deducing them from those
general laws by supposing any given set of circumstances, and then
considering what, according to the laws of mind, will be the influence of
those circumstances on the formation of character.

A science is thus formed, to which I would propose to give the name of
Ethology, or the Science of Character, from ἦθος, a word more nearly
corresponding to the term “character” as I here use it, than any other
word in the same language. The name is perhaps etymologically applicable
to the entire science of our mental and moral nature; but if, as is usual
and convenient, we employ the name Psychology for the science of the
elementary laws of mind, Ethology will serve for the ulterior science
which determines the kind of character produced in conformity to those
general laws by any set of circumstances, physical and moral. According to
this definition, Ethology is the science which corresponds to the art of
education in the widest sense of the term, including the formation of
national or collective character as well as individual. It would indeed be
vain to expect (however completely the laws of the formation of character
might be ascertained) that we could know so accurately the circumstances
of any given case as to be able positively to predict the character that
would be produced in that case. But we must remember that a degree of
knowledge far short of the power of actual prediction is often of much
practical value. There may be great power of influencing phenomena, with a
very imperfect knowledge of the causes by which they are in any given
instance determined. It is enough that we know that certain means have a
_tendency_ to produce a given effect, and that others have a tendency to
frustrate it. When the circumstances of an individual or of a nation are
in any considerable degree under our control, we may, by our knowledge of
tendencies, be enabled to shape those circumstances in a manner much more
favorable to the ends we desire, than the shape which they would of
themselves assume. This is the limit of our power; but within this limit
the power is a most important one.

This science of Ethology may be called the Exact Science of Human Nature;
for its truths are not, like the empirical laws which depend on them,
approximate generalizations, but real laws. It is, however (as in all
cases of complex phenomena), necessary to the exactness of the
propositions, that they should be hypothetical only, and affirm
tendencies, not facts. They must not assert that something will always, or
certainly, happen; but only that such and such will be the effect of a
given cause, so far as it operates uncounteracted. It is a scientific
proposition, that bodily strength tends to make men courageous; not that
it always makes them so: that an interest on one side of a question tends
to bias the judgment; not that it invariably does so: that experience
tends to give wisdom; not that such is always its effect. These
propositions, being assertive only of tendencies, are not the less
universally true because the tendencies may be frustrated.

§ 5. While, on the one hand, Psychology is altogether, or principally, a
science of observation and experiment, Ethology, as I have conceived it,
is, as I have already remarked, altogether deductive. The one ascertains
the simple laws of Mind in general, the other traces their operation in
complex combinations of circumstances. Ethology stands to Psychology in a
relation very similar to that in which the various branches of natural
philosophy stand to mechanics. The principles of Ethology are properly the
middle principles, the _axiomata media_ (as Bacon would have said) of the
science of mind: as distinguished, on the one hand, from the empirical
laws resulting from simple observation, and, on the other, from the
highest generalizations.

And this seems a suitable place for a logical remark, which, though of
general application, is of peculiar importance in reference to the present
subject. Bacon has judiciously observed that the _axiomata media_ of every
science principally constitute its value. The lowest generalizations,
until explained by and resolved into the middle principles of which they
are the consequences, have only the imperfect accuracy of empirical laws;
while the most general laws are _too_ general, and include too few
circumstances, to give sufficient indication of what happens in individual
cases, where the circumstances are almost always immensely numerous. In
the importance, therefore, which Bacon assigns, in every science, to the
middle principles, it is impossible not to agree with him. But I conceive
him to have been radically wrong in his doctrine respecting the mode in
which these _axiomata media_ should be arrived at; though there is no one
proposition laid down in his works for which he has been more
extravagantly eulogized. He enunciates as a universal rule that induction
should proceed from the lowest to the middle principles, and from those to
the highest, never reversing that order, and, consequently, leaving no
room for the discovery of new principles by way of deduction at all. It is
not to be conceived that a man of his sagacity could have fallen into this
mistake if there had existed in his time, among the sciences which treat
of successive phenomena, one single instance of a deductive science, such
as mechanics, astronomy, optics, acoustics, etc., now are. In those
sciences it is evident that the higher and middle principles are by no
means derived from the lowest, but the reverse. In some of them the very
highest generalizations were those earliest ascertained with any
scientific exactness; as, for example (in mechanics), the laws of motion.
Those general laws had not, indeed, at first the acknowledged universality
which they acquired after having been successfully employed to explain
many classes of phenomena to which they were not originally seen to be
applicable; as when the laws of motion were employed, in conjunction with
other laws, to explain deductively the celestial phenomena. Still, the
fact remains, that the propositions which were afterward recognized as the
most general truths of the science were, of all its accurate
generalizations, those earliest arrived at. Bacon’s greatest merit can not
therefore consist, as we are so often told that it did, in exploding the
vicious method pursued by the ancients of flying to the highest
generalizations first, and deducing the middle principles from them; since
this is neither a vicious nor an exploded, but the universally accredited
method of modern science, and that to which it owes its greatest triumphs.
The error of ancient speculation did not consist in making the largest
generalizations first, but in making them without the aid or warrant of
rigorous inductive methods, and applying them deductively without the
needful use of that important part of the Deductive Method termed
Verification.

The order in which truths of the various degrees of generality should be
ascertained can not, I apprehend, be prescribed by any unbending rule. I
know of no maxim which can be laid down on the subject, but to obtain
those first in respect to which the conditions of a real induction can be
first and most completely realized. Now, wherever our means of
investigation can reach causes, without stopping at the empirical laws of
the effects, the simplest cases, being those in which fewest causes are
simultaneously concerned, will be most amenable to the inductive process;
and these are the cases which elicit laws of the greatest
comprehensiveness. In every science, therefore, which has reached the
stage at which it becomes a science of causes, it will be usual as well as
desirable first to obtain the highest generalizations, and then deduce the
more special ones from them. Nor can I discover any foundation for the
Baconian maxim, so much extolled by subsequent writers, except this: That
before we attempt to explain deductively from more general laws any new
class of phenomena, it is desirable to have gone as far as is practicable
in ascertaining the empirical laws of those phenomena; so as to compare
the results of deduction, not with one individual instance after another,
but with general propositions expressive of the points of agreement which
have been found among many instances. For if Newton had been obliged to
verify the theory of gravitation, not by deducing from it Kepler’s laws,
but by deducing all the observed planetary positions which had served
Kepler to establish those laws, the Newtonian theory would probably never
have emerged from the state of an hypothesis.(273)

The applicability of these remarks to the special case under consideration
can not admit of question. The science of the formation of character is a
science of causes. The subject is one to which those among the canons of
induction, by which laws of causation are ascertained, can be rigorously
applied. It is, therefore, both natural and advisable to ascertain the
simplest, which are necessarily the most general, laws of causation first,
and to deduce the middle principles from them. In other words, Ethology,
the deductive science, is a system of corollaries from Psychology, the
experimental science.

§ 6. Of these, the earlier alone has been, as yet, really conceived or
studied as a science; the other, Ethology, is still to be created. But its
creation has at length become practicable. The empirical laws, destined to
verify its deductions, have been formed in abundance by every successive
age of humanity; and the premises for the deductions are now sufficiently
complete. Excepting the degree of uncertainty which still exists as to the
extent of the natural differences of individual minds, and the physical
circumstances on which these may be dependent (considerations which are of
secondary importance when we are considering mankind in the average, or
_en masse_), I believe most competent judges will agree that the general
laws of the different constituent elements of human nature are even now
sufficiently understood to render it possible for a competent thinker to
deduce from those laws, with a considerable approach to certainty, the
particular type of character which would be formed in mankind generally by
any assumed set of circumstances. A science of Ethology, founded on the
laws of Psychology, is therefore possible; though little has yet been
done, and that little not at all systematically, toward forming it. The
progress of this important but most imperfect science will depend on a
double process: first, that of deducing theoretically the ethological
consequences of particular circumstances of position, and comparing them
with the recognized results of common experience; and, secondly, the
reverse operation; increased study of the various types of human nature
that are to be found in the world; conducted by persons not only capable
of analyzing and recording the circumstances in which these types
severally prevail, but also sufficiently acquainted with psychological
laws to be able to explain and account for the characteristics of the
type, by the peculiarities of the circumstances: the residuum alone, when
there proves to be any, being set down to the account of congenital
predispositions.

For the experimental or _a posteriori_ part of this process, the materials
are continually accumulating by the observation of mankind. So far as
thought is concerned, the great problem of Ethology is to deduce the
requisite middle principles from the general laws of Psychology. The
subject to be studied is, the origin and sources of all those qualities in
human beings which are interesting to us, either as facts to be produced,
to be avoided, or merely to be understood; and the object is, to
determine, from the general laws of mind, combined with the general
position of our species in the universe, what actual or possible
combinations of circumstances are capable of promoting or of preventing
the production of those qualities. A science which possesses middle
principles of this kind, arranged in the order, not of causes, but of the
effects which it is desirable to produce or to prevent, is duly prepared
to be the foundation of the corresponding Art. And when Ethology shall be
thus prepared, practical education will be the mere transformation of
those principles into a parallel system of precepts, and the adaptation of
these to the sum total of the individual circumstances which exist in each
particular case.

It is hardly necessary again to repeat that, as in every other deductive
science, verification _a posteriori_ must proceed _pari passu_ with
deduction _a priori_. The inference given by theory as to the type of
character which would be formed by any given circumstances must be tested
by specific experience of those circumstances whenever obtainable; and the
conclusions of the science as a whole must undergo a perpetual
verification and correction from the general remarks afforded by common
experience respecting human nature in our own age, and by history
respecting times gone by. The conclusions of theory can not be trusted,
unless confirmed by observation; nor those of observation, unless they can
be affiliated to theory, by deducing them from the laws of human nature,
and from a close analysis of the circumstances of the particular
situation. It is the accordance of these two kinds of evidence separately
taken—the consilience of _a priori_ reasoning and specific
experience—which forms the only sufficient ground for the principles of
any science so “immersed in matter,” dealing with such complex and
concrete phenomena, as Ethology.




                               Chapter VI.


General Considerations On The Social Science.


§ 1. Next after the science of individual man comes the science of man in
society—of the actions of collective masses of mankind, and the various
phenomena which constitute social life.

If the formation of individual character is already a complex subject of
study, this subject must be, in appearance at least, still more complex;
because the number of concurrent causes, all exercising more or less
influence on the total effect, is greater, in the proportion in which a
nation, or the species at large, exposes a larger surface to the operation
of agents, psychological and physical, than any single individual. If it
was necessary to prove, in opposition to an existing prejudice, that the
simpler of the two is capable of being a subject of science, the prejudice
is likely to be yet stronger against the possibility of giving a
scientific character to the study of Politics, and of the phenomena of
Society. It is, accordingly, but of yesterday that the conception of a
political or social science has existed anywhere but in the mind of here
and there an insulated thinker, generally very ill prepared for its
realization: though the subject itself has of all others engaged the most
general attention, and been a theme of interested and earnest discussions,
almost from the beginning of recorded time.

The condition, indeed, of politics as a branch of knowledge was, until
very lately, and has scarcely even yet ceased to be, that which Bacon
animadverted on, as the natural state of the sciences while their
cultivation is abandoned to practitioners; not being carried on as a
branch of speculative inquiry, but only with a view to the exigencies of
daily practice, and the _fructifera experimenta_, therefore, being aimed
at, almost to the exclusion of the _lucifera_. Such was medical
investigation, before physiology and natural history began to be
cultivated as branches of general knowledge. The only questions examined
were, what diet is wholesome, or what medicine will cure some given
disease; without any previous systematic inquiry into the laws of
nutrition, and of the healthy and morbid action of the different organs,
on which laws the effect of any diet or medicine must evidently depend.
And in politics the questions which engaged general attention were
similar: Is such an enactment, or such a form of government, beneficial or
the reverse—either universally, or to some particular community? without
any previous inquiry into the general conditions by which the operation of
legislative measures, or the effects produced by forms of government, are
determined. Students in politics thus attempted to study the pathology and
therapeutics of the social body, before they had laid the necessary
foundation in its physiology; to cure disease without understanding the
laws of health. And the result was such as it must always be when persons,
even of ability, attempt to deal with the complex questions of a science
before its simpler and more elementary truths have been established.

No wonder that, when the phenomena of society have so rarely been
contemplated in the point of view characteristic of science, the
philosophy of society should have made little progress; should contain few
general propositions sufficiently precise and certain for common inquirers
to recognize in them a scientific character. The vulgar notion accordingly
is, that all pretension to lay down general truths on politics and society
is quackery; that no universality and no certainty are attainable in such
matters. What partly excuses this common notion is, that it is really not
without foundation in one particular sense. A large proportion of those
who have laid claim to the character of philosophic politicians have
attempted not to ascertain universal sequences, but to frame universal
precepts. They have imagined some one form of government, or system of
laws, to fit all cases—a pretension well meriting the ridicule with which
it is treated by practitioners, and wholly unsupported by the analogy of
the art to which, from the nature of its subject, that of politics must be
the most nearly allied. No one now supposes it possible that one remedy
can cure all diseases, or even the same disease in all constitutions and
habits of body.

It is not necessary even to the perfection of a science, that the
corresponding art should possess universal, or even general, rules. The
phenomena of society might not only be completely dependent on known
causes, but the mode of action of all those causes might be reducible to
laws of considerable simplicity, and yet no two cases might admit of being
treated in precisely the same manner. So great might be the variety of
circumstances on which the results in different cases depend, that the art
might not have a single general precept to give, except that of watching
the circumstances of the particular case, and adapting our measures to the
effects which, according to the principles of the science, result from
those circumstances. But although, in so complicated a class of subjects,
it is impossible to lay down practical maxims of universal application, it
does not follow that the phenomena do not conform to universal laws.

§ 2. All phenomena of society are phenomena of human nature, generated by
the action of outward circumstances upon masses of human beings; and if,
therefore, the phenomena of human thought, feeling, and action are subject
to fixed laws, the phenomena of society can not but conform to fixed laws,
the consequence of the preceding. There is, indeed, no hope that these
laws, though our knowledge of them were as certain and as complete as it
is in astronomy, would enable us to predict the history of society, like
that of the celestial appearances, for thousands of years to come. But the
difference of certainty is not in the laws themselves, it is in the data
to which these laws are to be applied. In astronomy the causes influencing
the result are few, and change little, and that little according to known
laws; we can ascertain what they are now, and thence determine what they
will be at any epoch of a distant future. The data, therefore, in
astronomy are as certain as the laws themselves. The circumstances, on the
contrary, which influence the condition and progress of society are
innumerable, and perpetually changing; and though they all change in
obedience to causes, and therefore to laws, the multitude of the causes is
so great as to defy our limited powers of calculation. Not to say that the
impossibility of applying precise numbers to facts of such a description
would set an impassable limit to the possibility of calculating them
beforehand, even if the powers of the human intellect were otherwise
adequate to the task.

But, as before remarked, an amount of knowledge quite insufficient for
prediction, may be most valuable for guidance. The science of society
would have attained a very high point of perfection if it enabled us, in
any given condition of social affairs, in the condition, for instance, of
Europe or any European country at the present time, to understand by what
causes it had, in any and every particular, been made what it was; whether
it was tending to any, and to what, changes; what effects each feature of
its existing state was likely to produce in the future; and by what means
any of those effects might be prevented, modified, or accelerated, or a
different class of effects superinduced. There is nothing chimerical in
the hope that general laws, sufficient to enable us to answer these
various questions for any country or time with the individual
circumstances of which we are well acquainted, do really admit of being
ascertained; and that the other branches of human knowledge, which this
undertaking presupposes, are so far advanced that the time is ripe for its
commencement. Such is the object of the Social Science.

That the nature of what I consider the true method of the science may be
made more palpable, by first showing what that method is not, it will be
expedient to characterize briefly two radical misconceptions of the proper
mode of philosophizing on society and government, one or other of which
is, either explicitly or more often unconsciously, entertained by almost
all who have meditated or argued respecting the logic of politics, since
the notion of treating it by strict rules, and on Baconian principles, has
been current among the more advanced thinkers. These erroneous methods, if
the word method can be applied to erroneous tendencies arising from the
absence of any sufficiently distinct conception of method, may be termed
the Experimental, or Chemical, mode of investigation, and the Abstract, or
Geometrical, mode. We shall begin with the former.




                               Chapter VII.


Of The Chemical, Or Experimental, Method In The Social Science.


§ 1. The laws of the phenomena of society are, and can be, nothing but the
laws of the actions and passions of human beings united together in the
social state. Men, however, in a state of society are still men; their
actions and passions are obedient to the laws of individual human nature.
Men are not, when brought together, converted into another kind of
substance, with different properties; as hydrogen and oxygen are different
from water, or as hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and azote, are different from
nerves, muscles, and tendons. Human beings in society have no properties
but those which are derived from, and may be resolved into, the laws of
the nature of individual man. In social phenomena the Composition of
Causes is the universal law.

Now, the method of philosophizing which may be termed chemical overlooks
this fact, and proceeds as if the nature of man as an individual were not
concerned at all, or were concerned in a very inferior degree, in the
operations of human beings in society. All reasoning in political or
social affairs, grounded on principles of human nature, is objected to by
reasoners of this sort, under such names as “abstract theory.” For the
direction of their opinions and conduct, they profess to demand, in all
cases without exception, specific experience.

This mode of thinking is not only general with practitioners in politics,
and with that very numerous class who (on a subject which no one, however
ignorant, thinks himself incompetent to discuss) profess to guide
themselves by common sense rather than by science; but is often
countenanced by persons with greater pretensions to instruction—persons
who, having sufficient acquaintance with books and with the current ideas
to have heard that Bacon taught mankind to follow experience, and to
ground their conclusions on facts instead of metaphysical dogmas, think
that, by treating political facts in as directly experimental a method as
chemical facts, they are showing themselves true Baconians, and proving
their adversaries to be mere syllogizers and school-men. As, however, the
notion of the applicability of experimental methods to political
philosophy can not co-exist with any just conception of these methods
themselves, the kind of arguments from experience which the chemical
theory brings forth as its fruits (and which form the staple, in this
country especially, of parliamentary and hustings oratory), are such as,
at no time since Bacon, would have been admitted to be valid in chemistry
itself, or in any other branch of experimental science. They are such as
these: that the prohibition of foreign commodities must conduce to
national wealth, because England has flourished under it, or because
countries in general which have adopted it have flourished; that our laws,
or our internal administration, or our constitution, are excellent for a
similar reason; and the eternal arguments from historical examples, from
Athens or Rome, from the fires in Smithfield or the French Revolution.

I will not waste time in contending against modes of argumentation which
no person with the smallest practice in estimating evidence could possibly
be betrayed into; which draw conclusions of general application from a
single unanalyzed instance, or arbitrarily refer an effect to some one
among its antecedents, without any process of elimination or comparison of
instances. It is a rule both of justice and of good sense to grapple not
with the absurdest, but with the most reasonable form of a wrong opinion.
We shall suppose our inquirer acquainted with the true conditions of
experimental investigation, and competent in point of acquirements for
realizing them, so far as they can be realized. He shall know as much of
the facts of history as mere erudition can teach—as much as can be proved
by testimony, without the assistance of any theory; and if those mere
facts, properly collated, can fulfill the conditions of a real induction,
he shall be qualified for the task.

But that no such attempt can have the smallest chance of success, has been
abundantly shown in the tenth chapter of the Third Book.(274) We there
examined whether effects which depend on a complication of causes can be
made the subject of a true induction by observation and experiment; and
concluded, on the most convincing grounds, that they can not. Since, of
all effects, none depend on so great a complication of causes as social
phenomena, we might leave our case to rest in safety on that previous
showing. But a logical principle as yet so little familiar to the ordinary
run of thinkers, requires to be insisted on more than once, in order to
make the due impression; and the present being the case which of all
others exemplifies it the most strongly, there will be advantage in
re-stating the grounds of the general maxim, as applied to the specialties
of the class of inquiries now under consideration.

§ 2. The first difficulty which meets us in the attempt to apply
experimental methods for ascertaining the laws of social phenomena, is
that we are without the means of making artificial experiments. Even if we
could contrive experiments at leisure, and try them without limit, we
should do so under immense disadvantage; both from the impossibility of
ascertaining and taking note of all the facts of each case, and because
(those facts being in a perpetual state of change), before sufficient time
had elapsed to ascertain the result of the experiment, some material
circumstances would always have ceased to be the same. But it is
unnecessary to consider the logical objections which would exist to the
conclusiveness of our experiments, since we palpably never have the power
of trying any. We can only watch those which nature produces, or which are
produced for other reasons. We can not adapt our logical means to our
wants, by varying the circumstances as the exigencies of elimination may
require. If the spontaneous instances, formed by contemporary events and
by the successions of phenomena recorded in history, afford a sufficient
variation of circumstances, an induction from specific experience is
attainable; otherwise not. The question to be resolved is, therefore,
whether the requisites for induction respecting the causes of political
effects or the properties of political agents, are to be met with in
history? including under the term, contemporary history. And in order to
give fixity to our conceptions, it will be advisable to suppose this
question asked in reference to some special subject of political inquiry
or controversy; such as that frequent topic of debate in the present
century, the operation of restrictive and prohibitory commercial
legislation upon national wealth. Let this, then, be the scientific
question to be investigated by specific experience.

§ 3. In order to apply to the case the most perfect of the methods of
experimental inquiry, the Method of Difference, we require to find two
instances which tally in every particular except the one which is the
subject of inquiry. If two nations can be found which are alike in all
natural advantages and disadvantages; whose people resemble each other in
every quality, physical and moral, spontaneous and acquired; whose habits,
usages, opinions, laws, and institutions are the same in all respects,
except that one of them has a more protective tariff, or in other respects
interferes more with the freedom of industry; if one of these nations is
found to be rich and the other poor, or one richer than the other, this
will be an _experimentum crucis_: a real proof by experience, which of the
two systems is most favorable to national riches. But the supposition that
two such instances can be met with is manifestly absurd. Nor is such a
concurrence even abstractedly possible. Two nations which agreed in every
thing except their commercial policy would agree also in that. Differences
of legislation are not inherent and ultimate diversities; are not
properties of Kinds. They are effects of pre-existing causes. If the two
nations differ in this portion of their institutions, it is from some
difference in their position, and thence in their apparent interests, or
in some portion or other of their opinions, habits, and tendencies; which
opens a view of further differences without any assignable limit, capable
of operating on their industrial prosperity, as well as on every other
feature of their condition, in more ways than can be enumerated or
imagined. There is thus a demonstrated impossibility of obtaining, in the
investigations of the social science, the conditions required for the most
conclusive form of inquiry by specific experience.

In the absence of the direct, we may next try, as in other cases, the
supplementary resource, called in a former place the Indirect Method of
Difference; which, instead of two instances differing in nothing but the
presence or absence of a given circumstance, compares two _classes_ of
instances respectively agreeing in nothing but the presence of a
circumstance on the one side and its absence on the other. To choose the
most advantageous case conceivable (a case far too advantageous to be ever
obtained), suppose that we compare one nation which has a restrictive
policy with two or more nations agreeing in nothing but in permitting free
trade. We need not now suppose that either of these nations agrees with
the first in all its circumstances; one may agree with it in some of its
circumstances, and another in the remainder. And it may be argued, that if
these nations remain poorer than the restrictive nation, it can not be for
want either of the first or of the second set of circumstances, but it
must be for want of the protective system. If (we might say) the
restrictive nation had prospered from the one set of causes, the first of
the free-trade nations would have prospered equally; if by reason of the
other, the second would; but neither has; therefore the prosperity was
owing to the restrictions. This will be allowed to be a very favorable
specimen of an argument from specific experience in politics, and if this
be inconclusive, it would not be easy to find another preferable to it.

Yet, that it is inconclusive, scarcely requires to be pointed out. Why
must the prosperous nation have prospered from one cause exclusively?
National prosperity is always the collective result of a multitude of
favorable circumstances; and of these, the restrictive nation may unite a
greater number than either of the others, though it may have all of those
circumstances in common with either one or the other of them. Its
prosperity may be partly owing to circumstances common to it with one of
those nations, and partly with the other, while they, having each of them
only half the number of favorable circumstances, have remained inferior.
So that the closest imitation which can be made, in the social science, of
a legitimate induction from direct experience, gives but a specious
semblance of conclusiveness, without any real value.

§ 4. The Method of Difference in either of its forms being thus completely
out of the question, there remains the Method of Agreement. But we are
already aware of how little value this method is, in cases admitting
Plurality of Causes; and social phenomena are those in which the plurality
prevails in the utmost possible extent.

Suppose that the observer makes the luckiest hit which could be given by
any conceivable combination of chances; that he finds two nations which
agree in no circumstance whatever, except in having a restrictive system,
and in being prosperous; or a number of nations, all prosperous, which
have no antecedent circumstances common to them all but that of having a
restrictive policy. It is unnecessary to go into the consideration of the
impossibility of ascertaining from history, or even from contemporary
observation, that such is really the fact; that the nations agree in no
other circumstance capable of influencing the case. Let us suppose this
impossibility vanquished, and the fact ascertained that they agree only in
a restrictive system as an antecedent, and industrial prosperity as a
consequent. What degree of presumption does this raise that the
restrictive system caused the prosperity? One so trifling as to be
equivalent to none at all. That some one antecedent is the cause of a
given effect, because all other antecedents have been found capable of
being eliminated, is a just inference, only if the effect can have but one
cause. If it admits of several, nothing is more natural than that each of
these should separately admit of being eliminated. Now, in the case of
political phenomena, the supposition of unity of cause is not only wide of
the truth, but at an immeasurable distance from it. The causes of every
social phenomenon which we are particularly interested about, security,
wealth, freedom, good government, public virtue, general intelligence, or
their opposites, are infinitely numerous, especially the external or
remote causes, which alone are, for the most part, accessible to direct
observation. No one cause suffices of itself to produce any of these
phenomena; while there are countless causes which have some influence over
them, and may co-operate either in their production or in their
prevention. From the mere fact, therefore, of our having been able to
eliminate some circumstance, we can by no means infer that this
circumstance was not instrumental to the effect in some of the very
instances from which we have eliminated it. We can conclude that the
effect is sometimes produced without it; but not that, when present, it
does not contribute its share.

Similar objections will be found to apply to the Method of Concomitant
Variations. If the causes which act upon the state of any society produced
effects differing from one another in kind; if wealth depended on one
cause, peace on another, a third made people virtuous, a fourth
intelligent; we might, though unable to sever the causes from one another,
refer to each of them that property of the effect which waxed as it waxed,
and which waned as it waned. But every attribute of the social body is
influenced by innumerable causes; and such is the mutual action of the
co-existing elements of society, that whatever affects any one of the more
important of them, will by that alone, if it does not affect the others
directly, affect them indirectly. The effects, therefore, of different
agents not being different in quality, while the quantity of each is the
mixed result of all the agents, the variations of the aggregate can not
bear a uniform proportion to those of any one of its component parts.

§ 5. There remains the Method of Residues; which appears, on the first
view, less foreign to this kind of inquiry than the three other methods,
because it only requires that we should accurately note the circumstances
of some one country, or state of society. Making allowance, thereupon, for
the effect of all causes whose tendencies are known, the residue which
those causes are inadequate to explain may plausibly be imputed to the
remainder of the circumstances which are known to have existed in the
case. Something similar to this is the method which Coleridge(275)
describes himself as having followed in his political essays in the
_Morning Post_. “On every great occurrence I endeavored to discover in
past history the event that most nearly resembled it. I procured, whenever
it was possible, the contemporary historians, memorialists, and
pamphleteers. Then fairly subtracting the points of difference from those
of likeness, as the balance favored the former or the latter, I
conjectured that the result would be the same or different. As, for
instance, in the series of essays entitled ‘A Comparison of France under
Napoleon with Rome under the first Cæsars,’ and in those which followed,
‘on the probable final restoration of the Bourbons.’ The same plan I
pursued at the commencement of the Spanish Revolution, and with the same
success, taking the war of the United Provinces with Philip II. as the
groundwork of the comparison.” In this inquiry he no doubt employed the
Method of Residues; for, in “subtracting the points of difference from
those of likeness,” he doubtless weighed, and did not content himself with
numbering, them: he doubtless took those points of agreement only which he
presumed from their own nature to be capable of influencing the effect,
and, allowing for that influence, concluded that the remainder of the
result would be referable to the points of difference.

Whatever may be the efficacy of this method, it is, as we long ago
remarked, not a method of pure observation and experiment; it concludes,
not from a comparison of instances, but from the comparison of an instance
with the result of a previous deduction. Applied to social phenomena, it
presupposes that the causes from which part of the effect proceeded are
already known; and as we have shown that these can not have been known by
specific experience, they must have been learned by deduction from
principles of human nature; experience being called in only as a
supplementary resource, to determine the causes which produced an
unexplained residue. But if the principles of human nature may be had
recourse to for the establishment of some political truths, they may for
all. If it be admissible to say, England must have prospered by reason of
the prohibitory system, because after allowing for all the other
tendencies which have been operating, there is a portion of prosperity
still to be accounted for; it must be admissible to go to the same source
for the effect of the prohibitory system, and examine what account the
laws of human motives and actions will enable us to give of _its_
tendencies. Nor, in fact, will the experimental argument amount to any
thing, except in verification of a conclusion drawn from those general
laws. For we may subtract the effect of one, two, three, or four causes,
but we shall never succeed in subtracting the effect of all causes except
one; while it would be a curious instance of the dangers of too much
caution if, to avoid depending on _a priori_ reasoning concerning the
effect of a single cause, we should oblige ourselves to depend on as many
separate _a priori_ reasonings as there are causes operating concurrently
with that particular cause in some given instance.

We have now sufficiently characterized the gross misconception of the mode
of investigation proper to political phenomena, which I have termed the
Chemical Method. So lengthened a discussion would not have been necessary,
if the claim to decide authoritatively on political doctrines were
confined to persons who had competently studied any one of the higher
departments of physical science. But since the generality of those who
reason on political subjects, satisfactorily to themselves and to a more
or less numerous body of admirers, know nothing whatever of the methods of
physical investigation beyond a few precepts which they continue to parrot
after Bacon, being entirely unaware that Bacon’s conception of scientific
inquiry has done its work, and that science has now advanced into a higher
stage, there are probably many to whom such remarks as the foregoing may
still be useful. In an age in which chemistry itself, when attempting to
deal with the more complex chemical sequences—those of the animal or even
the vegetable organism—has found it necessary to become, and has succeeded
in becoming, a Deductive Science, it is not to be apprehended that any
person of scientific habits, who has kept pace with the general progress
of the knowledge of nature, can be in danger of applying the methods of
elementary chemistry to explore the sequences of the most complex order of
phenomena in existence.




                              Chapter VIII.


Of The Geometrical, Or Abstract, Method.


§ 1. The misconception discussed in the preceding chapter is, as we said,
chiefly committed by persons not much accustomed to scientific
investigation: practitioners in politics, who rather employ the
commonplaces of philosophy to justify their practice than seek to guide
their practice by philosophic principles; or imperfectly educated persons,
who, in ignorance of the careful selection and elaborate comparison of
instances required for the formation of a sound theory, attempt to found
one upon a few coincidences which they have casually noticed.

The erroneous method of which we are now to treat is, on the contrary,
peculiar to thinking and studious minds. It never could have suggested
itself but to persons of some familiarity with the nature of scientific
research; who, being aware of the impossibility of establishing, by casual
observation or direct experimentation, a true theory of sequences so
complex as are those of the social phenomena, have recourse to the simpler
laws which are immediately operative in those phenomena, and which are no
other than the laws of the nature of the human beings therein concerned,
These thinkers perceive (what the partisans of the chemical or
experimental theory do not) that the science of society must necessarily
be deductive. But, from an insufficient consideration of the specific
nature of the subject-matter—and often because (their own scientific
education having stopped short in too early a stage) geometry stands in
their minds as the type of all deductive science—it is to geometry, rather
than to astronomy and natural philosophy, that they unconsciously
assimilate the deductive science of society.

Among the differences between geometry (a science of co-existent facts,
altogether independent of the laws of the succession of phenomena), and
those physical Sciences of Causation which have been rendered deductive,
the following is one of the most conspicuous: That geometry affords no
room for what so constantly occurs in mechanics and its applications, the
case of conflicting forces; of causes which counteract or modify one
another. In mechanics we continually find two or more moving forces
producing, not motion, but rest; or motion in a different direction from
that which would have been produced by either of the generating forces. It
is true that the effect of the joint forces is the same when they act
simultaneously, as if they had acted one after another, or by turns; and
it is in this that the difference between mechanical and chemical laws
consists. But still the effects, whether produced by successive or by
simultaneous action, do, wholly or in part, cancel one another: what the
one force does, the other, partly, or altogether undoes. There is no
similar state of things in geometry. The result which follows from one
geometrical principle has nothing that conflicts with the result which
follows from another. What is proved true from one geometrical theorem,
what would be true if no other geometrical principles existed, can not be
altered and made no longer true by reason of some other geometrical
principle. What is once proved true is true in all cases, whatever
supposition may be made in regard to any other matter.

Now a conception similar to this last would appear to have been formed of
the social science, in the minds of the earlier of those who have
attempted to cultivate it by a deductive method. Mechanics would be a
science very similar to geometry, if every motion resulted from one force
alone, and not from a conflict of forces. In the geometrical theory of
society, it seems to be supposed that this is really the case with the
social phenomena; that each of them results always from only one force,
one single property of human nature.

At the point which we have now reached, it can not be necessary to say any
thing either in proof or in illustration of the assertion that such is not
the true character of the social phenomena. There is not, among these most
complex and (for that reason) most modifiable of all phenomena, any one
over which innumerable forces do not exercise influence; which does not
depend on a conjunction of very many causes. We have not, therefore, to
prove the notion in question to be an error, but to prove that the error
has been committed; that so mistaken a conception of the mode in which the
phenomena of society are produced has actually been ascertained.

§ 2. One numerous division of the reasoners who have treated social facts
according to geometrical methods, not admitting any modification of one
law by another, must for the present be left out of consideration, because
in them this error is complicated with, and is the effect of, another
fundamental misconception, of which we have already taken some notice, and
which will be further treated of before we conclude. I speak of those who
deduce political conclusions not from laws of nature, not from sequences
of phenomena, real or imaginary, but from unbending practical maxims.
Such, for example, are all who found their theory of politics on what is
called abstract right, that is to say, on universal precepts; a pretension
of which we have already noticed the chimerical nature. Such, in like
manner, are those who make the assumption of a social contract, or any
other kind of original obligation, and apply it to particular cases by
mere interpretation. But in this the fundamental error is the attempt to
treat an art like a science, and to have a deductive art; the
irrationality of which will be shown in a future chapter. It will be
proper to take our exemplification of the geometrical theory from those
thinkers who have avoided this additional error, and who entertain, so
far, a juster idea of the nature of political inquiry.

We may cite, in the first instance, those who assume as the principle of
their political philosophy that government is founded on fear; that the
dread of each other is the one motive by which human beings were
originally brought into a state of society, and are still held in it. Some
of the earlier scientific inquirers into politics, in particular Hobbes,
assumed this proposition, not by implication, but avowedly, as the
foundation of their doctrine, and attempted to build a complete philosophy
of politics thereupon. It is true that Hobbes did not find this one maxim
sufficient to carry him through the whole of his subject, but was obliged
to eke it out by the double sophism of an original contract. I call this a
double sophism; first, as passing off a fiction for a fact, and, secondly,
assuming a practical principle, or precept, as the basis of a theory;
which is a _petitio principii_, since (as we noticed in treating of that
Fallacy) every rule of conduct, even though it be so binding a one as the
observance of a promise, must rest its own foundations on the theory of
the subject; and the theory, therefore, can not rest upon it.

§ 3. Passing over less important instances, I shall come at once to the
most remarkable example afforded by our own times of the geometrical
method in politics; emanating from persons who are well aware of the
distinction between science and art; who knew that rules of conduct must
follow, not precede, the ascertainment of laws of nature, and that the
latter, not the former, is the legitimate field for the application of the
deductive method. I allude to the interest-philosophy of the Bentham
school.

The profound and original thinkers who are commonly known under this
description, founded their general theory of government on one
comprehensive premise, namely, that men’s actions are always determined by
their interests. There is an ambiguity in this last expression; for, as
the same philosophers, especially Bentham, gave the name of an interest to
any thing which a person likes, the proposition may be understood to mean
only this, that men’s actions are always determined by their wishes. In
this sense, however, it would not bear out any of the consequences which
these writers drew from it; and the word, therefore, in their political
reasonings, must be understood to mean (which is also the explanation they
themselves, on such occasions gave of it) what is commonly termed private,
or worldly, interest.

Taking the doctrine, then, in this sense, an objection presents itself _in
limine_ which might be deemed a fatal one, namely, that so sweeping a
proposition is far from being universally true. Human beings are not
governed in all their actions by their worldly interests. This, however,
is by no means so conclusive an objection as it at first appears; because
in politics we are for the most part concerned with the conduct, not of
individual persons, but either of a series of persons (as a succession of
kings), or a body or mass of persons, as a nation, an aristocracy, or a
representative assembly. And whatever is true of a large majority of
mankind, may without much error be taken for true of any succession of
persons, considered as a whole, or of any collection of persons in which
the act of the majority becomes the act of the whole body. Although,
therefore, the maxim is sometimes expressed in a manner unnecessarily
paradoxical, the consequences drawn from it will hold equally good if the
assertion be limited as follows: Any succession of persons, or the
majority of any body of persons, will be governed in the bulk of their
conduct by their personal interests. We are bound to allow to this school
of thinkers the benefit of this more rational statement of their
fundamental maxim, which is also in strict conformity to the explanations
which, when considered to be called for, have been given by themselves.

The theory goes on to infer, quite correctly, that if the actions of
mankind are determined in the main by their selfish interests, the only
rulers who will govern according to the interest of the governed, are
those whose selfish interests are in accordance with it. And to this is
added a third proposition, namely, that no rulers have their selfish
interest identical with that of the governed, unless it be rendered so by
accountability, that is, by dependence on the will of the governed. In
other words (and as the result of the whole), that the desire of retaining
or the fear of losing their power, and whatever is thereon consequent, is
the sole motive which can be relied on for producing on the part of rulers
a course of conduct in accordance with the general interest.

We have thus a fundamental theorem of political science, consisting of
three syllogisms, and depending chiefly on two general premises, in each
of which a certain effect is considered as determined only by one cause,
not by a concurrence of causes. In the one, it is assumed that the actions
of average rulers are determined solely by self-interest; in the other,
that the sense of identity of interest with the governed, is produced and
producible by no other cause than responsibility.

Neither of these propositions is by any means true; the last is extremely
wide of the truth.

It is not true that the actions even of average rulers are wholly, or any
thing approaching to wholly, determined by their personal interest, or
even by their own opinion of their personal interest. I do not speak of
the influence of a sense of duty, or feelings of philanthropy, motives
never to be mainly relied on, though (except in countries or during
periods of great moral debasement) they influence almost all rulers in
some degree, and some rulers in a very great degree. But I insist only on
what is true of all rulers, viz., that the character and course of their
actions is largely influenced (independently of personal calculation) by
the habitual sentiments and feelings, the general modes of thinking and
acting, which prevail throughout the community of which they are members;
as well as by the feelings, habits, and modes of thought which
characterize the particular class in that community to which they
themselves belong. And no one will understand or be able to decipher their
system of conduct, who does not take all these things into account. They
are also much influenced by the maxims and traditions which have descended
to them from other rulers, their predecessors; which maxims and traditions
have been known to retain an ascendancy during long periods, even in
opposition to the private interests of the rulers for the time being. I
put aside the influence of other less general causes. Although, therefore,
the private interest of the rulers or of the ruling class is a very
powerful force, constantly in action, and exercising the most important
influence upon their conduct, there is also, in what they do, a large
portion which that private interest by no means affords a sufficient
explanation of; and even the particulars which constitute the goodness or
badness of their government, are in some, and no small degree, influenced
by those among the circumstances acting upon them, which can not, with any
propriety, be included in the term self-interest.

Turning now to the other proposition, that responsibility to the governed
is the only cause capable of producing in the rulers a sense of identity
of interest with the community, this is still less admissible as a
universal truth, than even the former. I am not speaking of perfect
identity of interest, which is an impracticable chimera; which, most
assuredly, responsibility to the people does not give. I speak of identity
in essentials; and the essentials are different at different places and
times. There are a large number of cases in which those things which it is
most for the general interest that the rulers should do, are also those
which they are prompted to do by their strongest personal interest, the
consolidation of their power. The suppression, for instance, of anarchy
and resistance to law—the complete establishment of the authority of the
central government, in a state of society like that of Europe in the
Middle Ages—is one of the strongest interests of the people, and also of
the rulers simply because they are the rulers; and responsibility on their
part could not strengthen, though in many conceivable ways it might
weaken, the motives prompting them to pursue this object. During the
greater part, of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of many other monarchs
who might be named, the sense of identity of interest between the
sovereign and the majority of the people was probably stronger than it
usually is in responsible governments; every thing that the people had
most at heart, the monarch had at heart too. Had Peter the Great, or the
rugged savages whom he began to civilize, the truest inclination toward
the things which were for the real interest of those savages?

I am not here attempting to establish a theory of government, and am not
called upon to determine the proportional weight which ought to be given
to the circumstances which this school of geometrical politicians left out
of their system, and those which they took into it. I am only concerned to
show that their method was unscientific; not to measure the amount of
error which may have affected their practical conclusions.

It is but justice to them, however, to remark, that their mistake was not
so much one of substance as of form, and consisted in presenting in a
systematic shape, and as the scientific treatment of a great philosophical
question, what should have passed for that which it really was, the mere
polemics of the day. Although the actions of rulers are by no means wholly
determined by their selfish interests, it is chiefly as a security against
those selfish interests that constitutional checks are required; and for
that purpose such checks, in England, and the other nations of modern
Europe, can in no manner be dispensed with. It is likewise true, that in
these same nations, and in the present age, responsibility to the governed
is the only means practically available to create a feeling of identity of
interest, in the cases, and on the points, where that feeling does not
sufficiently exist. To all this, and to the arguments which may be founded
on it in favor of measures for the correction of our representative
system, I have nothing to object; but I confess my regret, that the small
though highly important portion of the philosophy of government, which was
wanted for the immediate purpose of serving the cause of parliamentary
reform, should have been held forth by thinkers of such eminence as a
complete theory.

It is not to be imagined possible, nor is it true in point of fact, that
these philosophers regarded the few premises of their theory as including
all that is required for explaining social phenomena, or for determining
the choice of forms of government and measures of legislation and
administration. They were too highly instructed, of too comprehensive
intellect, and some of them of too sober and practical a character, for
such an error. They would have applied, and did apply, their principles
with innumerable allowances. But it is not allowances that are wanted.
There is little chance of making due amends in the superstructure of a
theory for the want of sufficient breadth in its foundations. It is
unphilosophical to construct a science out of a few of the agencies by
which the phenomena are determined, and leave the rest to the routine of
practice or the sagacity of conjecture. We either ought not to pretend to
scientific forms, or we ought to study all the determining agencies
equally, and endeavor, so far as it can be done, to include all of them
within the pale of the science; else we shall infallibly bestow a
disproportionate attention upon those which our theory takes into account,
while we misestimate the rest, and probably underrate their importance.
That the deductions should be from the whole and not from a part only of
the laws of nature that are concerned, would be desirable even if those
omitted were so insignificant in comparison with the others, that they
might, for most purposes and on most occasions, be left out of the
account. But this is far indeed from being true in the social science. The
phenomena of society do not depend, in essentials, on some one agency or
law of human nature, with only inconsiderable modifications from others.
The whole of the qualities of human nature influence those phenomena, and
there is not one which influences them in a small degree. There is not
one, the removal or any great alteration of which would not materially
affect the whole aspect of society, and change more or less the sequences
of social phenomena generally.

The theory which has been the subject of these remarks is, in this country
at least, the principal contemporary example of what I have styled the
geometrical method of philosophizing in the social science; and our
examination of it has, for this reason, been more detailed than would
otherwise have been suitable to a work like the present. Having now
sufficiently illustrated the two erroneous methods, we shall pass without
further preliminary to the true method; that which proceeds (conformably
to the practice of the more complex physical sciences) deductively indeed,
but by deduction from many, not from one or a very few, original premises;
considering each effect as (what it really is) an aggregate result of many
causes, operating sometimes through the same, sometimes through different
mental agencies, or laws of human nature.




                               Chapter IX.


Of The Physical, Or Concrete Deductive, Method.


§ 1. After what has been said to illustrate the nature of the inquiry into
social phenomena, the general character of the method proper to that
inquiry is sufficiently evident, and needs only to be recapitulated, not
proved. However complex the phenomena, all their sequences and
co-existences result from the laws of the separate elements. The effect
produced, in social phenomena, by any complex set of circumstances,
amounts precisely to the sum of the effects of the circumstances taken
singly; and the complexity does not arise from the number of the laws
themselves, which is not remarkably great, but from the extraordinary
number and variety of the data or elements—of the agents which, in
obedience to that small number of laws, co-operate toward the effect. The
Social Science, therefore (which, by a convenient barbarism, has been
termed Sociology), is a deductive science; not, indeed, after the model of
geometry, but after that of the more complex physical sciences. It infers
the law of each effect from the laws of causation on which that effect
depends; not, however, from the law merely of one cause, as in the
geometrical method, but by considering all the causes which conjunctly
influence the effect, and compounding their laws with one another. Its
method, in short, is the Concrete Deductive Method: that of which
astronomy furnishes the most perfect, natural philosophy a somewhat less
perfect, example, and the employment of which, with the adaptations and
precautions required by the subject, is beginning to regenerate
physiology.

Nor does it admit of doubt, that similar adaptations and precautions are
indispensable in sociology. In applying to that most complex of all
studies what is demonstrably the sole method capable of throwing the light
of science even upon phenomena of a far inferior degree of complication,
we ought to be aware that the same superior complexity which renders the
instrument of Deduction more necessary, renders it also more precarious;
and we must be prepared to meet, by appropriate contrivances, this
increase of difficulty.

The actions and feelings of human beings in the social state, are, no
doubt, entirely governed by psychological and ethological laws: whatever
influence any cause exercises upon the social phenomena, it exercises
through those laws. Supposing therefore the laws of human actions and
feelings to be sufficiently known, there is no extraordinary difficulty in
determining from those laws, the nature of the social effects which any
given cause tends to produce. But when the question is that of compounding
several tendencies together, and computing the aggregate result of many
co-existent causes; and especially when, by attempting to predict what
will actually occur in a given case, we incur the obligation of estimating
and compounding the influences of all the causes which happen to exist in
that case, we attempt a task to proceed far in which, surpasses the
compass of the human faculties.

If all the resources of science are not sufficient to enable us to
calculate, _a priori_, with complete precision, the mutual action of three
bodies gravitating toward one another, it may be judged with what prospect
of success we should endeavor to calculate the result of the conflicting
tendencies which are acting in a thousand different directions and
promoting a thousand different changes at a given instant in a given
society; although we might and ought to be able, from the laws of human
nature, to distinguish correctly enough the tendencies themselves, so far
as they depend on causes accessible to our observation; and to determine
the direction which each of them, if acting alone, would impress upon
society, as well as, in a general way at least, to pronounce that some of
these tendencies are more powerful than others.

But, without dissembling the necessary imperfections of the _a priori_
method when applied to such a subject, neither ought we, on the other
hand; to exaggerate them. The same objections which apply to the Method of
Deduction in this its most difficult employment, apply to it, as we
formerly showed,(276) in its easiest; and would even there have been
insuperable, if there had not existed, as was then fully explained, an
appropriate remedy. This remedy consists in the process which, under the
name of Verification, we have characterized as the third essential
constituent part of the Deductive Method; that of collating the
conclusions of the ratiocination either with the concrete phenomena
themselves, or, when such are obtainable, with their empirical laws. The
ground of confidence in any concrete deductive science is not the _a
priori_ reasoning itself, but the accordance between its results and those
of observation _a posteriori_. Either of these processes, apart from the
other, diminishes in value as the subject increases in complication, and
this is in so rapid a ratio as soon to become entirely worthless; but the
reliance to be placed in the concurrence of the two sorts of evidence, not
only does not diminish in any thing like the same proportion, but is not
necessarily much diminished at all. Nothing more results than a
disturbance in the order of precedency of the two processes, sometimes
amounting to its actual inversion: insomuch that instead of deducing our
conclusions by reasoning, and verifying them by observation, we in some
cases begin by obtaining them provisionally from specific experience, and
afterward connect them with the principles of human nature by _a priori_
reasonings, which reasonings are thus a real Verification.

The only thinker who, with a competent knowledge of scientific methods in
general, has attempted to characterize the Method of Sociology, M. Comte,
considers this inverse order as inseparably inherent in the nature of
sociological speculation. He looks upon the social science as essentially
consisting of generalizations from history, verified, not originally
suggested, by deduction from the laws of human nature. Though there is a
truth contained in this opinion, of which I shall presently endeavor to
show the importance, I can not but think that this truth is enunciated in
too unlimited a manner, and that there is considerable scope in
sociological inquiry for the direct, as well as for the inverse, Deductive
Method.

It will, in fact, be shown in the next chapter, that there is a kind of
sociological inquiries to which, from their prodigious complication, the
method of direct deduction is altogether inapplicable, while by a happy
compensation it is precisely in these cases that we are able to obtain the
best empirical laws: to these inquiries, therefore, the Inverse Method is
exclusively adapted. But there are also, as will presently appear, other
cases in which it is impossible to obtain from direct observation any
thing worthy the name of an empirical law; and it fortunately happens that
these are the very cases in which the Direct Method is least affected by
the objection which undoubtedly must always affect it in a certain degree.

We shall begin, then, by looking at the Social Science as a science of
direct Deduction, and considering what can be accomplished in it, and
under what limitations, by that mode of investigation. We shall, then, in
a separate chapter, examine and endeavor to characterize the inverse
process.

§ 2. It is evident, in the first place, that Sociology, considered as a
system of deductions _a priori_, can not be a science of positive
predictions, but only of tendencies. We may be able to conclude, from the
laws of human nature applied to the circumstances of a given state of
society, that a particular cause will operate in a certain manner unless
counteracted; but we can never be assured to what extent or amount it will
so operate, or affirm with certainty that it will not be counteracted;
because we can seldom know, even approximately, all the agencies which may
co-exist with it, and still less calculate the “collective result” of so
many combined elements. The remark, however, must here be once more
repeated, that knowledge insufficient for prediction may be most valuable
for guidance. It is not necessary for the wise conduct of the affairs of
society, no more than of any one’s private concerns, that we should be
able to foresee infallibly the results of what we do. We must seek our
objects by means which may perhaps be defeated, and take precautions
against dangers which possibly may never be realized. The aim of practical
politics is to surround any given society with the greatest possible
number of circumstances of which the tendencies are beneficial, and to
remove or counteract, as far as practicable, those of which the tendencies
are injurious. A knowledge of the tendencies only, though without the
power of accurately predicting their conjunct result, gives us to a
considerable extent this power.

It would, however, be an error to suppose that even with respect to
tendencies we could arrive in this manner at any great number of
propositions which will be true in all societies without exception. Such a
supposition would be inconsistent with the eminently modifiable nature of
the social phenomena, and the multitude and variety of the circumstances
by which they are modified—circumstances never the same, or even nearly
the same, in two different societies, or in two different periods of the
same society. This would not be so serious an obstacle if, though the
causes acting upon society in general are numerous, those which influence
any one feature of society were limited in number; for we might then
insulate any particular social phenomenon, and investigate its laws
without disturbance from the rest. But the truth is the very opposite of
this. Whatever affects, in an appreciable degree, any one element of the
social state, affects through it all the other elements. The mode of
production of all social phenomena is one great case of Intermixture of
Laws. We can never either understand in theory or command in practice the
condition of a society in any one respect, without taking into
consideration its condition in all other respects. There is no social
phenomenon which is not more or less influenced by every other part of the
condition of the same society, and therefore by every cause which is
influencing any other of the contemporaneous social phenomena. There is,
in short, what physiologists term a _consensus_, similar to that existing
among the various organs and functions of the physical frame of man and
the more perfect animals; and constituting one of the many analogies which
have rendered universal such expressions as the “body politic” and “body
natural.” It follows from this _consensus_, that unless two societies
could be alike in all the circumstances which surround and influence them
(which would imply their being alike in their previous history), no
portion whatever of the phenomena will, unless by accident, precisely
correspond; no one cause will produce exactly the same effects in both.
Every cause, as its effect spreads through society, comes somewhere in
contact with different sets of agencies, and thus has its effects on some
of the social phenomena differently modified; and these differences, by
their reaction, produce a difference even in those of the effects which
would otherwise have been the same. We can never, therefore, affirm with
certainty that a cause which has a particular tendency in one people or in
one age will have exactly the same tendency in another, without referring
back to our premises, and performing over again for the second age or
nation, that analysis of the whole of its influencing circumstances which
we had already performed for the first. The deductive science of society
will not lay down a theorem, asserting in a universal manner the effect of
any cause; but will rather teach us how to frame the proper theorem for
the circumstances of any given case. It will not give the laws of society
in general, but the means of determining the phenomena of any given
society from the particular elements or data of that society.

All the general propositions which can be framed by the deductive science,
are therefore, in the strictest sense of the word, hypothetical. They are
grounded on some suppositious set of circumstances, and declare how some
given cause would operate in those circumstances, supposing that no others
were combined with them. If the set of circumstances supposed have been
copied from those of any existing society, the conclusions will be true of
that society, provided, and in as far as, the effect of those
circumstances shall not be modified by others which have not been taken
into the account. If we desire a nearer approach to concrete truth, we can
only aim at it by taking, or endeavoring to take, a greater number of
individualizing circumstances into the computation.

Considering, however, in how accelerating a ratio the uncertainty of our
conclusions increases as we attempt to take the effect of a greater number
of concurrent causes into our calculations, the hypothetical combinations
of circumstances on which we construct the general theorems of the
science, can not be made very complex, without so rapidly accumulating a
liability to error as must soon deprive our conclusions of all value. This
mode of inquiry, considered as a means of obtaining general propositions,
must, therefore, on pain of frivolity, be limited to those classes of
social facts which, though influenced like the rest by all sociological
agents, are under the _immediate_ influence, principally at least, of a
few only.

§ 3. Notwithstanding the universal _consensus_ of the social phenomena,
whereby nothing which takes place in any part of the operations of society
is without its share of influence on every other part; and notwithstanding
the paramount ascendancy which the general state of civilization and
social progress in any given society must hence exercise over all the
partial and subordinate phenomena; it is not the less true that different
species of social facts are in the main dependent, immediately and in the
first resort, on different kinds of causes; and therefore not only may
with advantage, but must, be studied apart: just as in the natural body we
study separately the physiology and pathology of each of the principal
organs and tissues, though every one is acted upon by the state of all the
others; and though the peculiar constitution and general state of health
of the organism co-operates with, and often preponderates over, the local
causes, in determining the state of any particular organ.

On these considerations is grounded the existence of distinct and
separate, though not independent, branches or departments of sociological
speculation.

There is, for example, one large class of social phenomena in which the
immediately determining causes are principally those which act through the
desire of wealth, and in which the psychological law mainly concerned is
the familiar one, that a greater gain is preferred to a smaller. I mean,
of course, that portion of the phenomena of society which emanate from the
industrial, or productive, operations of mankind; and from those of their
acts through which the distribution of the products of those industrial
operations takes place, in so far as not effected by force, or modified by
voluntary gift. By reasoning from that one law of human nature, and from
the principal outward circumstances (whether universal or confined to
particular states of society) which operate upon the human mind through
that law, we may be enabled to explain and predict this portion of the
phenomena of society, so far as they depend on that class of circumstances
only; overlooking the influence of any other of the circumstances of
society; and therefore neither tracing back the circumstances which we do
take into account, to their possible origin in some other facts in the
social state, nor making allowance for the manner in which any of those
other circumstances may interfere with, and counteract or modify, the
effect of the former. A department of science may thus be constructed,
which has received the name of Political Economy.

The motive which suggests the separation of this portion of the social
phenomena from the rest, and the creation of a distinct branch of science
relating to them is—that they do _mainly_ depend, at least in the first
resort, on one class of circumstances only; and that even when other
circumstances interfere, the ascertainment of the effect due to the one
class of circumstances alone, is a sufficiently intricate and difficult
business to make it expedient to perform it once for all, and then allow
for the effect of the modifying circumstances; especially as certain fixed
combinations of the former are apt to recur often, in conjunction with
ever-varying circumstances of the latter class.

Political Economy, as I have said on another occasion, concerns itself
only with “such of the phenomena of the social state as take place in
consequence of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of every
other human passion or motive; except those which may be regarded as
perpetually antagonizing principles to the desire of wealth, namely,
aversion to labor, and desire of the present enjoyment of costly
indulgences. These it takes, to a certain extent, into its calculations,
because these do not merely, like our other desires, occasionally conflict
with the pursuit of wealth, but accompany it always as a drag or
impediment, and are therefore inseparably mixed up in the consideration of
it. Political Economy considers mankind as occupied solely in acquiring
and consuming wealth; and aims at showing what is the course of action
into which mankind, living in a state of society, would be impelled, if
that motive, except in the degree in which it is checked by the two
perpetual counter-motives above adverted to, were absolute ruler of all
their actions. Under the influence of this desire, it shows mankind
accumulating wealth, and employing that wealth in the production of other
wealth; sanctioning by mutual agreement the institution of property;
establishing laws to prevent individuals from encroaching upon the
property of others by force or fraud; adopting various contrivances for
increasing the productiveness of their labor; settling the division of the
produce by agreement, under the influence of competition (competition
itself being governed by certain laws, which laws are therefore the
ultimate regulators of the division of the produce); and employing certain
expedients (as money, credit, etc.) to facilitate the distribution. All
these operations, though many of them are really the result of a plurality
of motives, are considered by political economy as flowing solely from the
desire of wealth. The science then proceeds to investigate the laws which
govern these several operations, under the supposition that man is a being
who is determined, by the necessity of his nature, to prefer a greater
portion of wealth to a smaller, in all cases, without any other exception
than that constituted by the two counter-motives already specified. Not
that any political economist was ever so absurd as to suppose that mankind
are really thus constituted, but because this is the mode in which science
must necessarily proceed. When an effect depends on a concurrence of
causes, these causes must be studied one at a time, and their laws
separately investigated, if we wish, through the causes, to obtain the
power of either predicting or controlling the effect; since the law of the
effect is compounded of the laws of all the causes which determine it. The
law of the centripetal and that of the projectile force must have been
known, before the motions of the earth and planets could be explained, or
many of them predicted. The same is the case with the conduct of man in
society. In order to judge how he will act under the variety of desires
and aversions which are concurrently operating upon him, we must know how
he would act under the exclusive influence of each one in particular.
There is, perhaps, no action of a man’s life in which he is neither under
the immediate nor under the remote influence of any impulse but the mere
desire of wealth. With respect to those parts of human conduct of which
wealth is not even the principal object, to these political economy does
not pretend that its conclusions are applicable. But there are also
certain departments of human affairs, in which the acquisition of wealth
is the main and acknowledged end. It is only of these that political
economy takes notice. The manner in which it necessarily proceeds is that
of treating the main and acknowledged end as if it were the sole end;
which, of all hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the truth. The
political economist inquires, what are the actions which would be produced
by this desire, if within the departments in question it were unimpeded by
any other. In this way a nearer approximation is obtained than would
otherwise be practicable to the real order of human affairs in those
departments. This approximation has then to be corrected by making proper
allowance for the effects of any impulses of a different description,
which can be shown to interfere with the result in any particular case.
Only in a few of the most striking cases (such as the important one of the
principle of population) are these corrections interpolated into the
expositions of political economy itself; the strictness of purely
scientific arrangement being thereby somewhat departed from, for the sake
of practical utility. So far as it is known, or may be presumed, that the
conduct of mankind in the pursuit of wealth is under the collateral
influence of any other of the properties of our nature than the desire of
obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the least labor and
self-denial, the conclusions of political economy will so far fail of
being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real events, until
they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of influence
exercised by the other cause.”(277)

Extensive and important practical guidance may be derived, in any given
state of society, from general propositions such as those above indicated;
even though the modifying influence of the miscellaneous causes which the
theory does not take into account, as well as the effect of the general
social changes in progress, be provisionally overlooked. And though it has
been a very common error of political economists to draw conclusions from
the elements of one state of society, and apply them to other states in
which many of the elements are not the same, it is even then not
difficult, by tracing back the demonstrations, and introducing the new
premises in their proper places, to make the same general course of
argument which served for the one case, serve for the others too.

For example, it has been greatly the custom of English political
economists to discuss the laws of the distribution of the produce of
industry, on a supposition which is scarcely realized anywhere out of
England and Scotland, namely, that the produce is “shared among three
classes, altogether distinct from one another, laborers, capitalists, and
landlords; and that all these are free agents, permitted in law and in
fact to set upon their labor, their capital, and their land, whatever
price they are able to get for it. The conclusions of the science, being
all adapted to a society thus constituted, require to be revised whenever
they are applied to any other. They are inapplicable where the only
capitalists are the landlords, and the laborers are their property, as in
slave countries. They are inapplicable where the almost universal landlord
is the state, as in India. They are inapplicable where the agricultural
laborer is generally the owner both of the land itself and of the capital,
as frequently in France, or of the capital only, as in Ireland.” But
though it may often be very justly objected to the existing race of
political economists “that they attempt to construct a permanent fabric
out of transitory materials; that they take for granted the immutability
of arrangements of society, many of which are in their nature fluctuating
or progressive, and enunciate with as little qualification as if they were
universal and absolute truths, propositions which are perhaps applicable
to no state of society except the particular one in which the writer
happened to live;” this does not take away the value of the propositions,
considered with reference to the state of society from which they were
drawn. And even as applicable to other states of society, “it must not be
supposed that the science is so incomplete and unsatisfactory as this
might seem to prove. Though many of its conclusions are only locally true,
its method of investigation is applicable universally; and as whoever has
solved a certain number of algebraic equations, can without difficulty
solve all others of the same kind, so whoever knows the political economy
of England, or even of Yorkshire, knows that of all nations, actual or
possible, provided he have good sense enough not to expect the same
conclusion to issue from varying premises.” Whoever has mastered with the
degree of precision which is attainable the laws which, under free
competition, determine the rent, profits, and wages, received by
landlords, capitalists, and laborers, in a state of society in which the
three classes are completely separate, will have no difficulty in
determining the very different laws which regulate the distribution of the
produce among the classes interested in it in any of the states of
cultivation and landed property set forth in the foregoing extract.(278)

§ 4. I would not here undertake to decide what other hypothetical or
abstract sciences similar to Political Economy, may admit of being carved
out of the general body of the social science; what other portions of the
social phenomena are in a sufficiently close and complete dependence, in
the first resort, on a peculiar class of causes, to make it convenient to
create a preliminary science of those causes; postponing the consideration
of the causes which act through them, or in concurrence with them, to a
later period of the inquiry. There is, however, among these separate
departments one which can not be passed over in silence, being of a more
comprehensive and commanding character than any of the other branches into
which the social science may admit of being divided. Like them, it is
directly conversant with the causes of only one class of social facts, but
a class which exercises, immediately or remotely, a paramount influence
over the test. I allude to what may be termed Political Ethology, or the
theory of the causes which determine the type of character belonging to a
people or to an age. Of all the subordinate branches of the social
science, this is the most completely in its infancy. The causes of
national character are scarcely at all understood, and the effect of
institutions or social arrangements upon the character of the people is
generally that portion of their effects which is least attended to, and
least comprehended. Nor is this wonderful, when we consider the infant
state of the science of Ethology itself, from whence the laws must be
drawn, of which the truths of political ethology can be but results and
exemplifications.

Yet, to whoever well considers the matter, it must appear that the laws of
national (or collective) character are by far the most important class of
sociological laws. In the first place, the character which is formed by
any state of social circumstances is in itself the most interesting
phenomenon which that state of society can possibly present. Secondly, it
is also a fact which enters largely into the production of all the other
phenomena. And above all, the character, that is, the opinions, feelings,
and habits, of the people, though greatly the results of the state of
society which precedes them, are also greatly the causes of the state of
society which follows them; and are the power by which all those of the
circumstances of society which are artificial, laws and customs for
instance, are altogether moulded: customs evidently, laws no less really,
either by the direct influence of public sentiment upon the ruling powers,
or by the effect which the state of national opinion and feeling has in
determining the form of government and shaping the character of the
governors.

As might be expected, the most imperfect part of those branches of social
inquiry which have been cultivated as separate sciences, is the theory of
the manner in which their conclusions are affected by ethological
considerations. The omission is no defect in them as abstract or
hypothetical sciences, but it vitiates them in their practical application
as branches of a comprehensive social science. In political economy, for
instance, empirical laws of human nature are tacitly assumed by English
thinkers, which are calculated only for Great Britain and the United
States. Among other things, an intensity of competition is constantly
supposed, which, as a general mercantile fact, exists in no country in the
world except those two. An English political economist, like his
countrymen in general, has seldom learned that it is possible that men, in
conducting the business of selling their goods over a counter, should care
more about their ease or their vanity than about their pecuniary gain. Yet
those who know the habits of the continent of Europe are aware how
apparently small a motive often outweighs the desire of money getting,
even in the operations which have money getting for their direct object.
The more highly the science of ethology is cultivated, and the better the
diversities of individual and national character are understood, the
smaller, probably, will the number of propositions become, which it will
be considered safe to build on as universal principles of human nature.

These considerations show that the process of dividing off the social
science into compartments, in order that each may be studied separately,
and its conclusions afterward corrected for practice by the modifications
supplied by the others, must be subject to at least one important
limitation. Those portions alone of the social phenomena can with
advantage be made the subjects, even provisionally, of distinct branches
of science, into which the diversities of character between different
nations or different times enter as influencing causes only in a secondary
degree. Those phenomena, on the contrary, with which the influences of the
ethological state of the people are mixed up at every step (so that the
connection of effects and causes can not be even rudely marked out without
taking those influences into consideration) could not with any advantage,
nor without great disadvantage, be treated independently of political
ethology, nor, therefore, of all the circumstances by which the qualities
of a people are influenced. For this reason (as well as for others which
will hereafter appear) there can be no separate Science of Government;
that being the fact which, of all others, is most mixed up, both as cause
and effect, with the qualities of the particular people or of the
particular age. All questions respecting the tendencies of forms of
government must stand part of the general science of society, not of any
separate branch of it.

This general Science of Society, as distinguished from the separate
departments of the science (each of which asserts its conclusions only
conditionally, subject to the paramount control of the laws of the general
science) now remains to be characterized. And as will be shown presently,
nothing of a really scientific character is here possible, except by the
inverse deductive method. But before we quit the subject of those
sociological speculations which proceed by way of direct deduction, we
must examine in what relation they stand to that indispensable element in
all deductive sciences, Verification by Specific Experience—comparison
between the conclusions of reasoning and the results of observation.

§ 5. We have seen that, in most deductive sciences, and among the rest in
Ethology itself, which is the immediate foundation of the Social Science,
a preliminary work of preparation is performed on the observed facts, to
fit them for being rapidly and accurately collated (sometimes even for
being collated at all) with the conclusions of theory. This preparatory
treatment consists in finding general propositions which express concisely
what is common to large classes of observed facts; and these are called
the empirical laws of the phenomena. We have, therefore, to inquire,
whether any similar preparatory process can be performed on the facts of
the social science; whether there are any empirical laws in history or
statistics.

In statistics, it is evident that empirical laws may sometimes be traced;
and the tracing them forms an important part of that system of indirect
observation on which we must often rely for the data of the Deductive
Science. The process of the science consists in inferring effects from
their causes; but we have often no means of observing the causes, except
through the medium of their effects. In such cases the deductive science
is unable to predict the effects, for want of the necessary data; it can
determine what causes are capable of producing any given effect, but not
with what frequency and in what quantities those causes exist. An instance
in point is afforded by a newspaper now lying before me. A statement was
furnished by one of the official assignees in bankruptcy showing among the
various bankruptcies which it had been his duty to investigate, in how
many cases the losses had been caused by misconduct of different kinds,
and in how many by unavoidable misfortunes. The result was, that the
number of failures caused by misconduct greatly preponderated over those
arising from all other causes whatever. Nothing but specific experience
could have given sufficient ground for a conclusion to this purport. To
collect, therefore, such empirical laws (which are never more than
approximate generalizations) from direct observation, is an important part
of the process of sociological inquiry.

The experimental process is not here to be regarded as a distinct road to
the truth, but as a means (happening accidentally to be the only, or the
best, available) for obtaining the necessary data for the deductive
science. When the immediate causes of social facts are not open to direct
observation, the empirical law of the effects gives us the empirical law
(which in that case is all that we can obtain) of the causes likewise. But
those immediate causes depend on remote causes; and the empirical law,
obtained by this indirect mode of observation, can only be relied on as
applicable to unobserved cases, so long as there is reason to think that
no change has taken place in any of the remote causes on which the
immediate causes depend. In making use, therefore, of even the best
statistical generalizations for the purpose of inferring (though it be
only conjecturally) that the same empirical laws will hold in any new
case, it is necessary that we be well acquainted with the remoter causes,
in order that we may avoid applying the empirical law to cases which
differ in any of the circumstances on which the truth of the law
ultimately depends. And thus, even where conclusions derived from specific
observation are available for practical inferences in new cases, it is
necessary that the deductive science should stand sentinel over the whole
process; that it should be constantly referred to, and its sanction
obtained to every inference.

The same thing holds true of all generalizations which can be grounded on
history. Not only there are such generalizations, but it will presently be
shown that the general science of society, which inquires into the laws of
succession and co-existence of the great facts constituting the state of
society and civilization at any time, can proceed in no other manner than
by making such generalizations—afterward to be confirmed by connecting
them with the psychological and ethological laws on which they must really
depend.

§ 6. But (reserving this question for its proper place) in those more
special inquiries which form the subject of the separate branches of the
social science, this twofold logical process and reciprocal verification
is not possible; specific experience affords nothing amounting to
empirical laws. This is particularly the case where the object is to
determine the effect of any one social cause among a great number acting
simultaneously; the effect, for example, of corn laws, or of a prohibitive
commercial system generally. Though it may be perfectly certain, from
theory, what _kind_ of effects corn laws must produce, and in what general
direction their influence must tell upon industrial prosperity, their
effect is yet of necessity so much disguised by the similar or contrary
effects of other influencing agents, that specific experience can at most
only show that on the average of some great number of instances, the cases
where there were corn laws exhibited the effect in a greater degree than
those where there were not. Now the number of instances necessary to
exhaust the whole round of combinations of the various influential
circumstances, and thus afford a fair average, never can be obtained. Not
only we can never learn with sufficient authenticity the facts of so many
instances, but the world itself does not afford them in sufficient
numbers, within the limits of the given state of society and civilization
which such inquiries always presuppose. Having thus no previous empirical
generalizations with which to collate the conclusions of theory, the only
mode of direct verification which remains is to compare those conclusions
with the result of an individual experiment or instance. But here the
difficulty is equally great. For in order to verify a theory by an
experiment, the circumstances of the experiment must be exactly the same
with those contemplated in the theory. But in social phenomena the
circumstances of no two cases are exactly alike. A trial of corn laws in
another country, or in a former generation, would go a very little way
toward verifying a conclusion drawn respecting their effect in this
generation and in this country. It thus happens, in most cases, that the
only individual instance really fitted to verify the predictions of theory
is the very instance for which the predictions were made; and the
verification comes too late to be of any avail for practical guidance.

Although, however, direct verification is impossible, there is an indirect
verification, which is scarcely of less value, and which is always
practicable. The conclusion drawn as to the individual case can only be
directly verified in that case; but it is verified indirectly, by the
verification of other conclusions, drawn in other individual cases from
the same laws. The experience which comes too late to verify the
particular proposition to which it refers, is not too late to help toward
verifying the general sufficiency of the theory. The test of the degree in
which the science affords safe ground for predicting (and consequently for
practically dealing with) what has not yet happened, is the degree in
which it would have enabled us to predict what has actually occurred.
Before our theory of the influence of a particular cause, in a given state
of circumstances, can be entirely trusted, we must be able to explain and
account for the existing state of all that portion of the social phenomena
which that cause has a tendency to influence. If, for instance, we would
apply our speculations in political economy to the prediction or guidance
of the phenomena of any country, we must be able to explain all the
mercantile or industrial facts of a general character, appertaining to the
present state of that country; to point out causes sufficient to account
for all of them, and prove, or show good ground for supposing, that these
causes have really existed. If we can not do this, it is a proof either
that the facts which ought to be taken into account are not yet completely
known to us, or that although we know the facts, we are not masters of a
sufficiently perfect theory to enable us to assign their consequences. In
either case we are not, in the present state of our knowledge, fully
competent to draw conclusions, speculative or practical, for that country.
In like manner, if we would attempt to judge of the effect which any
political institution would have, supposing that it could be introduced
into any given country, we must be able to show that the existing state of
the practical government of that country, and of whatever else depends
thereon, together with the particular character and tendencies of the
people, and their state in respect to the various elements of social
well-being, are such as the institutions they have lived under, in
conjunction with the other circumstances of their nature or of their
position, were calculated to produce.

To prove, in short, that our science, and our knowledge of the particular
case, render us competent to predict the future, we must show that they
would have enabled us to predict the present and the past. If there be any
thing which we could not have predicted, this constitutes a residual
phenomenon, requiring further study for the purpose of explanation; and we
must either search among the circumstances of the particular case until we
find one which, on the principles of our existing theory, accounts for the
unexplained phenomenon, or we must turn back, and seek the explanation by
an extension and improvement of the theory itself.




                                Chapter X.


Of The Inverse Deductive, Or Historical, Method.


§ 1. There are two kinds of sociological inquiry. In the first kind, the
question proposed is, what effect will follow from a given cause, a
certain general condition of social circumstances being presupposed. As,
for example, what would be the effect of imposing or of repealing corn
laws, of abolishing monarchy or introducing universal suffrage, in the
present condition of society and civilization in any European country, or
under any other given supposition with regard to the circumstances of
society in general, without reference to the changes which might take
place, or which may already be in progress, in those circumstances. But
there is also a second inquiry, namely, what are the laws which determine
those general circumstances themselves. In this last the question is, not
what will be the effect of a given cause in a certain state of society,
but what are the causes which produce, and the phenomena which
characterize, states of society generally. In the solution of this
question consists the general Science of Society; by which the conclusions
of the other and more special kind of inquiry must be limited and
controlled.

§ 2. In order to conceive correctly the scope of this general science, and
distinguish it from the subordinate departments of sociological
speculation, it is necessary to fix the ideas attached to the phrase, “A
State of Society.” What is called a state of society, is the simultaneous
state of all the greater social facts or phenomena. Such are: the degree
of knowledge, and of intellectual and moral culture, existing in the
community, and in every class of it; the state of industry, of wealth and
its distribution; the habitual occupations of the community; their
division into classes, and the relations of those classes to one another;
the common beliefs which they entertain on all the subjects most important
to mankind, and the degree of assurance with which those beliefs are held;
their tastes, and the character and degree of their æsthetic development;
their form of government, and the more important of their laws and
customs. The condition of all these things, and of many more which will
readily suggest themselves, constitute the state of society, or the state
of civilization, at any given time.

When states of society, and the causes which produce them, are spoken of
as a subject of science, it is implied that there exists a natural
correlation among these different elements; that not every variety of
combination of these general social facts is possible, but only certain
combinations; that, in short, there exist Uniformities of Co-existence
between the states of the various social phenomena. And such is the truth;
as is indeed a necessary consequence of the influence exercised by every
one of those phenomena over every other. It is a fact implied in the
_consensus_ of the various parts of the social body.

States of society are like different constitutions or different ages in
the physical frame; they are conditions not of one or a few organs or
functions, but of the whole organism. Accordingly, the information which
we possess respecting past ages, and respecting the various states of
society now existing in different regions of the earth, does, when duly
analyzed, exhibit uniformities. It is found that when one of the features
of society is in a particular state, a state of many other features, more
or less precisely determinate, always or usually co-exists with it.

But the uniformities of co-existence obtaining among phenomena which are
effects of causes, must (as we have so often observed) be corollaries from
the laws of causation by which these phenomena are really determined. The
mutual correlation between the different elements of each state of
society, is, therefore, a derivative law, resulting from the laws which
regulate the succession between one state of society and another; for the
proximate cause of every state of society is the state of society
immediately preceding it. The fundamental problem, therefore, of the
social science, is to find the laws according to which any state of
society produces the state which succeeds it and takes its place. This
opens the great and vexed question of the progressiveness of man and
society; an idea involved in every just conception of social phenomena as
the subject of a science.

§ 3. It is one of the characters, not absolutely peculiar to the sciences
of human nature and society, but belonging to them in a peculiar degree,
to be conversant with a subject-matter whose properties are changeable. I
do not mean changeable from day to day, but from age to age; so that not
only the qualities of individuals vary, but those of the majority are not
the same in one age as in another.

The principal cause of this peculiarity is the extensive and constant
reaction of the effects upon their causes. The circumstances in which
mankind are placed, operating according to their own laws and to the laws
of human nature, form the characters of the human beings; but the human
beings, in their turn, mould and shape the circumstances for themselves
and for those who come after them. From this reciprocal action there must
necessarily result either a cycle or a progress. In astronomy also, every
fact is at once effect and cause; the successive positions of the various
heavenly bodies produce changes both in the direction and in the intensity
of the forces by which those positions are determined. But in the case of
the solar system, these mutual actions bring around again, after a certain
number of changes, the former state of circumstances; which, of course,
leads to the perpetual recurrence of the same series in an unvarying
order. Those bodies, in short, revolve in orbits: but there are (or,
conformably to the laws of astronomy, there might be) others which,
instead of an orbit, describe a trajectory—a course not returning into
itself. One or other of these must be the type to which human affairs must
conform.

One of the thinkers who earliest conceived the succession of historical
events as subject to fixed laws, and endeavored to discover these laws by
an analytical survey of history, Vico, the celebrated author of the
_Scienza Nuova_, adopted the former of these opinions. He conceived the
phenomena of human society as revolving in an orbit; as going through
periodically the same series of changes. Though there were not wanting
circumstances tending to give some plausibility to this view, it would not
bear a close scrutiny: and those who have succeeded Vico in this kind of
speculations have universally adopted the idea of a trajectory or
progress, in lieu of an orbit or cycle.

The words Progress and Progressiveness are not here to be understood as
synonymous with improvement and tendency to improvement. It is conceivable
that the laws of human nature might determine, and even necessitate, a
certain series of changes in man and society, which might not in every
case, or which might not on the whole, be improvements. It is my belief,
indeed, that the general tendency is, and will continue to be, saving
occasional and temporary exceptions, one of improvement; a tendency toward
a better and happier state. This, however, is not a question of the method
of the social science, but a theorem of the science itself. For our
purpose it is sufficient that there is a progressive change both in the
character of the human race and in their outward circumstances, so far as
moulded by themselves; that in each successive age the principal phenomena
of society are different from what they were in the age preceding, and
still more different from any previous age: the periods which most
distinctly mark these successive changes being intervals of one
generation, during which a new set of human beings have been educated,
have grown up from childhood, and taken possession of society.

The progressiveness of the human race is the foundation on which a method
of philosophizing in the social science has been of late years erected,
far superior to either of the two modes which had previously been
prevalent, the chemical or experimental, and the geometrical modes. This
method, which is now generally adopted by the most advanced thinkers on
the Continent, consists in attempting, by a study and analysis of the
general facts of history, to discover (what these philosophers term) the
law of progress: which law, once ascertained, must according to them
enable us to predict future events, just as after a few terms of an
infinite series in algebra we are able to detect the principle, of
regularity in their formation, and to predict the rest of the series to
any number of terms we please. The principal aim of historical speculation
in France, of late years, has been to ascertain this law. But while I
gladly acknowledge the great services which have been rendered to
historical knowledge by this school, I can not but deem them to be mostly
chargeable with a fundamental misconception of the true method of social
philosophy. The misconception consists in supposing that the order of
succession which we may be able to trace among the different states of
society and civilization which history presents to us, even if that order
were more rigidly uniform than it has yet been proved to be, could ever
amount to a law of nature. It can only be an empirical law. The succession
of states of the human mind and of human society can not have an
independent law of its own; it must depend on the psychological and
ethological laws which govern the action of circumstances on men and of
men on circumstances. It is conceivable that those laws might be such, and
the general circumstances of the human race such, as to determine the
successive transformations of man and society to one given and unvarying
order. But even if the case were so, it can not be the ultimate aim of
science to discover an empirical law. Until that law could be connected
with the psychological and ethological laws on which it must depend, and,
by the consilience of deduction _a priori_ with historical evidence, could
be converted from an empirical law into a scientific one, it could not be
relied on for the prediction of future events, beyond, at most, strictly
adjacent cases. M. Comte alone, among the new historical school, has seen
the necessity of thus connecting all our generalizations from history with
the laws of human nature.

§ 4. But, while it is an imperative rule never to introduce any
generalization from history into the social science unless sufficient
grounds can be pointed out for it in human nature, I do not think any one
will contend that it would have been possible, setting out from the
principles of human nature and from the general circumstances of the
position of our species, to determine _a priori_ the order in which human
development must take place, and to predict, consequently, the general
facts of history up to the present time. After the first few terms of the
series, the influence exercised, over each generation by the generations
which preceded it, becomes, (as is well observed by the writer last
referred to) more and more preponderant over all other influences; until
at length what we now are and do, is in a very small degree the result of
the universal circumstances of the human race, or even of our own
circumstances acting through the original qualities of our species, but
mainly of the qualities produced in us by the whole previous history of
humanity. So long a series of actions and reactions between Circumstances
and Man, each successive term being composed of an ever greater number and
variety of parts, could not possibly be computed by human faculties from
the elementary laws which produce it. The mere length of the series would
be a sufficient obstacle, since a slight error in any one of the terms
would augment in rapid progression at every subsequent step.

If, therefore, the series of the effects themselves did not, when examined
as a whole, manifest any regularity, we should in vain attempt to
construct a general science of society. We must in that case have
contented ourselves with that subordinate order of sociological
speculation formerly noticed, namely, with endeavoring to ascertain what
would be the effect of the introduction of any new cause, in a state of
society supposed to be fixed—a knowledge sufficient for the more common
exigencies of daily political practice, but liable to fail in all cases in
which the progressive movement of society is one of the influencing
elements; and therefore more precarious in proportion as the case is more
important. But since both the natural varieties of mankind, and the
original diversities of local circumstances, are much less considerable
than the points of agreement, there will naturally be a certain degree of
uniformity in the progressive development of the species and of its works.
And this uniformity tends to become greater, not less, as society
advances; since the evolution of each people, which is at first determined
exclusively by the nature and circumstances of that people, is gradually
brought under the influence (which becomes stronger as civilization
advances) of the other nations of the earth, and of the circumstances by
which they have been influenced. History accordingly does, when
judiciously examined, afford Empirical Laws of Society. And the problem of
general sociology is to ascertain these, and connect them with the laws of
human nature, by deductions showing that such were the derivative laws
naturally to be expected as the consequences of those ultimate ones.

It is, indeed, hardly ever possible, even after history has suggested the
derivative law, to demonstrate _a priori_ that such was the only order of
succession or of co-existence in which the effects could, consistently
with the laws of human nature, have been produced. We can at most make out
that there were strong _a priori_ reasons for expecting it, and that no
other order of succession or co-existence would have been so likely to
result from the nature of man and the general circumstances of his
position. Often we can not do even this; we can not even show that what
did take place was probable _a priori_, but only that it was possible.
This, however—which, in the Inverse Deductive Method that we are now
characterizing, is a real process of verification—is as indispensable, as
verification by specific experience has been shown to be, where the
conclusion is originally obtained by the direct way of deduction. The
empirical laws must be the result of but a few instances, since few
nations have ever attained at all, and still fewer by their own
independent development, a high stage of social progress. If, therefore,
even one or two of these few instances be insufficiently known, or
imperfectly analyzed into their elements, and therefore not adequately
compared with other instances, nothing is more probable than that a wrong
empirical law will emerge instead of the right one. Accordingly, the most
erroneous generalizations are continually made from the course of history;
not only in this country, where history can not yet be said to be at all
cultivated as a science, but in other countries where it is so cultivated,
and by persons well versed in it. The only check or corrective is,
constant verification by psychological and ethological laws. We may add to
this, that no one but a person competently skilled in those laws is
capable of preparing the materials for historical generalization, by
analyzing the facts of history, or even by observing the social phenomena
of his own time. No other will be aware of the comparative importance of
different facts, nor consequently know what facts to look for, or to
observe; still less will he be capable of estimating the evidence of facts
which, as is the case with most, can not be ascertained by direct
observation or learned from testimony, but must be inferred from marks.

§ 5. The Empirical Laws of Society are of two kinds; some are uniformities
of co-existence, some of succession. According as the science is occupied
in ascertaining and verifying the former sort of uniformities or the
latter, M. Comte gives it the title of Social Statics, or of Social
Dynamics; conformably to the distinction in mechanics between the
conditions of equilibrium and those of movement; or in biology, between
the laws of organization and those of life. The first branch of the
science ascertains the conditions of stability in the social union; the
second, the laws of progress. Social Dynamics is the theory of Society
considered in a state of progressive movement; while Social Statics is the
theory of the _consensus_ already spoken of as existing among the
different parts of the social organism; in other words, the theory of the
mutual actions and reactions of contemporaneous social phenomena;
making(279) provisionally, as far as possible, abstraction, for scientific
purposes, of the fundamental movement which is at all times gradually
modifying the whole of them.

“In this first point of view, the provisions of sociology will enable us
to infer one from another (subject to ulterior verification by direct
observation) the various characteristic marks of each distinct mode of
social existence, in a manner essentially analogous to what is now
habitually practiced in the anatomy of the physical body. This preliminary
aspect, therefore, of political science, of necessity supposes that
(contrary to the existing habits of philosophers) each of the numerous
elements of the social state, ceasing to be looked at independently and
absolutely, shall be always and exclusively considered relatively to all
the other elements, with the whole of which it is united by mutual
interdependence. It would be superfluous to insist here upon the great and
constant utility of this branch of sociological speculation. It is, in the
first place, the indispensable basis of the theory of social progress. It
may, moreover, be employed, immediately, and of itself, to supply the
place, provisionally at least, of direct observation, which in many cases
is not always practicable for some of the elements of society, the real
condition of which may, however, be sufficiently judged of by means of the
relations which connect them with others previously known. The history of
the sciences may give us some notion of the habitual importance of this
auxiliary resource, by reminding us, for example, how the vulgar errors of
mere erudition concerning the pretended acquirements of the ancient
Egyptians in the higher astronomy were irrevocably dissipated (even before
sentence had been passed on them by a sounder erudition) from the single
consideration of the inevitable connection between the general state of
astronomy and that of abstract geometry, then evidently in its infancy. It
would be easy to cite a multitude of analogous cases, the character of
which could admit of no dispute. In order to avoid exaggeration, however,
it should be remarked, that these necessary relations among the different
aspects of society can not, from their very nature, be so simple and
precise that the results observed could only have arisen from some one
mode of mutual co-ordination. Such a notion, already too narrow in the
science of life, would be completely at variance with the still more
complex nature of sociological speculations. But the exact estimation of
these limits of variation, both in the healthy and in the morbid state,
constitutes, at least as much as in the anatomy of the natural body, an
indispensable complement to every theory of Sociological Statics; without
which the indirect exploration above spoken of would often lead into
error.

“This is not the place for methodically demonstrating the existence of a
necessary relation among all the possible aspects of the same social
organism; a point on which, in principle at least, there is now little
difference of opinion among sound thinkers. From whichever of the social
elements we choose to set out, we may easily recognize that it has always
a connection, more or less immediate, with all the other elements, even
with those which at first sight appear the most independent of it. The
dynamical consideration of the progressive development of civilized
humanity, affords, no doubt, a still more efficacious means of effecting
this interesting verification of the _consensus_ of the social phenomena,
by displaying the manner in which every change in any one part, operates
immediately, or very speedily, upon all the rest. But this indication may
be preceded, or at all events followed, by a confirmation of a purely
statical kind; for, in politics as in mechanics, the communication of
motion from one object to another proves a connection between them.
Without descending to the minute interdependence of the different branches
of any one science or art, is it not evident that among the different
sciences, as well as among most of the arts, there exists such a
connection, that if the state of any one well-marked division of them is
sufficiently known to us, we can with real scientific assurance infer,
from their necessary correlation, the contemporaneous state of every one
of the others? By a further extension of this consideration, we may
conceive the necessary relation which exists between the condition of the
sciences in general and that of the arts in general, except that the
mutual dependence is less intense in proportion as it is more indirect.
The same is the case, when, instead of considering the aggregate of the
social phenomena in some one people, we examine it simultaneously in
different contemporaneous nations; between which the perpetual reciprocity
of influence, especially in modern times, can not be contested, though the
_consensus_ must in this case be ordinarily of a less decided character,
and must decrease gradually with the affinity of the cases and the
multiplicity of the points of contact, so as at last, in some cases, to
disappear almost entirely; as for, example, between Western Europe and
Eastern Asia, of which the various general states of society appear to
have been hitherto almost independent of one another.

These remarks are followed by illustrations of one of the most important,
and until lately, most neglected, of the general principles which, in this
division of the social science, may be considered as established; namely,
the necessary correlation between the form of government existing in any
society and the contemporaneous state of civilization: a natural law which
stamps the endless discussions and innumerable theories respecting forms
of government in the abstract, as fruitless and worthless, for any other
purpose than as a preparatory treatment of materials to be afterward used
for the construction of a better philosophy.

As already remarked, one of the main results of the science of social
statics would be to ascertain the requisites of stable political union.
There are some circumstances which, being found in all societies without
exception, and in the greatest degree where the social union is most
complete, may be considered (when psychological and ethological laws
confirm the indication) as conditions of the existence of the complex
phenomena called a State. For example, no numerous society has ever been
held together without laws, or usages equivalent to them; without
tribunals, and an organized force of some sort to execute their decisions.
There have always been public authorities whom, with more or less
strictness and in cases more or less accurately defined, the rest of the
community obeyed, or according to general opinion were bound to obey. By
following out this course of inquiry we shall find a number of requisites,
which have been present in every society that has maintained a collective
existence, and on the cessation of which it has either merged in some
other society, or reconstructed itself on some new basis, in which the
conditions were conformed to. Although these results, obtained by
comparing different forms and states of society, amount in themselves only
to empirical laws; some of them, when once suggested, are found to follow
with so much probability from general laws of human nature, that the
consilience of the two processes raises the evidence to proof, and the
generalizations to the rank of scientific truths.

This seems to be affirmable (for instance) of the conclusions arrived at
in the following passage, extracted, with some alterations, from a
criticism on the negative philosophy of the eighteenth century,(280) and
which I quote, though (as in some former instances) from myself, because I
have no better way of illustrating the conception I have formed of the
kind of theorems of which sociological statics would consist.

“The very first element of the social union, obedience to a government of
some sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in the world.
Among a timid and spiritless race like the inhabitants of the vast plains
of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural growth; though
even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among any people with
whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the pressure of
circumstances as a divine decree, did not prevail as a religious doctrine.
But the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike race to submit their
individual _arbitrium_ to any common umpire, has always been felt to be so
great, that nothing short of supernatural power has been deemed adequate
to overcome it; and such tribes have always assigned to the first
institution of civil society a divine origin. So differently did those
judge who knew savage men by actual experience, from those who had no
acquaintance with them except in the civilized state. In modern Europe
itself, after the fall of the Roman empire, to subdue the feudal anarchy
and bring the whole people of any European nation into subjection to
government (though Christianity in the most concentrated form of its
influence was co-operating in the work) required thrice as many centuries
as have elapsed since that time.

“Now if these philosophers had known human nature under any other type
than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society among
whom they lived, it would have occurred to them, that wherever this
habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and durably
established, and yet the vigor and manliness of character which resisted
its establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain requisites
have existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of which the
following may be regarded as the principal.

“First: there has existed, for all who were accounted citizens—for all who
were not slaves, kept down by brute force—a system of _education_,
beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which whatever else
it might include, one main and incessant ingredient was _restraining
discipline_. To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power,
of subordinating his personal impulses and aims to what were considered
the ends of society; of adhering, against all temptation, to the course of
conduct which those ends prescribed; of controlling in himself all
feelings which were liable to militate against those ends, and encouraging
all such as tended toward them; this was the purpose, to which every
outward motive that the authority directing the system could command, and
every inward power or principle which its knowledge of human nature
enabled it to evoke, were endeavored to be rendered instrumental. The
entire civil and military policy of the ancient commonwealths was such a
system of training; in modern nations its place has been attempted to be
supplied, principally, by religious teaching. And whenever and in
proportion as the strictness of the restraining discipline was relaxed,
the natural tendency of mankind to anarchy re-asserted itself; the state
became disorganized from within; mutual conflict for selfish ends,
neutralized the energies which were required to keep up the contest
against natural causes of evil; and the nation, after a longer or briefer
interval of progressive decline, became either the slave of a despotism,
or the prey of a foreign invader.

“The second condition of permanent political society has been found to be,
the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance or
loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to any
particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a
monarchy, its essence is always the same; viz., that there be in the
constitution of the state _something_ which is settled, something
permanent, and not to be called in question; something which, by general
agreement, has a right to be where it is, and to be secure against
disturbance, whatever else may change. This feeling may attach itself, as
among the Jews (and in most of the commonwealths of antiquity), to a
common God or gods, the protectors and guardians of their state. Or it may
attach itself to certain persons, who are deemed to be, whether by divine
appointment, by long prescription, or by the general recognition of their
superior capacity and worthiness, the rightful guides and guardians of the
rest. Or it may connect itself with laws; with ancient liberties or
ordinances. Or, finally, (and this is the only shape in which the feeling
is likely to exist hereafter), it may attach itself to the principles of
individual freedom and political and social equality, as realized in
institutions which as yet exist nowhere, or exist only in a rudimentary
state. But in all political societies which have had a durable existence,
there has been some fixed point: something which people agreed in holding
sacred; which, wherever freedom of discussion was a recognized principle,
it was of course lawful to contest in theory, but which no one could
either fear or hope to see shaken in practice; which, in short (except
perhaps during some temporary crisis), was in the common estimation placed
beyond discussion. And the necessity of this may easily be made evident. A
state never is, nor until mankind are vastly improved, can hope to be, for
any long time exempt from internal dissension; for there neither is nor
has ever been any state of society in which collisions did not occur
between the immediate interests and passions of powerful sections of the
people. What, then, enables nations to weather these storms, and pass
through turbulent times without any permanent weakening of the securities
for peaceable existence? Precisely this—that however important the
interests about which men fell out, the conflict did not affect the
fundamental principle of the system of social union which happened to
exist; nor threaten large portions of the community with the subversion of
that on which they had built their calculations, and with which their
hopes and aims had become identified. But when the questioning of these
fundamental principles is (not the occasional disease, or salutary
medicine, but) the habitual condition of the body politic, and when all
the violent animosities are called forth, which spring naturally from such
a situation, the state is virtually in a position of civil war; and can
never long remain free from it in act and fact.

“The third essential condition of stability in political society, is a
strong and active principle of cohesion among the members of the same
community or state. We need scarcely say that we do not mean nationality,
in the vulgar sense of the term; a senseless antipathy to foreigners;
indifference to the general welfare of the human race, or an unjust
preference of the supposed interests of our own country; a cherishing of
bad peculiarities because they are national, or a refusal to adopt what
has been found good by other countries. We mean a principle of sympathy,
not of hostility; of union, not of separation. We mean a feeling of common
interest among those who live under the same government, and are contained
within the same natural or historical boundaries. We mean, that one part
of the community do not consider themselves as foreigners with regard to
another part; that they set a value on their connection—feel that they are
one people, that their lot is cast together, that evil to any of their
fellow-countrymen is evil to themselves, and do not desire selfishly to
free themselves from their share of any common inconvenience by severing
the connection. How strong this feeling was in those ancient commonwealths
which attained any durable greatness, every one knows. How happily Rome,
in spite of all her tyranny, succeeded in establishing the feeling of a
common country among the provinces of her vast and divided empire, will
appear when any one who has given due attention to the subject shall take
the trouble to point it out. In modern times the countries which have had
that feeling in the strongest degree have been the most powerful
countries: England, France, and, in proportion to their territory and
resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in her connection with
Ireland is one of the most signal examples of the consequences of its
absence. Every Italian knows why Italy is under a foreign yoke; every
German knows what maintains despotism in the Austrian empire;(281) the
evils of Spain flow as much from the absence of nationality among the
Spaniards themselves, as from the presence of it in their relations with
foreigners: while the completest illustration of all is afforded by the
republics of South America, where the parts of one and the same state
adhere so slightly together, that no sooner does any province think itself
aggrieved by the general government than it proclaims itself a separate
nation.”

§ 6. While the derivative laws of social statics are ascertained by
analyzing different states of society, and comparing them with one
another, without regard to the order of their succession, the
consideration of the successive order is, on the contrary, predominant in
the study of social dynamics, of which the aim is to observe and explain
the sequences of social conditions. This branch of the social science
would be as complete as it can be made, if every one of the leading
general circumstances of each generation were traced to its causes in the
generation immediately preceding. But the _consensus_ is so complete
(especially in modern history), that in the filiation of one generation
and another, it is the whole which produces the whole, rather than any
part a part. Little progress, therefore, can be made in establishing the
filiation, directly from laws of human nature, without having first
ascertained the immediate or derivative laws according to which social
states generate one another as society advances; the _axiomata media_ of
General Sociology.

The empirical laws which are most readily obtained by generalization from
history do not amount to this. They are not the "middle principles"
themselves, but only evidence toward the establishment of such principles.
They consist of certain general tendencies which may be perceived in
society; a progressive increase of some social elements, and diminution of
others, or a gradual change in the general character of certain elements.
It is easily seen, for instance, that as society advances, mental tend
more and more to prevail over bodily qualities, and masses over
individuals; that the occupation of all that portion of mankind who are
not under external restraint is at first chiefly military, but society
becomes progressively more and more engrossed with productive pursuits,
and the military spirit gradually gives way to the industrial; to which
many similar truths might be added. And with generalizations of this
description, ordinary inquirers, even of the historical school now
predominant on the Continent, are satisfied. But these and all such
results are still at too great a distance from the elementary laws of
human nature on which they depend—too many links intervene, and the
concurrence of causes at each link is far too complicated—to enable these
propositions to be presented as direct corollaries from those elementary
principles. They have, therefore, in the minds of most inquirers, remained
in the state of empirical laws, applicable only within the bounds of
actual observation; without any means of determining their real limits,
and of judging whether the changes which have hitherto been in progress
are destined to continue indefinitely, or to terminate, or even to be
reversed.

§ 7. In order to obtain better empirical laws, we must not rest satisfied
with noting the progressive changes which manifest themselves in the
separate elements of society, and in which nothing is indicated but the
relation of fragments of the effect to corresponding fragments of the
cause. It is necessary to combine the statical view of social phenomena
with the dynamical, considering not only the progressive changes of the
different elements, but the contemporaneous condition of each; and thus
obtain empirically the law of correspondence not only between the
simultaneous states, but between the simultaneous changes, of those
elements. This law of correspondence it is, which, duly verified _a
priori_, would become the real scientific derivative law of the
development of humanity and human affairs.

In the difficult process of observation and comparison which is here
required, it would evidently be a great assistance if it should happen to
be the fact, that some one element in the complex existence of social man
is pre-eminent over all others as the prime agent of the social movement.
For we could then take the progress of that one element as the central
chain, to each successive link of which, the corresponding links of all
the other progressions being appended, the succession of the facts would
by this alone be presented in a kind of spontaneous order, far more nearly
approaching to the real order of their filiation than could be obtained by
any other merely empirical process.

Now, the evidence of history and that of human nature combine, by a
striking instance of consilience, to show that there really is one social
element which is thus predominant, and almost paramount, among the agents
of the social progression. This is, the state of the speculative faculties
of mankind; including the nature of the beliefs which by any means they
have arrived at, concerning themselves and the world by which they are
surrounded.

It would be a great error, and one very little likely to be committed, to
assert that speculation, intellectual activity, the pursuit of truth, is
among the more powerful propensities of human nature, or holds a
predominating place in the lives of any, save decidedly exceptional,
individuals. But, notwithstanding the relative weakness of this principle
among other sociological agents, its influence is the main determining
cause of the social progress; all the other dispositions of our nature
which contribute to that progress being dependent on it for the means of
accomplishing their share of the work. Thus (to take the most obvious case
first), the impelling force to most of the improvements effected in the
arts of life, is the desire of increased material comfort; but as we can
only act upon external objects in proportion to our knowledge of them, the
state of knowledge at any time is the limit of the industrial improvements
possible at that time; and the progress of industry must follow, and
depend on, the progress of knowledge. The same thing may be shown to be
true, though it is not quite so obvious, of the progress of the fine arts.
Further, as the strongest propensities of uncultivated or half-cultivated
human nature (being the purely selfish ones, and those of a sympathetic
character which partake most of the nature of selfishness) evidently tend
in themselves to disunite mankind, not to unite them—to make them rivals,
not confederates, social existence is only possible by a disciplining of
those more powerful propensities, which consists in subordinating them to
a common system of opinions. The degree of this subordination is the
measure of the completeness of the social union, and the nature of the
common opinions determines its kind. But in order that mankind should
conform their actions to any set of opinions, these opinions must exist,
must be believed by them. And thus, the state of the speculative
faculties, the character of the propositions assented to by the intellect,
essentially determines the moral and political state of the community, as
we have already seen that it determines the physical.

These conclusions, deduced from the laws of human nature, are in entire
accordance with the general facts of history. Every considerable change
historically known to us in the condition of any portion of mankind, when
not brought about by external force, has been preceded by a change, of
proportional extent, in the state of their knowledge, or in their
prevalent beliefs. As between any given state of speculation, and the
correlative state of every thing else, it was almost always the former
which first showed itself; though the effects, no doubt, reacted potently
upon the cause. Every considerable advance in material civilization has
been preceded by an advance in knowledge: and when any great social change
has come to pass, either in the way of gradual development or of sudden
conflict, it has had for its precursor a great change in the opinions and
modes of thinking of society. Polytheism, Judaism, Christianity,
Protestantism, the critical philosophy of modern Europe, and its positive
science—each of these has been a primary agent in making society what it
was at each successive period, while society was but secondarily
instrumental in making _them_, each of them (so far as causes can be
assigned for its existence) being mainly an emanation not from the
practical life of the period, but from the previous state of belief and
thought. The weakness of the speculative propensity in mankind generally
has not, therefore, prevented the progress of speculation from governing
that of society at large; it has only, and too often, prevented progress
altogether, where the intellectual progression has come to an early stand
for want of sufficiently favorable circumstances.

From this accumulated evidence, we are justified in concluding, that the
order of human progression in all respects will mainly depend on the order
of progression in the intellectual convictions of mankind, that is, on the
law of the successive transformations of human opinions. The question
remains, whether this law can be determined; at first from history as an
empirical law, then converted into a scientific theorem by deducing it _a
priori_ from the principles of human nature. As the progress of knowledge
and the changes in the opinions of mankind are very slow, and manifest
themselves in a well-defined manner only at long intervals, it can not be
expected that the general order of sequence should be discoverable from
the examination of less than a very considerable part of the duration of
the social progress. It is necessary to take into consideration the whole
of past time, from the first recorded condition of the human race, to the
memorable phenomena of the last and present generations.

§ 8. The investigation which I have thus endeavored to characterize, has
been systematically attempted, up to the present time, by M. Comte alone.
His work is hitherto the only known example of the study of social
phenomena according to this conception of the Historical Method. Without
discussing here the worth of his conclusions, and especially of his
predictions and recommendations with respect to the Future of society,
which appear to me greatly inferior in value to his appreciation of the
Past, I shall confine myself to mentioning one important generalization,
which M. Comte regards as the fundamental law of the progress of human
knowledge. Speculation he conceives to have, on every subject of human
inquiry, three successive stages; in the first of which it tends to
explain the phenomena by supernatural agencies, in the second by
metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or final state confines itself
to ascertaining their laws of succession and similitude. This
generalization appears to me to have that high degree of scientific
evidence which is derived from the concurrence of the indications of
history with the probabilities derived from the constitution of the human
mind. Nor could it be easily conceived, from the mere enunciation of such
a proposition, what a flood of light it lets in upon the whole course of
history, when its consequences are traced, by connecting with each of the
three states of human intellect which it distinguishes, and with each
successive modification of those three states, the correlative condition
of other social phenomena.(282)

But whatever decision competent judges may pronounce on the results
arrived at by any individual inquirer, the method now characterized is
that by which the derivative laws of social order and of social progress
must be sought. By its aid we may hereafter succeed not only in looking
far forward into the future history of the human race, but in determining
what artificial means may be used, and to what extent, to accelerate the
natural progress in so far as it is beneficial; to compensate for whatever
may be its inherent inconveniences or disadvantages; and to guard against
the dangers or accidents to which our species is exposed from the
necessary incidents of its progression. Such practical instructions,
founded on the highest branch of speculative sociology, will form the
noblest and most beneficial portion of the Political Art.

That of this science and art even the foundations are but beginning to be
laid, is sufficiently evident. But the superior minds are fairly turning
themselves toward that object. It has become the aim of really scientific
thinkers to connect by theories the facts of universal history: it is
acknowledged to be one of the requisites of a general system of social
doctrine, that it should explain, so far as the data exist, the main facts
of history; and a Philosophy of History is generally admitted to be at
once the verification, and the initial form, of the Philosophy of the
Progress of Society.

If the endeavors now making in all the more cultivated nations, and
beginning to be made even in England (usually the last to enter into the
general movement of the European mind) for the construction of a
Philosophy of History, shall be directed and controlled by those views of
the nature of sociological evidence which I have (very briefly and
imperfectly) attempted to characterize; they can not fail to give birth to
a sociological system widely removed from the vague and conjectural
character of all former attempts, and worthy to take its place, at last,
among the sciences. When this time shall come, no important branch of
human affairs will be any longer abandoned to empiricism and unscientific
surmise: the circle of human knowledge will be complete, and it can only
thereafter receive further enlargement by perpetual expansion from within.




                               Chapter XI.


Additional Elucidations Of The Science Of History.


§ 1. The doctrine which the preceding chapters were intended to enforce
and elucidate—that the collective series of social phenomena, in other
words the course of history, is subject to general laws, which philosophy
may possibly detect—has been familiar for generations to the scientific
thinkers of the Continent, and has for the last quarter of a century
passed out of their peculiar domain, into that of newspapers and ordinary
political discussion. In our own country, however, at the time of the
first publication of this Treatise, it was almost a novelty, and the
prevailing habits of thought on historical subjects were the very reverse
of a preparation for it. Since then a great change has taken place, and
has been eminently promoted by the important work of Mr. Buckle; who, with
characteristic energy, flung down this great principle, together with many
striking exemplifications of it, into the arena of popular discussion, to
be fought over by a sort of combatants, in the presence of a sort of
spectators, who would never even have been aware that there existed such a
principle if they had been left to learn its existence from the
speculations of pure science. And hence has arisen a considerable amount
of controversy, tending not only to make the principle rapidly familiar to
the majority of cultivated minds, but also to clear it from the confusions
and misunderstandings by which it was but natural that it should for a
time be clouded, and which impair the worth of the doctrine to those who
accept it, and are the stumbling-block of many who do not.

Among the impediments to the general acknowledgment, by thoughtful minds,
of the subjection of historical facts to scientific laws, the most
fundamental continues to be that which is grounded on the doctrine of Free
Will, or, in other words, on the denial that the law of invariable
Causation holds true of human volitions; for if it does not, the course of
history, being the result of human volitions, can not be a subject of
scientific laws, since the volitions on which it depends can neither be
foreseen, nor reduced to any canon of regularity even after they have
occurred. I have discussed this question, as far as seemed suitable to the
occasion, in a former chapter; and I only think it necessary to repeat,
that the doctrine of the Causation of human actions, improperly called the
doctrine of Necessity, affirms no mysterious _nexus_, or overruling
fatality: it asserts only that men’s actions are the joint result of the
general laws and circumstances of human nature, and of their own
particular characters; those characters again being the consequence of the
natural and artificial circumstances that constituted their education,
among which circumstances must be reckoned their own conscious efforts.
Any one who is willing to take (if the expression may be permitted) the
trouble of thinking himself into the doctrine as thus stated, will find
it, I believe, not only a faithful interpretation of the universal
experience of human conduct, but a correct representation of the mode in
which he himself, in every particular case, spontaneously interprets his
own experience of that conduct.

But if this principle is true of individual man, it must be true of
collective man. If it is the law of human life, the law must be realized
in history. The experience of human affairs when looked at _en masse_,
must be in accordance with it if true, or repugnant to it if false. The
support which this _a posteriori_ verification affords to the law, is the
part of the case which has been most clearly and triumphantly brought out
by Mr. Buckle.

The facts of statistics, since they have been made a subject of careful
recordation and study, have yielded conclusions, some of which have been
very startling to persons not accustomed to regard moral actions as
subject to uniform laws. The very events which in their own nature appear
most capricious and uncertain, and which in any individual case no
attainable degree of knowledge would enable us to foresee, occur, when
considerable numbers are taken into the account, with a degree of
regularity approaching to mathematical. What act is there which all would
consider as more completely dependent on individual character, and on the
exercise of individual free will, than that of slaying a fellow-creature?
Yet in any large country, the number of murders, in proportion to the
population, varies (it has been found) very little from one year to
another, and in its variations never deviates widely from a certain
average. What is still more remarkable, there is a similar approach to
constancy in the proportion of these murders annually committed with every
particular kind of instrument. There is a like approximation to identity,
as between one year and another, in the comparative number of legitimate
and of illegitimate births. The same thing is found true of suicides,
accidents, and all other social phenomena of which the registration is
sufficiently perfect; one of the most curiously illustrative examples
being the fact, ascertained by the registers of the London and Paris
post-offices, that the number of letters posted which the writers have
forgotten to direct, is nearly the same, in proportion to the whole number
of letters posted, in one year as in another. “Year after year,” says Mr.
Buckle, “the same proportion of letter-writers forget this simple act; so
that for each successive period we can actually foretell the number of
persons whose memory will fail them in regard to this trifling, and as it
might appear, accidental occurrence.”(283)

This singular degree of regularity _en masse_, combined with the extreme
of irregularity in the cases composing the mass, is a felicitous
verification _a posteriori_ of the law of causation in its application to
human conduct. Assuming the truth of that law, every human action, every
murder, for instance, is the concurrent result of two sets of causes. On
the one part, the general circumstances of the country and its
inhabitants; the moral, educational, economical, and other influences
operating on the whole people, and constituting what we term the state of
civilization. On the other part, the great variety of influences special
to the individual: his temperament, and other peculiarities of
organization, his parentage, habitual associates, temptations, and so
forth. If we now take the whole of the instances which occur within a
sufficiently large field to exhaust all the combinations of these special
influences, or, in other words, to eliminate chance; and if all these
instances have occurred within such narrow limits of time, that no
material change can have taken place in the general influences
constituting the state of civilization of the country; we may be certain,
that if human actions are governed by invariable laws, the aggregate
result will be something like a constant quantity. The number of murders
committed within that space and time, being the effect partly of general
causes which have not varied, and partly of partial causes the whole round
of whose variations has been included, will be, practically speaking,
invariable.

Literally and mathematically invariable it is not, and could not be
expected to be: because the period of a year is too short to include _all_
the possible combinations of partial causes, while it is, at the same
time, sufficiently long to make it probable that in some years at least,
of every series, there will have been introduced new influences of a more
or less general character; such as a more vigorous or a more relaxed
police; some temporary excitement from political or religious causes; or
some incident generally notorious, of a nature to act morbidly on the
imagination. That in spite of these unavoidable imperfections in the data,
there should be so very trifling a margin of variation in the annual
results, is a brilliant continuation of the general theory.

§ 2. The same considerations which thus strikingly corroborate the
evidence of the doctrine, that historical facts are the invariable effects
of causes, tend equally to clear that doctrine from various
misapprehensions, the existence of which has been put in evidence by the
recent discussions. Some persons, for instance, seemingly imagine the
doctrine to imply, not merely that the total number of murders committed
in a given space and time is entirely the effect of the general
circumstances of society, but that every particular murder is so too—that
the individual murderer is, so to speak, a mere instrument in the hands of
general causes that he himself has no option, or, if he has, and chose to
exercise it, some one else would be necessitated to take his place; that
if any one of the actual murderers had abstained from the crime, some
person who would otherwise have remained innocent, would have committed an
extra murder to make up the average. Such a corollary would certainly
convict any theory which necessarily led to it of absurdity. It is
obvious, however, that each particular murder depends, not on the general
state of society only, but on that combined with causes special to the
case, which are generally much more powerful; and if these special causes,
which have greater influence than the general ones in causing every
particular murder, have no influence on the number of murders in a given
period, it is because the field of observation is so extensive as to
include all possible combinations of the special causes—all varieties of
individual character and individual temptation compatible with the general
state of society. The collective experiment, as it may be termed, exactly
separates the effect of the general from that of the special causes, and
shows the net result of the former; but it declares nothing at all
respecting the amount of influence of the special causes, be it greater or
smaller, since the scale of the experiment extends to the number of cases
within which the effects of the special causes balance one another, and
disappear in that of the general causes.

I will not pretend that all the defenders of the theory have always kept
their language free from this same confusion, and have shown no tendency
to exalt the influence of general causes at the expense of special. I am
of opinion, on the contrary, that they have done so in a very great
degree, and by so doing have encumbered their theory with difficulties,
and laid it open to objections, which do not necessarily affect it. Some,
for example (among whom is Mr. Buckle himself), have inferred, or allowed
it to be supposed that they inferred, from the regularity in the
recurrence of events which depend on moral qualities, that the moral
qualities of mankind are little capable of being improved, or are of
little importance in the general progress of society, compared with
intellectual or economic causes. But to draw this inference is to forget
that the statistical tables, from which the invariable averages are
deduced, were compiled from facts occurring within narrow geographical
limits and in a small number of successive years; that is, from a field
the whole of which was under the operation of the same general causes, and
during too short a time to allow of much change therein. All moral causes
but those common to the country generally, have been eliminated by the
great number of instances taken; and those which are common to the whole
country have not varied considerably, in the short space of time comprised
in the observations. If we admit the supposition that they have varied; if
we compare one age with another, or one country with another, or even one
part of a country with another, differing in position and character as to
the moral elements, the crimes committed within a year give no longer the
same, but a widely different numerical aggregate. And this can not but be
the case: for, inasmuch as every single crime committed by an individual
mainly depends on his moral qualities, the crimes committed by the entire
population of the country must depend in an equal degree on their
collective moral qualities. To render this element inoperative upon the
large scale, it would be necessary to suppose that the general moral
average of mankind does not vary from country to country or from age to
age; which is not true, and, even if it were true, could not possibly be
proved by any existing statistics. I do not on this account the less agree
in the opinion of Mr. Buckle, that the intellectual element in mankind,
including in that expression the nature of their beliefs, the amount of
their knowledge, and the development of their intelligence, is the
predominant circumstance in determining their progress. But I am of this
opinion, not because I regard their moral or economical condition either
as less powerful or less variable agencies, but because these are in a
great degree the consequences of the intellectual condition, and are, in
all cases, limited by it; as was observed in the preceding chapter. The
intellectual changes are the most conspicuous agents in history, not from
their superior force, considered in themselves, but because practically
they work with the united power belonging to all three.(284)

§ 3. There is another distinction often neglected in the discussion of
this subject, which it is extremely important to observe. The theory of
the subjection of social progress to invariable laws, is often held in
conjunction with the doctrine, that social progress can not be materially
influenced by the exertions of individual persons, or by the acts of
governments. But though these opinions are often held by the same persons,
they are two very different opinions, and the confusion between them is
the eternally recurring error of confounding Causation with Fatalism.
Because whatever happens will be the effect of causes, human volitions
among the rest, it does not follow that volitions, even those of peculiar
individuals, are not of great efficacy as causes. If any one in a storm at
sea, because about the same number of persons in every year perish by
shipwreck, should conclude that it was useless for him to attempt to save
his own life, we should call him a Fatalist; and should remind him that
the efforts of shipwrecked persons to save their lives are so far from
being immaterial, that the average amount of those efforts is one of the
causes on which the ascertained annual number of deaths by shipwreck
depend. However universal the laws of social development may be, they can
not be more universal or more rigorous than those of the physical agencies
of nature; yet human will can convert these into instruments of its
designs, and the extent to which it does so makes the chief difference
between savages and the most highly civilized people. Human and social
facts, from their more complicated nature, are not less, but more,
modifiable than mechanical and chemical facts; human agency, therefore,
has still greater power over them. And accordingly, those who maintain
that the evolution of society depends exclusively, or almost exclusively,
on general causes, always include among these the collective knowledge and
intellectual development of the race. But if of the race, why not also of
some powerful monarch or thinker, or of the ruling portion of some
political society, acting through its government? Though the varieties of
character among ordinary individuals neutralize one another on any large
scale, exceptional individuals in important positions do not in any given
age neutralize one another; there was not another Themistocles, or Luther,
or Julius Cæsar, of equal powers and contrary dispositions, who exactly
balanced the given Themistocles, Luther, and Cæsar, and prevented them
from having any permanent effect. Moreover, for aught that appears, the
volitions of exceptional persons, or the opinions and purposes of the
individuals who at some particular time compose a government, may be
indispensable links in the chain of causation by which even the general
causes produce their effects; and I believe this to be the only tenable
form of the theory.

Lord Macaulay, in a celebrated passage of one of his early essays (let me
add that it was one which he did not himself choose to reprint), gives
expression to the doctrine of the absolute inoperativeness of great men,
more unqualified, I should think, than has been given to it by any writer
of equal abilities. He compares them to persons who merely stand on a
loftier height, and thence receive the sun’s rays a little earlier, than
the rest of the human race. “The sun illuminates the hills while it is
still below the horizon, and truth is discovered by the highest minds a
little before it becomes manifest to the multitude. This is the extent of
their superiority. They are the first to catch and reflect a light which,
without their assistance, must in a short time be visible to those who lie
far beneath them.”(285) If this metaphor is to be carried out, it follows
that if there had been no Newton, the world would not only have had the
Newtonian system, but would have had it equally soon; as the sun would
have risen just as early to spectators in the plain if there had been no
mountain at hand to catch still earlier rays. And so it would be, if
truths, like the sun, rose by their own proper motion, without human
effort; but not otherwise. I believe that if Newton had not lived, the
world must have waited for the Newtonian philosophy until there had been
another Newton, or his equivalent. No ordinary man, and no succession of
ordinary men, could have achieved it. I will not go the length of saying
that what Newton did in a single life, might not have been done in
successive steps by some of those who followed him, each singly inferior
to him in genius. But even the least of those steps required a man of
great intellectual superiority. Eminent men do not merely see the coming
light from the hill-top, they mount on the hill-top and evoke it; and if
no one had ever ascended thither, the light, in many cases, might never
have risen upon the plain at all. Philosophy and religion are abundantly
amenable to general causes; yet few will doubt that, had there been no
Socrates, no Plato, and no Aristotle, there would have been no philosophy
for the next two thousand years, nor in all probability then; and that if
there had been no Christ, and no St. Paul, there would have been no
Christianity.

The point in which, above all, the influence of remarkable individuals is
decisive, is in determining the celerity of the movement. In most states
of society it is the existence of great men which decides even whether
there shall be any progress. It is conceivable that Greece, or that
Christian Europe, might have been progressive in certain periods of their
history through general causes only: but if there had been no Mohammed,
would Arabia have produced Avicenna or Averroes, or Caliphs of Bagdad or
of Cordova? In determining, however, in what manner and order the progress
of mankind shall take place if it take place at all, much less depends on
the character of individuals. There is a sort of necessity established in
this respect by the general laws of human nature—by the constitution of
the human mind. Certain truths can not be discovered, nor inventions made,
unless certain others have been made first; certain social improvements,
from the nature of the case, can only follow, and not precede, others. The
order of human progress, therefore, may to a certain extent have definite
laws assigned to it: while as to its celerity, or even as to its taking
place at all, no generalization, extending to the human species generally,
can possibly be made; but only some very precarious approximate
generalizations, confined to the small portion of mankind in whom there
has been any thing like consecutive progress within the historical period,
and deduced from their special position, or collected from their
particular history. Even looking to the _manner_ of progress, the order of
succession of social states, there is need of great flexibility in our
generalizations. The limits of variation in the possible development of
social, as of animal life, are a subject of which little is yet
understood, and are one of the great problems in social science. It is, at
all events, a fact, that different portions of mankind, under the
influence of different circumstances, have developed themselves in a more
or less different manner and into different forms; and among these
determining circumstances, the individual character of their great
speculative thinkers or practical organizers may well have been one. Who
can tell how profoundly the whole subsequent history of China may have
been influenced by the individuality of Confucius? and of Sparta (and
hence of Greece and the world) by that of Lycurgus?

Concerning the nature and extent of what a great man under favorable
circumstances can do for mankind, as well as of what a government can do
for a nation, many different opinions are possible; and every shade of
opinion on these points is consistent with the fullest recognition that
there are invariable laws of historical phenomena. Of course the degree of
influence which has to be assigned to these more special agencies, makes a
great difference in the precision which can be given to the general laws,
and in the confidence with which predictions can be grounded on them.
Whatever depends on the peculiarities of individuals, combined with the
accident of the positions they hold, is necessarily incapable of being
foreseen. Undoubtedly these casual combinations might be eliminated like
any others, by taking a sufficiently large cycle: the peculiarities of a
great historical character make their influence felt in history sometimes
for several thousand years, but it is highly probable that they will make
no difference at all at the end of fifty millions. Since, however, we can
not obtain an average of the vast length of time necessary to exhaust all
the possible combinations of great men and circumstances, as much of the
law of evolution of human affairs as depends upon this average, is and
remains inaccessible to us; and within the next thousand years, which are
of considerably more importance to us than the whole remainder of the
fifty millions, the favorable and unfavorable combinations which will
occur will be to us purely accidental. We can not foresee the advent of
great men. Those who introduce new speculative thoughts or great practical
conceptions into the world, can not have their epoch fixed beforehand.
What science can do, is this. It can trace through past history the
general causes which had brought mankind into that preliminary state
which, when the right sort of great man appeared, rendered them accessible
to his influence. If this state continues, experience renders it tolerably
certain that in a longer or shorter period the great man will be produced;
provided that the general circumstances of the country and people are
(which very often they are not) compatible with his existence; of which
point also, science can in some measure judge. It is in this manner that
the results of progress, except as to the celerity of their production,
can be, to a certain extent, reduced to regularity and law. And the belief
that they can be so, is equally consistent with assigning very great, or
very little efficacy, to the influence of exceptional men, or of the acts
of governments. And the same may be said of all other accidents and
disturbing causes.

§ 4. It would nevertheless be a great error to assign only a trifling
importance to the agency of eminent individuals, or of governments. It
must not be concluded that the influence of either is small, because they
can not bestow what the general circumstances of society, and the course
of its previous history, have not prepared it to receive. Neither thinkers
nor governments effect all that they intend, but in compensation they
often produce important results which they did not in the least foresee.
Great men, and great actions, are seldom wasted; they send forth a
thousand unseen influences, more effective than those which are seen; and
though nine out of every ten things done, with a good purpose, by those
who are in advance of their age, produce no material effect, the tenth
thing produces effects twenty times as great as any one would have dreamed
of predicting from it. Even the men who for want of sufficiently favorable
circumstances left no impress at all upon their own age, have often been
of the greatest value to posterity. Who could appear to have lived more
entirely in vain than some of the early heretics? They were burned or
massacred, their writings extirpated, their memory anathematized, and
their very names and existence left for seven or eight centuries in the
obscurity of musty manuscripts—their history to be gathered, perhaps, only
from the sentences by which they were condemned. Yet the memory of these
men—men who resisted certain pretensions or certain dogmas of the Church
in the very age in which the unanimous assent of Christendom was afterward
claimed as having been given to them, and asserted as the ground of their
authority—broke the chain of tradition, established a series of precedents
for resistance, inspired later Reformers with the courage, and armed them
with the weapons, which they needed when mankind were better prepared to
follow their impulse. To this example from men, let us add another from
governments. The comparatively enlightened rule of which Spain had the
benefit during a considerable part of the eighteenth century, did not
correct the fundamental defects of the Spanish people; and in consequence,
though it did great temporary good, so much of that good perished with it,
that it may plausibly be affirmed to have had no permanent effect. The
case has been cited as a proof how little governments can do in opposition
to the causes which have determined the general character of the nation.
It does show how much there is which they can not do; but not that they
can do nothing. Compare what Spain was at the beginning of that
half-century of liberal government, with what she had become at its close.
That period fairly let in the light of European thought upon the more
educated classes; and it never afterward ceased to go on spreading.
Previous to that time the change was in an inverse direction; culture,
light, intellectual and even material activity, were becoming
extinguished. Was it nothing to arrest this downward and convert it into
an upward course? How much that Charles the Third and Aranda could not do,
has been the ultimate consequence of what they did! To that half-century
Spain owes that she has got rid of the Inquisition, that she has got rid
of the monks, that she now has parliaments and (save in exceptional
intervals) a free press, and the feelings of freedom and citizenship, and
is acquiring railroads and all the other constituents of material and
economical progress. In the Spain which preceded that era, there was not a
single element at work which could have led to these results in any length
of time, if the country had continued to be governed as it was by the last
princes of the Austrian dynasty, or if the Bourbon rulers had been from
the first what, both in Spain and in Naples, they afterward became.

And if a government can do much, even when it seems to have done little,
in causing positive improvement, still greater are the issues dependent on
it in the way of warding off evils, both internal and external, which else
would stop improvement altogether. A good or a bad counselor, in a single
city at a particular crisis, has affected the whole subsequent fate of the
world. It is as certain as any contingent judgment respecting historical
events can be, that if there had been no Themistocles there would have
been no victory of Salamis; and had there not, where would have been all
our civilization? How different, again, would have been the issue if
Epaminondas, or Timoleon, or even Iphicrates, instead of Chares and
Lysicles, had commanded at Chæroneia. As is well said in the second of two
Essays on the Study of History,(286) in my judgment the soundest and most
philosophical productions which the recent controversies on this subject
have called forth, historical science authorizes not absolute, but only
conditional predictions. General causes count for much, but individuals
also “produce great changes in history, and color its whole complexion
long after their death.... No one can doubt that the Roman republic would
have subsided into a military despotism if Julius Cæsar had never lived”
(thus much was rendered practically certain by general causes); “but is it
at all clear that in that case Gaul would ever have formed a province of
the empire? Might not Varus have lost his three legions on the banks of
the Rhone? and might not that river have become the frontier instead of
the Rhine? This might well have happened if Cæsar and Crassus had changed
provinces; and it is surely impossible to say that in such an event the
venue (as lawyers say) of European civilization might not have been
changed. The Norman Conquest in the same way was as much the act of a
single man, as the writing of a newspaper article; and knowing as we do
the history of that man and his family, we can retrospectively predict
with all but infallible certainty, that no other person” (no other in that
age, I presume, is meant) “could have accomplished the enterprise. If it
had not been accomplished, is there any ground to suppose that either our
history or our national character would have been what they are?”

As is most truly remarked by the same writer, the whole stream of Grecian
history, as cleared up by Mr. Grote, is one series of examples how often
events on which the whole destiny of subsequent civilization turned, were
dependent on the personal character for good or evil of some one
individual. It must be said, however, that Greece furnishes the most
extreme example of this nature to be found in history, and is a very
exaggerated specimen of the general tendency. It has happened only that
once, and will probably never happen again, that the fortunes of mankind
depended upon keeping a certain order of things in existence in a single
town, or a country scarcely larger than Yorkshire; capable of being ruined
or saved by a hundred causes, of very slight magnitude in comparison with
the general tendencies of human affairs. Neither ordinary accidents, nor
the characters of individuals, can ever again be so vitally important as
they then were. The longer our species lasts, and the more civilized it
becomes, the more, as Comte remarks, does the influence of past
generations over the present, and of mankind _en masse_ over every
individual in it, predominate over other forces; and though the course of
affairs never ceases to be susceptible of alteration both by accidents and
by personal qualities, the increasing preponderance of the collective
agency of the species over all minor causes, is constantly bringing the
general evolution of the race into something which deviates less from a
certain and preappointed track. Historical science, therefore, is always
becoming more possible; not solely because it is better studied, but
because, in every generation, it becomes better adapted for study.




                               Chapter XII.


Of The Logic Of Practice, Or Art; Including Morality And Policy.


§ 1. In the preceding chapters we have endeavored to characterize the
present state of those among the branches of knowledge called Moral, which
are sciences in the only proper sense of the term, that is, inquiries into
the course of nature. It is customary, however, to include under the term
moral knowledge, and even (though improperly) under that of moral science,
an inquiry the results of which do not express themselves in the
indicative, but in the imperative mood, or in periphrases equivalent to
it; what is called the knowledge of duties; practical ethics, or morality.

Now, the imperative mood is the characteristic of art, as distinguished
from science. Whatever speaks in rules, or precepts, not in assertions
respecting matters of fact, is art; and ethics, or morality, is properly a
portion of the art corresponding to the sciences of human nature and
society.(287)

The Method, therefore, of Ethics, can be no other than that of Art, or
Practice, in general; and the portion yet uncompleted of the task which we
proposed to ourselves in the concluding Book, is to characterize the
general Method of Art, as distinguished from Science.

§ 2. In all branches of practical business there are cases in which
individuals are bound to conform their practice to a pre-established rule,
while there are others in which it is part of their task to find or
construct the rule by which they are to govern their conduct. The first,
for example, is the case of a judge, under a definite written code. The
judge is not called upon to determine what course would be intrinsically
the most advisable in the particular case in hand, but only within what
rule of law it falls; what the legislature has ordained to be done in the
kind of case, and must therefore be presumed to have intended in the
individual case. The method must here be wholly and exclusively one of
ratiocination, or syllogism; and the process is obviously, what in our
analysis of the syllogism we showed that all ratiocination is, namely the
interpretation of a formula.

In order that our illustration of the opposite case may be taken from the
same class of subjects as the former, we will suppose, in contrast with
the situation of the judge, the position of the legislator. As the judge
has laws for his guidance, so the legislator has rules, and maxims of
policy; but it would be a manifest error to suppose that the legislator is
bound by these maxims in the same manner as the judge is bound by the
laws, and that all he has to do is to argue down from them to the
particular case, as the judge does from the laws. The legislator is bound
to take into consideration the reasons or grounds of the maxim; the judge
has nothing to do with those of the law, except so far as a consideration
of them may throw light upon the intention of the law-maker, where his
words have left it doubtful. To the judge, the rule, once positively
ascertained, is final; but the legislator, or other practitioner, who goes
by rules rather than by their reasons, like the old-fashioned German
tacticians who were vanquished by Napoleon, or the physician who preferred
that his patients should die by rule rather than recover contrary to it,
is rightly judged to be a mere pedant, and the slave of his formulas.

Now, the reasons of a maxim of policy, or of any other rule of art, can be
no other than the theorems of the corresponding science.

The relation in which rules of art stand to doctrines of science may be
thus characterized. The art proposes to itself an end to be attained,
defines the end, and hands it over to the science. The science receives
it, considers it as a phenomenon or effect to be studied, and having
investigated its causes and conditions, sends it back to art with a
theorem of the combination of circumstances by which it could be produced.
Art then examines these combinations of circumstances, and according as
any of them are or are not in human power, pronounces the end attainable
or not. The only one of the premises, therefore, which Art supplies, is
the original major premise, which asserts that the attainment of the given
end is desirable. Science then lends to Art the proposition (obtained by a
series of inductions or of deductions) that the performance of certain
actions will attain the end. From these premises Art concludes that the
performance of these actions is desirable, and finding it also
practicable, converts the theorem into a rule or precept.

§ 3. It deserves particular notice, that the theorem or speculative truth
is not ripe for being turned into a precept, until the whole, and not a
part merely, of the operation which belongs to science, has been
performed. Suppose that we have completed the scientific process only up
to a certain point; have discovered that a particular cause will produce
the desired effect, but have not ascertained all the negative conditions
which are necessary, that is, all the circumstances which, if present,
would prevent its production. If, in this imperfect state of the
scientific theory, we attempt to frame a rule of art, we perform that
operation prematurely. Whenever any counteracting cause, overlooked by the
theorem, takes place, the rule will be at fault; we shall employ the means
and the end will not follow. No arguing from or about the rule itself will
then help us through the difficulty; there is nothing for it but to turn
back and finish the scientific process which should have preceded the
formation of the rule. We must re-open the investigation to inquire into
the remainder of the conditions on which the effect depends; and only
after we have ascertained the whole of these are we prepared to transform
the completed law of the effect into a precept, in which those
circumstances or combinations of circumstances which the science exhibits
as conditions are prescribed as means.

It is true that, for the sake of convenience, rules must be formed from
something less than this ideally perfect theory: in the first place,
because the theory can seldom be made ideally perfect; and next, because,
if all the counteracting contingencies, whether of frequent or of rare
occurrence, were included, the rules would be too cumbrous to be
apprehended and remembered by ordinary capacities, on the common occasions
of life. The rules of art do not attempt to comprise more conditions than
require to be attended to in ordinary cases; and are therefore always
imperfect. In the manual arts, where the requisite conditions are not
numerous, and where those which the rules do not specify are generally
either plain to common observation or speedily learned from practice,
rules may often be safely acted on by persons who know nothing more than
the rule. But in the complicated affairs of life, and still more in those
of states and societies, rules can not be relied on, without constantly
referring back to the scientific laws on which they are founded. To know
what are the practical contingencies which require a modification of the
rule, or which are altogether exceptions to it, is to know what
combinations of circumstances would interfere with, or entirely
counteract, the consequences of those laws; and this can only be learned
by a reference to the theoretic grounds of the rule.

By a wise practitioner, therefore, rules of conduct will only be
considered as provisional. Being made for the most numerous cases, or for
those of most ordinary occurrence, they point out the manner in which it
will be least perilous to act, where time or means do not exist for
analyzing the actual circumstances of the case, or where we can not trust
our judgment in estimating them. But they do not at all supersede the
propriety of going through, when circumstances permit, the scientific
process requisite for framing a rule from the data of the particular case
before us. At the same time, the common rule may very properly serve as an
admonition that a certain mode of action has been found by ourselves and
others to be well adapted to the cases of most common occurrence; so that
if it be unsuitable to the case in hand, the reason of its being so will
be likely to arise from some unusual circumstance.

§ 4. The error is therefore apparent of those who would deduce the line of
conduct proper to particular cases from supposed universal practical
maxims, overlooking the necessity of constantly referring back to the
principles of the speculative science, in order to be sure of attaining
even the specific end which the rules have in view. How much greater
still, then, must the error be, of setting up such unbending principles,
not merely as universal rules for attaining a given end, but as rules of
conduct generally, without regard to the possibility, not only that some
modifying cause may prevent the attainment of the given end by the means
which the rule prescribes, but that success itself may conflict with some
other end, which may possibly chance to be more desirable.

This is the habitual error of many of the political speculators whom I
have characterized as the geometrical school; especially in France, where
ratiocination from rules of practice forms the staple commodity of
journalism and political oratory—a misapprehension of the functions of
Deduction which has brought much discredit, in the estimation of other
countries, upon the spirit of generalization so honorably characteristic
of the French mind. The commonplaces of politics in France are large and
sweeping practical maxims, from which, as ultimate premises, men reason
downward to particular applications; and this they call being logical and
consistent. For instance, they are perpetually arguing that such and such
a measure ought to be adopted, because it is a consequence of the
principle on which the form of government is founded; of the principle of
legitimacy, or the principle of the sovereignty of the people. To which it
may be answered, that if these be really practical principles, they must
rest on speculative grounds; the sovereignty of the people, for example,
must be a right foundation for government, because a government thus
constituted tends to produce certain beneficial effects. Inasmuch,
however, as no government produces all possible beneficial effects, but
all are attended with more or fewer inconveniences, and since these can
not usually be combated by means drawn from the very causes which produce
them, it would be often a much stronger recommendation of some practical
arrangement, that it does not follow from what is called the general
principle of the government, than that it does. Under a government of
legitimacy, the presumption is far rather in favor of institutions of
popular origin; and in a democracy, in favor of arrangements tending to
check the impetus of popular will. The line of augmentation so commonly
mistaken in France for political philosophy, tends to the practical
conclusion that we should exert our utmost efforts to aggravate, instead
of alleviating, whatever are the characteristic imperfections of the
system of institutions which we prefer, or under which we happen to live.

§ 5. The grounds, then, of every rule of art, are to be found in the
theorems of science. An art, or a body of art, consists of the rules,
together with as much of the speculative propositions as comprises the
justification of those rules. The complete art of any matter includes a
selection of such a portion from the science as is necessary to show on
what conditions the effects, which the art aims at producing, depend. And
Art in general, consists of the truths of Science, arranged in the most
convenient order for practice, instead of the order which is the most
convenient for thought. Science groups and arranges its truths, so as to
enable us to take in at one view as much as possible of the general order
of the universe. Art, though it must assume the same general laws, follows
them only into such of their detailed consequences as have led to the
formation of rules of conduct; and brings together from parts of the field
of science most remote from one another, the truths relating to the
production of the different and heterogeneous conditions necessary to each
effect which the exigencies of practical life require to be produced.(288)

Science, therefore, following one cause to its various effects, while art
traces one effect to its multiplied and diversified causes and conditions,
there is need of a set of intermediate scientific truths, derived from the
higher generalities of science, and destined to serve as the generalia or
first principles of the various arts. The scientific operation of framing
these intermediate principles, M. Comte characterizes as one of those
results of philosophy which are reserved for futurity. The only complete
example which he points out as actually realized, and which can be held up
as a type to be imitated in more important matters, is the general theory
of the art of Descriptive Geometry, as conceived by M. Monge. It is not,
however, difficult to understand what the nature of these intermediate
principles must generally be. After framing the most comprehensive
possible conception of the end to be aimed at, that is, of the effect to
be produced, and determining in the same comprehensive manner the set of
conditions on which that effect depends, there remains to be taken, a
general survey of the resources which can be commanded for realizing this
set of conditions; and when the result of this survey has been embodied in
the fewest and most extensive propositions possible, those propositions
will express the general relation between the available means and the end,
and will constitute the general scientific theory of the art, from which
its practical methods will follow as corollaries.

§ 6. But though the reasonings which connect the end or purpose of every
art with its means belong to the domain of Science, the definition of the
end itself belongs exclusively to Art, and forms its peculiar province.
Every art has one first principle, or general major premise, not borrowed
from science; that which enunciates the object aimed at, and affirms it to
be a desirable object. The builder’s art assumes that it is desirable to
have buildings; architecture, as one of the fine arts, that it is
desirable to have them beautiful or imposing. The hygienic and medical
arts assume, the one that the preservation of health, the other that the
cure of disease, are fitting and desirable ends. These are not
propositions of science. Propositions of science assert a matter of fact:
an existence, a co-existence, a succession, or a resemblance. The
propositions now spoken of do not assert that any thing is, but enjoin or
recommend that something should be. They are a class by themselves. A
proposition of which the predicate is expressed by the words _ought_ or
_should be_, is generically different from one which is expressed by _is_,
or _will be_. It is true, that in the largest sense of the words, even
these propositions assert something as a matter of fact. The fact affirmed
in them is, that the conduct recommended excites in the speaker’s mind the
feeling of approbation. This, however, does not go to the bottom of the
matter; for the speaker’s approbation is no sufficient reason why other
people should approve; nor ought it to be a conclusive reason even with
himself. For the purposes of practice, every one must be required to
justify his approbation; and for this there is need of general premises,
determining what are the proper objects of approbation, and what the
proper order of precedence among those objects.

These general premises, together with the principal conclusions which may
be deduced from them, form (or rather might form) a body of doctrine,
which is properly the Art of Life, in its three departments, Morality,
Prudence or Policy, and Æsthetics; the Right, the Expedient, and the
Beautiful or Noble, in human conduct and works. To this art (which, in the
main, is unfortunately still to be created), all other arts are
subordinate; since its principles are those which must determine whether
the special aim of any particular art is worthy and desirable, and what is
its place in the scale of desirable things. Every art is thus a joint
result of laws of nature disclosed by science, and of the general
principles of what has been called Teleology, or the Doctrine of
Ends;(289) which, borrowing the language of the German metaphysicians, may
also be termed, not improperly, the principles of Practical Reason.

A scientific observer or reasoner, merely as such, is not an adviser for
practice. His part is only to show that certain consequences follow from
certain causes, and that to obtain certain ends, certain means are the
most effectual. Whether the ends themselves are such as ought to be
pursued, and if so, in what cases and to how great a length, it is no part
of his business as a cultivator of science to decide, and science alone
will never qualify him for the decision. In purely physical science, there
is not much temptation to assume this ulterior office; but those who treat
of human nature and society invariably claim it: they always undertake to
say, not merely what is, but what ought to be. To entitle them to do this,
a complete doctrine of Teleology is indispensable. A scientific theory,
however perfect, of the subject-matter, considered merely as part of the
order of nature, can in no degree serve as a substitute. In this respect
the various subordinate arts afford a misleading analogy. In them there is
seldom any visible necessity for justifying the end, since in general its
desirableness is denied by nobody, and it is only when the question of
precedence is to be decided between that end and some other, that the
general principles of Teleology have to be called in; but a writer on
Morals and Politics requires those principles at every step. The most
elaborate and well-digested exposition of the laws of succession and
co-existence among mental or social phenomena, and of their relation to
one another as causes and effects, will be of no avail toward the art of
Life or of Society, if the ends to be aimed at by that art are left to the
vague suggestions of the _intellectus sibi permissus_, or are taken for
granted without analysis or questioning.

§ 7. There is, then, a _philosophia prima_ peculiar to Art, as there is
one which belongs to Science. There are not only first principles of
Knowledge, but first principles of Conduct. There must be some standard by
which to determine the goodness or badness, absolute and comparative, of
ends, or objects of desire. And whatever that standard is, there can be
but one; for if there were several ultimate principles of conduct, the
same conduct might be approved by one of those principles and condemned by
another; and there would be needed some more general principle, as umpire
between them.

Accordingly, writers on Moral Philosophy have mostly felt the necessity
not only of referring all rules of conduct, and all judgments of praise
and blame, to principles, but of referring them to some one principle;
some rule, or standard, with which all other rules of conduct were
required to be consistent, and from which by ultimate consequence they
could all be deduced. Those who have dispensed with the assumption of such
a universal standard, have only been enabled to do so by supposing that a
moral sense, or instinct, inherent in our constitution, informs us, both
what principles of conduct we are bound to observe, and also in what order
these should be subordinated to one another.

The theory of the foundations of morality is a subject which it would be
out of place, in a work like this, to discuss at large, and which could
not to any useful purpose be treated incidentally. I shall content myself,
therefore, with saying, that the doctrine of intuitive moral principles,
even if true, would provide only for that portion of the field of conduct
which is properly called moral. For the remainder of the practice of life
some general principle, or standard, must still be sought; and if that
principle be rightly chosen, it will be found, I apprehend, to serve quite
as well for the ultimate principle of Morality, as for that of Prudence,
Policy, or Taste.

Without attempting in this place to justify my opinion, or even to define
the kind of justification which it admits of, I merely declare my
conviction, that the general principle to which all rules of practice
ought to conform, and the test by which they should be tried, is that of
conduciveness to the happiness of mankind, or rather, of all sentient
beings; in other words, that the promotion of happiness is the ultimate
principle of Teleology.(290)

I do not mean to assert that the promotion of happiness should be itself
the end of all actions, or even of all rules of action. It is the
justification, and ought to be the controller, of all ends, but it is not
itself the sole end. There are many virtuous actions, and even virtuous
modes of action (though the cases are, I think, less frequent than is
often supposed), by which happiness in the particular instance is
sacrificed, more pain being produced than pleasure. But conduct of which
this can be truly asserted, admits of justification only because it can be
shown that, on the whole, more happiness will exist in the world, if
feelings are cultivated which will make people, in certain cases,
regardless of happiness. I fully admit that this is true; that the
cultivation of an ideal nobleness of will and conduct should be to
individual human beings an end, to which the specific pursuit either of
their own happiness or of that of others (except so far as included in
that idea) should, in any case of conflict, give way. But I hold that the
very question, what constitutes this elevation of character, is itself to
be decided by a reference to happiness as the standard. The character
itself should be, to the individual, a paramount end, simply because the
existence of this ideal nobleness of character, or of a near approach to
it, in any abundance, would go farther than all things else toward making
human life happy, both in the comparatively humble sense of pleasure and
freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning, of rendering life, not what
it now is almost universally, puerile and insignificant, but such as human
beings with highly developed faculties can care to have.

§ 8. With these remarks we must close this summary view of the application
of the general logic of scientific inquiry to the moral and social
departments of science. Notwithstanding the extreme generality of the
principles of method which I have laid down (a generality which, I trust,
is not, in this instance, synonymous with vagueness), I have indulged the
hope that to some of those on whom the task will devolve of bringing those
most important of all sciences into a more satisfactory state, these
observations may be useful, both in removing erroneous, and in clearing up
the true, conceptions of the means by which, on subjects of so high a
degree of complication, truth can be attained. Should this hope be
realized, what is probably destined to be the great intellectual
achievement of the next two or three generations of European thinkers will
have been in some degree forwarded.

THE END.






FOOTNOTES


    1 In the later editions of Archbishop Whately’s “Logic,” he states his
      meaning to be, not that “rules” for the ascertainment of truths by
      inductive investigation can not be laid down, or that they may not
      be “of eminent service,” but that they “must always be comparatively
      vague and general, and incapable of being built up into a regular
      demonstrative theory like that of the Syllogism.” (Book iv., ch.
      iv., § 3.) And he observes, that to devise a system for this
      purpose, capable of being “brought into a scientific form,” would be
      an achievement which “he must be more sanguine than scientific who
      expects.” (Book iv., ch. ii., § 4.) To effect this, however, being
      the express object of the portion of the present work which treats
      of Induction, the words in the text are no overstatement of the
      difference of opinion between Archbishop Whately and me on the
      subject.

    2 Now forming a chapter in his volume on “The Philosophy of
      Discovery.”

    3 Archbishop Whately.

    4 I use these terms indiscriminately, because, for the purpose in
      view, there is no need for making any distinction between them. But
      metaphysicians usually restrict the name Intuition to the direct
      knowledge we are supposed to have of things external to our minds,
      and Consciousness to our knowledge of our own mental phenomena.

    5 This important theory has of late been called in question by a
      writer of deserved reputation, Mr. Samuel Bailey; but I do not
      conceive that the grounds on which it has been admitted as an
      established doctrine for a century past, have been at all shaken by
      that gentleman’s objections. I have elsewhere said what appeared to
      me necessary in reply to his arguments. (_Westminster Review_ for
      October, 1842; reprinted in “Dissertations and Discussions,” vol.
      ii.)

    6 The view taken in the text, of the definition and purpose of Logic,
      stands in marked opposition to that of the school of philosophy
      which, in this country, is represented by the writings of Sir
      William Hamilton and of his numerous pupils. Logic, as this school
      conceives it, is “the Science of the Formal Laws of Thought;” a
      definition framed for the express purpose of excluding, as
      irrelevant to Logic, whatever relates to Belief and Disbelief, or to
      the pursuit of truth as such, and restricting the science to that
      very limited portion of its total province, which has reference to
      the conditions, not of Truth, but of Consistency. What I have
      thought it useful to say in opposition to this limitation of the
      field of Logic, has been said at some length in a separate work,
      first published in 1865, and entitled “An Examination of Sir William
      Hamilton’s Philosophy, and of the Principal Philosophical Questions
      discussed in his Writings.” For the purposes of the present
      Treatise, I am content that the justification of the larger
      extension which I give to the domain of the science, should rest on
      the sequel of the Treatise itself. Some remarks on the relation
      which the Logic of Consistency bears to the Logic of Truth, and on
      the place which that particular part occupies in the whole to which
      it belongs, will be found in the present volume (Book II., chap.
      iii., § 9).

_    7 Computation or Logic_, chap. ii.

    8 In the original “had, _or had not_.” These last words, as involving
      a subtlety foreign to our present purpose, I have forborne to quote.

    9 Vide infra, note at the end of § 3, book ii., chap. ii.

_   10 Notare_, to mark; _con_notare, to mark _along with_; to mark one
      thing _with_ or _in addition to_ another.

   11 Archbishop Whately, who, in the later editions of his _Elements of
      Logic_, aided in reviving the important distinction treated of in
      the text, proposes the term “Attributive” as a substitute for
      “Connotative” (p. 22, 9th edit.). The expression is, in itself,
      appropriate; but as it has not the advantage of being connected with
      any verb, of so markedly distinctive a character as “to connote,” it
      is not, I think, fitted to supply the place of the word Connotative
      in scientific use.

   12 A writer who entitles his book _Philosophy; or, the Science of
      Truth_, charges me in his very first page (referring at the foot of
      it to this passage) with asserting that _general_ names have
      properly no signification. And he repeats this statement many times
      in the course of his volume, with comments, not at all flattering,
      thereon. It is well to be now and then reminded to how great a
      length perverse misquotation (for, strange as it appears, I do not
      believe that the writer is dishonest) can sometimes go. It is a
      warning to readers when they see an author accused, with volume and
      page referred to, and the apparent guarantee of inverted commas, of
      maintaining something more than commonly absurd, not to give
      implicit credence to the assertion without verifying the reference.

   13 “Take the familiar term Stone. It is applied to mineral and rocky
      materials, to the kernels of fruit, to the accumulations in the
      gall-bladder and in the kidney; while it is refused to polished
      minerals (called gems), to rocks that have the cleavage suited for
      roofing (slates), and to baked clay (bricks). It occurs in the
      designation of the magnetic oxide of iron (loadstone), and not in
      speaking of other metallic ores. Such a term is wholly unfit for
      accurate reasoning, unless hedged round on every occasion by other
      phrases; as building stone, precious stone, gall-stone, etc.
      Moreover, the methods of definition are baffled for want of
      sufficient community to ground upon. There is no quality uniformly
      present in the cases where it is applied, and uniformly absent where
      it is not applied; hence the definer would have to employ largely
      the license of striking off existing applications, and taking in new
      ones.”—BAIN, _Logic_, ii., 172.

   14 Before quitting the subject of connotative names, it is proper to
      observe, that the first writer who, in our times, has adopted from
      the schoolmen the word _to connote_, Mr. James Mill, in his
      _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind_, employs it in a
      signification different from that in which it is here used. He uses
      the word in a sense co-extensive with its etymology, applying it to
      every case in which a name, while pointing directly to one thing
      (which is consequently termed its signification), includes also a
      tacit reference to some other thing. In the case considered in the
      text, that of concrete general names, his language and mine are the
      converse of one another. Considering (very justly) the signification
      of the name to lie in the attribute, he speaks of the word as
      _noting_ the attribute, and _connoting_ the things possessing the
      attribute. And he describes abstract names as being properly
      concrete names with their connotation dropped; whereas, in my view,
      it is the _de_notation which would be said to be dropped, what was
      previously connoted becoming the whole signification.

      In adopting a phraseology at variance with that which so high an
      authority, and one which I am less likely than any other person to
      undervalue, has deliberately sanctioned, I have been influenced by
      the urgent necessity for a term exclusively appropriated to express
      the manner in which a concrete general name serves to mark the
      attributes which are involved in its signification. This necessity
      can scarcely be felt in its full force by any one who has not found
      by experience how vain is the attempt to communicate clear ideas on
      the philosophy of language without such a word. It is hardly an
      exaggeration to say, that some of the most prevalent of the errors
      with which logic has been infected, and a large part of the
      cloudiness and confusion of ideas which have enveloped it, would, in
      all probability, have been avoided, if a term had been in common use
      to express exactly what I have signified by the term to connote. And
      the schoolmen, to whom we are indebted for the greater part of our
      logical language, gave us this also, and in this very sense. For
      though some of their general expressions countenance the use of the
      word in the more extensive and vague acceptation in which it is
      taken by Mr. Mill, yet when they had to define it specifically as a
      technical term, and to fix its meaning as such, with that admirable
      precision which always characterizes their definitions, they clearly
      explained that nothing was said to be connoted except _forms_, which
      word may generally, in their writings, be understood as synonymous
      with _attributes_.

      Now, if the word _to connote_, so well suited to the purpose to
      which they applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken
      to fulfill another, for which it does not seem to me to be at all
      required; I am unable to find any expression to replace it, but such
      as are commonly employed in a sense so much more general, that it
      would be useless attempting to associate them peculiarly with this
      precise idea. Such are the words, to involve, to imply, etc. By
      employing these, I should fail of attaining the object for which
      alone the name is needed, namely, to distinguish this particular
      kind of involving and implying from all other kinds, and to assure
      to it the degree of habitual attention which its importance demands.

   15 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 56) thinks that negative names are not
      names of all things whatever except those denoted by the correlative
      positive name, but only for all things of some particular class:
      _not-white_, for instance, he deems not to be a name for every thing
      in nature except white things, but only for every _colored_ thing
      other than white. In this case, however, as in all others, the test
      of what a name denotes is what it can be predicated of: and we can
      certainly predicate of a sound, or a smell, that it is not white.
      The affirmation and the negation of the same attribute can not but
      divide the whole field of predication between them.

   16 Or rather, all objects except itself and the percipient mind; for,
      as we shall see hereafter, to ascribe any attribute to an object,
      necessarily implies a mind to perceive it.

      The simple and clear explanation given in the text, of relation and
      relative names, a subject so long the opprobrium of metaphysics, was
      given (as far as I know) for the first time, by Mr. James Mill, in
      his Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind.

   17 On the preceding passage Professor Bain remarks (Logic, i., 265):
      “The Categories do not seem to have been intended as a
      classification of Namable Things, in the sense of ‘an enumeration of
      all kinds of Things which are capable of being made predicates, or
      of having any thing predicated of them.’ They seem to have been
      rather intended as a generalization of predicates; an analysis of
      the final import of predication. Viewed in this light, they are not
      open to the objections offered by Mr. Mill. The proper question to
      ask is not—In what Category are we to place sensations or other
      feelings or states of mind? but, Under what Categories can we
      predicate regarding states of mind? Take, for example, Hope. When we
      say that it is a state of mind, we predicate Substance: we may also
      describe how great it is (Quantity), what is the quality of it,
      pleasurable or painful (Quality), what it has reference to
      (Relation). Aristotle seems to have framed the Categories on the
      plan—Here is an individual; what is the final analysis of all that
      we can predicate about him?”

      This is doubtless a true statement of the leading idea in the
      classification. The Category Οὐσία was certainly understood by
      Aristotle to be a general name for all possible answers to the
      question Quid sit? when asked respecting a concrete individual; as
      the other Categories are names comprehending all possible answers to
      the questions Quantum sit? Quale sit? etc. In Aristotle’s
      conception, therefore, the Categories may not have been a
      classification of Things; but they were soon converted into one by
      his Scholastic followers, who certainly regarded and treated them as
      a classification of Things, and carried them out as such, dividing
      down the Category Substance as a naturalist might do, into the
      different classes of physical or metaphysical objects as
      distinguished from attributes, and the other Categories into the
      principal varieties of quantity, quality, relation, etc. It is,
      therefore, a just subject of complaint against them, that they had
      no Category of Feeling. Feeling is assuredly predicable as a summum
      genus, of every particular kind of feeling, for instance, as in Mr.
      Bain’s example, of Hope: but it can not be brought within any of the
      Categories as interpreted either by Aristotle or by his followers.

_   18 Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, vol. i., p. 40.

_   19 Discussions on Philosophy_, etc. Appendix I., pp. 643, 644.

   20 It is to be regretted that Sir William Hamilton, though he often
      strenuously insists on this doctrine, and though, in the passage
      quoted, he states it with a comprehensiveness and force which leave
      nothing to be desired, did not consistently adhere to his own
      doctrine, but maintained along with it opinions with which it is
      utterly irreconcilable. See the third and other chapters of _An
      Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_.

   21 “Nous savons qu’il existe quelque chose hors de nous, parceque nous
      ne pouvons expliquer nos perceptions sans les rattacher à des causes
      distinctes de nous mêmes; nous savons de plus que ces causes, dont
      nous ne connaissons pas d’ailleurs l’essence, produisent les effets
      les plus variables, les plus divers, et même les plus contraires,
      selon qu’elles rencontrent telle nature ou telle disposition du
      sujet. Mais savons-nous quelque chose de plus? et même, vu le
      caractère indéterminé des causes que nous concevons dans les corps,
      y a-t-il quelque chose de plus à savoir? Y a-t-il lieu de nous
      enquérir si nous percevons les choses telles qu’elles sont? Non
      évidemment.... Je ne dis pas que le problème est insoluble, _je dis
      qu’il est absurde et enferme une contradiction_. Nous _ne savons pas
      ce que ces causes sont en elles-mêmes_, et la raison nous défend de
      chercher à le connaître: mais il est bien évident _à priori_,
      qu’_elles ne sont pas en elles-mêmes ce qu’elles sont par rapport à
      nous_, puisque la présence du sujet modifie nécessairement leur
      action. Supprimez tout sujet sentant, il est certain que ces causes
      agiraient encore puisqu’elles continueraient d’exister; mais elles
      agiraient autrement; elles seraient encore des qualités et des
      propriétés, mais qui ne ressembleraient à rien de ce que nous
      connaissons. Le feu ne manifesterait plus aucune des propriétés que
      nous lui connaissons: que serait-il? C’est ce que nous ne saurons
      jamais. _C’est d’ailleurs peut-être un problème qui ne répugne pas
      seulement à la nature de notre esprit, mais à l’essence même des
      choses._ Quand même en effet on supprimerait par le pensée tous les
      sujets sentants, il faudrait encore admettre que nul corps ne
      manifesterait ses propriétés autrement qu’en relation avec un sujet
      quelconque, et dans ce cas _ses propriétés ne seraient encore que
      relatives_: en sorte qu’il me paraît fort raisonnable d’admettre que
      les propriétés déterminées des corps n’existent pas indépendamment
      d’un sujet quelconque, et que quand on demande si les propriétés de
      la matiere sont telles que nous les percevons, il faudrait voir
      auparavant si elles sont en tant que déterminées, et dans quel sens
      il est vrai de dire qu’elles sont.”—_Cours d’Histoire de la
      Philosophie Morale au 18me siècle_, 8me leçon.

   22 An attempt, indeed, has been made by Reid and others, to establish
      that although some of the properties we ascribe to objects exist
      only in our sensations, others exist in the things themselves, being
      such as can not possibly be copies of any impression upon the
      senses; and they ask, from what sensations our notions of extension
      and figure have been derived? The gauntlet thrown down by Reid was
      taken up by Brown, who, applying greater powers of analysis than had
      previously been applied to the notions of extension and figure,
      pointed out that the sensations from which those notions are
      derived, are sensations of touch, combined with sensations of a
      class previously too little adverted to by metaphysicians, those
      which have their seat in our muscular frame. His analysis, which was
      adopted and followed up by James Mill, has been further and greatly
      improved upon in Professor Bain’s profound work, _The Senses and the
      Intellect_, and in the chapters on “Perception” of a work of eminent
      analytic power, Mr. Herbert Spencer’s _Principles of Psychology_.

      On this point M. Cousin may again be cited in favor of the better
      doctrine. M. Cousin recognizes, in opposition to Reid, the essential
      subjectivity of our conceptions of what are called the primary
      qualities of matter, as extension, solidity, etc., equally with
      those of color, heat, and the remainder of the so-called secondary
      qualities.—_Cours_, ut supra, 9me leçon.

   23 This doctrine, which is the most complete form of the philosophical
      theory known as the Relativity of Human Knowledge, has, since the
      recent revival in this country of an active interest in metaphysical
      speculation, been the subject of a greatly increased amount of
      discussion and controversy; and dissentients have manifested
      themselves in considerably greater number than I had any knowledge
      of when the passage in the text was written. The doctrine has been
      attacked from two sides. Some thinkers, among whom are the late
      Professor Ferrier, in his _Institutes of Metaphysic_, and Professor
      John Grote, in his _Exploratio Philosophica_, appear to deny
      altogether the reality of Noumena, or Things in themselves—of an
      unknowable substratum or support for the sensations which we
      experience, and which, according to the theory, constitute all our
      knowledge of an external world. It seems to me, however, that in
      Professor Grote’s case at least, the denial of Noumena is only
      apparent, and that he does not essentially differ from the other
      class of objectors, including Mr. Bailey in his valuable _Letters on
      the Philosophy of the Human Mind_, and (in spite of the striking
      passage quoted in the text) also Sir William Hamilton, who contend
      for a direct knowledge by the human mind of more than the
      sensations—of certain attributes or properties as they exist not in
      us, but in the Things themselves.

      With the first of these opinions, that which denies Noumena, I have,
      as a metaphysician, no quarrel; but, whether it be true or false, it
      is irrelevant to Logic. And since all the forms of language are in
      contradiction to it, nothing but confusion could result from its
      unnecessary introduction into a treatise, every essential doctrine
      of which could stand equally well with the opposite and accredited
      opinion. The other and rival doctrine, that of a direct perception
      or intuitive knowledge of the outward object as it is in itself,
      considered as distinct from the sensations we receive from it, is of
      far greater practical moment. But even this question, depending on
      the nature and laws of Intuitive Knowledge, is not within the
      province of Logic. For the grounds of my own opinion concerning it,
      I must content myself with referring to a work already mentioned—_An
      Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_; several chapters
      of which are devoted to a full discussion of the questions and
      theories relating to the supposed direct perception of external
      objects.

   24 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 49) defines attributes as “points of
      community among classes.” This definition expresses well one point
      of view, but is liable to the objection that it applies only to the
      attributes of classes; though an object, unique in its kind, may be
      said to have attributes. Moreover, the definition is not ultimate,
      since the points of community themselves admit of, and require,
      further analysis; and Mr. Bain does analyze them into resemblances
      in the sensations, or other states of consciousness excited by the
      object.

_   25 Analysis of the Human Mind_, i., 126 et seq.

_   26 Logic_, i., 85.

   27 Instead of Universal and Particular as applied to propositions,
      Professor Bain proposes (_Logic_, i., 81) the terms Total and
      Partial; reserving the former pair of terms for their inductive
      meaning, “the contrast between a general proposition and the
      particulars or individuals that we derive it from.” This change in
      nomenclature would be attended with the further advantage, that
      Singular propositions, which in the Syllogism follow the same rules
      as Universal, would be included along with them in the same class,
      that of Total predications. It is not the Subject’s denoting many
      things or only one, that is of importance in reasoning, it is that
      the assertion is made of the whole or a part only of what the
      Subject denotes. The words Universal and Particular, however, are so
      familiar and so well understood in both the senses mentioned by Mr.
      Bain, that the double meaning does not produce any material
      inconvenience.

   28 It may, however, be considered as equivalent to a universal
      proposition with a different predicate, viz.: “All wine is good
      _quâ_ wine,” or “is good in respect of the qualities which
      constitute it wine.”

_   29 Logic_, i., 82.

   30 Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 242) questions this
      statement, and asks, “Are we to say that a mole can not dig the
      ground, except he has an idea of the ground, and of the snout and
      paws with which he digs it?” I do not know what passes in a mole’s
      mind, nor what amount of mental apprehension may or may not
      accompany his instinctive actions. But a human being does not use a
      spade by instinct; and he certainly could not use it unless he had
      knowledge of a spade, and of the earth which he uses it upon.

   31 Professor Bain remarks, in qualification of the statement in the
      text (_Logic_, i., 50), that the word Class has two meanings; “the
      class definite, and the class indefinite. The class definite is an
      enumeration of actual individuals, as the Peers of the Realm, the
      oceans of the globe, the known planets.... The class indefinite is
      unenumerated. Such classes are stars, planets, gold-bearing rocks,
      men, poets, virtuous.... In this last acceptation of the word, class
      name and general name are identical. The class name denotes an
      indefinite number of individuals, and connotes the points of
      community or likeness.”

      The theory controverted in the text, tacitly supposes all classes to
      be _definite_. I have assumed them to be indefinite; because, for
      the purposes of Logic, definite classes, as such, are almost
      useless; though often serviceable as means of abridged expression.
      (Vide infra, book iii., chap. ii.)

   32 “From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were
      arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon
      things, or received them from the imposition of others. For it is
      true (for example) that _man is a living creature_, but it is for
      this reason, that it pleased men to impose both these names on the
      same thing.”—_Computation or Logic_, chap. iii., sect. 8.

   33 “Men are subject to err not only in affirming and denying, but also
      in perception, and in silent cogitation.... Tacit errors, or the
      errors of sense and cogitation, are made by passing from one
      imagination to the imagination of another different thing; or by
      feigning that to be past, or future, which never was, nor ever shall
      be; as when by seeing the image of the sun in water, we imagine the
      sun itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that there has been, or
      shall be, fighting, because it used to be so for the most part; or
      when from promises we feign the mind of the promiser to be such and
      such; or, lastly, when from any sign we vainly imagine something to
      be signified which is not. And errors of this sort are common to all
      things that have sense.”—_Computation or Logic_, chap. v., sect. 1.

   34 Chap. iii., sect 3.

   35 To the preceding statement it has been objected, that “we naturally
      construe the subject of a proposition in its extension, and the
      predicate (which therefore may be an adjective) in its intension
      (connotation): and that consequently co-existence of attributes does
      not, any more than the opposite theory of equation of groups,
      correspond with the living processes of thought and language.” I
      acknowledge the distinction here drawn, which, indeed, I had myself
      laid down and exemplified a few pages back (p. 77). But though it is
      true that we naturally “construe the subject of a proposition in its
      extension,” this extension, or in other words, the extent of the
      class denoted by the name, is not apprehended or indicated directly.
      It is both apprehended and indicated solely through the attributes.
      In the “living processes of thought and language” the extension,
      though in this case really thought of (which in the case of the
      predicate it is not), is thought of only through the medium of what
      my acute and courteous critic terms the “intension.”

      For further illustrations of this subject, see _Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy_, chap. xxii.

   36 Professor Bain, in his _Logic_ (i., 256), excludes Existence from
      the list, considering it as a mere name. All propositions, he says,
      which predicate mere existence “are more or less abbreviated, or
      elliptical: when fully expressed they fall under either co-existence
      or succession. When we say there _exists_ a conspiracy for a
      particular purpose, we mean that at the present time a body of men
      have formed themselves into a society for a particular object; which
      is a complex affirmation, resolvable into propositions of
      co-existence and succession (as causation). The assertion that the
      dodo does not exist, points to the fact that this animal, once known
      in a certain place, has disappeared or become extinct; is no longer
      associated with the locality: all which may be better stated without
      the use of the verb ‘exist.’ There is a debated question—Does an
      ether exist? but the concrete form would be this—‘Are heat and light
      and other radiant influences propagated by an ethereal medium
      diffused in space;’ which is a proposition of causation. In like
      manner the question of the Existence of a Deity can not be discussed
      in that form. It is properly a question as to the First _Cause_ of
      the Universe, and as to the continued exertion of that Cause in
      providential superintendence.” (i., 407.)

      Mr. Bain thinks it “fictitious and unmeaning language” to carry up
      the classification of Nature to one _summum genus_, Being, or that
      which Exists; since nothing can be perceived or apprehended but by
      way of contrast with something else (of which important truth, under
      the name of Law of Relativity, he has been in our time the principal
      expounder and champion), and we have no other class to oppose to
      Being, or fact to contrast with Existence.

      I accept fully Mr. Bain’s Law of Relativity, but I do not understand
      by it that to enable us to apprehend or be conscious of any fact, it
      is necessary that we should contrast it with some other positive
      fact. The antithesis necessary to consciousness need not, I
      conceive, be an antithesis between two positives; it may be between
      one positive and its negative. Hobbes was undoubtedly right when he
      said that a single sensation indefinitely prolonged would cease to
      be felt at all; but simple intermission, without other change, would
      restore it to consciousness. In order to be conscious of heat, it is
      not necessary that we should pass to it from cold; it suffices that
      we should pass to it from a state of no sensation, or from a
      sensation of some other kind. The relative opposite of Being,
      considered as a summum genus, is Nonentity, or Nothing; and we have,
      now and then, occasion to consider and discuss things merely in
      contrast with Nonentity.

      I grant that the _decision_ of questions of Existence usually if not
      always depends on a previous question of either Causation or
      Co-existence. But Existence is nevertheless a different thing from
      Causation or Co-existence, and can be predicated apart from them.
      The meaning of the abstract name Existence, and the connotation of
      the concrete name Being, consist, like the meaning of all other
      names, in sensations or states of consciousness: their peculiarity
      is that to exist, is to excite, or be capable of exciting, _any_
      sensations or states of consciousness: no matter what, but it is
      indispensable that there should be some. It was from overlooking
      this that Hegel, finding that Being is an abstraction reached by
      thinking away all particular attributes, arrived at the
      self-contradictory proposition on which he founded all his
      philosophy, that Being is the same as Nothing. It is really the name
      of Something, taken in the most comprehensive sense of the word.

   37 Book iv., chap. vii.

_   38 Logic_, i., 103-105.

   39 The doctrines which prevented the real meaning of Essences from
      being understood, had not assumed so settled a shape in the time of
      Aristotle and his immediate followers, as was afterward given to
      them by the Realists of the Middle Ages. Aristotle himself (in his
      Treatise on the Categories) expressly denies that the δεύτεραι
      οὔσιαι, or Substantiæ Secundæ, inhere in a subject. They are only,
      he says, predicated of it.

   40 The always acute and often profound author of _An Outline of
      Sematology_ (Mr. B. H. Smart) justly says, “Locke will be much more
      intelligible, if, in the majority of places, we substitute ‘the
      knowledge of’ for what he calls ‘the Idea of’ ” (p. 10). Among the
      many criticisms on Locke’s use of the word Idea, this is the one
      which, as it appears to me, most nearly hits the mark; and I quote
      it for the additional reason that it precisely expresses the point
      of difference respecting the import of Propositions, between my view
      and what I have spoken of as the Conceptualist view of them. Where a
      Conceptualist says that a name or a proposition expresses our Idea
      of a thing, I should generally say (instead of our Idea) our
      Knowledge, or Belief, concerning the thing itself.

   41 This distinction corresponds to that which is drawn by Kant and
      other metaphysicians between what they term _analytic_ and
      _synthetic_, judgments; the former being those which can be evolved
      from the meaning of the terms used.

   42 If we allow a differentia to what is not really a species. For the
      distinction of Kinds, in the sense explained by us, not being in any
      way applicable to attributes, it of course follows that although
      attributes may be put into classes, those classes can be admitted to
      be genera or species only by courtesy.

   43 Professor Bain, in his Logic, takes a peculiar view of Definition.
      He holds (i., 71) with the present work, that “the definition in its
      full import, is the sum of all the properties connoted by the name;
      it exhausts the meaning of a word.” But he regards the meaning of a
      general name as including, not indeed all the common properties of
      the class named, but all of them that are ultimate properties, not
      resolvable into one another. “The enumeration of the attributes of
      oxygen, of gold, of man, should be an enumeration of the final (so
      far as can be made out), the underivable, powers or functions of
      each,” and nothing less than this is a complete Definition (i., 75).
      An independent property, not derivable from other properties, even
      if previously unknown, yet as soon as discovered becomes, according
      to him, part of the meaning of the term, and should be included in
      the definition. “When we are told that diamond, which we know to be
      a transparent, glittering, hard, and high-priced substance, is
      composed of carbon, and is combustible, we must put these additional
      properties on the same level as the rest; to us they are henceforth
      connoted by the name” (i., 73). Consequently the propositions that
      diamond is composed of carbon, and that it is combustible, are
      regarded by Mr. Bain as merely verbal propositions. He carries this
      doctrine so far as to say that unless mortality can be shown to be a
      consequence of the ultimate laws of animal organization, mortality
      is connoted by man, and “Man is Mortal” is a merely verbal
      proposition. And one of the peculiarities (I think a disadvantageous
      peculiarity) of his able and valuable treatise, is the large number
      of propositions requiring proof, and learned by experience, which,
      in conformity with this doctrine, he considers as not real, but
      verbal, propositions.

      The objection I have to this language is that it confounds, or at
      least confuses, a much more important distinction than that which it
      draws. The only reason for dividing Propositions into real and
      verbal, is in order to discriminate propositions which convey
      information about facts, from those which do not. A proposition
      which affirms that an object has a given attribute, while
      designating the object by a name which already signifies the
      attribute, adds no information to that which was already possessed
      by all who understood the name. But when this is said, it is implied
      that, by the signification of a name, is meant the signification
      attached to it in the common usage of life. I can not think we ought
      to say that the meaning of a word includes matters of fact which are
      unknown to every person who uses the word unless he has learned them
      by special study of a particular department of Nature; or that
      because a few persons are aware of these matters of fact, the
      affirmation of them is a proposition conveying no information. I
      hold that (special scientific connotation apart) a name means, or
      connotes, only the properties which it is a mark of in the general
      mind; and that in the case of any additional properties, however
      uniformly found to accompany these, it remains possible that a thing
      which did not possess the properties might still be thought entitled
      to the name. Ruminant, according to Mr. Bain’s use of language,
      connotes cloven-hoofed, since the two properties are always found
      together, and no connection has ever been discovered between them:
      but ruminant does not mean cloven-hoofed; and were an animal to be
      discovered which chews the cud, but has its feet undivided, I
      venture to say that it would still be called ruminant.

   44 In the fuller discussion which Archbishop Whately has given to this
      subject in his later editions, he almost ceases to regard the
      definitions of names and those of things as, in any important sense,
      distinct. He seems (9th ed., p. 145) to limit the notion of a Real
      Definition to one which “explains any thing _more_ of the nature of
      the thing than is implied in the name;” (including under the word
      “implied,” not only what the name connotes, but every thing which
      can be deduced by reasoning from the attributes connoted). Even
      this, as he adds, is usually called not a Definition, but a
      Description; and (as it seems to me) rightly so called. A
      Description, I conceive, can only be ranked among Definitions, when
      taken (as in the case of the zoological definition of man) to
      fulfill the true office of a Definition, by declaring the
      connotation given to a word in some special use, as a term of
      science or art: which special connotation of course would not be
      expressed by the proper definition of the word in its ordinary
      employment.

      Mr. De Morgan, exactly reversing the doctrine of Archbishop Whately,
      understands by a Real Definition one which contains _less_ than the
      Nominal Definition, provided only that what it contains is
      sufficient for distinction. “By _real_ definition I mean such an
      explanation of the word, be it the whole of the meaning or only
      part, as will be sufficient to separate the things contained under
      that word from all others. Thus the following, I believe, is a
      complete definition of an elephant: An animal which naturally drinks
      by drawing the water into its nose, and then spurting it into its
      mouth.”—_Formal Logic_, p. 36. Mr. De Morgan’s general proposition
      and his example are at variance; for the peculiar mode of drinking
      of the elephant certainly forms no part of the meaning of the word
      elephant. It could not be said, because a person happened to be
      ignorant of this property, that he did not know what an elephant
      means.

   45 In the only attempt which, so far as I know, has been made to refute
      the preceding argumentation, it is maintained that in the first form
      of the syllogism,

      A dragon is a thing which breathes flame,
      A dragon is a serpent,
      Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame,

      “there is just as much truth in the conclusion as there is in the
      premises, or rather, no more in the latter than in the former. If
      the general name serpent includes both real and imaginary serpents,
      there is no falsity in the conclusion; if not, there is falsity in
      the minor premise.”

      Let us, then, try to set out the syllogism on the hypothesis that
      the name serpent includes imaginary serpents. We shall find that it
      is now necessary to alter the predicates; for it can not be asserted
      that an imaginary creature breathes flame; in predicating of it such
      a fact, we assert by the most positive implication that it is real,
      and not imaginary. The conclusion must run thus, “Some serpent or
      serpents either do or are _imagined_ to breathe flame.” And to prove
      this conclusion by the instance of dragons, the premises must be, A
      dragon is _imagined_ as breathing flame. A dragon is a (real or
      imaginary) serpent: from which it undoubtedly follows, that there
      are serpents which are imagined to breathe flame; but the major
      premise is not a definition, nor part of a definition; which is all
      that I am concerned to prove.

      Let us now examine the other assertion—that if the word serpent
      stands for none but real serpents, the minor premise (a dragon is a
      serpent) is false. This is exactly what I have myself said of the
      premise, considered as a statement of fact: but it is not false as
      part of the definition of a dragon; and since the premises, or one
      of them, must be false (the conclusion being so), the real premise
      can not be the definition, which is true, but the statement of fact,
      which is false.

   46 “Few people” (I have said in another place) “have reflected how
      great a knowledge of Things is required to enable a man to affirm
      that any given argument turns wholly upon words. There is, perhaps,
      not one of the leading terms of philosophy which is not used in
      almost innumerable shades of meaning, to express ideas more or less
      widely different from one another. Between two of these ideas a
      sagacious and penetrating mind will discern, as it were intuitively,
      an unobvious link of connection, upon which, though perhaps unable
      to give a logical account of it, he will found a perfectly valid
      argument, which his critic, not having so keen an insight into the
      Things, will mistake for a fallacy turning on the double meaning of
      a term. And the greater the genius of him who thus safely leaps over
      the chasm, the greater will probably be the crowing and vainglory of
      the mere logician, who, hobbling after him, evinces his own superior
      wisdom by pausing on its brink, and giving up as desperate his
      proper business of bridging it over.”

   47 The different cases of Equipollency, or “Equivalent Propositional
      Forms,” are set forth with some fullness in Professor Bain’s
      _Logic_. One of the commonest of these changes of expression, that
      from affirming a proposition to denying its negative, or _vicè
      versa_, Mr. Bain designates, very happily, by the name Obversion.

   48 As Sir William Hamilton has pointed out, “Some A is not B” may also
      be converted in the following form: “No B is _some_ A.” Some men are
      not negroes; therefore, No negroes are _some_ men (_e.g._,
      Europeans).

   49 Contraries:
      All  A is B
      No   A is B

      Subtraries:
      Some A is B
      Some A is not B

      Contradictories:
      All  A is B
      Some A is not B

      Also contradictories:
      No A is B
      Some A is B

      Respectively subalternate:
      All  A is B and No A is B
      Some A is B and Some A is not B

   50 Professor Bain denies the claim of Singular Propositions to be
      classed, for the purposes of ratiocination, with Universal; though
      they come within the designation which he himself proposes as an
      equivalent for Universal, that of Total. He would even, to use his
      own expression, banish them entirely from the syllogism. He takes as
      an example,

      Socrates is wise,
      Socrates is poor, therefore
      Some poor men are wise,

      or more properly (as he observes) “one poor man is wise.” “Now, if
      wise, poor, and a man, are attributes belonging to the meaning of
      the word Socrates, there is then no march of reasoning at all. We
      have given in Socrates, _inter alia_, the facts wise, poor, and a
      man, and we merely repeat the concurrence which is selected from the
      whole aggregate of properties making up the whole, Socrates. The
      case is one under the head ‘Greater and Less Connotation’ in
      Equivalent Propositional Forms, or Immediate Inference.

      “But the example in this form does not do justice to the syllogism
      of singulars. We must suppose both propositions to be real, the
      predicates being in no way involved in the subject. Thus

      Socrates was the master of Plato,
      Socrates fought at Delium,
      The master of Plato fought at Delium.

      “It may fairly be doubted whether the transitions, in this instance,
      are any thing more than equivalent forms. For the proposition
      ‘Socrates was the master of Plato and fought at Delium,’ compounded
      out of the two premises, is obviously nothing more than a
      grammatical abbreviation. No one can say that there is here any
      change of meaning, or any thing beyond a verbal modification of the
      original form. The next step is, ‘The master of Plato fought at
      Delium,’ which is the previous statement cut down by the omission of
      Socrates. It contents itself with reproducing a part of the meaning,
      or saying less than had been previously said. The full equivalent of
      the affirmation is, ‘The master of Plato fought at Delium, and the
      master of Plato was Socrates:’ the new form omits the last piece of
      information, and gives only the first. Now, we never consider that
      we have made a real inference, a step in advance, when we repeat
      _less_ than we are entitled to say, or drop from a complex statement
      some portion not desired at the moment. Such an operation keeps
      strictly within the domain of equivalence, or Immediate Inference.
      In no way, therefore, can a syllogism with two singular premises be
      viewed as a genuine syllogistic or deductive inference.” (_Logic_,
      i., 159.)

      The first argument, as will have been seen, rests upon the
      supposition that the name Socrates has a meaning; that man, wise,
      and poor, are parts of this meaning; and that by predicating them of
      Socrates we convey no information; a view of the signification of
      names which, for reasons already given (Note to § 4 of the chapter
      on Definition, _supra_, pp. 110, 111.), I can not admit, and which,
      as applied to the class of names which Socrates belongs to, is at
      war with Mr. Bain’s own definition of a Proper Name (i., 148), “a
      single _meaningless_ mark or designation appropriated to the thing.”
      Such names, Mr. Bain proceeded to say, do not necessarily indicate
      even human beings: much less then does the name Socrates include the
      meaning of wise or poor. Otherwise it would follow that if Socrates
      had grown rich, or had lost his mental faculties by illness, he
      would no longer have been called Socrates.

      The second part of Mr. Bain’s argument, in which he contends that
      even when the premises convey real information, the conclusion is
      merely the premises with a part left out, is applicable, if at all,
      as much to universal propositions as to singular. In every syllogism
      the conclusion contains less than is asserted in the two premises
      taken together. Suppose the syllogism to be

      All bees are intelligent,
      All bees are insects, therefore
      Some insects are intelligent:

      one might use the same liberty taken by Mr. Bain, of joining
      together the two premises as if they were one—“All bees are insects
      and intelligent”—and might say that in omitting the middle term
      _bees_ we make no real inference, but merely reproduce part of what
      had been previously said. Mr. Bain’s is really an objection to the
      syllogism itself, or at all events to the third figure: it has no
      special applicability to singular propositions.

   51 His conclusions are, “The first figure is suited to the discovery or
      proof of the properties of a thing; the second to the discovery or
      proof of the distinctions between things; the third to the discovery
      or proof of instances and exceptions; the fourth to the discovery,
      or exclusion, of the different species of a genus.” The reference of
      syllogisms in the last three figures to the _dictum de omni et
      nullo_ is, in Lambert’s opinion, strained and unnatural: to each of
      the three belongs, according to him, a separate axiom, co-ordinate
      and of equal authority with that _dictum_, and to which he gives the
      names of _dictum de diverso_ for the second figure, _dictum de
      exemplo_ for the third, and _dictum de reciproco_ for the fourth.
      See part i., or _Dianoiologie_, chap, iv., § 229 _et seqq._ Mr.
      Bailey (_Theory of Reasoning_, 2d ed., pp. 70-74) takes a similar
      view of the subject.

   52 Since this chapter was written, two treatises have appeared (or
      rather a treatise and a fragment of a treatise), which aim at a
      further improvement in the theory of the forms of ratiocination: Mr.
      De Morgan’s “Formal Logic; or, the Calculus of Inference, Necessary
      and Probable;” and the “New Analytic of Logical Forms,” attached as
      an Appendix to Sir William Hamilton’s _Discussions on Philosophy_,
      and at greater length, to his posthumous _Lectures on Logic_.

      In Mr. De Morgan’s volume—abounding, in its more popular parts, with
      valuable observations felicitously expressed—the principal feature
      of originality is an attempt to bring within strict technical rules
      the cases in which a conclusion can be drawn from premises of a form
      usually classed as particular. Mr. De Morgan observes, very justly,
      that from the premises most Bs are Cs, most Bs are As, it may be
      concluded with certainty that some As are Cs, since two portions of
      the class B, each of them comprising more than half, must
      necessarily in part consist of the same individuals. Following out
      this line of thought, it is equally evident that if we knew exactly
      what proportion the “most” in each of the premises bear to the
      entire class B, we could increase in a corresponding degree the
      definiteness of the conclusion. Thus if 60 per cent. of B are
      included in C, and 70 per cent. in A, 30 per cent. at least must be
      common to both; in other words, the number of As which are Cs, and
      of Cs which are As, must be at least equal to 30 per cent. of the
      class B. Proceeding on this conception of “numerically definite
      propositions,” and extending it to such forms as these:—“45 Xs (or
      more) are each of them one of 70 Ys,” or “45 Xs (or more) are no one
      of them to be found among 70 Ys,” and examining what inferences
      admit of being drawn from the various combinations which may be made
      of premises of this description, Mr. De Morgan establishes universal
      formulæ for such inferences; creating for that purpose not only a
      new technical language, but a formidable array of symbols analogous
      to those of algebra.

      Since it is undeniable that inferences, in the cases examined by Mr.
      De Morgan, can legitimately be drawn, and that the ordinary theory
      takes no account of them, I will not say that it was not worth while
      to show in detail how these also could be reduced to formulæ as
      rigorous as those of Aristotle. What Mr. De Morgan has done was
      worth doing once (perhaps more than once, as a school exercise); but
      I question if its results are worth studying and mastering for any
      practical purpose. The practical use of technical forms of reasoning
      is to bar out fallacies: but the fallacies which require to be
      guarded against in ratiocination properly so called, arise from the
      incautious use of the common forms of language; and the logician
      must track the fallacy into that territory, instead of waiting for
      it on a territory of his own. While he remains among propositions
      which have acquired the numerical precision of the Calculus of
      Probabilities, the enemy is left in possession of the only ground on
      which he can be formidable. And since the propositions (short of
      universal) on which a thinker has to depend, either for purposes of
      speculation or of practice, do not, except in a few peculiar cases,
      admit of any numerical precision; common reasoning can not be
      translated into Mr. De Morgan’s forms, which therefore can not serve
      any purpose as a test of it.

      Sir William Hamilton’s theory of the “quantification of the
      predicate” may be described as follows:

      “Logically” (I quote his words) “we ought to take into account the
      quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, for manifest
      reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but also
      of the predicate of a judgment.” All A is B, is equivalent to all A
      is _some_ B. No A is B, to No A is _any_ B. Some A is B, is
      tantamount to some A is _some_ B. Some A is not B, to Some A is _not
      any_ B. As in these forms of assertion the predicate is exactly
      co-extensive with the subject, they all admit of simple conversion;
      and by this we obtain two additional forms—Some B is _all_ A, and No
      B is _some_ A. We may also make the assertion All A is all B, which
      will be true if the classes A and B are exactly co-extensive. The
      last three forms, though conveying real assertions, have no place in
      the ordinary classification of Propositions. All propositions, then,
      being supposed to be translated into this language, and written each
      in that one of the preceding forms which answers to its
      signification, there emerges a new set of syllogistic rules,
      materially different from the common ones. A general view of the
      points of difference may be given in the words of Sir W. Hamilton
      (_Discussions_, 2d ed., p. 651):

      “The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true
      relation; a proposition being always an _equation_ of its subject
      and its predicate.

      “The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from
      three species to one—that of Simple Conversion.

      “The reduction of all the _General Laws_ of Categorical Syllogisms
      to a single Canon.

      “The evolution from that one canon of all the Species and varieties
      of Syllogisms.

      “The abrogation of all the _Special Laws_ of Syllogism.

      “A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three Syllogistic
      Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of
      the Fourth.

      “A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in
      syllogistic form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the
      syllogisms of the other figures to the first.

      “An enouncement of _one Organic Principle_ for each Figure.

      “A determination of the true number of the Legitimate Moods; with

      “Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

      “Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

      “Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every
      schematic difference.

      “That, in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both
      the same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first,
      an opposition and subordination between a term major and a term
      minor, mutually containing and contained, in the counter wholes of
      Extension and Comprehension.

      “Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no
      determinate major and minor premises, and there are two indifferent
      conclusions: whereas in the first the premises are determinate, and
      there is a single proximate conclusion.”

      This doctrine, like that of Mr. De Morgan previously noticed, is a
      real addition to the syllogistic theory; and has moreover this
      advantage over Mr. De Morgan’s “numerically definite Syllogism,”
      that the forms it supplies are really available as a test of the
      correctness of ratiocination; since propositions in the common form
      may always have their predicates quantified, and so be made amenable
      to Sir W. Hamilton’s rules. Considered, however, as a contribution
      to the _Science_ of Logic, that is, to the analysis of the mental
      processes concerned in reasoning, the new doctrine appears to me, I
      confess, not merely superfluous, but erroneous; since the form in
      which it clothes propositions does not, like the ordinary form,
      express what is in the mind of the speaker when he enunciates the
      proposition. I can not think Sir William Hamilton right in
      maintaining that the quantity of the predicate is “always understood
      in thought.” It is implied, but is not present to the mind of the
      person who asserts the proposition. The quantification of the
      predicate, instead of being a means of bringing out more clearly the
      meaning of the proposition, actually leads the mind out of the
      proposition, into another order of ideas. For when we say, All men
      are mortal, we simply mean to affirm the attribute mortality of all
      men; without thinking at all of the _class_ mortal in the concrete,
      or troubling ourselves about whether it contains any other beings or
      not. It is only for some artificial purpose that we ever look at the
      proposition in the aspect in which the predicate also is thought of
      as a class-name, either including the subject only, or the subject
      and something more. (See above, p. 77, 78.)

      For a fuller discussion of this subject, see the twenty-second
      chapter of a work already referred to, “An Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy.”

   53 Mr. Herbert Spencer (_Principles of Psychology_, pp. 125-7), though
      his theory of the syllogism coincides with all that is essential of
      mine, thinks it a logical fallacy to present the two axioms in the
      text, as the regulating principles of syllogism. He charges me with
      falling into the error pointed out by Archbishop Whately and myself,
      of confounding exact likeness with literal identity; and maintains,
      that we ought not to say that Socrates possesses _the same_
      attributes which are connoted by the word Man, but only that he
      possesses attributes _exactly like_ them: according to which
      phraseology, Socrates, and the attribute mortality, are not two
      things co-existing with the same thing, as the axiom asserts, but
      two things coexisting with two different things.

      The question between Mr. Spencer and me is merely one of language;
      for neither of us (if I understand Mr. Spencer’s opinions rightly)
      believes an attribute to be a real thing, possessed of objective
      existence; we believe it to be a particular mode of naming our
      sensations, or our expectations of sensation, when looked at in
      their relation to an external object which excites them. The
      question raised by Mr. Spencer does not, therefore, concern the
      properties of any really existing thing, but the comparative
      appropriateness, for philosophical purposes, of two different modes
      of using a name. Considered in this point of view, the phraseology I
      have employed, which is that commonly used by philosophers, seems to
      me to be the best. Mr. Spencer is of opinion that because Socrates
      and Alcibiades are not the same man, the attribute which constitutes
      them men should not be called the same attribute; that because the
      humanity of one man and that of another express themselves to our
      senses not by the same individual sensations but by sensations
      exactly alike, humanity ought to be regarded as a different
      attribute in every different man. But on this showing, the humanity
      even of any one man should be considered as different attributes now
      and half an hour hence; for the sensations by which it will then
      manifest itself to my organs will not be a continuation of my
      present sensations, but a repetition of them; fresh sensations, not
      identical with, but only exactly like the present. If every general
      conception, instead of being “the One in the Many,” were considered
      to be as many different conceptions as there are things to which it
      is applicable, there would be no such thing as general language. A
      name would have no general meaning if _man_ connoted one thing when
      predicated of John, and another, though closely resembling, thing
      when predicated of William. Accordingly a recent pamphlet asserts
      the impossibility of general knowledge on this precise ground.

      The meaning of any general name is some outward or inward
      phenomenon, consisting, in the last resort, of feelings; and these
      feelings, if their continuity is for an instant broken, are no
      longer the same feelings, in the sense of individual identity. What,
      then, is the common something which gives a meaning to the general
      name? Mr. Spencer can only say, it is the similarity of the
      feelings; and I rejoin, the attribute is precisely that similarity.
      The names of attributes are in their ultimate analysis names for the
      resemblances of our sensations (or other feelings). Every general
      name, whether abstract or concrete, denotes or connotes one or more
      of those resemblances. It will not, probably, be denied, that if a
      hundred sensations are undistinguishably alike, their resemblance
      ought to be spoken of as one resemblance, and not a hundred
      resemblances which merely _resemble_ one another. The things
      compared are many, but the something common to all of them must be
      conceived as one, just as the name is conceived as one, though
      corresponding to numerically different sensations of sound each time
      it is pronounced. The general term _man_ does not connote the
      sensations derived once from one man, which, once gone, can no more
      occur again than the same flash of lightning. It connotes the
      general type of the sensations derived always from all men, and the
      power (always thought of as one) of producing sensations of that
      type. And the axiom might be thus worded: Two _types of sensation_
      each of which co-exists with a third type, co-exist with another; or
      Two _powers_ each of which co-exists with a third power co-exist
      with one another.

      Mr. Spencer has misunderstood me in another particular. He supposes
      that the co-existence spoken of in the axiom, of two things with the
      same third thing, means simultaneousness in time. The co-existence
      meant is that of being jointly attributes of the same subject. The
      attribute of being born without teeth, and the attribute of having
      thirty-two teeth in mature age, are in this sense co-existent, both
      being attributes of man, though _ex vi termini_ never of the same
      man at the same time.

   54 Supra, p. 93.

   55 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 157) considers the axiom (or rather
      axioms) here proposed as a substitute for the _dictum de omni_, to
      possess certain advantages, but to be “unworkable as a basis of the
      syllogism. The fatal defect consists in this, that it is ill-adapted
      to bring out the difference between total and partial coincidence of
      terms, the observation of which is the essential precaution in
      syllogizing correctly. If all the terms were co-extensive, the axiom
      would flow on admirably; A carries B, all B and none but B; B
      carries C in the same manner; at once A carries C, without
      limitation or reserve. But in point of fact, we know that while A
      carries B, other things carry B also; whence a process of limitation
      is required, in transferring A to C through B. A (in common with
      other things) carries B; B (in common with other things) carries C;
      whence A (in common with other things) carries C. The axiom provides
      no means of making this limitation; if we were to follow A
      literally, we should be led to suppose A and C co-extensive: for
      such is the only obvious meaning of ‘the attribute A coincides with
      the attribute C.’ ”

      It is certainly possible that a careless learner here and there may
      suppose that if A carries B, it follows that B carries A. But if any
      one is so incautious as to commit this mistake, the very earliest
      lesson in the logic of inference, the Conversion of propositions,
      will correct it. The first of the two forms in which I have stated
      the axiom, is in some degree open to Mr. Bain’s criticism: when B is
      said to co-exist with A (it must be by a _lapsus calami_ that Mr.
      Bain uses the word _coincide_), it is possible, in the absence of
      warning, to suppose the meaning to be that the two things are only
      found together. But this misinterpretation is excluded by the other,
      or practical, form of the maxim; _Nota notœ est nota rei ipsius._ No
      one would be in any danger of inferring that because _a_ is a mark
      of _b, b_ can never exist without _a_; that because being in a
      confirmed consumption is a mark of being about to die, no one dies
      who is not in a consumption; that because being coal is a mark of
      having come out of the earth, nothing can come out of the earth
      except coal. Ordinary knowledge of English seems a sufficient
      protection against these mistakes, since in speaking of a mark of
      any thing we are never understood as implying reciprocity.

      A more fundamental objection is stated by Mr. Bain in a subsequent
      passage (p. 158). “The axiom does not accommodate itself to the type
      of Deductive Reasoning as contrasted with Induction—the application
      of a general principle to a special case. Any thing that fails to
      make prominent this circumstance is not adapted as a foundation for
      the syllogism.” But though it may be proper to limit the term
      Deduction to the application of a general principle to a special
      case, it has never been held that Ratiocination or Syllogism is
      subject to the same limitation; and the adoption of it would exclude
      a great amount of valid and conclusive syllogistic reasoning.
      Moreover, if the _dictum de omni_ makes prominent the fact of the
      application of a general principle to a particular case, the axiom I
      propose makes prominent the condition which alone makes that
      application a real inference.

      I conclude, therefore, that both forms have their value, and their
      place in Logic. The _dictum de omni_ should be retained as the
      fundamental axiom of the logic of mere consistency, often called
      Formal Logic; nor have I ever quarreled with the use of it in that
      character, nor proposed to banish it from treatises on Formal Logic.
      But the other is the proper axiom for the logic of the pursuit of
      truth by way of Deduction; and the recognition of it can alone show
      how it is possible that deductive reasoning can be a road to truth.

_   56 Logic_, p. 239 (9th ed.).

   57 It is hardly necessary to say, that I am not contending for any such
      absurdity as that we _actually_ “ought to have known” and considered
      the case of every individual man, past, present, and future, before
      affirming that all men are mortal: although this interpretation has
      been, strangely enough, put upon the preceding observations. There
      is no difference between me and Archbishop Whately, or any other
      defender of the syllogism, on the practical part of the matter; I am
      only pointing out an inconsistency in the logical theory of it, as
      conceived by almost all writers. I do not say that a person who
      affirmed, before the Duke of Wellington was born, that all men are
      mortal, _knew_ that the Duke of Wellington was mortal; but I do say
      that he _asserted_ it; and I ask for an explanation of the apparent
      logical fallacy, of adducing in proof of the Duke of Wellington’s
      mortality, a general statement which presupposes it. Finding no
      sufficient resolution of this difficulty in any of the writers on
      Logic, I have attempted to supply one.

   58 The language of ratiocination would, I think, be brought into closer
      agreement with the real nature of the process, if the general
      propositions employed in reasoning, instead of being in the form All
      men are mortal, or Every man is mortal, were expressed in the form
      Any man is mortal. This mode of expression, exhibiting as the type
      of all reasoning from experience “The men A, B, C, etc., are so and
      so, therefore _any_ man is so and so,” would much better manifest
      the true idea—that inductive reasoning is always, at bottom,
      inference from particulars to particulars, and that the whole
      function of general propositions in reasoning, is to vouch for the
      legitimacy of such inferences.

   59 Review of Quetelet on Probabilities, _Essays_, p. 367.

_   60 Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289.

_   61 Theory of Reasoning_, chap. iv., to which I may refer for an able
      statement and enforcement of the grounds of the doctrine.

   62 On a recent careful reperusal of Berkeley’s whole works, I have been
      unable to find this doctrine in them. Sir John Herschel probably
      meant that it is implied in Berkeley’s argument against abstract
      ideas. But I can not find that Berkeley saw the implication, or had
      ever asked himself what bearing his argument had on the theory of
      the syllogism. Still less can I admit that the doctrine is (as has
      been affirmed by one of my ablest and most candid critics) “among
      the standing marks of what is called the empirical philosophy.”

_   63 Logic_, book iv., chap. i., sect. 1.

   64 See the important chapter on Belief, in Professor Bain’s great
      treatise, _The Emotions and the Will_, pp. 581-4.

   65 A writer in the “British Quarterly Review” (August, 1846), in a
      review of this treatise, endeavors to show that there is no _petitio
      principii_ in the syllogism, by denying that the proposition, All
      men are mortal, asserts or assumes that Socrates is mortal. In
      support of this denial, he argues that we may, and in fact do, admit
      the general proposition that all men are mortal, without having
      particularly examined the case of Socrates, and even without knowing
      whether the individual so named is a man or something else. But this
      of course was never denied. That we can and do draw conclusions
      concerning cases specifically unknown to us, is the datum from which
      all who discuss this subject must set out. The question is, in what
      terms the evidence, or ground, on which we draw these conclusions,
      may best be designated—whether it is most correct to say, that the
      unknown case is proved by known cases, or that it is proved by a
      general proposition including both sets of cases, the unknown and
      the known? I contend for the former mode of expression. I hold it an
      abuse of language to say, that the proof that Socrates is mortal, is
      that all men are mortal. Turn it in what way we will, this seems to
      me to be asserting that a thing is the proof of itself. Whoever
      pronounces the words, All men are mortal, has affirmed that Socrates
      is mortal, though he may never have heard of Socrates; for since
      Socrates, whether known to be so or not, really is a man, he is
      included in the words, All men, and in every assertion of which they
      are the subject. If the reviewer does not see that there is a
      difficulty here, I can only advise him to reconsider the subject
      until he does: after which he will be a better judge of the success
      or failure of an attempt to remove the difficulty. That he had
      reflected very little on the point when he wrote his remarks, is
      shown by his oversight respecting the _dictum de omni et nullo_. He
      acknowledges that this maxim as commonly expressed—“Whatever is true
      of a class, is true of every thing included in the class,” is a mere
      identical proposition, since the class _is_ nothing but the things
      included in it. But he thinks this defect would be cured by wording
      the maxim thus—“Whatever is true of a class, is true of every thing
      which _can be shown_ to be a member of the class:” as if a thing
      could “be shown” to be a member of the class without being one. If a
      class means the sum of all the things included in the class, the
      things which can “be shown” to be included in it are part of the
      sum, and the _dictum_ is as much an identical proposition with
      respect to them as to the rest. One would almost imagine that, in
      the reviewer’s opinion, things are not members of a class until they
      are called up publicly to take their place in it—that so long, in
      fact, as Socrates is not known to be a man, he _is not_ a man, and
      any assertion which can be made concerning men does not at all
      regard him, nor is affected as to its truth or falsity by any thing
      in which he is concerned.

      The difference between the reviewer’s theory and mine may be thus
      stated. Both admit that when we say, All men are mortal, we make an
      assertion reaching beyond the sphere of our knowledge of individual
      cases; and that when a new individual, Socrates, is brought within
      the field of our knowledge by means of the minor premise, we learn
      that we have already made an assertion respecting Socrates without
      knowing it: our own general formula being, to that extent, for the
      first time _interpreted_ to us. But according to the reviewer’s
      theory, the smaller assertion is proved by the larger: while I
      contend, that both assertions are proved together, by the same
      evidence, namely, the grounds of experience on which the general
      assertion was made, and by which it must be justified.

      The reviewer says, that if the major premise included the
      conclusion, “we should be able to affirm the conclusion without the
      intervention of the minor premise; but every one sees that that is
      impossible.” A similar argument is urged by Mr. De Morgan (_Formal
      Logic_, p. 259): “The whole objection tacitly assumes the
      superfluity of the minor; that is, tacitly assumes we know Socrates
      (Mr. De Morgan says ‘Plato,’ but to prevent confusion I have kept to
      my own _exemplum_.) to be a man as soon as we know him to be
      Socrates.” The objection would be well grounded if the assertion
      that the major premise includes the conclusion, meant that it
      individually specifies all it includes. As, however, the only
      indication it gives is a description by marks, we have still to
      compare any new individual with the marks; and to show that this
      comparison has been made, is the office of the minor. But since, by
      supposition, the new individual has the marks, whether we have
      ascertained him to have them or not; if we have affirmed the major
      premise, we have asserted him to be mortal. Now my position is that
      this assertion can not be a necessary part of the argument. It can
      not be a necessary condition of reasoning that we should begin by
      making an assertion, which is afterward to be employed in proving a
      part of itself. I can conceive only one way out of this difficulty,
      viz., that what really forms the proof is _the other_ part of the
      assertion: the portion of it, the truth of which has been
      ascertained previously: and that the unproved part is bound up in
      one formula with the proved part in mere anticipation, and as a
      memorandum of the nature of the conclusions which we are prepared to
      prove.

      With respect to the minor premise in its formal shape, the minor as
      it stands in the syllogism, predicating of Socrates a definite class
      name, I readily admit that it is no more a necessary part of
      reasoning than the major. When there is a major, doing its work by
      means of a class name, minors are needed to interpret it: but
      reasoning can be carried on without either the one or the other.
      They are not the conditions of reasoning, but a precaution against
      erroneous reasoning. The only minor premise necessary to reasoning
      in the example under consideration, is, Socrates is _like_ A, B, C,
      and the other individuals who are known to have died. And this is
      the only universal type of that step in the reasoning process which
      is represented by the minor. Experience, however, of the uncertainty
      of this loose mode of inference, teaches the expediency of
      determining beforehand what _kind_ of likeness to the cases
      observed, is necessary to bring an unobserved case within the same
      predicate; and the answer to this question is the major. The minor
      then identifies the precise kind of likeness possessed by Socrates,
      as being the kind required by the formula. Thus the syllogistic
      major and the syllogistic minor start into existence together, and
      are called forth by the same exigency. When we conclude from
      personal experience without referring to any record—to any general
      theorems, either written, or traditional, or mentally registered by
      ourselves as conclusions of our own drawing—we do not use, in our
      thoughts, either a major or a minor, such as the syllogism puts into
      words. When, however, we revise this rough inference from
      particulars to particulars, and substitute a careful one, the
      revision consists in selecting two syllogistic premises. But this
      neither alters nor adds to the evidence we had before; it only puts
      us in a better position for judging whether our inference from
      particulars to particulars is well grounded.

   66 Infra, book iii., chap. ii.

   67 Infra, book iii., ch. iv., § 3, and elsewhere.

   68 It is justly remarked by Professor Bain (_Logic_, ii., 134) that the
      word Hypothesis is here used in a somewhat peculiar sense. An
      hypothesis, in science, usually means a supposition not proved to be
      true, but surmised to be so, because if true it would account for
      certain known facts; and the final result of the speculation may be
      to prove its truth. The hypotheses spoken of in the text are of a
      different character; they are known not to be literally true, while
      as much of them as is true is not hypothetical, but certain. The two
      cases, however, resemble in the circumstance that in both we reason,
      not from a truth, but from an assumption, and the truth therefore of
      the conclusions is conditional, not categorical. This suffices to
      justify, in point of logical propriety, Stewart’s use of the term.
      It is of course needful to bear in mind that the hypothetical
      element in the definitions of geometry is the assumption that what
      is very nearly true is exactly so. This unreal exactitude might be
      called a fiction, as properly as an hypothesis; but that
      appellation, still more than the other, would fail to point out the
      close relation which exists between the fictitious point or line and
      the points and lines of which we have experience.

_   69 Mechanical Euclid_, pp. 149 _et seqq._

   70 We might, it is true, insert this property into the definition of
      parallel lines, framing the definition so as to require, both that
      when produced indefinitely they shall never meet, and also that any
      straight line which intersects one of them shall, if prolonged, meet
      the other. But by doing this we by no means get rid of the
      assumption; we are still obliged to take for granted the geometrical
      truth, that all straight lines in the same plane, which have the
      former of these properties, have also the latter. For if it were
      possible that they should not, that is, if any straight lines in the
      same plane, other than those which are parallel according to the
      definition, had the property of never meeting although indefinitely
      produced, the demonstrations of the subsequent portions of the
      theory of parallels could not be maintained.

   71 Some persons find themselves prevented from believing that the
      axiom, Two straight lines can not inclose a space, could ever become
      known to us through experience, by a difficulty which may be stated
      as follows: If the straight lines spoken of are those contemplated
      in the definition—lines absolutely without breadth and absolutely
      straight—that such are incapable of inclosing a space is not proved
      by experience, for lines such as these do not present themselves in
      our experience. If, on the other hand, the lines meant are such
      straight lines as we do meet with in experience, lines straight
      enough for practical purposes, but in reality slightly zigzag, and
      with some, however trifling, breadth; as applied to these lines the
      axiom is not true, for two of them may, and sometimes do, inclose a
      small portion of space. In neither case, therefore, does experience
      prove the axiom.

      Those who employ this argument to show that geometrical axioms can
      not be proved by induction, show themselves unfamiliar with a common
      and perfectly valid mode of inductive proof; proof by approximation.
      Though experience furnishes us with no lines so unimpeachably
      straight that two of them are incapable of inclosing the smallest
      space, it presents us with gradations of lines possessing less and
      less either of breadth or of flexure, of which series the straight
      line of the definition is the ideal limit. And observation shows
      that just as much, and as nearly, as the straight lines of
      experience approximate to having no breadth or flexure, so much and
      so nearly does the space-inclosing power of any two of them approach
      to zero. The inference that if they had no breadth or flexure at
      all, they would inclose no space at all, is a correct inductive
      inference from these facts, conformable to one of the four Inductive
      Methods hereinafter characterized, the Method of Concomitant
      Variations; of which the mathematical Doctrine of Limits presents
      the extreme case.

   72 Whewell’s _History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 140.

   73 Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289) thinks it
      unreasonable to contend that we know by experience, that our idea of
      a line exactly resembles a real line. “It does not appear,” he says,
      “how we can compare our ideas with the realities, since we know the
      realities only by our ideas.” We know the realities by our
      sensations. Dr. Whewell surely does not hold the “doctrine of
      perception by means of ideas,” which Reid gave himself so much
      trouble to refute. If Dr. Whewell doubts whether we compare our
      ideas with the corresponding sensations, and assume that they
      resemble, let me ask on what evidence do we judge that a portrait of
      a person not present is like the original. Surely because it is like
      our idea, or mental image of the person, and because our idea is
      like the man himself.

      Dr. Whewell also says, that it does not appear why this resemblance
      of ideas to the sensations of which they are copies, should be
      spoken of as if it were a peculiarity of one class of ideas, those
      of space. My reply is, that I do not so speak of it. The peculiarity
      I contend for is only one of degree. All our ideas of sensation of
      course resemble the corresponding sensations, but they do so with
      very different degrees of exactness and of reliability. No one, I
      presume, can recall in imagination a color or an odor with the same
      distinctness and accuracy with which almost every one can mentally
      reproduce an image of a straight line or a triangle. To the extent,
      however, of their capabilities of accuracy, our recollections of
      colors or of odors may serve as subjects of experimentation, as well
      as those of lines and spaces, and may yield conclusions which will
      be true of their external prototypes. A person in whom, either from
      natural gift or from cultivation, the impressions of color were
      peculiarly vivid and distinct, if asked which of two blue flowers
      was of the darkest tinge, though he might never have compared the
      two, or even looked at them together, might be able to give a
      confident answer on the faith of his distinct recollection of the
      colors; that is, he might examine his mental pictures, and find
      there a property of the outward objects. But in hardly any case
      except that of simple geometrical forms, could this be done by
      mankind generally, with a degree of assurance equal to that which is
      given by a contemplation of the objects themselves. Persons differ
      most widely in the precision of their recollection, even of forms:
      one person, when he has looked any one in the face for half a
      minute, can draw an accurate likeness of him from memory; another
      may have seen him every day for six months, and hardly know whether
      his nose is long or short. But every body has a perfectly distinct
      mental image of a straight line, a circle, or a rectangle. And every
      one concludes confidently from these mental images to the
      corresponding outward things. The truth is, that we may, and
      continually do, study nature in our recollections, when the objects
      themselves are absent; and in the case of geometrical forms we can
      perfectly, but in most other cases only imperfectly, trust our
      recollections.

_   74 Logic_, i., 222.

   75 Ibid., 226.

_   76 History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 65-67.

   77 Ibid., i., 60.

   78 Ibid., 58, 59.

   79 “If all mankind had spoken one language, we can not doubt that there
      would have been a powerful, perhaps a universal, school of
      philosophers, who would have believed in the inherent connection
      between names and things, who would have taken the sound _man_ to be
      the mode of agitating the air which is essentially communicative of
      the ideas of reason, cookery, bipedality, etc.”—De Morgan, _Formal
      Logic_, p. 246.

   80 It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable at once for the
      greatness and the wide range of his mental accomplishments, than
      Leibnitz. Yet this eminent man gave as a reason for rejecting
      Newton’s scheme of the solar system, that God _could not_ make a
      body revolve round a distant centre, unless either by some impelling
      mechanism, or by miracle: “Tout ce qui n’est pas explicable,” says
      he in a letter to the Abbé Conti, “par la nature des créatures, est
      miraculeux. Il ne suffit pas de dire: Dieu a fait une telle loi de
      nature; donc la chose est naturelle. Il faut que la loi soit
      exécutable par les natures des créatures. Si Dien donnait cette loi,
      par exemple, à un corps libre, de tourner à l’entour d’un certain
      centre, _il faudrait ou qu’il y joignît d’autres corps qui par leur
      impulsion l’obligeassent de rester toujours dans son orbite
      circulaire, ou qu’il mît un ange à ses trousses, ou enfin il
      faudrait qu’il y concourût extraordinairement_; car naturellement il
      s’écartera par la tangente.”—_Works of Leibnitz_, ed. Dutens, iii.,
      446.

_   81 Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 32, 33.

_   82 History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 264.

   83 Ibid., i., 263.

   84 Ibid., 240.

_   85 Hist. Scientific Ideas_, ii., 25, 26.

_   86 Phil. of Disc._, p. 339.

_   87 Phil. of Disc._, p. 338.

   88 Ibid., p. 463.

_   89 Phil. of Disc._, pp. 472, 473.

   90 The _Quarterly Review_ for June, 1841, contained an article of great
      ability on Dr. Whewell’s two great works (since acknowledged and
      reprinted in Sir John Herschel’s Essays) which maintains, on the
      subject of axioms, the doctrine advanced in the text, that they are
      generalizations from experience, and supports that opinion by a line
      of argument strikingly coinciding with mine. When I state that the
      whole of the present chapter (except the last four pages, added in
      the fifth edition) was written before I had seen the article (the
      greater part, indeed, before it was published), it is not my object
      to occupy the reader’s attention with a matter so unimportant as the
      degree of originality which may or may not belong to any portion of
      my own speculations, but to obtain for an opinion which is opposed
      to reigning doctrines, the recommendation derived from a striking
      concurrence of sentiment between two inquirers entirely independent
      of one another. I embrace the opportunity of citing from a writer of
      the extensive acquirements in physical and metaphysical knowledge
      and the capacity of systematic thought which the article evinces,
      passages so remarkably in unison with my own views as the following:

      “The truths of geometry are summed up and embodied in its
      definitions and axioms.... Let us turn to the axioms, and what do we
      find? A string of propositions concerning magnitude in the abstract,
      which are equally true of space, time, force, number, and every
      other magnitude susceptible of aggregation and subdivision. Such
      propositions, where they are not mere definitions, as some of them
      are, carry their inductive origin on the face of their
      enunciation.... Those which declare that two straight lines can not
      inclose a space, and that two straight lines which cut one another
      can not both be parallel to a third, are in reality the only ones
      which express characteristic properties of space, and these it will
      be worth while to consider more nearly. Now the only clear notion we
      can form of straightness is uniformity of direction, for space in
      its ultimate analysis is nothing but an assemblage of distances and
      directions. And (not to dwell on the notion of continued
      contemplation, _i.e._, mental experience, as included in the very
      idea of uniformity; nor on that of transfer of the contemplating
      being from point to point, and of experience, during such transfer,
      of the homogeneity of the interval passed over) we can not even
      propose the proposition in an intelligible form to any one whose
      experience ever since he was born has not assured him of the fact.
      The unity of direction, or that we can not march from a given point
      by more than one path direct to the same object, is matter of
      practical experience long before it can by possibility become matter
      of abstract thought. _We can not attempt mentally to exemplify the
      conditions of the assertion in an imaginary case opposed to it,
      without violating our habitual recollection of this experience, and
      defacing our mental picture of space as grounded on it._ What but
      experience, we may ask, can possibly assure us of the homogeneity of
      the parts of distance, time, force, and measurable aggregates in
      general, on which the truth of the other axioms depends? As regards
      the latter axiom, after what has been said it must be clear that the
      very same course of remarks equally applies to its case, and that
      its truth is quite as much forced on the mind as that of the former
      by daily and hourly experience, ... _including always, be it
      observed, in our notion of experience, that which is gained by
      contemplation of the inward picture which the mind forms to itself
      in any proposed case, or which it arbitrarily selects as an
      example—such picture, in virtue of the extreme simplicity of these
      primary relations, being called up by the imagination with as much
      vividness and clearness as could be done by any external impression,
      which is the only meaning we can attach to the word intuition, as
      applied to such relations_.”

      And again, of the axioms of mechanics: “As we admit no such
      propositions, other than as truths inductively collected from
      observation, even in geometry itself, it can hardly be expected
      that, in a science of obviously contingent relations, we should
      acquiesce in a contrary view. Let us take one of these axioms and
      examine its evidence: for instance, that equal forces
      perpendicularly applied at the opposite ends of equal arms of a
      straight lever will balance each other. What but experience, we may
      ask, in the first place, can possibly inform us that a force so
      applied will have any tendency to turn the lever on its centre at
      all? or that force can be so transmitted along a rigid line
      perpendicular to its direction, as to act elsewhere in space than
      along its own line of action? Surely this is so far from being
      self-evident that it has even a paradoxical appearance, which is
      only to be removed by giving our lever thickness, material
      composition, and molecular powers. Again, we conclude, that the two
      forces, being equal and applied under precisely similar
      circumstances, must, if they exert any effort at all to turn the
      lever, exert equal and opposite efforts: but what _a priori_
      reasoning can possibly assure us that they _do_ act under precisely
      similar circumstances? that points which differ in place _are_
      similarly circumstanced as regards the exertion of force? that
      universal space may not have relations to universal force—or, at all
      events, that the organization of the material universe may not be
      such as to place that portion of space occupied by it in such
      relations to the forces exerted in it, as may invalidate the
      absolute similarity of circumstances assumed? Or we may argue, what
      have we to do with the notion of angular movement in the lever at
      all? The case is one of rest, and of quiescent destruction of force
      by force. Now how is this destruction effected? Assuredly by the
      counter-pressure which supports the fulcrum. But would not this
      destruction equally arise, and by the same amount of counteracting
      force, if each force simply pressed its own half of the lever
      against the fulcrum? And what can assure us that it is not so,
      except removal of one or other force, and consequent tilting of the
      lever? The other fundamental axiom of statics, that the pressure on
      the point of support is the sum of the weights ... is merely a
      scientific transformation and more refined mode of stating a coarse
      and obvious result of universal experience, viz., that the weight of
      a rigid body is the same, handle it or suspend it in what position
      or by what point we will, and that whatever sustains it sustains its
      total weight. Assuredly, as Mr. Whewell justly remarks, ‘No one
      probably ever made a trial for the purpose of showing that the
      pressure on the support is equal to the sum of the weights.’ ... But
      it is precisely because in every action of his life from earliest
      infancy he has been continually making the trial, and seeing it made
      by every other living being about him, that he never dreams of
      staking its result on one additional attempt made with scientific
      accuracy. This would be as if a man should resolve to decide by
      experiment whether his eyes were useful for the purpose of seeing,
      by hermetically sealing himself up for half an hour in a metal
      case.”

      On the “paradox of universal propositions obtained by experience,”
      the same writer says: “If there be necessary and universal truths
      expressible in propositions of axiomatic simplicity and obviousness,
      and having for their subject-matter the elements of all our
      experience and all our knowledge, surely these are the truths which,
      if experience suggest to us any truths at all, it ought to suggest
      most readily, clearly, and unceasingly. If it were a truth,
      universal and necessary, that a net is spread over the whole surface
      of every planetary globe, we should not travel far on our own
      without getting entangled in its meshes, and making the necessity of
      some means of extrication an axiom of locomotion.... There is,
      therefore, nothing paradoxical, but the reverse, in our being led by
      observation to a recognition of such truths, as _general_
      propositions, co-extensive at least with all human experience. That
      they pervade all the objects of experience, must insure their
      continual suggestion _by_ experience; that they are true, must
      insure that consistency of suggestion, that iteration of
      uncontradicted assertion, which commands implicit assent, and
      removes all occasion of exception; that they are simple, and admit
      of no misunderstanding, must secure their admission by every mind.”

      “A truth, necessary and universal, relative to any object of our
      knowledge, must verify itself in every instance where that object is
      before our contemplation, and if at the same time it be simple and
      intelligible, its verification must be obvious. _The sentiment of
      such a truth can not, therefore, but be present to our minds
      whenever that object is contemplated, and must therefore make a part
      of the mental picture or idea of that object which we may on any
      occasion summon before our imagination.... All propositions,
      therefore, become not only untrue but inconceivable_, if ... axioms
      be violated in their enunciation.”

      Another eminent mathematician had previously sanctioned by his
      authority the doctrine of the origin of geometrical axioms in
      experience. “Geometry is thus founded likewise on observation; but
      of a kind so familiar and obvious, that the primary notions which it
      furnishes might seem intuitive.”—_Sir John Leslie_, quoted by Sir
      William Hamilton, _Discourses_, etc., p. 272.

   91 Principles of Psychology.

   92 Mr. Spencer is mistaken in supposing me to claim any peculiar
      “necessity” for this axiom as compared with others. I have corrected
      the expressions which led him into that misapprehension of my
      meaning.

   93 Mr. Spencer, in recently returning to the subject (Principles of
      Psychology, new edition, chap. xii.: “The Test of Relative
      Validity”), makes two answers to the preceding remarks. One is:

      “Were an argument formed by repeating the same proposition over and
      over again, it would be true that any intrinsic fallibility of the
      postulate would not make the conclusion more untrustworthy than the
      first step. But an argument consists of unlike propositions. Now,
      since Mr. Mill’s criticism on the Universal Postulate is that in
      some cases, which he names, it has proved to be an untrustworthy
      test; it follows that in any argument consisting of heterogeneous
      propositions, there is a risk, increasing as the number of
      propositions increases, that some one of them belongs to this class
      of cases, and is wrongly accepted because of the inconceivableness
      of its negation.”

      No doubt: but this supposes new _premises_ to be taken in. The point
      we are discussing is the fallibility not of the premises, but of the
      reasoning, as distinguished from the premises. Now the validity of
      the reasoning depends always upon the same axiom, repeated (in
      thought) “over and over again,” viz., that whatever has a mark, has
      what it is a mark of. Even, therefore, on the assumption that this
      axiom rests ultimately on the Universal Postulate, and that, the
      Postulate not being wholly trustworthy, the axiom may be one of the
      cases of its failure; all the risk there is of this is incurred at
      the very first step of the reasoning, and is not added to, however
      long may be the series of subsequent steps.

      I am here arguing, of course, from Mr. Spencer’s point of view. From
      my own the case is still clearer; for, in my view, the truth that
      whatever has a mark has what it is a mark of, is wholly trustworthy,
      and derives none of its evidence from so very untrustworthy a test
      as the inconceivability of the negative.

      Mr. Spencer’s second answer is valid up to a certain point; it is,
      that every prolongation of the process involves additional chances
      of casual error, from carelessness in the reasoning operation. This
      is an important consideration in the private speculations of an
      individual reasoner; and even with respect to mankind at large, it
      must be admitted that, though mere oversights in the syllogistic
      process, like errors of addition in an account, are special to the
      individual, and seldom escape detection, confusion of thought
      produced (for example) by ambiguous terms has led whole nations or
      ages to accept fallacious reasoning as valid. But this very fact
      points to causes of error so much more dangerous than the mere
      length of the process, as quite to vitiate the doctrine that the
      “test of the relative validities of conflicting conclusions” is the
      number of times the fundamental postulate is involved. On the
      contrary, the subjects on which the trains of reasoning are longest,
      and the assumption, therefore, oftenest repeated, are in general
      those which are best fortified against the really formidable causes
      of fallacy; as in the example already given of mathematics.

   94 Mr. Spencer makes a distinction between conceiving myself looking
      into darkness, and conceiving _that I am_ then and there looking
      into darkness. To me it seems that this change of the expression to
      the form _I am_, just marks the transition from conception to
      belief, and that the phrase “to conceive that _I am_,” or “that any
      thing _is_,” is not consistent with using the word conceive in its
      rigorous sense.

   95 I have myself accepted the contest, and fought it out on this
      battle-ground, in the eleventh chapter of _An Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy._

   96 Chap. xi.

   97 In one of the three cases, Mr. Spencer, to my no small surprise,
      thinks that the belief of mankind “can not be rightly said to have
      undergone” the change I allege. Mr. Spencer himself still thinks we
      are unable to conceive gravitation acting through empty space. “If
      an astronomer avowed that he could conceive gravitative force as
      exercised through space absolutely void, my private opinion would be
      that he mistook the nature of conception. Conception implies
      representation. Here the elements of the representation are the two
      bodies and an agency by which either affects the other. To conceive
      this agency is to represent it in some terms derived from our
      experiences—that is, from our sensations. As this agency gives us no
      sensations, we are obliged (if we try to conceive it) to use symbols
      idealized from our sensations—imponderable units forming a medium.”

      If Mr. Spencer means that the action of gravitation gives us no
      sensations, the assertion is one than which I have not seen, in the
      writings of philosophers, many more startling. What other sensation
      do we need than the sensation of one body moving toward another?
      “The elements of the representation” are not two bodies and an
      “agency,” but two bodies and an effect; viz., the fact of their
      approaching one another. If we are able to conceive a vacuum, is
      there any difficulty in conceiving a body falling to the earth
      through it?

_   98 Discussions_, etc., 2d ed., p. 624.

   99 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 16) identifies the Principle of
      Contradiction with his Law of Relativity, viz., that “every thing
      that can be thought of, every affirmation that can be made, has an
      opposite or counter notion or affirmation;” a proposition which is
      one of the general results of the whole body of human experience.
      For further considerations respecting the axioms of Contradiction
      and Excluded Middle, see the twenty-first chapter of _An Examination
      of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_.

  100 Dr. Whewell thinks it improper to apply the term Induction to any
      operation not terminating in the establishment of a general truth.
      Induction, he says (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 245), “is not the
      same thing as experience and observation. Induction is experience or
      observation _consciously_ looked at in a _general_ form. This
      consciousness and generality are necessary parts of that knowledge
      which is science.” And he objects (p. 241) to the mode in which the
      word Induction is employed in this work, as an undue extension of
      that term “not only to the cases in which the general induction is
      consciously applied to a particular instance, but to the cases in
      which the particular instance is dealt with by means of experience
      in that rude sense in which experience can be asserted of brutes,
      and in which of course we can in no way imagine that the law is
      possessed or understood as a general proposition.” This use of the
      term he deems a “confusion of knowledge with practical tendencies.”

      I disclaim, as strongly as Dr. Whewell can do, the application of
      such terms as induction, inference, or reasoning, to operations
      performed by mere instinct, that is, from an animal impulse, without
      the exertion of any intelligence. But I perceive no ground for
      confining the use of those terms to cases in which the inference is
      drawn in the forms and with the precautions required by scientific
      propriety. To the idea of Science, an express recognition and
      distinct apprehension of general laws as such, is essential: but
      nine-tenths of the conclusions drawn from experience in the course
      of practical life, are drawn without any such recognition: they are
      direct inferences from known cases, to a case supposed to be
      similar. I have endeavored to show that this is not only as
      legitimate an operation, but substantially the same operation, as
      that of ascending from known cases to a general proposition; except
      that the latter process has one great security for correctness which
      the former does not possess. In science, the inference must
      necessarily pass through the intermediate stage of a general
      proposition, because Science wants its conclusions for record, and
      not for instantaneous use. But the inferences drawn for the guidance
      of practical affairs, by persons who would often be quite incapable
      of expressing in unexceptionable terms the corresponding
      generalizations, may and frequently do exhibit intellectual powers
      quite equal to any which have ever been displayed in science; and if
      these inferences are not inductive, what are they? The limitation
      imposed on the term by Dr. Whewell seems perfectly arbitrary;
      neither justified by any fundamental distinction between what he
      includes and what he desires to exclude, nor sanctioned by usage, at
      least from the time of Reid and Stewart, the principal legislators
      (as far as the English language is concerned) of modern metaphysical
      terminology.

  101 Supra, p. 145.

_  102 Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 72, 73.

_  103 Novum Organum Renovatum_, p. 32.

_  104 Cours de Philosophie Positive_, vol. ii., p. 202.

  105 Dr. Whewell, in his reply, contests the distinction here drawn, and
      maintains, that not only different descriptions, but different
      explanations of a phenomenon, may all be true. Of the three theories
      respecting the motions of the heavenly bodies, he says (_Philosophy
      of Discovery_, p. 231): “Undoubtedly all these explanations may be
      true and consistent with each other, and would be so if each had
      been followed out so as to show in what manner it could be made
      consistent with the facts. And this was, in reality, in a great
      measure done. The doctrine that the heavenly bodies were moved by
      vortices was successfully modified, so that it came to coincide in
      its results with the doctrine of an inverse-quadratic centripetal
      force.... When this point was reached, the vortex was merely a
      machinery, well or ill devised, for producing such a centripetal
      force, and therefore did not contradict the doctrine of a
      centripetal force. Newton himself does not appear to have been
      averse to explaining gravity by impulse. So little is it true that
      if one theory be true the other must be false. The attempt to
      explain gravity by the impulse of streams of particles flowing
      through the universe in all directions, which I have mentioned in
      the _Philosophy_, is so far from being inconsistent with the
      Newtonian theory, that it is founded entirely upon it. And even with
      regard to the doctrine, that the heavenly bodies move by an inherent
      virtue; if this doctrine had been maintained in any such way that it
      was brought to agree with the facts, the inherent virtue must have
      had its laws determined; and then it would have been found that the
      virtue had a reference to the central body; and so, the ‘inherent
      virtue’ must have coincided in its effect with the Newtonian force;
      and then, the two explanations would agree, except so far as the
      word ‘inherent’ was concerned. And if such a part of an earlier
      theory as this word _inherent_ indicates, is found to be untenable,
      it is of course rejected in the transition to later and more exact
      theories, in Inductions of this kind, as well as in what Mr. Mill
      calls Descriptions. There is, therefore, still no validity
      discoverable in the distinction which Mr. Mill attempts to draw
      between descriptions like Kepler’s law of elliptical orbits, and
      other examples of induction.”

      If the doctrine of vortices had meant, not that vortices existed,
      but only that the planets moved _in the same manner_ as if they had
      been whirled by vortices; if the hypothesis had been merely a mode
      of representing the facts, not an attempt to account for them; if,
      in short, it had been only a Description; it would, no doubt, have
      been reconcilable with the Newtonian theory. The vortices, however,
      were not a mere aid to conceiving the motions of the planets, but a
      supposed physical agent, actively impelling them; a material fact,
      which might be true or not true, but could not be both true and not
      true. According to Descartes’s theory it was true, according to
      Newton’s it was not true. Dr. Whewell probably means that since the
      phrases, centripetal and projectile force, do not declare the nature
      but only the direction of the forces, the Newtonian theory does not
      absolutely contradict any hypothesis which may be framed respecting
      the mode of their production. The Newtonian theory, regarded as a
      mere _description_ of the planetary motions, does not; but the
      Newtonian theory as an _explanation_ of them does. For in what does
      the explanation consist? In ascribing those motions to a general law
      which obtains between all particles of matter, and in identifying
      this with the law by which bodies fall to the ground. If the planets
      are kept in their orbits by a force which draws the particles
      composing them toward every other particle of matter in the solar
      system, they are not kept in those orbits by the impulsive force of
      certain streams of matter which whirl them round. The one
      explanation absolutely excludes the other. Either the planets are
      not moved by vortices, or they do not move by a law common to all
      matter. It is impossible that both opinions can be true. As well
      might it be said that there is no contradiction between the
      assertions, that a man died because somebody killed him, and that he
      died a natural death.

      So, again, the theory that the planets move by a virtue inherent in
      their celestial nature, is incompatible with either of the two
      others: either that of their being moved by vortices, or that which
      regards them as moving by a property which they have in common with
      the earth and all terrestrial bodies. Dr. Whewell says that the
      theory of an inherent virtue agrees with Newton’s when the word
      inherent is left out, which of course it would be (he says) if
      “found to be untenable.” But leave that out, and where is the
      theory? The word inherent _is_ the theory. When that is omitted,
      there remains nothing except that the heavenly bodies move “by a
      virtue,” _i.e._, by a power of some sort; or by virtue of their
      celestial nature, which directly contradicts the doctrine that
      terrestrial bodies fall by the same law.

      If Dr. Whewell is not yet satisfied, any other subject will serve
      equally well to test his doctrine. He will hardly say that there is
      no contradiction between the emission theory and the undulatory
      theory of light; or that there can be both one and two
      electricities; or that the hypothesis of the production of the
      higher organic forms by development from the lower, and the
      supposition of separate and successive acts of creation, are quite
      reconcilable; or that the theory that volcanoes are fed from a
      central fire, and the doctrines which ascribe them to chemical
      action at a comparatively small depth below the earth’s surface, are
      consistent with one another, and all true as far as they go.

      If different explanations of the same fact can not both be true,
      still less, surely, can different predictions. Dr. Whewell quarrels
      (on what ground it is not necessary here to consider) with the
      example I had chosen on this point, and thinks an objection to an
      illustration a sufficient answer to a theory. Examples not liable to
      his objection are easily found, if the proposition that conflicting
      predictions can not both be true, can be made clearer by many
      examples. Suppose the phenomenon to be a newly-discovered comet, and
      that one astronomer predicts its return once in every 300
      years—another once in every 400: can they both be right? When
      Columbus predicted that by sailing constantly westward he should in
      time return to the point from which he set out, while others
      asserted that he could never do so except by turning back, were both
      he and his opponents true prophets? Were the predictions which
      foretold the wonders of railways and steamships, and those which
      averred that the Atlantic could never be crossed by steam
      navigation, nor a railway train propelled ten miles an hour, both
      (in Dr. Whewell’s words) “true, and consistent with one another?”

      Dr. Whewell sees no distinction between holding contradictory
      opinions on a question of fact, and merely employing different
      analogies to facilitate the conception of the same fact. The case of
      different Inductions belongs to the former class, that of different
      Descriptions to the latter.

_  106 Phil. of Discov._, p. 256.

_  107 Essays on the Pursuit of Truth._

  108 In the first edition a note was appended at this place, containing
      some criticism on Archbishop Whately’s mode of conceiving the
      relation between Syllogism and Induction. In a subsequent issue of
      his _Logic_, the Archbishop made a reply to the criticism, which
      induced me to cancel part of the note, incorporating the remainder
      in the text. In a still later edition, the Archbishop observes in a
      tone of something like disapprobation, that the objections,
      “doubtless from their being fully answered and found untenable, were
      silently suppressed,” and that hence he might appear to some of his
      readers to be combating a shadow. On this latter point, the
      Archbishop need give himself no uneasiness. His readers, I make bold
      to say, will fully credit his mere affirmation that the objections
      have actually been made.

      But as he seems to think that what he terms the suppression of the
      objections ought not to have been made “silently,” I now break that
      silence, and state exactly what it is that I suppressed, and why. I
      suppressed that alone which might be regarded as personal criticism
      on the Archbishop. I had imputed to him the having omitted to ask
      himself a particular question. I found that he had asked himself the
      question, and could give it an answer consistent with his own
      theory. I had also, within the compass of a parenthesis, hazarded
      some remarks on certain general characteristics of Archbishop
      Whately as a philosopher. These remarks, though their tone, I hope,
      was neither disrespectful nor arrogant, I felt, on reconsideration,
      that I was hardly entitled to make; least of all, when the instance
      which I had regarded as an illustration of them, failed, as I now
      saw, to bear them out. The real matter at the bottom of the whole
      dispute, the different view we take of the function of the major
      premise, remains exactly where it was; and so far was I from
      thinking that my opinion had been fully “answered” and was
      “untenable,” that in the same edition in which I canceled the note,
      I not only enforced the opinion by further arguments, but answered
      (though without naming him) those of the Archbishop.

      For not having made this statement before, I do not think it needful
      to apologize. It would be attaching very great importance to one’s
      smallest sayings, to think a formal retractation requisite every
      time that one falls into an error. Nor is Archbishop Whately’s
      well-earned fame of so tender a quality as to require that in
      withdrawing a slight criticism on him I should have been bound to
      offer a public _amende_ for having made it.

  109 But though it is a condition of the validity of every induction that
      there be uniformity in the course of nature, it is not a necessary
      condition that the uniformity should pervade all nature. It is
      enough that it pervades the particular class of phenomena to which
      the induction relates. An induction concerning the motions of the
      planets, or the properties of the magnet, would not be vitiated
      though we were to suppose that wind and weather are the sport of
      chance, provided it be assumed that astronomical and magnetic
      phenomena are under the dominion of general laws. Otherwise the
      early experience of mankind would have rested on a very weak
      foundation; for in the infancy of science it could not be known that
      _all_ phenomena are regular in their course.

      Neither would it be correct to say that every induction by which we
      infer any truth, implies the general fact of uniformity _as
      foreknown_, even in reference to the kind of phenomena concerned. It
      implies, _either_ that this general fact is already known, _or_ that
      we may now know it: as the conclusion, the Duke of Wellington is
      mortal, drawn from the instances A, B, and C, implies either that we
      have already concluded all men to be mortal, or that we are now
      entitled to do so from the same evidence. A vast amount of confusion
      and paralogism respecting the grounds of Induction would be
      dispelled by keeping in view these simple considerations.

  110 Infra, chap. xxi.

  111 Infra, chap. xxi., xxii.

  112 In strictness, wherever the present constitution of space exists;
      which we have ample reason to believe that it does in the region of
      the fixed stars.

  113 Dr. Whewell (_Phil. of Discov._, p. 246) will not allow these and
      similar erroneous judgments to be called inductions; inasmuch as
      such superstitious fancies “were not collected from the facts by
      seeking a law of their occurrence, but were suggested by an
      imagination of the anger of superior powers, shown by such
      deviations from the ordinary course of nature.” I conceive the
      question to be, not in what manner these notions were at first
      suggested, but by what evidence they have, from time to time, been
      supposed to be substantiated. If the believers in these erroneous
      opinions had been put on their defense, they would have referred to
      experience: to the comet which preceded the assassination of Julius
      Cæsar, or to oracles and other prophecies known to have been
      fulfilled. It is by such appeals to facts that all analogous
      superstitions, even in our day, attempt to justify themselves; the
      supposed evidence of experience is necessary to their hold on the
      mind. I quite admit that the influence of such coincidences would
      not be what it is, if strength were not lent to it by an antecedent
      presumption; but this is not peculiar to such cases; preconceived
      notions of probability form part of the explanation of many other
      cases of belief on insufficient evidence. The _a priori_ prejudice
      does not prevent the erroneous opinion from being sincerely regarded
      as a legitimate conclusion from experience; though it improperly
      predisposes the mind to that interpretation of experience.

      Thus much in defense of the sort of examples objected to. But it
      would be easy to produce instances, equally adapted to the purpose,
      and in which no antecedent prejudice is at all concerned. “For many
      ages,” says Archbishop Whately, “all farmers and gardeners were
      firmly convinced—and convinced of their knowing it by
      experience—that the crops would never turn out good unless the seed
      were sown during the increase of the moon.” This was induction, but
      bad induction; just as a vicious syllogism is reasoning, but bad
      reasoning.

  114 The assertion, that any and every one of the conditions of a
      phenomenon may be and is, on some occasions and for some purposes,
      spoken of as the cause, has been disputed by an intelligent reviewer
      of this work in the _Prospective Review_ (the predecessor of the
      justly esteemed _National Review_), who maintains that “we always
      apply the word cause rather to that element in the antecedents which
      exercises _force_, and which would _tend_ at all times to produce
      the same or a similar effect to that which, under certain
      conditions, it would actually produce.” And he says, that “every one
      would feel” the expression, that the cause of a surprise was the
      sentinel’s being off his post, to be incorrect; but that the
      “allurement or force which _drew_ him off his post, might be so
      called, because in doing so it removed a resisting power which would
      have prevented the surprise.” I can not think that it would be wrong
      to say, that the event took place because the sentinel was absent,
      and yet right to say that it took place because he was bribed to be
      absent. Since the only direct effect of the bribe was his absence,
      the bribe could be called the remote cause of the surprise, only on
      the supposition that the absence was the proximate cause; nor does
      it seem to me that any one (who had not a theory to support) would
      use the one expression and reject the other.

      The reviewer observes, that when a person dies of poison, his
      possession of bodily organs is a necessary condition, but that no
      one would ever speak of it as the cause. I admit the fact; but I
      believe the reason to be, that the occasion could never arise for so
      speaking of it; for when in the inaccuracy of common discourse we
      are led to speak of some one condition of a phenomenon as its cause,
      the condition so spoken of is always one which it is at least
      possible that the hearer may require to be informed of. The
      possession of bodily organs is a known condition, and to give that
      as the answer, when asked the cause of a person’s death, would not
      supply the information sought. Once conceive that a doubt could
      exist as to his having bodily organs, or that he were to be compared
      with some being who had them not, and cases may be imagined in which
      it might be said that his possession of them was the cause of his
      death. If Faust and Mephistopheles together took poison, it might be
      said that Faust died because he was a human being, and had a body,
      while Mephistopheles survived because he was a spirit.

      It is for the same reason that no one (as the reviewer remarks)
      “calls the cause of a leap, the muscles or sinews of the body,
      though they are necessary conditions; nor the cause of a
      self-sacrifice, the knowledge which was necessary for it; nor the
      cause of writing a book, that a man has time for it, which is a
      necessary condition.” These conditions (besides that they are
      antecedent _states_, and not proximate antecedent _events_, and are
      therefore never the conditions in closest apparent proximity to the
      effect) are all of them so obviously implied, that it is hardly
      possible there should exist that necessity for insisting on them,
      which alone gives occasion for speaking of a single condition as if
      it were the cause. Wherever this necessity exists in regard to some
      one condition, and does not exist in regard to any other, I conceive
      that it is consistent with usage, when scientific accuracy is not
      aimed at, to apply the name cause to that one condition. If the only
      condition which can be supposed to be unknown is a negative
      condition, the negative condition may be spoken of as the cause. It
      might be said that a person died for want of medical advice: though
      this would not be likely to be said, unless the person was already
      understood to be ill, and in order to indicate that this negative
      circumstance was what made the illness fatal, and not the weakness
      of his constitution, or the original virulence of the disease. It
      might be said that a person was drowned because he could not swim;
      the positive condition, namely, that he fell into the water, being
      already implied in the word drowned. And here let me remark, that
      his falling into the water is in this case the only positive
      condition: all the conditions not expressly or virtually included in
      this (as that he could not swim, that nobody helped him, and so
      forth) are negative. Yet, if it were simply said that the cause of a
      man’s death was falling into the water, there would be quite as
      great a sense of impropriety in the expression, as there would be if
      it were said that the cause was his inability to swim; because,
      though the one condition is positive and the other negative, it
      would be felt that neither of them was sufficient, without the
      other, to produce death.

      With regard to the assertion that nothing is termed the cause,
      except the element which exerts active force; I waive the question
      as to the meaning of active force, and accepting the phrase in its
      popular sense, I revert to a former example, and I ask, would it be
      more agreeable to custom to say that a man fell because his foot
      slipped in climbing a ladder, or that he fell because of his weight?
      for his weight, and not the motion of his foot, was the active force
      which determined his fall. If a person walking out in a frosty day,
      stumbled and fell, it might be said that he stumbled because the
      ground was slippery, or because he was not sufficiently careful: but
      few people, I suppose, would say, that he stumbled because he
      walked. Yet the only active force concerned was that which he
      exerted in walking: the others were mere negative conditions; but
      they happened to be the only ones which there could be any necessity
      to state; for he walked, most likely, in exactly his usual manner,
      and the negative conditions made all the difference. Again, if a
      person were asked why the army of Xerxes defeated that of Leonidas,
      he would probably say, because they were a thousand times the
      number; but I do not think he would say, it was because they fought,
      though that was the element of active force. To borrow another
      example, used by Mr. Grove and by Mr. Baden Powell, the opening of
      flood-gates is said to be the cause of the flow of water; yet the
      active force is exerted by the water itself, and opening the
      flood-gates merely supplies a negative condition. The reviewer adds,
      “There are some conditions absolutely passive, and yet absolutely
      necessary to physical phenomena, viz., the relations of space and
      time; and to these no one ever applies the word cause without being
      immediately arrested by those who hear him.” Even from this
      statement I am compelled to dissent. Few persons would feel it
      incongruous to say (for example) that a secret became known because
      it was spoken of when A. B. was within hearing; which is a condition
      of space: or that the cause why one of two particular trees is
      taller than the other, is that it has been longer planted; which is
      a condition of time.

  115 There are a few exceptions; for there are some properties of objects
      which seem to be purely preventive; as the property of opaque
      bodies, by which they intercept the passage of light. This, as far
      as we are able to understand it, appears an instance not of one
      cause counteracting another by the same law whereby it produces its
      own effects, but of an agency which manifests itself in no other way
      than in defeating the effects of another agency. If we knew on what
      other relations to light, or on what peculiarities of structure,
      opacity depends, we might find that this is only an apparent, not a
      real, exception to the general proposition in the text. In any case
      it needs not affect the practical application. The formula which
      includes all the negative conditions of an effect in the single one
      of the absence of counteracting causes, is not violated by such
      cases as this; though, if all counteracting agencies were of this
      description, there would be no purpose served by employing the
      formula.

  116 I mean by this expression, the ultimate laws of nature (whatever
      they may be) as distinguished from the derivative laws and from the
      collocations. The diurnal revolution of the earth (for example) is
      not a part of the constitution of things, because nothing can be so
      called which might possibly be terminated or altered by natural
      causes.

  117 I use the words “straight line” for brevity and simplicity. In
      reality the line in question is not exactly straight, for, from the
      effect of refraction, we actually see the sun for a short interval
      during which the opaque mass of the earth is interposed in a direct
      line between the sun and our eyes; thus realizing, though but to a
      limited extent, the coveted desideratum of seeing round a corner.

_  118 Second Burnett Prize Essay_, by Principal Tulloch, p. 25.

_  119 Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind_, First Series, p. 219.

_  120 Essays_, pp. 206-208.

  121 To the universality which mankind are agreed in ascribing to the Law
      of Causation, there is one claim of exception, one disputed case,
      that of the Human Will; the determinations of which, a large class
      of metaphysicians are not willing to regard as following the causes
      called motives, according to as strict laws as those which they
      suppose to exist in the world of mere matter. This controverted
      point will undergo a special examination when we come to treat
      particularly of the Logic of the Moral Sciences (Book vi., chap. 2).
      In the mean time, I may remark that these metaphysicians, who, it
      must be observed, ground the main part of their objection on the
      supposed repugnance of the doctrine in question to our
      consciousness, seem to me to mistake the fact which consciousness
      testifies against. What is really in contradiction to consciousness,
      they would, I think, on strict self-examination, find to be, the
      application to human actions and volitions of the ideas involved in
      the common use of the term Necessity; which I agree with them in
      objecting to. But if they would consider that by saying that a
      person’s actions _necessarily_ follow from his character, all that
      is really meant (for no more is meant in any case whatever of
      causation) is that he invariably _does_ act in conformity to his
      character, and that any one who thoroughly knew his character could
      certainly predict how he would act in any supposable case; they
      probably would not find this doctrine either contrary to their
      experience or revolting to their feelings. And no more than this is
      contended for by any one but an Asiatic fatalist.

  122 I believe, however, the accredited authorities do suppose that
      molecular motion, equivalent in amount to that which will be
      manifested in the combustion of the coal, is actually taking place
      during the whole of the long interval, if not in the coal, yet in
      the oxygen which will then combine with it. But how purely
      hypothetical this supposition is, need hardly be remarked; I venture
      to say, unnecessarily and extravagantly hypothetical.

_  123 Lectures on Metaphysics_, vol. ii., Lect. xxxix., pp. 391-2.

      I regret that I can not invoke the authority of Sir William Hamilton
      in favor of my own opinions on Causation, as I can against the
      particular theory which I am now combating. But that acute thinker
      has a theory of Causation peculiar to himself, which has never yet,
      as far as I know, been analytically examined, but which, I venture
      to think, admits of as complete refutation as any one of the false
      or insufficient psychological theories which strew the ground in
      such numbers under his potent metaphysical scythe. (Since examined
      and controverted in the sixteenth chapter of _An Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy_.)

  124 Unless we are to consider as such the following statement, by one of
      the writers quoted in the text: “In the case of mental exertion, the
      result to be accomplished is _preconsidered_ or meditated, and is
      therefore known _a priori_, or before experience.”—(Bowen’s _Lowell
      Lectures on the Application of Metaphysical and Ethical Science to
      the Evidence of Religion_. Boston, 1849.) This is merely saying that
      when we will a thing we have an idea of it. But to have an idea of
      what we wish to happen, does not imply a prophetic knowledge that it
      will happen. Perhaps it will be said that the _first time_ we
      exerted our will, when we had of course no experience of any of the
      powers residing in us, we nevertheless must already have known that
      we possessed them, since we can not will that which we do not
      believe to be in our power. But the impossibility is perhaps in the
      words only, and not in the facts; for we may _desire_ what we do not
      know to be in our power; and finding by experience that our bodies
      move according to our _desire_, we may then, and only then, pass
      into the more complicated mental state which is termed will.

      After all, even if we had an instinctive knowledge that our actions
      would follow our will, this, as Brown remarks, would prove nothing
      as to the nature of Causation. Our knowing, previous to experience,
      that an antecedent will be followed by a certain consequent, would
      not prove the relation between them to be any thing more than
      antecedence and consequence.

  125 Reid’s _Essays on the Active Powers_, Essay iv., chap. 3.

_  126 Prospective Review_ for February, 1850.

  127 Vide supra, p. 178, note.

_  128 Westminster Review_ for October, 1855.

  129 See the whole doctrine in Aristotle _de Ánimâ_, where the θρεπτικὴ
      ψυχὴ is treated as exactly equivalent to θρεπτικὴ δύναμις.

  130 It deserves notice that the parts of nature which Aristotle regards
      as representing evidence of design, are the Uniformities: the
      phenomena in so far as reducible to law. Τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον
      satisfy him as explanations of the variable element in phenomena,
      but their occurring according to a fixed rule can only, to his
      conceptions, be accounted for by an Intelligent Will. The common, or
      what may be called the instinctive, religious interpretation of
      nature, is the reverse of this. The events in which men
      spontaneously see the hand of a supernatural being, are those which
      can not, as they think, be reduced to a physical law. What they can
      distinctly connect with physical causes, and especially what they
      can predict, though of course ascribed to an Author of Nature, if
      they already recognize such an author, might be conceived, they
      think, to arise from a blind fatality, and in any case do not appear
      to them to bear so obviously the mark of a divine will. And this
      distinction has been countenanced by eminent writers on Natural
      Theology, in particular by Dr. Chalmers, who thinks that though
      design is present everywhere, the irresistible evidence of it is to
      be found not in the _laws_ of nature but in the collocations,
      _i.e._, in the part of nature in which it is impossible to trace any
      law. A few properties of dead matter might, he thinks, conceivably
      account for the regular and invariable succession of effects and
      causes; but that the different kinds of matter have been so placed
      as to promote beneficent ends, is what he regards as the proof of a
      Divine Providence. Mr. Baden Powell, in his Essay entitled
      “Philosophy of Creation,” has returned to the point of view of
      Aristotle and the ancients, and vigorously re-asserts the doctrine
      that the indication of design in the universe is not special
      adaptations, but Uniformity and Law, these being the evidences of
      mind, and not what appears to us to be a provision for our uses.
      While I decline to express any opinion here on this _vexata
      quæstio_, I ought not to mention Mr. Powell’s volume without the
      acknowledgment due to the philosophic spirit which pervades
      generally the three Essays composing it, forming in the case of one
      of them (the “Unity of Worlds”) an honorable contrast with the other
      dissertations, so far as they have come under my notice, which have
      appeared on either side of that controversy.

  131 In the words of Fontenelle, another celebrated Cartesian, “les
      philosophes aussi bien que le peuple avaient cru que l’âme et le
      corps agissaient réellement et physiquement l’un sur l’autre.
      Descartes vint, qui prouva que leur nature ne permettait point cette
      sorte de communication véritable, et qu’ils n’en pouvaient avoir
      qu’une apparente, dont Dieu était le Médiateur.”—(_Œuvres de
      Fontenelle_, ed. 1767, tom. v., p. 534.)

  132 I omit, for simplicity, to take into account the effect, in this
      latter case, of the diminution of pressure, in diminishing the flow
      of water through the drain; which evidently in no way affects the
      truth or applicability of the principle, since when the two causes
      act simultaneously the conditions of that diminution of pressure do
      not arise.

  133 Professor Bain adds several other well-established chemical
      generalizations: “The laws that simple substances exhibit the
      strongest affinities; that compounds are more fusible than their
      elements; that combination tends to a lower state of matter from gas
      down to solid;” and some general propositions concerning the
      circumstances which facilitate or resist chemical combination.
      (Logic, ii., 254.)

  134 Professor Bain (Logic, ii., 39) points out a class of cases, other
      than that spoken of in the text, which he thinks must be regarded as
      an exception to the Composition of Causes. “Causes that merely make
      good the collocation for bringing a prime mover into action, or that
      release a potential force, do not follow any such rule. One man may
      direct a gun upon a fort as well as three: two sparks are not more
      effectual than one in exploding a barrel of gunpowder. In medicine
      there is a certain dose that answers the end; and adding to it does
      no more good.”

      I am not sure that these cases are really exceptions. The law of
      Composition of Causes, I think, is really fulfilled, and the
      appearance to the contrary is produced by attending to the remote
      instead of the immediate effect of the causes. In the cases
      mentioned, the immediate effect of the causes in action is a
      collocation, and the duplication of the cause does double the
      quantity of collocation. Two men could raise the gun to the required
      angle twice as quickly as one, though one is enough. Two sparks put
      two sets of particles of the gunpowder into the state of intestine
      motion which makes them explode, though one is sufficient. It is the
      collocation itself that does not, by being doubled, always double
      the effect; because in many cases a certain collocation, once
      obtained, is all that is required for the production of the whole
      amount of effect which can be produced at all at the given time and
      place. Doubling the collocation with difference of time and place,
      as by pointing two guns, or exploding a second barrel after the
      first, does double the effect. This remark applies still more to Mr.
      Bain’s third example, that of a double dose of medicine; for a
      double dose of an aperient does purge more violently, and a double
      dose of laudanum does produce longer and sounder sleep. But a double
      purging, or a double amount of narcotism, may have remote effects
      different in kind from the effect of the smaller amount, reducing
      the case to that of heteropathic laws, discussed in the text.

  135 Unless, indeed, the consequent was generated, not by the antecedent,
      but by the means employed to produce the antecedent. As, however,
      these means are under our power, there is so far a probability that
      they are also sufficiently within our knowledge to enable us to
      judge whether that could be the case or not.

_  136 Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy_, p. 179.

  137 For this speculation, as for many other of my scientific
      illustrations, I am indebted to Professor Bain, whose subsequent
      treatise on Logic abounds with apt illustrations of all the
      inductive methods.

  138 This view of the necessary co-existence of opposite excitements
      involves a great extension of the original doctrine of two
      electricities. The early theorists assumed that, when amber was
      rubbed, the amber was made positive and the rubber negative to the
      same degree; but it never occurred to them to suppose that the
      existence of the amber charge was dependent on an opposite charge in
      the bodies with which the amber was contiguous, while the existence
      of the negative charge on the rubber was equally dependent on a
      contrary state of the surfaces that might accidentally be confronted
      with it; that, in fact, in a case of electrical excitement by
      friction, four charges were the minimum that could exist. But this
      double electrical action is essentially implied in the explanation
      now universally adopted in regard to the phenomena of the common
      electric machine.

  139 Pp. 110, 111.

  140 Infra, book iv., chap. ii., On Abstraction.

  141 I must, however, remark, that this example, which seems to militate
      against the assertion we made of the comparative inapplicability of
      the Method of Difference to cases of pure observation, is really one
      of those exceptions which, according to a proverbial expression,
      prove the general rule. For in this case, in which Nature, in her
      experiment, seems to have imitated the type of the experiments made
      by man, she has only succeeded in producing the likeness of man’s
      most imperfect experiments; namely, those in which, though he
      succeeds in producing the phenomenon, he does so by employing
      complex means, which he is unable perfectly to analyze, and can
      form, therefore, no sufficient judgment what portion of the effects
      may be due, not to the supposed cause, but to some unknown agency of
      the means by which that cause was produced. In the natural
      experiment which we are speaking of, the means used was the clearing
      off a canopy of clouds; and we certainly do not know sufficiently in
      what this process consists, or on what it depends, to be certain _a
      priori_ that it might not operate upon the deposition of dew
      independently of any thermometric effect at the earth’s surface.
      Even, therefore, in a case so favorable as this to Nature’s
      experimental talents, her experiment is of little value except in
      corroboration of a conclusion already attained through other means.

  142 In his subsequent work, _Outlines of Astronomy_ (§ 570), Sir John
      Herschel suggests another possible explanation of the acceleration
      of the revolution of a comet.

  143 Discourse, pp. 156-8, and 171.

  144 Outlines of Astronomy, § 856.

_  145 Philosophy of Discovery_, pp. 263, 264.

  146 See, on this point, the second chapter of the present book.

  147 Ante, chap. vii., § 1.

  148 It seems hardly necessary to say that the word _impinge_, as a
      general term to express collision of forces, is here used by a
      figure of speech, and not as expressive of any theory respecting the
      nature of force.

_  149 Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_, Essay V.

  150 It is justly remarked by Professor Bain, that though the Methods of
      Agreement and Difference are not applicable to these cases, they are
      not wholly inaccessible to the Method of Concomitant Variations. “If
      a cause happens to vary alone, the effect will also vary alone: a
      cause and effect may be thus singled out under the greatest
      complications. Thus, when the appetite for food increases with the
      cold, we have a strong evidence of connection between these two
      facts, although other circumstances may operate in the same
      direction. The assigning of the respective parts of the sun and moon
      in the action of the tides may be effected, to a certain degree of
      exactness, by the variations of the amount according to the
      positions of the two attractive bodies. By a series of experiments
      of Concomitant Variations, directed to ascertain the elimination of
      nitrogen from the human body under varieties of muscular exercise,
      Dr. Parkes obtained the remarkable conclusion, that a muscle grows
      during exercise, and loses bulk during the subsequent rest.”
      (_Logic_, ii., 83.)

      It is, no doubt, often possible to single out the influencing causes
      from among a great number of mere concomitants, by noting what are
      the antecedents, a variation in which is followed by a variation in
      the effect. But when there are many influencing causes, no one of
      them greatly predominating over the rest, and especially when some
      of these are continually changing, it is scarcely ever possible to
      trace such a relation between the variations of the effect and those
      of any one cause as would enable us to assign to that cause its real
      share in the production of the effect.

  151 Bain’s _Logic_, ii., 360.

  152 What is said in the text on the applicability of the experimental
      methods to resolve particular questions of medical treatment, does
      not detract from their efficacy in ascertaining the general laws of
      the animal or human system. The functions, for example, of the
      different classes of nerves have been discovered, and probably could
      only have been discovered, by experiments on living animals.
      Observation and experiment are the ultimate basis of all knowledge:
      from them we obtain the elementary laws of life, as we obtain all
      other elementary truths. It is in dealing with the complex
      combinations that the experimental methods are for the most part
      illusory, and the deductive mode of investigation must be invoked to
      disentangle the complexity.

  153 Professor Bain, though concurring generally in the views expressed
      in this chapter, seems to estimate more highly than I do the scope
      for specific experimental evidence in politics. (_Logic_, ii.,
      333-337.) There are, it is true, as he remarks (p. 336), some cases
      “when an agent suddenly introduced is almost instantaneously
      followed by some other changes, as when the announcement of a
      diplomatic rupture between two nations is followed the same day by a
      derangement of the money-market.” But this experiment would be quite
      inconclusive merely as an experiment. It can only serve, as any
      experiment may, to verify the conclusion of a deduction. Unless we
      already knew by our knowledge of the motives which act on business
      men, that the prospect of war _tends_ to derange the money-market,
      we should never have been able to prove a connection between the two
      facts, unless after having ascertained historically that the one
      followed the other in too great a number of instances to be
      consistent with their having been recorded with due precautions.
      Whoever has carefully examined any of the attempts continually made
      to prove economic doctrines by such a recital of instances, knows
      well how futile they are. It always turns out that the circumstances
      of scarcely any of the cases have been fully stated; and that cases,
      in equal or greater numbers, have been omitted which would have
      tended to an opposite conclusion.

  154 Vide Memoir by Thomas Graham, F.R.S., Master of the Mint, “On Liquid
      Diffusion applied to Analysis,” in the _Philosophical Transactions_
      for 1862, reprinted in the _Journal of the Chemical Society_, and
      also separately as a pamphlet.

  155 It was an old generalization in surgery, that tight bandaging had a
      tendency to prevent or dissipate local inflammation. This sequence,
      being, in the progress of physiological knowledge, resolved into
      more general laws, led to the important surgical invention made by
      Dr. Arnott, the treatment of local inflammation and tumors by means
      of an equable pressure, produced by a bladder partially filled with
      air. The pressure, by keeping back the blood from the part, prevents
      the inflammation, or the tumor, from being nourished: in the case of
      inflammation, it removes the stimulus, which the organ is unfit to
      receive; in the case of tumors, by keeping back the nutritive fluid,
      it causes the absorption of matter to exceed the supply, and the
      diseased mass is gradually absorbed and disappears.

  156 Since acknowledged and reprinted in Mr. Martineau’s _Miscellanies_.

_  157 Dissertations and Discussions_, vol. i., fourth paper.

  158 Written before the rise of the new views respecting the relation of
      heat to mechanical force; but confirmed rather than contradicted by
      them.

  159 As is well remarked by Professor Bain, in the very valuable chapter
      of his Logic which treats of this subject (ii., 121), “scientific
      explanation and inductive generalization being the same thing, the
      limits of Explanation are the limits of Induction,” and “the limits
      to inductive generalization are the limits to the agreement or
      community of facts. Induction supposes similarity among phenomena;
      and when such similarity is discovered, it reduces the phenomena
      under a common statement. The similarity of terrestrial gravity to
      celestial attraction enables the two to be expressed as one
      phenomenon. The similarity between capillary attraction, solution,
      the operation of cements, etc., leads to their being regarded not as
      a plurality, but as a unity, a single causative link, the operation
      of a single agency.... If it be asked whether we can merge gravity
      itself in some still higher law, the answer must depend upon the
      facts. Are there any other forces, at present held distinct from
      gravity, that we may hope to make fraternize with it, so as to join
      in constituting a higher unity? Gravity is an attractive force; and
      another great attractive force is cohesion, or the force that binds
      together the atoms of solid matter. Might we, then, join these two
      in a still higher unity, expressed under a more comprehensive law?
      Certainly we might, but not to any advantage. The two kinds of force
      agree in the one point, attraction, but they agree in no other;
      indeed, in the manner of the attraction, they differ widely; so
      widely that we should have to state totally distinct laws for each.
      Gravity is common to all matter, and equal in amount in equal masses
      of matter, whatever be the kind; it follows the law of the diffusion
      of space from a point (the inverse square of the distance); it
      extends to distances unlimited; it is indestructible and invariable.
      Cohesion is special for each separate substance; it decreases
      according to distance much more rapidly than the inverse square,
      vanishing entirely at very small distances. Two such forces have not
      sufficient kindred to be generalized into one force; the
      generalization is only illusory; the statement of the difference
      would still make two forces; while the consideration of one would
      not in any way simplify the phenomena of the other, as happened in
      the generalization of gravity itself.”

      To the impassable limit of the explanation of laws of nature, set
      forth in the text, must therefore be added a further limitation.
      Although, when the phenomena to be explained are not, in their own
      nature, generically distinct, the attempt to refer them to the same
      cause is scientifically legitimate; yet to the success of the
      attempt it is indispensable that the cause should be shown to be
      capable of producing them according to the same law. Otherwise the
      unity of cause is a mere guess, and the generalization only a
      nominal one, which, even if admitted, would not diminish the number
      of ultimate laws of nature.

_  160 Cours de Philosophie Positive_, ii., 656.

  161 Vide supra, book iii., chap. xi.

_  162 Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 185 et seq.

  163 Comte, _Philosophie Positive_, ii., 434-437.

  164 As an example of legitimate hypothesis according to the test here
      laid down, has been justly cited that of Broussais, who, proceeding
      on the very rational principle that every disease must originate in
      some definite part or other of the organism, boldly assumed that
      certain fevers, which not being known to be local were called
      constitutional, had their origin in the mucous membrane of the
      alimentary canal. The supposition was, indeed, as is now generally
      admitted, erroneous; but he was justified in making it, since by
      deducing the consequences of the supposition, and comparing them
      with the facts of those maladies, he might be certain of disproving
      his hypothesis if it was ill founded, and might expect that the
      comparison would materially aid him in framing another more
      conformable to the phenomena.

      The doctrine now universally received that the earth is a natural
      magnet, was originally an hypothesis of the celebrated Gilbert.

      Another hypothesis, to the legitimacy of which no objection can lie,
      and which is well calculated to light the path of scientific
      inquiry, is that suggested by several recent writers, that the brain
      is a voltaic pile, and that each of its pulsations is a discharge of
      electricity through the system. It has been remarked that the
      sensation felt by the hand from the beating of a brain, bears a
      strong resemblance to a voltaic shock. And the hypothesis, if
      followed to its consequences, might afford a plausible explanation
      of many physiological facts, while there is nothing to discourage
      the hope that we may in time sufficiently understand the conditions
      of voltaic phenomena to render the truth of the hypothesis amenable
      to observation and experiment.

      The attempt to localize, in different regions of the brain, the
      physical organs of our different mental faculties and propensities,
      was, on the part of its original author, a legitimate example of a
      scientific hypothesis; and we ought not, therefore, to blame him for
      the extremely slight grounds on which he often proceeded, in an
      operation which could only be tentative, though we may regret that
      materials barely sufficient for a first rude hypothesis should have
      been hastily worked up into the vain semblance of a science. If
      there be really a connection between the scale of mental endowments
      and the various degrees of complication in the cerebral system, the
      nature of that connection was in no other way so likely to be
      brought to light as by framing, in the first instance, an hypothesis
      similar to that of Gall. But the verification of any such hypothesis
      is attended, from the peculiar nature of the phenomena, with
      difficulties which phrenologists have not shown themselves even
      competent to appreciate, much less to overcome.

      Mr. Darwin’s remarkable speculation on the Origin of Species is
      another unimpeachable example of a legitimate hypothesis. What he
      terms “natural selection” is not only a _vera causa_, but one proved
      to be capable of producing effects of the same kind with those which
      the hypothesis ascribes to it; the question of possibility is
      entirely one of degree. It is unreasonable to accuse Mr. Darwin (as
      has been done) of violating the rules of Induction. The rules of
      Induction are concerned with the conditions of Proof. Mr. Darwin has
      never pretended that his doctrine was proved. He was not bound by
      the rules of Induction, but by those of Hypothesis. And these last
      have seldom been more completely fulfilled. He has opened a path of
      inquiry full of promise, the results of which none can foresee. And
      is it not a wonderful feat of scientific knowledge and ingenuity to
      have rendered so bold a suggestion, which the first impulse of every
      one was to reject at once, admissible and discussible, even as a
      conjecture?

  165 Whewell’s _Phil. of Discovery_, pp. 275, 276.

  166 What has most contributed to accredit the hypothesis of a physical
      medium for the conveyance of light, is the certain fact that light
      _travels_ (which can not be proved of gravitation); that its
      communication is not instantaneous, but requires time; and that it
      is intercepted (which gravitation is not) by intervening objects.
      These are analogies between its phenomena and those of the
      mechanical motion of a solid or fluid substance. But we are not
      entitled to assume that mechanical motion is the only power in
      nature capable of exhibiting those attributes.

_  167 Phil. of Discovery_, p. 274.

  168 P. 271.

  169 P. 251 and the whole of Appendix G.

  170 In Dr. Whewell’s latest version of his theory (_Philosophy of
      Discovery_, p. 331) he makes a concession respecting the medium of
      the transmission of light, which, taken in conjunction with the rest
      of his doctrine on the subject, is not, I confess, very intelligible
      to me, but which goes far toward removing, if it does not actually
      remove, the whole of the difference between us. He is contending,
      against Sir William Hamilton, that all matter has weight. Sir
      William, in proof of the contrary, cited the luminiferous ether, and
      the calorific and electric fluids, “which,” he said, “we can neither
      denude of their character of substance, nor clothe with the
      attribute of weight.” “To which,” continues Dr. Whewell, “my reply
      is, that precisely because I can not clothe these agents with the
      attribute of Weight, I _do_ denude them of the character of
      Substance. They are not substances, but agencies. These Imponderable
      Agents are not properly called Imponderable Fluids. This I conceive
      that I have proved.” Nothing can be more philosophical. But if the
      luminiferous ether is not matter, and fluid matter, too, what is the
      meaning of its undulations? Can an agency undulate? Can there be
      alternate motion forward and backward of the particles of an agency?
      And does not the whole mathematical theory of the undulations imply
      them to be material? Is it not a series of deductions from the known
      properties of elastic fluids? _This_ opinion of Dr. Whewell reduces
      the undulations to a figure of speech, and the undulatory theory to
      the proposition which all must admit, that the transmission of light
      takes place according to laws which present a very striking and
      remarkable agreement with those of undulations. If Dr. Whewell is
      prepared to stand by this doctrine, I have no difference with him on
      the subject.

  171 Thus water, of which eight-ninths in weight are oxygen, dissolves
      most bodies which contain a high proportion of oxygen, such as all
      the nitrates (which have more oxygen than any others of the common
      salts), most of the sulphates, many of the carbonates, etc. Again,
      bodies largely composed of combustible elements, like hydrogen and
      carbon, are soluble in bodies of similar composition; resin, for
      instance, will dissolve in alcohol, tar in oil of turpentine. This
      empirical generalization is far from being universally true; no
      doubt because it is a remote, and therefore easily defeated, result
      of general laws too deep for us at present to penetrate; but it will
      probably in time suggest processes of inquiry, leading to the
      discovery of those laws.

  172 Or, according to Laplace’s theory, the sun and the sun’s rotation.

  173 Supra, book iii., chap. v., § 7.

  174 Supra, book iii., chap. x., § 2

  175 In the preceding discussion, the _mean_ is spoken of as if it were
      exactly the same thing with the _average_. But the mean, for
      purposes of inductive inquiry, is not the average, or arithmetical
      mean, though in a familiar illustration of the theory the difference
      may be disregarded. If the deviations on one side of the average are
      much more numerous than those on the other (these last being fewer
      but greater), the effect due to the invariable cause, as distinct
      from the variable ones, will not coincide with the average, but will
      be either below or above the average, the deviation being toward the
      side on which the greatest number of the instances are found. This
      follows from a truth, ascertained both inductively and deductively,
      that small deviations from the true central point are greatly more
      frequent than large ones. The mathematical law is, “that the most
      probable determination of one or more invariable elements from
      observation is that in which the _sum of the squares_ of the
      individual aberrations,” or deviations, “_shall be the least
      possible_.” See this principle stated, and its grounds popularly
      explained, by Sir John Herschel, in his review of Quetelet on
      Probabilities, _Essays_, p. 395 _et seq._

_  176 Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités_, fifth Paris edition, p.
      7.

  177 It even appears to me that the calculation of chances, where there
      are no data grounded either on special experience or on special
      inference, must, in an immense majority of cases, break down, from
      sheer impossibility of assigning any principle by which to be guided
      in setting out the list of possibilities. In the case of the colored
      balls we have no difficulty in making the enumeration, because we
      ourselves determine what the possibilities shall be. But suppose a
      case more analogous to those which occur in nature: instead of three
      colors, let there be in the box all possible colors, we being
      supposed ignorant of the comparative frequency with which different
      colors occur in nature, or in the productions of art. How is the
      list of cases to be made out? Is every distinct shade to count as a
      color? If so, is the test to be a common eye, or an educated eye—a
      painter’s, for instance? On the answer to these questions would
      depend whether the chances against some particular color would be
      estimated at ten, twenty, or perhaps five hundred to one. While if
      we knew from experience that the particular color occurs on an
      average a certain number of times in every hundred or thousand, we
      should not require to know any thing either of the frequency or of
      the number of the other possibilities.

_  178 Prospective Review_ for February, 1850.

  179 “If this be not so, why do we feel so much more probability added by
      the first instance than by any single subsequent instance? Why,
      except that the first instance gives us its possibility (a cause
      _adequate_ to it), while every other only gives us the frequency of
      its conditions? If no reference to a cause be supposed, possibility
      would have no meaning; yet it is clear that, antecedent to its
      happening, we might have supposed the event impossible, _i.e._, have
      believed that there was no physical energy really existing in the
      world equal to producing it.... After the first time of happening,
      which is, then, more important to the whole probability than any
      other single instance (because proving the possibility), the
      _number_ of times becomes important as an index to the intensity or
      extent of the cause, and its independence of any particular time. If
      we took the case of a tremendous leap, for instance, and wished to
      form an estimate of the probability of its succeeding a certain
      number of times; the first instance, by showing its possibility
      (before doubtful) is of the most importance; but every succeeding
      leap shows the power to be more perfectly under control, greater and
      more invariable, and so increases the probability; and no one would
      think of reasoning in this case straight from one instance to the
      next, without referring to the physical energy which each leap
      indicated. Is it not, then, clear that we do not ever” (let us
      rather say, that we do not in an advanced state of our knowledge)
      “conclude directly from the happening of an event to the probability
      of its happening again; but that we refer to the cause, regarding
      the past cases as an index to the cause, and the cause as our guide
      to the future?”—_Ibid._

  180 The writer last quoted says that the valuation of chances by
      comparing the number of cases in which the event occurs with the
      number in which it does not occur, “would generally be wholly
      erroneous,” and “is not the true theory of probability.” It is at
      least that which forms the foundation of insurance, and of all those
      calculations of chances in the business of life which experience so
      abundantly verifies. The reason which the reviewer gives for
      rejecting the theory is, that it “would regard an event as certain
      which had hitherto never failed; which is exceedingly far from the
      truth, even for a very large number of constant successes.” This is
      not a defect in a particular theory, but in any theory of chances.
      No principle of evaluation can provide for such a case as that which
      the reviewer supposes. If an event has never once failed, in a
      number of trials sufficient to eliminate chance, it really has all
      the certainty which can be given by an empirical law; it _is_
      certain during the continuance of the same collocation of causes
      which existed during the observations. If it ever fails, it is in
      consequence of some change in that collocation. Now, no theory of
      chances will enable us to infer the future probability of an event
      from the past, if the causes in operation, capable of influencing
      the event, have intermediately undergone a change.

  181 Pp. 18, 19. The theorem is not stated by Laplace in the exact terms
      in which I have stated it; but the identity of import of the two
      modes of expression is easily demonstrable.

  182 For a fuller treatment of the many interesting questions raised by
      the theory of probabilities, I may now refer to a recent work by Mr.
      Venn, Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge, “The Logic of Chance;” one
      of the most thoughtful and philosophical treatises on any subject
      connected with Logic and Evidence which have been produced, to my
      knowledge, for many years. Some criticisms contained in it have been
      very useful to me in revising the corresponding chapters of the
      present work. In several of Mr. Venn’s opinions, however, I do not
      agree. What these are will be obvious to any reader of Mr. Venn’s
      work who is also a reader of this.

  183 Hartley’s _Observations on Man_, vol. i., p. 16. The passage is not
      in Priestley’s curtailed edition.

  184 I am happy to be able to quote the following excellent passage from
      Mr. Baden Powell’s _Essay on the Inductive Philosophy_, in
      confirmation, both in regard to history and to doctrine, of the
      statement made in the text. Speaking of the “conviction of the
      universal and permanent uniformity of nature,” Mr. Powell says (pp.
      98-100):

      “We may remark that this idea, in its proper extent, is by no means
      one of popular acceptance or natural growth. Just so far as the
      daily experience of every one goes, so far indeed he comes to
      embrace a certain persuasion of this kind, but merely to this
      limited extent, that what is going on around him at present, in his
      own narrow sphere of observation, will go on in like manner in
      future. The peasant believes that the sun which rose to-day will
      rise again to-morrow; that the seed put into the ground will be
      followed in due time by the harvest this year as it was last year,
      and the like; but has no notion of such inferences in subjects
      beyond his immediate observation. And it should be observed that
      each class of persons, in admitting this belief within the limited
      range of his own experience, though he doubt or deny it in every
      thing beyond, is, in fact, bearing unconscious testimony to its
      universal truth. Nor, again, is it only among the _most_ ignorant
      that this limitation is put upon the truth. There is a very general
      propensity to believe that every thing beyond common experience, or
      especially ascertained laws of nature, is left to the dominion of
      chance or fate or arbitrary intervention; and even to object to any
      attempted explanation by physical causes, if conjecturally thrown
      out for an apparently unaccountable phenomenon.

      “The precise doctrine of the _generalization_ of this idea of the
      uniformity of nature, so far from being obvious, natural, or
      intuitive, is utterly beyond the attainment of the many. In all the
      extent of its universality it is characteristic of the philosopher.
      It is clearly the result of philosophic cultivation and training,
      and by no means the spontaneous offspring of any primary principle
      naturally inherent in the mind, as some seem to believe. It is no
      mere vague persuasion taken up without examination, as a common
      prepossession to which we are always accustomed; on the contrary,
      all common prejudices and associations are against it. It is
      pre-eminently _an acquired idea_. It is not attained without deep
      study and reflection. The best informed philosopher is the man who
      most firmly believes it, even in opposition to received notions; its
      acceptance depends on the extent and profoundness of his inductive
      studies.”

  185 Supra, book iii., chap. iii., § 1

  186 It deserves remark, that these early generalizations did not, like
      scientific inductions, presuppose causation. What they did
      presuppose, was _uniformity_ in physical facts. But the observers
      were as ready to presume uniformity in the co-existence of facts as
      in the sequences. On the other hand, they never thought of assuming
      that this uniformity was a principle pervading all nature: their
      generalizations did not imply that there was uniformity in every
      thing, but only that as much uniformity as existed within their
      observation, existed also beyond it. The induction, fire burns, does
      not require for its validity that all nature should observe uniform
      laws, but only that there should be uniformity in one particular
      class of natural phenomena; the effects of fire on the senses and on
      combustible substances. And uniformity to this extent was not
      assumed, anterior to the experience, but proved by the experience.
      The same observed instances which proved the narrower truth, proved
      as much of the wider one as corresponded to it. It is from losing
      sight of this fact, and considering the law of causation in its full
      extent as necessarily presupposed in the very earliest
      generalizations, that persons have been led into the belief that the
      law of causation is known _a priori_, and is not itself a conclusion
      from experience.

  187 Book ii., chap. iii.

  188 One of the most rising thinkers of the new generation in France, M.
      Taine (who has given, in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, the most
      masterly analysis, at least in one point of view, ever made of the
      present work), though he rejects, on this and similar points of
      psychology, the intuition theory in its ordinary form, nevertheless
      assigns to the law of causation, and to some other of the most
      universal laws, that certainty beyond the bounds of human
      experience, which I have not been able to accord to them. He does
      this on the faith of our faculty of abstraction, in which he seems
      to recognize an independent source of evidence, not indeed
      disclosing truths not contained in our experience, but affording an
      assurance which experience can not give, of the universality of
      those which it does contain. By abstraction M. Taine seems to think
      that we are able, not merely to analyze that part of nature which we
      see, and exhibit apart the elements which pervade it, but to
      distinguish such of them as are elements of the system of nature
      considered as a whole, not incidents belonging to our limited
      terrestrial experience. I am not sure that I fully enter into M.
      Taine’s meaning; but I confess I do not see how any mere abstract
      conception, elicited by our minds from our experience, can be
      evidence of an objective fact in universal Nature, beyond what the
      experience itself bears witness of; or how, in the process of
      interpreting in general language the testimony of experience, the
      limitations of the testimony itself can be cast off.

      Dr. Ward, in an able article in the _Dublin Review_ for October,
      1871, contends that the uniformity of nature can not be proved from
      experience, but from “transcendental considerations” only, and that,
      consequently, all physical science would be deprived of its basis,
      if such transcendental proof were impossible.

      When physical science is said to depend on the assumption that the
      course of nature is invariable, all that is meant is that the
      conclusions of physical science are not known as _absolute_ truths:
      the truth of them is _conditional_ on the uniformity of the course
      of nature; and all that the most conclusive observations and
      experiments can prove, is that the result arrived at will be true
      if, and as long as, the present laws of nature are valid. But this
      is all the assurance we require for the guidance of our conduct. Dr.
      Ward himself does not think that his transcendental proofs make it
      practically greater; for he believes, as a Catholic, that the course
      of nature not only has been, but frequently and even daily is,
      suspended by supernatural intervention.

      But though this conditional conclusiveness of the evidence of
      experience, which is sufficient for the purposes of life, is all
      that I was necessarily concerned to prove, I have given reasons for
      thinking that the uniformity, as itself a part of experience, is
      sufficiently proved to justify undoubting reliance on it. This Dr.
      Ward contests, for the following reasons:

      First (p. 315), supposing it true that there has hitherto been no
      well authenticated case of a breach in the uniformity of nature;
      “the number of natural agents constantly at work is incalculably
      large; and the observed cases of uniformity in their action must be
      immeasurably fewer than one thousandth of the whole. Scientific men,
      we assume for the moment, have discovered that in a certain
      proportion of instances—immeasurably fewer than one thousandth of
      the whole—a certain fact has prevailed; the fact of uniformity; and
      they have not found a single instance in which that fact does _not_
      prevail. Are they justified, we ask, in inferring from these
      premises that the fact is universal? Surely the question answers
      itself. Let us make a very grotesque supposition, in which, however,
      the conclusion would really be tried according to the arguments
      adduced. In some desert of Africa there is an enormous connected
      edifice, surrounding some vast space, in which dwell certain
      reasonable beings, who are unable to leave the inclosure. In this
      edifice are more than a thousand chambers, which some years ago were
      entirely locked up, and the keys no one knew where. By constant
      diligence twenty-five keys have been found, out of the whole number;
      and the corresponding chambers, situated promiscuously throughout
      the edifice, have been opened. Each chamber, when examined, is found
      to be in the precise shape of a dodecahedron. Are the inhabitants
      justified on that account in holding with certitude that the
      remaining 975 chambers are built on the same plan?”

      Not with perfect certitude, but (if the chambers to which the keys
      have been found are really “situated promiscuously”) with so high a
      degree of probability that they would be justified in acting upon
      the presumption until an exception appeared.

      Dr. Ward’s argument, however, does not touch mine as it stands in
      the text. My argument is grounded on the fact that the uniformity of
      the course of nature as a whole, is constituted by the uniform
      sequences of special effects from special natural agencies; that the
      number of these natural agencies in the part of the universe known
      to us is not incalculable, nor even extremely great; that we have
      now reason to think that at least the far greater number of them, if
      not separately, at least in some of the combinations into which they
      enter, have been made sufficiently amenable to observation, to have
      enabled us actually to ascertain some of their fixed laws; and that
      this amount of experience justifies the same degree of assurance
      that the course of nature is uniform throughout, which we previously
      had of the uniformity of sequence among the phenomena best known to
      us. This view of the subject, if correct, destroys the force of Dr.
      Ward’s first argument.

      His second argument is, that many or most persons, both scientific
      and unscientific, believe that there _are_ well authenticated cases
      of breach in the uniformity of nature, namely, miracles. Neither
      does this consideration touch what I have said in the text. I admit
      no other uniformity in the events of nature than the law of
      Causation; and (as I have explained in the chapter of this volume
      which treats of the Grounds of Disbelief) a miracle is no exception
      to that law. In every case of alleged miracle, a _new antecedent_ is
      affirmed to exist; a _counteracting cause_, namely, the volition of
      a supernatural being. To all, therefore, to whom beings with
      superhuman power over nature are a _vera causa_, a miracle is a
      _case_ of the Law of Universal Causation, not a deviation from it.

      Dr. Ward’s last, and as he says, strongest argument, is the familiar
      one of Reid, Stewart, and their followers—that whatever knowledge
      experience gives us of the past and present, it gives us none of the
      future. I confess that I see no force whatever in this argument.
      Wherein does a future fact differ from a present or a past fact,
      except in their merely momentary relation to the human beings at
      present in existence? The answer made by Priestley, in his
      _Examination of Reid_, seems to me sufficient, viz., that though we
      have had no experience of what _is_ future, we have had abundant
      experience of what _was_ future. The “leap in the dark” (as
      Professor Bain calls it) from the past to the future, is exactly as
      much in the dark and no more, as the leap from a past which we have
      personally observed, to a past which we have not. I agree with Mr.
      Bain in the opinion that the resemblance of what we have not
      experienced to what we have, is, by a law of our nature, presumed
      through the mere energy of the idea, before experience has proved
      it. This _psychological_ truth, however, is not, as Dr. Ward when
      criticising Mr. Bain appears to think, inconsistent with the
      _logical_ truth that experience does prove it. The proof comes after
      the presumption, and consists in its invariable _verification_ by
      experience when the experience arrives. The fact which while it was
      future could not be observed, having as yet no existence, is always,
      when it becomes present and _can_ be observed, found conformable to
      the past.

      Dr. M’Cosh maintains (_Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy_,
      p. 257) that the uniformity of the course of nature is a different
      thing from the law of causation; and while he allows that the former
      is only proved by a long continuance of experience, and that it is
      not inconceivable nor necessarily incredible that there may be
      worlds in which it does not prevail, he considers the law of
      causation to be known intuitively. There is, however, no other
      uniformity in the events of nature than that which arises from the
      law of causation: so long therefore as there remained any doubt that
      the course of nature was uniform throughout, at least when not
      modified by the intervention of a new (supernatural) cause, a doubt
      was necessarily implied, not indeed of the reality of causation, but
      of its universality. If the uniformity of the course of nature has
      any exceptions—if any events succeed one another without fixed
      laws—to that extent the law of causation fails; there are events
      which do not depend on causes.

  189 Book i., chap. vii.

  190 In some cases, a Kind is sufficiently identified by some one
      remarkable property: but most commonly several are required; each
      property considered singly, being a joint property of that and of
      other Kinds. The color and brightness of the diamond are common to
      it with the paste from which false diamonds are made; its octohedral
      form is common to it with alum, and magnetic iron ore; but the color
      and brightness and the form together, identify its Kind: that is,
      are a mark to us that it is combustible; that when burned it
      produces carbonic acid; that it can not be cut with any known
      substance; together with many other ascertained properties, and the
      fact that there exist an indefinite number still unascertained.

  191 This doctrine of course assumes that the allotropic forms of what is
      chemically the same substance are so many different Kinds; and such,
      in the sense in which the word Kind is used in this treatise, they
      really are.

  192 Professor Bain (Logic, ii., 13) mentions two empirical laws, which
      he considers to be, with the exception of the law connecting Gravity
      with Resistance to motion, “the two most widely operating laws as
      yet discovered whereby two distinct properties are conjoined
      throughout substances generally.” The first is, “a law connecting
      Atomic Weight and Specific Heat by an inverse proportion. For equal
      weights of the simple bodies, the atomic weight multiplied by a
      number expressing the specific heat, gives a nearly uniform product.
      The products, for all the elements, are near the constant number 6.”
      The other is a law which obtains “between the specific gravity of
      substances in the gaseous state, and the atomic weights. The
      relationship of the two numbers is in some instances equality; in
      other instances the one is a multiple of the other.”

      Neither of these generalizations has the smallest appearance of
      being an ultimate law. They point unmistakably to higher laws. Since
      the heat necessary to raise to a given temperature the same weight
      of different substances (called their specific heat) is inversely as
      their atomic weight, that is, directly as the number of atoms in a
      given weight of the substance, it follows that a single atom of
      every substance requires the same amount of heat to raise it to a
      given temperature; a most interesting and important law, but a law
      of causation. The other law mentioned by Mr. Bain points to the
      conclusion, that in the gaseous state all substances contain, in the
      same space, the same number of atoms; which, as the gaseous state
      suspends all cohesive force, might naturally be expected, though it
      could not have been positively assumed. This law may also be a
      result of the mode of action of causes, namely, of molecular
      motions. The cases in which one of the numbers is not identical with
      the other, but a multiple of it, may be explained on the nowise
      unlikely supposition, that in our present estimate of the atomic
      weights of some substances, we mistake two, or three, atoms for one,
      or one for several.

  193 Dr. M’Cosh (p. 324 of his book) considers the laws of the chemical
      composition of bodies as not coming under the principle of
      Causation; and thinks it an omission in this work not to have
      provided special canons for their investigation and proof. But every
      case of chemical composition is, as I have explained, a case of
      causation. When it is said that water is composed of hydrogen and
      oxygen, the affirmation is that hydrogen and oxygen, by the action
      on one another which they exert under certain conditions, _generate_
      the properties of water. The Canons of Induction, therefore, as laid
      down in this treatise, are applicable to the case. Such special
      adaptations as the Inductive methods may require in their
      application to chemistry, or any other science, are a proper subject
      for any one who treats of the logic of the special sciences, as
      Professor Bain has done in the latter part of his work; but they do
      not appertain to General Logic.

      Dr. M’Cosh also complains (p. 325) that I have given no canons for
      those sciences in which “the end sought is not the discovery of
      Causes or of Composition, but of Classes; that is, Natural Classes.”
      Such canons could be no other than the principles and rules of
      Natural Classification, which I certainly thought that I had
      expounded at considerable length. But this is far from the only
      instance in which Dr. M’Cosh does not appear to be aware of the
      contents of the books he is criticising.

  194 Mr. De Morgan, in his _Formal Logic_, makes the just remark, that
      from two such premises as Most A are B, and Most A are C, we may
      infer with certainty that some B are C. But this is the utmost limit
      of the conclusions which can be drawn from two approximate
      generalizations, when the precise degree of their approximation to
      universality is unknown or undefined.

_  195 Rationale of Judicial Evidence_, vol. iii., p. 224.

  196 The evaluation of the chances in this statement has been objected to
      by a mathematical friend. The correct mode, in his opinion, of
      setting out the possibilities is as follows. If the thing (let us
      call it T) which is both an A and a C, is a B, something is true
      which is only true twice in every thrice, and something else which
      is only true thrice in every four times. The first fact being true
      eight times in twelve, and the second being true six times in every
      eight, and consequently six times in those eight; both facts will be
      true only six times in twelve. On the other hand, if T, although it
      is both an A and a C, is not a B, something is true which is only
      true once in every thrice, and something else which is only true
      once in every four times. The former being true four times out of
      twelve, and the latter once in every four, and therefore once in
      those four; both are only true in one case out of twelve. So that T
      is a B six times in twelve, and T is not a B, only once: making the
      comparative probabilities, not eleven to one, as I had previously
      made them, but six to one.

      In the last edition I accepted this reasoning as conclusive. More
      attentive consideration, however, has convinced me that it contains
      a fallacy.

      The objector argues, that the fact of A’s being a B is true eight
      times in twelve, and the fact of C’s being a B six times in eight,
      and consequently six times in those eight; both facts, therefore,
      are true only six times in every twelve. That is, he concludes that
      because among As taken indiscriminately only eight out of twelve are
      Bs and the remaining four are not, it must equally hold that four
      out of twelve are not Bs when the twelve are taken from the select
      portion of As which are also Cs. And by this assumption he arrives
      at the strange result, that there are fewer Bs among things which
      are both As and Cs than there are among either As or Cs taken
      indiscriminately; so that a thing which has both chances of being a
      B, is less likely to be so than if it had only the one chance or
      only the other.

      The objector (as has been acutely remarked by another correspondent)
      applies to the problem under consideration, a mode of calculation
      only suited to the reverse problem. Had the question been—If two of
      every three Bs are As and three out of every four Bs are Cs, how
      many Bs will be both As and Cs, his reasoning would have been
      correct. For the Bs that are both As and Cs must be fewer than
      either the Bs that are As or the Bs that are Cs, and to find their
      number we must abate either of these numbers in the ratio due to the
      other. But when the problem is to find, not how many Bs are both As
      and Cs, but how many things that are both As and Cs are Bs, it is
      evident that among these the proportion of Bs must be not less, but
      greater, than among things which are only A, or among things which
      are only B.

      The true theory of the chances is best found by going back to the
      scientific grounds on which the proportions rest. The degree of
      frequency of a coincidence depends on, and is a measure of, the
      frequency, combined with the efficacy, of the causes in operation
      that are favorable to it. If out of every twelve As taken
      indiscriminately eight are Bs and four are not, it is implied that
      there are causes operating on A which tend to make it a B, and that
      these causes are sufficiently constant and sufficiently powerful to
      succeed in eight out of twelve cases, but fail in the remaining
      four. So if of twelve Cs, nine are Bs and three are not, there must
      be causes of the same tendency operating on C, which succeed in nine
      cases and fail in three. Now suppose twelve cases which are both As
      and Cs. The whole twelve are now under the operation of both sets of
      causes. One set is sufficient to prevail in eight of the twelve
      cases, the other in nine. The analysis of the cases shows that six
      of the twelve will be Bs through the operation of both sets of
      causes; two more in virtue of the causes operating on A; and three
      more through those operating on C, and that there will be only one
      case in which all the causes will be inoperative. The total number,
      therefore, which are Bs will be eleven in twelve, and the evaluation
      in the text is correct.

  197 Supra, book i., chap. v.

  198 Supra, book i., chap. v., § 1, and book ii., chap, v., § 5.

  199 The axiom, “Equals subtracted from equals leave equal differences,”
      may be demonstrated from the two axioms in the text. If A = _a_ and
      B = _b_, A-B = _a-b_. For if not, let A-B = _a-b+c_. Then since B =
      _b_, adding equals to equals, A = _a+c_. But A = _a_. Therefore _a =
      a+c_, which is impossible.

      This proposition having been demonstrated, we may, by means of it,
      demonstrate the following: “If equals be added to unequals, the sums
      are unequal.” If A = _a_ and B not = _b_, A+B is not = _a+b_. For
      suppose it to be so. Then, since A = _a_ and A+B = _a+b_,
      subtracting equals from equals, B = _b_; which is contrary to the
      hypothesis.

      So again, it may be proved that two things, one of which is equal
      and the other unequal to a third thing, are unequal to one another.
      If A = _a_ and A not = B, neither is _a_ = B. For suppose it to be
      equal. Then since A = _a_ and _a_ = B, and since things equal to the
      same thing are equal to one another A = B; which is contrary to the
      hypothesis.

  200 Geometers have usually preferred to define parallel lines by the
      property of being in the same plane and never meeting. This,
      however, has rendered it necessary for them to assume, as an
      additional axiom, some other property of parallel lines; and the
      unsatisfactory manner in which properties for that purpose have been
      selected by Euclid and others has always been deemed the opprobrium
      of elementary geometry. Even as a verbal definition, equidistance is
      a fitter property to characterize parallels by, since it is the
      attribute really involved in the signification of the name. If to be
      in the same plane and never to meet were all that is meant by being
      parallel, we should feel no incongruity in speaking of a curve as
      parallel to its asymptote. The meaning of parallel lines is, lines
      which pursue exactly the same direction, and which, therefore,
      neither draw nearer nor go farther from one another; a conception
      suggested at once by the contemplation of nature. That the lines
      will never meet is of course included in the more comprehensive
      proposition that they are everywhere equally distant. And that any
      straight lines which are in the same plane and not equidistant will
      certainly meet, may be demonstrated in the most rigorous manner from
      the fundamental property of straight lines assumed in the text,
      viz., that if they set out from the same point, they diverge more
      and more without limit.

_  201 Philosophie Positive_, iii., 414-416.

  202 See the two remarkable notes (A) and (F), appended to his _Inquiry
      into the Relation of Cause and Effect_.

  203 Supra, p. 413.

  204 A writer to whom I have several times referred, gives as the
      definition of an impossibility, that which there exists in the world
      no cause adequate to produce. This definition does not take in such
      impossibilities as these—that two and two should make five; that two
      straight lines should inclose a space; or that any thing should
      begin to exist without a cause. I can think of no definition of
      impossibility comprehensive enough to include all its varieties,
      except the one which I have given: viz., An impossibility is that,
      the truth of which would conflict with a complete induction, that
      is, with the most conclusive evidence which we possess of universal
      truth.

      As to the reputed impossibilities which rest on no other grounds
      than our ignorance of any cause capable of producing the supposed
      effects; very few of them are certainly impossible, or permanently
      incredible. The facts of traveling seventy miles an hour, painless
      surgical operations, and conversing by instantaneous signals between
      London and New York, held a high place, not many years ago, among
      such impossibilities.

  205 Not, however, as might at first sight appear, 999 times as much. A
      complete analysis of the cases shows that (always assuming the
      veracity of the witness to be 9/10) in 10,000 drawings, the drawing
      of No. 79 will occur nine times, and be announced incorrectly once;
      the credibility, therefore, of the announcement of No. 79 is 9/10;
      while the drawing of a white ball will occur nine times, and be
      announced incorrectly 999 times. The credibility, therefore, of the
      announcement of white is 9/1008, and the ratio of the two 1008:10;
      the one announcement being thus only about a hundred times more
      credible than the other, instead of 999 times.

  206 Supra, book iii., chap. ii., § 3, 4, 5.

  207 Mr. Bailey has given the best statement of this theory. “The general
      name,” he says, “raises up the image sometimes of one individual of
      the class formerly seen, sometimes of another, not unfrequently of
      many individuals in succession; and it sometimes suggests an image
      made up of elements from several different objects, by a latent
      process of which I am not conscious.” (Letters on the Philosophy of
      the Human Mind, 1st series, letter 22.) But Mr. Bailey must allow
      that we carry on inductions and ratiocinations respecting the class,
      by means of this idea or conception of some one individual in it.
      This is all I require. The name of a class calls up some idea,
      through which we can, to all intents and purposes, think of the
      class as such, and not solely of an individual member of it.

  208 I have entered rather fully into this question in chap. xvii. of _An
      Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_, headed “The
      Doctrine of Concepts or General Notions,” which contains my last
      views on the subject.

  209 Other examples of inappropriate conceptions are given by Dr. Whewell
      (_Phil. Ind. Sc._ ii., 185) as follows: “Aristotle and his followers
      endeavored in vain to account for the mechanical relation of forces
      in the lever, by applying the _inappropriate_ geometrical
      conceptions of the properties of the circle: they failed in
      explaining the _form_ of the luminous spot made by the sun shining
      through a hole, because they applied the _inappropriate_ conception
      of a circular _quality_ in the sun’s light: they speculated to no
      purpose about the elementary composition of bodies, because they
      assumed the _inappropriate_ conception of _likeness_ between the
      elements and the compound, instead of the genuine notion of elements
      merely _determining_ the qualities of the compound.” But in these
      cases there is more than an inappropriate conception; there is a
      false conception; one which has no prototype in nature, nothing
      corresponding to it in facts. This is evident in the last two
      examples, and is equally true in the first; the “properties of the
      circle” which were referred to, being purely fantastical. There is,
      therefore, an error beyond the wrong choice of a principle of
      generalization; there is a false assumption of matters of fact. The
      attempt is made to resolve certain laws of nature into a more
      general law, that law not being one which, though real, is
      inappropriate, but one wholly imaginary.

  210 Professor Bain.

  211 This sentence having been erroneously understood as if I had meant
      to assert that belief is nothing but an irresistible association, I
      think it necessary to observe that I express no theory respecting
      the ultimate analysis either of reasoning or of belief, two of the
      most obscure points in analytical psychology. I am speaking not of
      the powers themselves, but of the previous conditions necessary to
      enable those powers to exert themselves: of which conditions I am
      contending that language is not one, senses and association being
      sufficient without it. The irresistible association theory of
      belief, and the difficulties connected with the subject, have been
      discussed at length in the notes to the new edition of Mr. James
      Mill’s _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind_.

  212 Mr. Bailey agrees with me in thinking that whenever “from something
      actually present to my senses, conjoined with past experience, I
      feel satisfied that something has happened, or will happen, or is
      happening, beyond the sphere of my personal observation,” I may with
      strict propriety be said to reason: and of course to reason
      inductively, for demonstrative reasoning is excluded by the
      circumstances of the case. (_The Theory of Reasoning_, 2d ed., p.
      27.)

_  213 Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 35-37.

_  214 Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 39, 40.

  215 P. 217, 4to edition.

  216 “E, ex, extra, extraneus, étranger, stranger.”

      Another etymological example sometimes cited is the derivation of
      the English _uncle_ from the Latin _avus_. It is scarcely possible
      for two words to bear fewer outward marks of relationship, yet there
      is but one step between them, _avus_, _avunculus_, _uncle_. So
      _pilgrim_, from _ager_: _per agrum_, _peragrinus_, _peregrinus_,
      _pellegrino_, _pilgrim_. Professor Bain gives some apt examples of
      these transitions of meaning. “The word ‘damp’ primarily signified
      moist, humid, wet. But the property is often accompanied with the
      feeling of cold or chilliness, and hence the idea of cold is
      strongly suggested by the word. This is not all. Proceeding upon the
      superadded meaning, we speak of damping a man’s ardor, a metaphor
      where the cooling is the only circumstance concerned; we go on still
      further to designate the iron slide that shuts off the draft of a
      stove, ‘the damper,’ the primary meaning being now entirely dropped.
      ‘Dry,’ in like manner, through signifying the absence of moisture,
      water, or liquidity, is applied to sulphuric acid containing water,
      although not thereby ceasing to be a moist, wet, or liquid
      substance.” So in the phrases, dry sherry, or Champagne.

      “ ‘Street,’ originally a paved way, with or without houses, has been
      extended to roads lined with houses, whether paved or unpaved.
      ‘Impertinent’ signified at first irrelevant, alien to the purpose in
      hand: through which it has come to mean, meddling, intrusive,
      unmannerly, insolent.” (_Logic_, ii., 173, 174.)

  217 Pp. 226, 227.

_  218 Essays_, p. 214.

_  219 Essays_, p. 215.

  220 Though no such evil consequences as take place in these instances
      are likely to arise from the modern freak of writing _sanatory_
      instead of sanitary, it deserves notice as a charming specimen of
      pedantry ingrafted upon ignorance. Those who thus undertake to
      correct the spelling of the classical English writers, are not aware
      that the meaning of _sanatory_, if there were such a word in the
      language, would have reference not to the preservation of health,
      but to the cure of disease.

_  221 Historical Introduction_, vol. i., pp. 66-68.

_  222 History of Scientific Ideas_, ii., 110, 111.

_  223 History of Scientific Ideas_, ii., 111-113.

_  224 Nov. Org. Renov._, pp. 286, 287.

_  225 History of Scientific Ideas_, ii., 120-122.

_  226 Nov. Org. Renov._, p. 274.

_  227 Hist. Sc. Id._, i. 133.

  228 Dr. Whewell, in his reply (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 270) says
      that he “stopped short of, or rather passed by, the doctrine of a
      series of organized beings,” because he “thought it bad and narrow
      philosophy.” If he did, it was evidently without understanding this
      form of the doctrine; for he proceeds to quote a passage from his
      “History,” in which the doctrine he condemns is designated as that
      of “a mere linear progression in nature, which would place each
      genus in contact only with the preceding and succeeding ones.” Now
      the series treated of in the text agrees with this linear
      progression in nothing whatever but in being a progression.

  229 Supra, p. 137.

_  230 Vulgar Errors_, book v., chap. 21.

_  231 Pharmacologia_, Historical Introduction, p. 16.

  232 The author of one of the Bridgewater Treatises has fallen, as it
      seems to me, into a similar fallacy when, after arguing in rather a
      curious way to prove that matter may exist without any of the known
      properties of matter, and may therefore be changeable, he concludes
      that it can not be eternal, because “eternal (passive) existence
      necessarily involves incapability of change.” I believe it would be
      difficult to point out any other connection between the facts of
      eternity and unchangeableness, than a strong association between the
      two ideas. Most of the _a priori_ arguments, both religious and
      anti-religious, on the origin of things, are fallacies drawn from
      the same source.

  233 Supra, book ii., chap. v., § 6, and chap. vii., § 1, 2, 3, 4. See
      also _Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_, chap. vi.
      and elsewhere.

  234 It seems that this doctrine was, before the time I have mentioned,
      disputed by some thinkers. Dr. Ward mentions Scotus, Vasquez, Biel,
      Francis Lugo, and Valentia.

  235 I quote this passage from Playfair’s celebrated _Dissertation on the
      Progress of Mathematical and Physical Science_.

  236 This statement I must now correct, as too unqualified. The maxim in
      question was maintained with full conviction by no less an authority
      than Sir William Hamilton. See my _Examination_, chap. xxiv.

_  237 Nouveaux Essais sur l’Entendement Humain—Avant-propos._ (Œuvres,
      Paris ed., 1842, vol. i., p. 19.)

  238 This doctrine also was accepted as true, and conclusions were
      grounded on it, by Sir William Hamilton. See _Examination_, chap.
      xxiv.

  239 Not that of Leibnitz, but the principle commonly appealed to under
      that name by mathematicians.

_  240 Dissertation_, p. 27.

_  241 Hist. Ind. Sc._, Book i., chap. i.

_  242 Novum Organum_, Aph. 75.

  243 Supra, book iii., chap. vii., § 4.

  244 It is hardly needful to remark that nothing is here intended to be
      said against the possibility at some future period of making gold—by
      first discovering it to be a compound, and putting together its
      different elements or ingredients. But this is a totally different
      idea from that of the seekers of the grand arcanum.

_  245 Pharmacologia_, pp. 43-45.

  246 Vol. i., chap. 8.

_  247 Nov. Org._, Aph. 46.

  248 Playfair’s _Dissertation_, sect. 4.

_  249 Nov. Org. Renov._, p. 61.

_  250 Pharmacologia_, p. 21.

_  251 Pharmacologia_, pp. 23, 24.

  252 Ibid., p. 28.

  253 Ibid., p. 62.

  254 Ibid., pp. 61, 62.

_  255 Supra_, p. 450.

_  256 Elements of the Philosophy of the Mind_, vol. ii., chap. 4, sect.
      5.

  257 “Thus Fourcroy,” says Dr. Paris, “explained the operation of mercury
      by its specific gravity, and the advocates of this doctrine favored
      the general introduction of the preparations of iron, especially in
      scirrhus of the spleen or liver, upon the same hypothetical
      principle; for, say they, whatever is most forcible in removing the
      obstruction must be the most proper instrument of cure: such is
      steel, which, besides the attenuating power with which it is
      furnished, has still a greater force in this case from the gravity
      of its particles, which, being seven times specifically heavier than
      any vegetable, acts in proportion with a stronger impulse, and
      therefore is a more powerful deobstruent. This may be taken as a
      specimen of the style in which these mechanical physicians reasoned
      and practiced.”—_Pharmacologia_, pp. 38, 39.

_  258 Pharmacologia_, pp. 39, 40.

  259 I quote from Dr. Whewell’s _Hist. Ind. Sc._, 3d ed., i., 129.

_  260 Hist. Ind. Sc._, i., 52.

_  261 Nov. Org._, Aph. 60.

  262 “An advocate,” says Mr. De Morgan (_Formal Logic_, p. 270), “is
      sometimes guilty of the argument _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
      simpliciter_: it is his business to do for his client all that his
      client might _honestly_ do for himself. Is not the word in italics
      frequently omitted? _Might_ any man honestly try to do for himself
      all that counsel frequently try to do for him? We are often reminded
      of the two men who stole the leg of mutton; one could swear he had
      not got it, the other that he had not taken it. The counsel is doing
      his duty by his client, the client has left the matter to his
      counsel. Between the unexecuted intention of the client, and the
      unintended execution of the counsel, there may be a wrong done, and,
      if we are to believe the usual maxims, no wrong-doer.”

      The same writer justly remarks (p. 251) that there is a converse
      fallacy, _à dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid_, called by
      the scholastic logicians _fallacia accidentis_; and another which
      may be called _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum secundum alterum
      quid_ (p. 265). For apt instances of both, I must refer the reader
      to Mr. De Morgan’s able chapter on Fallacies.

  263 An example of this fallacy is the popular error that _strong_ drink
      must be a cause of _strength_. There is here fallacy within fallacy;
      for granting that the words “strong” and “strength” were not (as
      they are) applied in a totally different sense to fermented liquors
      and to the human body, there would still be involved the error of
      supposing that an effect must be like its cause; that the conditions
      of a phenomenon are likely to resemble the phenomenon itself; which
      we have already treated of as an _a priori_ fallacy of the first
      rank. As well might it be supposed that a strong poison will make
      the person who takes it strong.

  264 In his later editions, Archbishop Whately confines the name of
      Petitio Principii “to those cases in which one of the premises
      either is manifestly the same in sense with the conclusion, or is
      actually proved from it, or is such as the persons you are
      addressing are not likely to know, or to admit, except as an
      inference from the conclusion; as, _e.g._, if any one should infer
      the authenticity of a certain history, from its recording such and
      such facts, the reality of which rests on the evidence of that
      history.”

  265 No longer even a probable hypothesis, since the establishment of the
      atomic theory; it being now certain that the integral particles of
      different substances gravitate unequally. It is true that these
      particles, though real _minima_ for the purposes of chemical
      combination, may not be the ultimate particles of the substance; and
      this doubt alone renders the hypothesis admissible, even as an
      hypothesis.

_  266 Hist. Ind. Sc._, i., 34.

  267 “And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin.”

  268 Some arguments and explanations, supplementary to those in the text,
      will be found in _An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s
      Philosophy_, chap. xxvi.

_  269 Supra_, p. 424.

  270 When this chapter was written, Professor Bain had not yet published
      even the first part (“The Senses and the Intellect”) of his profound
      Treatise on the Mind. In this the laws of association have been more
      comprehensively stated and more largely exemplified than by any
      previous writer; and the work, having been completed by the
      publication of “The Emotions and the Will,” may now be referred to
      as incomparably the most complete analytical exposition of the
      mental phenomena, on the basis of a legitimate Induction, which has
      yet been produced. More recently still, Mr. Bain has joined with me
      in appending to a new edition of the “Analysis,” notes intended to
      bring up the analytic science of Mind to its latest improvements.

      Many striking applications of the laws of association to the
      explanation of complex mental phenomena are also to be found in Mr.
      Herbert Spencer’s “Principles of Psychology.”

  271 In the case of the moral sentiments the place of direct experiment
      is to a considerable extent supplied by historical experience, and
      we are able to trace with a tolerable approach to certainty the
      particular associations by which those sentiments are engendered.
      This has been attempted, so far as respects the sentiment of
      justice, in a little work by the present author, entitled
      _Utilitarianism_.

  272 The most favorable cases for making such approximate generalizations
      are what may be termed collective instances; where we are
      fortunately enabled to see the whole class respecting which we are
      inquiring in action at once, and, from the qualities displayed by
      the collective body, are able to judge what must be the qualities of
      the majority of the individuals composing it. Thus the character of
      a nation is shown in its acts as a nation; not so much in the acts
      of its government, for those are much influenced by other causes;
      but in the current popular maxims, and other marks of the general
      direction of public opinion; in the character of the persons or
      writings that are held in permanent esteem or admiration; in laws
      and institutions, so far as they are the work of the nation itself,
      or are acknowledged and supported by it; and so forth. But even here
      there is a large margin of doubt and uncertainty. These things are
      liable to be influenced by many circumstances; they are partially
      determined by the distinctive qualities of that nation or body of
      persons, but partly also by external causes which would influence
      any other body of persons in the same manner. In order, therefore,
      to make the experiment really complete, we ought to be able to try
      it without variation upon other nations: to try how Englishmen would
      act or feel if placed in the same circumstances in which we have
      supposed Frenchmen to be placed; to apply, in short, the Method of
      Differences as well as that of Agreement. Now these experiments we
      can not try, nor even approximate to.

  273 “To which,” says Dr. Whewell, “we may add, that it is certain, from
      the history of the subject, that in that case the hypothesis would
      never have been framed at all.”

      Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, pp. 277-282) defends Bacon’s
      rule against the preceding strictures. But his defense consists only
      in asserting and exemplifying a proposition which I had myself
      stated, viz., that though the largest generalizations may be the
      earliest made, they are not at first seen in their entire
      generality, but acquire it by degrees, as they are found to explain
      one class after another of phenomena. The laws of motion, for
      example, were not known to extend to the celestial regions, until
      the motions of the celestial bodies had been deduced from them.
      This, however, does not in any way affect the fact, that the middle
      principles of astronomy, the central force, for example, and the law
      of the inverse square, could not have been discovered, if the laws
      of motion, which are so much more universal, had not been known
      first. On Bacon’s system of step-by-step generalization, it would be
      impossible in any science to ascend higher than the empirical laws;
      a remark which Dr. Whewell’s own Inductive Tables, referred to by
      him in support of his argument, amply bear out.

_  274 Supra_, page 317 to the end of the chapter.

_  275 Biographia Literaria_, i., 214.

_  276 Supra_, p. 321.

_  277 Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_, pp.
      137-140.

  278 The quotations in this paragraph are from a paper written by the
      author, and published in a periodical in 1834.

_  279 Cours de Philosophie Positive_, iv., 325-29.

  280 Since reprinted entire in _Dissertations and Discussions_, as the
      concluding paper of the first volume.

  281 Written and first published in 1840.

  282 This great generalization is often unfavorably criticised (as by Dr.
      Whewell, for instance) under a misapprehension of its real import.
      The doctrine, that the theological explanation of phenomena belongs
      only to the infancy of our knowledge of them, ought not to be
      construed as if it was equivalent to the assertion, that mankind, as
      their knowledge advances, will necessarily cease to believe in any
      kind of theology. This was M. Comte’s opinion; but it is by no means
      implied in his fundamental theorem. All that is implied is, that in
      an advanced state of human knowledge, no other Ruler of the World
      will be acknowledged than one who rules by universal laws, and does
      not at all, or does not unless in very peculiar cases, produce
      events by special interpositions. Originally all natural events were
      ascribed to such interpositions. At present every educated person
      rejects this explanation in regard to all classes of phenomena of
      which the laws have been fully ascertained; though some have not yet
      reached the point of referring all phenomena to the idea of Law, but
      believe that rain and sunshine, famine and pestilence, victory and
      defeat, death and life, are issues which the Creator does not leave
      to the operation of his general laws, but reserves to be decided by
      express acts of volition. M. Comte’s theory is the negation of this
      doctrine.

      Dr. Whewell equally misunderstands M. Comte’s doctrine respecting
      the second or metaphysical stage of speculation. M. Comte did not
      mean that “discussions concerning ideas” are limited to an early
      stage of inquiry, and cease when science enters into the positive
      stage. (_Philosophy of Discovery_, pp. 226 et seq.) In all M.
      Comte’s speculations as much stress is laid on the process of
      clearing up our conceptions as on the ascertainment of facts. When
      M. Comte speaks of the metaphysical stage of speculation, he means
      the stage in which men speak of “Nature” and other abstractions as
      if they were active forces, producing effects; when Nature is said
      to do this, or forbid that; when Nature’s horror of a vacuum,
      Nature’s non-admission of a break, Nature’s _vis medicatrix_, were
      offered as explanations of phenomena; when the qualities of things
      were mistaken for real entities dwelling in the things; when the
      phenomena of living bodies were thought to be accounted for by being
      referred to a “vital force;” when, in short, the abstract names of
      phenomena were mistaken for the causes of their existence. In this
      sense of the word it can not be reasonably denied that the
      metaphysical explanation of phenomena, equally with the theological,
      gives way before the advance of real science.

      That the final, or positive stage, as conceived by M. Comte, has
      been equally misunderstood, and that, notwithstanding some
      expressions open to just criticism, M. Comte never dreamed of
      denying the legitimacy of inquiry into all causes which are
      accessible to human investigation, I have pointed out in a former
      place.

  283 Buckle’s _History of Civilization_, i., 30.

  284 I have been assured by an intimate friend of Mr. Buckle that he
      would not have withheld his assent from these remarks, and that he
      never intended to affirm or imply that mankind are not progressive
      in their moral as well as in their intellectual qualities. “In
      dealing with his problem, he availed himself of the artifice
      resorted to by the Political Economist, who leaves out of
      consideration the generous and benevolent sentiments, and founds his
      science on the proposition that mankind are actuated by acquisitive
      propensities alone,” not because such is the fact, but because it is
      necessary to begin by treating the principal influence as if it was
      the sole one, and make the due corrections afterward. “He desired to
      make abstraction of the intellect as the determining and dynamical
      element of the progression, eliminating the more dependent set of
      conditions, and treating the more active one as if it were an
      entirely independent variable.”

      The same friend of Mr. Buckle states that when he used expressions
      which seemed to exaggerate the influence of general at the expense
      of special causes, and especially at the expense of the influence of
      individual minds, Mr. Buckle really intended no more than to affirm
      emphatically that the greatest men can not effect great changes in
      human affairs unless the general mind has been in some considerable
      degree prepared for them by the general circumstances of the age; a
      truth which, of course, no one thinks of denying. And there
      certainly are passages in Mr. Buckle’s writings which speak of the
      influence exercised by great individual intellects in as strong
      terms as could be desired.

  285 Essay on Dryden, in Miscellaneous Writings, i., 186.

  286 In the _Cornhill Magazine_ for June and July, 1861.

  287 It is almost superfluous to observe, that there is another meaning
      of the word Art, in which it may be said to denote the poetical
      department or aspect of things in general, in contradistinction to
      the scientific. In the text, the word is used in its older, and I
      hope, not yet obsolete sense.

  288 Professor Bain and others call the selection from the truths of
      science made for the purposes of an art, a Practical Science, and
      confine the name Art to the actual rules.

  289 The word Teleology is also, but inconveniently and improperly,
      employed by some writers as a name for the attempt to explain the
      phenomena of the universe from final causes.

  290 For an express discussion and vindication of this principle, see the
      little volume entitled “Utilitarianism.”



AUGUSTE COMTE AND POSITIVISM

BY

JOHN STUART MILL


1865.



       *       *       *       *       *



PART I.

THE COURS DE PHILOSOPHIE POSITIVE.


For some time much has been said, in England and on the Continent,
concerning "Positivism" and "the Positive Philosophy." Those phrases,
which during the life of the eminent thinker who introduced them had
made their way into no writings or discussions but those of his very few
direct disciples, have emerged from the depths and manifested themselves
on the surface of the philosophy of the age. It is not very widely known
what they represent, but it is understood that they represent something.
They are symbols of a recognised mode of thought, and one of sufficient
importance to induce almost all who now discuss the great problems of
philosophy, or survey from any elevated point of view the opinions of
the age, to take what is termed the Positivist view of things into
serious consideration, and define their own position, more or less
friendly or hostile, in regard to it. Indeed, though the mode of thought
expressed by the terms Positive and Positivism is widely spread, the
words themselves are, as usual, better known through the enemies of that
mode of thinking than through its friends; and more than one thinker who
never called himself or his opinions by those appellations, and
carefully guarded himself against being confounded with those who did,
finds himself, sometimes to his displeasure, though generally by a
tolerably correct instinct, classed with Positivists, and assailed as a
Positivist. This change in the bearings of philosophic opinion commenced
in England earlier than in France, where a philosophy of a contrary kind
had been more widely cultivated, and had taken a firmer hold on the
speculative minds of a generation formed by Royer-Collard, Cousin,
Jouffroy, and their compeers. The great treatise of M. Comte was
scarcely mentioned in French literature or criticism, when it was
already working powerfully on the minds of many British students and
thinkers. But, agreeably to the usual course of things in France, the
new tendency, when it set in, set in more strongly. Those who call
themselves Positivists are indeed not numerous; but all French writers
who adhere to the common philosophy, now feel it necessary to begin by
fortifying their position against "the Positivist school." And the mode
of thinking thus designated is already manifesting its importance by one
of the most unequivocal signs, the appearance of thinkers who attempt a
compromise or _juste milieu_ between it and its opposite. The acute
critic and metaphysician M. Taine, and the distinguished chemist M.
Berthelot, are the authors of the two most conspicuous of these
attempts.

The time, therefore, seems to have come, when every philosophic thinker
not only ought to form, but may usefully express, a judgment respecting
this intellectual movement; endeavouring to understand what it is,
whether it is essentially a wholesome movement, and if so, what is to be
accepted and what rejected of the direction given to it by its most
important movers. There cannot be a more appropriate mode of discussing
these points than in the form of a critical examination of the
philosophy of Auguste Comte; for which the appearance of a new edition
of his fundamental treatise, with a preface by the most eminent, in
every point of view, of his professed disciples, M. Littré, affords a
good opportunity. The name of M. Comte is more identified than any other
with this mode of thought. He is the first who has attempted its
complete systematization, and the scientific extension of it to all
objects of human knowledge. And in doing this he has displayed a
quantity and quality of mental power, and achieved an amount of success,
which have not only won but retained the high admiration of thinkers as
radically and strenuously opposed as it is possible to be, to nearly the
whole of his later tendencies, and to many of his earlier opinions. It
would have been a mistake had such thinkers busied themselves in the
first instance with drawing attention to what they regarded as errors in
his great work. Until it had taken the place in the world of thought
which belonged to it, the important matter was not to criticise it, but
to help in making it known. To have put those who neither knew nor were
capable of appreciating the greatness of the book, in possession of its
vulnerable points, would have indefinitely retarded its progress to a
just estimation, and was not needful for guarding against any serious
inconvenience. While a writer has few readers, and no influence except
on independent thinkers, the only thing worth considering in him is what
he can teach us: if there be anything in which he is less wise than we
are already, it may be left unnoticed until the time comes when his
errors can do harm. But the high place which M. Comte has now assumed
among European thinkers, and the increasing influence of his principal
work, while they make it a more hopeful task than before to impress and
enforce the strong points of his philosophy, have rendered it, for the
first time, not inopportune to discuss his mistakes. Whatever errors he
may have fallen into are now in a position to be injurious, while the
free exposure of them can no longer be so.

We propose, then, to pass in review the main principles of M. Comte's
philosophy; commencing with the great treatise by which, in this
country, he is chiefly known, and postponing consideration of the
writings of the last ten years of his life, except for the occasional
illustration of detached points.

When we extend our examination to these later productions, we shall
have, in the main, to reverse our judgment. Instead of recognizing, as
in the Cours de Philosophic Positive, an essentially sound view of
philosophy, with a few capital errors, it is in their general character
that we deem the subsequent speculations false and misleading, while in
the midst of this wrong general tendency, we find a crowd of valuable
thoughts, and suggestions of thought, in detail. For the present we put
out of the question this signal anomaly in M. Comte's intellectual
career. We shall consider only the principal gift which he has left to
the world, his clear, full, and comprehensive exposition, and in part
creation, of what he terms the Positive Philosophy: endeavouring to
sever what in our estimation is true, from the much less which is
erroneous, in that philosophy as he conceived it, and distinguishing, as
we proceed, the part which is specially his, from that which belongs to
the philosophy of the age, and is the common inheritance of thinkers.
This last discrimination has been partially made in a late pamphlet, by
Mr Herbert Spencer, in vindication of his own independence of thought:
but this does not diminish the utility of doing it, with a less limited
purpose, here; especially as Mr Spencer rejects nearly all which
properly belongs to M. Comte, and in his abridged mode of statement does
scanty justice to what he rejects. The separation is not difficult, even
on the direct evidence given by M. Comte himself, who, far from claiming
any originality not really belonging to him, was eager to connect his
own most original thoughts with every germ of anything similar which he
observed in previous thinkers.

The fundamental doctrine of a true philosophy, according to M. Comte,
and the character by which he defines Positive Philosophy, is the
following:--We have no knowledge of anything but Phaenomena; and our
knowledge of phaenomena is relative, not absolute. We know not the
essence, nor the real mode of production, of any fact, but only its
relations to other facts in the way of succession or of similitude.
These relations are constant; that is, always the same in the same
circumstances. The constant resemblances which link phaenomena together,
and the constant sequences which unite them as antecedent and
consequent, are termed their laws. The laws of phaenomena are all we
know respecting them. Their essential nature, and their ultimate causes,
either efficient or final, are unknown and inscrutable to us.

M. Comte claims no originality for this conception of human knowledge.
He avows that it has been virtually acted on from the earliest period by
all who have made any real contribution to science, and became
distinctly present to the minds of speculative men from the time of
Bacon, Descartes, and Galileo, whom he regards as collectively the
founders of the Positive Philosophy. As he says, the knowledge which
mankind, even in the earliest ages, chiefly pursued, being that which
they most needed, was _fore_knowledge: "savoir, pour prevoir." When they
sought for the cause, it was mainly in order to control the effect or if
it was uncontrollable, to foreknow and adapt their conduct to it. Now,
all foresight of phaenomena, and power over them, depend on knowledge of
their sequences, and not upon any notion we may have formed respecting
their origin or inmost nature. We foresee a fact or event by means of
facts which are signs of it, because experience has shown them to be its
antecedents. We bring about any fact, other than our own muscular
contractions, by means of some fact which experience has shown to be
followed by it. All foresight, therefore, and all intelligent action,
have only been possible in proportion as men have successfully attempted
to ascertain the successions of phaenomena. Neither foreknowledge, nor
the knowledge which is practical power, can be acquired by any other
means.

The conviction, however, that knowledge of the successions and
co-existences of phaenomena is the sole knowledge accessible to us,
could not be arrived at in a very early stage of the progress of
thought. Men have not even now left off hoping for other knowledge, nor
believing that they have attained it; and that, when attained, it is, in
some undefinable manner, greatly more precious than mere knowledge of
sequences and co-existences. The true doctrine was not seen in its full
clearness even by Bacon, though it is the result to which all his
speculations tend: still less by Descartes. It was, however, correctly
apprehended by Newton.[1]

But it was probably first conceived in its entire generality by Hume,
who carries it a step further than Comte, maintaining not merely that
the only causes of phaenomena which can be known to us are other
phaenomena, their invariable antecedents, but that there is no other
kind of causes: cause, as he interprets it, _means_ the invariable
antecedent. This is the only part of Hume's doctrine which was contested
by his great adversary, Kant; who, maintaining as strenuously as Comte
that we know nothing of Things in themselves, of Noumena, of real
Substances and real Causes, yet peremptorily asserted their existence.
But neither does Comte question this: on the contrary, all his language
implies it. Among the direct successors of Hume, the writer who has best
stated and defended Comte's fundamental doctrine is Dr Thomas Brown. The
doctrine and spirit of Brown's philosophy are entirely Positivist, and
no better introduction to Positivism than the early part of his Lectures
has yet been produced. Of living thinkers we do not speak; but the same
great truth formed the groundwork of all the speculative philosophy of
Bentham, and pre-eminently of James Mill: and Sir William Hamilton's
famous doctrine of the Relativity of human knowledge has guided many to
it, though we cannot credit Sir William Hamilton himself with having
understood the principle, or been willing to assent to it if he had.

The foundation of M. Comte's philosophy is thus in no way peculiar to
him, but the general property of the age, however far as yet from being
universally accepted even by thoughtful minds.

The philosophy called Positive is not a recent invention of M. Comte,
but a simple adherence to the traditions of all the great scientific
minds whose discoveries have made the human race what it is. M. Comte
has never presented it in any other light. But he has made the doctrine
his own by his manner of treating it. To know rightly what a thing is,
we require to know, with equal distinctness, what it is not. To enter
into the real character of any mode of thought, we must understand what
other modes of thought compete with it. M. Comte has taken care that we
should do so. The modes of philosophizing which, according to him,
dispute ascendancy with the Positive, are two in number, both of them
anterior to it in date; the Theological, and the Metaphysical.

We use the words Theological, Metaphysical, and Positive, because they
are chosen by M. Comte as a vehicle for M. Comte's ideas. Any
philosopher whose thoughts another person undertakes to set forth,
has a right to require that it should be done by means of his own
nomenclature. They are not, however, the terms we should ourselves
choose. In all languages, but especially in English, they excite ideas
other than those intended. The words Positive and Positivism, in the
meaning assigned to them, are ill fitted to take, root in English soil;
while Metaphysical suggests, and suggested even to M. Comte, much that
in no way deserves to be included in his denunciation. The term
Theological is less wide of the mark, though the use of it as a term of
condemnation implies, as we shall see, a greater reach of negation than
need be included in the Positive creed. Instead of the Theological we
should prefer to speak of the Personal, or Volitional explanation of
nature; instead of Metaphysical, the Abstractional or Ontological: and
the meaning of Positive would be less ambiguously expressed in the
objective aspect by Phaenomenal, in the subjective by Experiential. But
M. Comte's opinions are best stated in his own phraseology; several of
them, indeed, can scarcely be presented in some of their bearings
without it.

The Theological, which is the original and spontaneous form of thought,
regards the facts of the universe as governed not by invariable laws of
sequence, but by single and direct volitions of beings, real or
imaginary, possessed of life and intelligence. In the infantile state of
reason and experience, individual objects are looked upon as animated.
The next step is the conception of invisible beings, each of whom
superintends and governs an entire class of objects or events. The last
merges this multitude of divinities in a single God, who made the whole
universe in the beginning, and guides and carries on its phaenomena by
his continued action, or, as others think, only modifies them from time
to time by special interferences.

The mode of thought which M. Comte terms Metaphysical, accounts for
phaenomena by ascribing them, not to volitions either sublunary or
celestial, but to realized abstractions. In this stage it is no longer
a god that causes and directs each of the various agencies of nature:
it is a power, or a force, or an occult quality, considered as real
existences, inherent in but distinct from the concrete bodies in which
they reside, and which they in a manner animate. Instead of Dryads
presiding over trees, producing and regulating their phaenomena, every
plant or animal has now a Vegetative Soul, the [Greek: Threptikè phygè]
of Aristotle. At a later period the Vegetative Soul has become a Plastic
Force, and still later, a Vital Principle. Objects now do all that they
do because it is their Essence to do so, or by reason of an inherent
Virtue. Phaenomena are accounted for by supposed tendencies and
propensities of the abstraction Nature; which, though regarded as
impersonal, is figured as acting on a sort of motives, and in a manner
more or less analogous to that of conscious beings. Aristotle affirms a
tendency of nature towards the best, which helps him to a theory of many
natural phaenomena. The rise of water in a pump is attributed to
Nature's horror of a vacuum. The fall of heavy bodies, and the ascent of
flame and smoke, are construed as attempts of each to get to its
_natural_ place. Many important consequences are deduced from the
doctrine that Nature has no breaks (non habet saltum). In medicine the
curative force (vis medicatrix) of Nature furnishes the explanation of
the reparative processes which modern physiologists refer each to its
own particular agencies and laws.

Examples are not necessary to prove to those who are acquainted with the
past phases of human thought, how great a place both the theological and
the metaphysical interpretations of phaenomena have historically
occupied, as well in the speculations of thinkers as in the familiar
conceptions of the multitude. Many had perceived before M. Comte that
neither of these modes of explanation was final: the warfare against
both of them could scarcely be carried on more vigorously than it
already was, early in the seventeenth century, by Hobbes. Nor is it
unknown to any one who has followed the history of the various physical
sciences, that the positive explanation of facts has substituted itself,
step by step, for the theological and metaphysical, as the progress of
inquiry brought to light an increasing number of the invariable laws of
phaenomena. In these respects M. Comte has not originated anything, but
has taken his place in a fight long since engaged, and on the side
already in the main victorious. The generalization which belongs to
himself, and in which he had not, to the best of our knowledge, been at
all anticipated, is, that every distinct class of human conceptions
passes through all these stages, beginning with the theological, and
proceeding through the metaphysical to the positive: the metaphysical
being a mere state of transition, but an indispensable one, from the
theological mode of thought to the positive, which is destined finally
to prevail, by the universal recognition that all phaemomena without
exception are governed by invariable laws, with which no volitions,
either natural or supernatural, interfere. This general theorem is
completed by the addition, that the theological mode of thought has
three stages, Fetichism, Polytheism, and Monotheism: the successive
transitions being prepared, and indeed caused, by the gradual uprising
of the two rival modes of thought, the metaphysical and the positive,
and in their turn preparing the way for the ascendancy of these; first
and temporarily of the metaphysical, finally of the positive.

This generalization is the most fundamental of the doctrines which
originated with M. Comte; and the survey of history, which occupies the
two largest volumes of the six composing his work, is a continuous
exemplification and verification of the law. How well it accords with
the facts, and how vast a number of the greater historical phaenomena it
explains, is known only to those who have studied its exposition, where
alone it can be found--in these most striking and instructive volumes.
As this theory is the key to M. Comte's other generalizations, all of
which arc more or less dependent on it; as it forms the backbone, if we
may so speak, of his philosophy, and, unless it be true, he has
accomplished little; we cannot better employ part of our space than in
clearing it from misconception, and giving the explanations necessary to
remove the obstacles which prevent many competent persons from assenting
to it.

It is proper to begin by relieving the doctrine from a religious
prejudice. The doctrine condemns all theological explanations, and
replaces them, or thinks them destined to be replaced, by theories which
take no account of anything but an ascertained order of phaenomena. It
is inferred that if this change were completely accomplished, mankind
would cease to refer the constitution of Nature to an intelligent will
or to believe at all in a Creator and supreme Governor of the world.
This supposition is the more natural, as M. Comte was avowedly of that
opinion. He indeed disclaimed, with some acrimony, dogmatic atheism, and
even says (in a later work, but the earliest contains nothing at
variance with it) that the hypothesis of design has much greater
verisimilitude than that of a blind mechanism. But conjecture, founded
on analogy, did not seem to him a basis to rest a theory on, in a mature
state of human intelligence. He deemed all real knowledge of a
commencement inaccessible to us, and the inquiry into it an overpassing
of the essential limits of our mental faculties. To this point, however,
those who accept his theory of the progressive stages of opinion are not
obliged to follow him. The Positive mode of thought is not necessarily a
denial of the supernatural; it merely throws back that question to the
origin of all things. If the universe had a beginning, its beginning, by
the very conditions of the case, was supernatural; the laws of nature
cannot account for their own origin. The Positive philosopher is free to
form his opinion on the subject, according to the weight he attaches to
the analogies which are called marks of design, and to the general
traditions of the human race. The value of these evidences is indeed a
question for Positive philosophy, but it is not one upon which Positive
philosophers must necessarily be agreed. It is one of M. Comte's
mistakes that he never allows of open questions. Positive Philosophy
maintains that within the existing order of the universe, or rather of
the part of it known to us, the direct determining cause of every
phaenomenon is not supernatural but natural. It is compatible with this
to believe, that the universe was created, and even that it is
continuously governed, by an Intelligence, provided we admit that the
intelligent Governor adheres to fixed laws, which are only modified or
counteracted by other laws of the same dispensation, and are never
either capriciously or providentially departed from. Whoever regards
all events as parts of a constant order, each one being the invariable
consequent of some antecedent condition, or combination of conditions,
accepts fully the Positive mode of thought: whether he acknowledges or
not an universal antecedent on which the whole system of nature was
originally consequent, and whether that universal antecedent is
conceived as an Intelligence or not.

There is a corresponding misconception to be corrected respecting the
Metaphysical mode of thought. In repudiating metaphysics, M. Comte did
not interdict himself from analysing or criticising any of the abstract
conceptions of the mind. He was not ignorant (though he sometimes seemed
to forget) that such analysis and criticism are a necessary part of the
scientific process, and accompany the scientific mind in all its
operations. What he condemned was the habit of conceiving these mental
abstractions as real entities, which could exert power, produce
phaenomena, and the enunciation of which could be regarded as a theory
or explanation of facts. Men of the present day with difficulty believe
that so absurd a notion was ever really entertained, so repugnant is it
to the mental habits formed by long and assiduous cultivation of the
positive sciences. But those sciences, however widely cultivated, have
never formed the basis of intellectual education in any society. It is
with philosophy as with religion: men marvel at the absurdity of other
people's tenets, while exactly parallel absurdities remain in their own,
and the same man is unaffectedly astonished that words can be mistaken
for things, who is treating other words as if they were things every
time he opens his mouth to discuss. No one, unless entirely ignorant of
the history of thought, will deny that the mistaking of abstractions for
realities pervaded speculation all through antiquity and the middle
ages. The mistake was generalized and systematized in the famous Ideas
of Plato. The Aristotelians carried it on. Essences, quiddities, virtues
residing in things, were accepted as a _bonâ fide_ explanation of
phaenomena. Not only abstract qualities, but the concrete names of
genera and species, were mistaken for objective existences. It was
believed that there were General Substances corresponding to all the
familiar classes of concrete things: a substance Man, a substance Tree,
a substance Animal, which, and not the individual objects so called,
were directly denoted by those names. The real existence of Universal
Substances was the question at issue in the famous controversy of the
later middle ages between Nominalism and Realism, which is one of the
turning points in the history of thought, being its first struggle to
emancipate itself from the dominion of verbal abstractions. The Realists
were the stronger party, but though the Nominalists for a time
succumbed, the doctrine they rebelled against fell, after a short
interval, with the rest of the scholastic philosophy. But while
universal substances and substantial forms, being the grossest kind of
realized abstractions, were the soonest discarded, Essences, Virtues,
and Occult Qualities long survived them, and were first completely
extruded from real existence by the Cartesians. In Descartes' conception
of science, all physical phaenomena were to be explained by matter and
motion, that is, not by abstractions but by invariable physical laws:
though his own explanations were many of them hypothetical, and turned
out to be erroneous. Long after him, however, fictitious entities (as
they are happily termed by Bentham) continued to be imagined as means of
accounting for the more mysterious phaenomena; above all in physiology,
where, under great varieties of phrase, mysterious _forces_ and
_principles_ were the explanation, or substitute for explanation, of the
phaenomena of organized beings. To modern philosophers these fictions
are merely the abstract names of the classes of phaenomena which
correspond to them; and it is one of the puzzles of philosophy, how
mankind, after inventing a set of mere names to keep together certain
combinations of ideas or images, could have so far forgotten their own
act as to invest these creations of their will with objective reality,
and mistake the name of a phaenomenon for its efficient cause. What was
a mystery from the purely dogmatic point of view, is cleared up by the
historical. These abstract words are indeed now mere names of
phaenomena, but were not so in their origin. To us they denote only the
phaenomena, because we have ceased to believe in what else they once
designated; and the employment of them in explanation is to us
evidently, as M. Comte says, the naïf reproduction of the phaenomenon
as the reason for itself: but it was not so in the beginning. The
metaphysical point of view was not a perversion of the positive, but a
transformation of the theological. The human mind, in framing a class of
objects, did not set out from the notion of a name, but from that of a
divinity. The realization of abstractions was not the embodiment of a
word, but the gradual disembodiment of a Fetish.

The primitive tendency or instinct of mankind is to assimilate all the
agencies which they perceive in Nature, to the only one of which they
are directly conscious, their own voluntary activity. Every object which
seems to originate power, that is, to act without being first visibly
acted upon, to communicate motion without having first received it, they
suppose to possess life, consciousness, will. This first rude conception
of nature can scarcely, however, have been at any time extended to all
phaenomena. The simplest observation, without which the preservation of
life would have been impossible, must have pointed out many uniformities
in nature, many objects which, under given circumstances, acted exactly
like one another: and whenever this was observed, men's natural and
untutored faculties led them to form the similar objects into a class,
and to think of them together: of which it was a natural consequence to
refer effects, which were exactly alike, to a single will, rather than
to a number of wills precisely accordant. But this single will could not
be the will of the objects themselves, since they were many: it must be
the will of an invisible being, apart from the objects, and ruling them
from an unknown distance. This is Polytheism. We are not aware that in
any tribe of savages or negroes who have been observed, Fetichism has
been found totally unmixed with Polytheism, and it is probable that the
two coexisted from the earliest period at which the human mind was
capable of forming objects into classes. Fetichism proper gradually
becomes limited to objects possessing a marked individuality. A
particular mountain or river is worshipped bodily (as it is even now by
the Hindoos and the South Sea Islanders) as a divinity in itself, not
the mere residence of one, long after invisible gods have been imagined
as rulers of all the great classes of phaenomena, even intellectual and
moral, as war, love, wisdom, beauty, &c. The worship of the earth
(Tellus or Pales) and of the various heavenly bodies, was prolonged into
the heart of Polytheism. Every scholar knows, though _littérateurs_ and
men of the world do not, that in the full vigour of the Greek religion,
the Sun and Moon, not a god and goddess thereof, were sacrificed to as
deities--older deities than Zeus and his descendants, belonging to the
earlier dynasty of the Titans (which was the mythical version of the
fact that their worship was older), and these deities had a distinct set
of fables or legends connected with them. The father of Phaëthon and the
lover of Endymion were not Apollo and Diana, whose identification with
the Sungod and the Moongoddess was a late invention. Astrolatry, which,
as M. Comte observes, is the last form of Fetichism, survived the other
forms, partly because its objects, being inaccessible, were not so soon
discovered to be in themselves inanimate, and partly because of the
persistent spontaneousness of their apparent motions.

As far as Fetichism reached, and as long as it lasted, there was no
abstraction, or classification of objects, and no room consequently for
the metaphysical mode of thought. But as soon as the voluntary agent,
whose will governed the phaenomenon, ceased to be the physical object
itself, and was removed to an invisible position, from which he or she
superintended an entire class of natural agencies, it began to seem
impossible that this being should exert his powerful activity from a
distance, unless through the medium of something present on the spot.
Through the same Natural Prejudice which made Newton unable to conceive
the possibility of his own law of gravitation without a subtle ether
filling up the intervening space, and through which the attraction could
be communicated--from this same natural infirmity of the human mind, it
seemed indispensable that the god, at a distance from the object, must
act through something residing in it, which was the immediate agent, the
god having imparted to the intermediate something the power whereby it
influenced and directed the object. When mankind felt a need for naming
these imaginary entities, they called them the _nature_ of the object,
or its _essence_, or _virtues_ residing in it, or by many other
different names. These metaphysical conceptions were regarded as
intensely real, and at first as mere instruments in the hands of the
appropriate deities. But the habit being acquired of ascribing not only
substantive existence, but real and efficacious agency, to the abstract
entities, the consequence was that when belief in the deities declined
and faded away, the entities were left standing, and a semblance of
explanation of phaenomena, equal to what existed before, was furnished
by the entities alone, without referring them to any volitions. When
things had reached this point, the metaphysical mode of thought, had
completely substituted itself for the theological.

Thus did the different successive states of the human intellect, even at
an early stage of its progress, overlap one another, the Fetichistic,
the Polytheistic, and the Metaphysical modes of thought coexisting even
in the same minds, while the belief in invariable laws, which
constitutes the Positive mode of thought, was slowly winning its way
beneath them all, as observation and experience disclosed in one class
of phaenomena after another the laws to which they are really subject.
It was this growth of positive knowledge which principally determined
the next transition in the theological conception of the universe, from
Polytheism to Monotheism.

It cannot be doubted that this transition took place very tardily. The
conception of a unity in Nature, which would admit of attributing it to
a single will, is far from being natural to man, and only finds
admittance after a long period of discipline and preparation, the
obvious appearances all pointing to the idea of a government by many
conflicting principles. We know how high a degree both of material
civilization and of moral and intellectual development preceded the
conversion of the leading populations of the world to the belief in one
God. The superficial observations by which Christian travellers have
persuaded themselves that they found their own Monotheistic belief in
some tribes of savages, have always been contradicted by more accurate
knowledge: those who have read, for instance, Mr Kohl's Kitchigami, know
what to think of the Great Spirit of the American Indians, who belongs
to a well-defined system of Polytheism, interspersed with large remains
of an original Fetichism. We have no wish to dispute the matter with
those who believe that Monotheism was the primitive religion,
transmitted to our race from its first parents in uninterrupted
tradition. By their own acknowledgment, the tradition was lost by all
the nations of the world except a small and peculiar people, in whom it
was miraculously kept alive, but who were themselves continually lapsing
from it, and in all the earlier parts of their history did not hold it
at all in its full meaning, but admitted the real existence of other
gods, though believing their own to be the most powerful, and to be the
Creator of the world. A greater proof of the unnaturalness of Monotheism
to the human mind before a certain period in its development, could not
well be required. The highest form of Monotheism, Christianity, has
persisted to the present time in giving partial satisfaction to the
mental dispositions that lead to Polytheism, by admitting into its
theology the thoroughly polytheistic conception of a devil. When
Monotheism, after many centuries, made its way to the Greeks and Romans
from the small corner of the world where it existed, we know how the
notion of daemons facilitated its reception, by making it unnecessary
for Christians to deny the existence of the gods previously believed in,
it being sufficient to place them under the absolute power of the new
God, as the gods of Olympus were already under that of Zeus, and as the
local deities of all the subjugated nations had been subordinated by
conquest to the divine patrons of the Roman State.

In whatever mode, natural or supernatural, we choose to account for the
early Monotheism of the Hebrews, there can be no question that its
reception by the Gentiles was only rendered possible by the slow
preparation which the human mind had undergone from the philosophers.
In the age of the Caesars nearly the whole educated and cultivated class
had outgrown the polytheistic creed, and though individually liable to
returns of the superstition of their childhood, were predisposed (such
of them as did not reject all religion whatever) to the acknowledgment
of one Supreme Providence. It is vain to object that Christianity did
not find the majority of its early proselytes among the educated class:
since, except in Palestine, its teachers and propagators were mainly of
that class--many of them, like St Paul, well versed in the mental
culture of their time; and they had evidently found no intellectual
obstacle to the new doctrine in their own minds. We must not be deceived
by the recrudescence, at a much later date, of a metaphysical Paganism
in the Alexandrian and other philosophical schools, provoked not by
attachment to Polytheism, but by distaste for the political and social
ascendancy of the Christian teachers. The fact was, that Monotheism had
become congenial to the cultivated mind: and a belief which has gained
the cultivated minds of any society, unless put down by force, is
certain, sooner or later, to reach the multitude. Indeed the multitude
itself had been prepared for it, as already hinted, by the more and more
complete subordination of all other deities to the supremacy of Zeus;
from which the step to a single Deity, surrounded by a host of angels,
and keeping in recalcitrant subjection an army of devils, was by no
means difficult.

By what means, then, had the cultivated minds of the Roman Empire been
educated for Monotheism? By the growth of a practical feeling of the
invariability of natural laws. Monotheism had a natural adaptation to
this belief, while Polytheism naturally and necessarily conflicted with
it. As men could not easily, and in fact never did, suppose that beings
so powerful had their power absolutely restricted, each to its special
department, the will of any divinity might always be frustrated by
another: and unless all their wills were in complete harmony (which
would itself be the most difficult to credit of all cases of
invariability, and would require beyond anything else the ascendancy
of a Supreme Deity) it was impossible that the course of any of the
phaenomena under their government could be invariable. But if, on the
contrary, all the phaenomena of the universe were under the exclusive
and uncontrollable influence of a single will, it was an admissible
supposition that this will might be always consistent with itself, and
might choose to conduct each class of its operations in an invariable
manner. In proportion, therefore, as the invariable laws of phaenomena
revealed themselves to observers, the theory which ascribed them all to
one will began to grow plausible; but must still have appeared
improbable until it had come to seem likely that invariability was the
common rule of all nature. The Greeks and Romans at the Christian era
had reached a point of advancement at which this supposition had become
probable. The admirable height to which geometry had already been
carried, had familiarized the educated mind with the conception of laws
absolutely invariable. The logical analysis of the intellectual
processes by Aristotle had shown a similar uniformity of law in the
realm of mind. In the concrete external world, the most imposing
phaenomena, those of the heavenly bodies, which by their power over the
imagination had done most to keep up the whole system of ideas connected
with supernatural agency, had been ascertained to take place in so
regular an order as to admit of being predicted with a precision which
to the notions of those days must have appeared perfect. And though an
equal degree of regularity had not been discerned in natural phaenomena
generally, even the most empirical observation had ascertained so many
cases of an uniformity _almost_ complete, that inquiring minds were
eagerly on the look-out for further indications pointing in the same
direction; and vied with one another in the formation of theories which,
though hypothetical and essentially premature, it was hoped would turn
out to be correct representations of invariable laws governing large
classes of phaenomena. When this hope and expectation became general,
they were already a great encroachment on the original domain of the
theological principle. Instead of the old conception, of events
regulated from day to day by the unforeseen and changeable volitions of
a legion of deities, it seemed more and more probable that all the
phaenomena of the universe took place according to rules which must have
been planned from the beginning; by which conception the function of the
gods seemed to be limited to forming the plans, and setting the
machinery in motion: their subsequent office appeared to be reduced to
a sinecure, or if they continued to reign, it was in the manner of
constitutional kings, bound by the laws to which they had previously
given their assent. Accordingly, the pretension of philosophers to
explain physical phaenomena by physical causes, or to predict their
occurrence, was, up to a very late period of Polytheism, regarded as
a sacrilegious insult to the gods. Anaxagoras was banished for it,
Aristotle had to fly for his life, and the mere unfounded suspicion of
it contributed greatly to the condemnation of Socrates. We are too well
acquainted with this form of the religious sentiment even now, to have
any difficulty in comprehending what must have been its violence then.
It was inevitable that philosophers should be anxious to get rid of at
least _these_ gods, and so escape from the particular fables which stood
immediately in their way; accepting a notion of divine government which
harmonized better with the lessons they learnt from the study of nature,
and a God concerning whom no mythos, as far as they knew, had yet been
invented.

Again, when the idea became prevalent that the constitution of every
part of Nature had been planned from the beginning, and continued to
take place as it had been planned, this was itself a striking feature of
resemblance extending through all Nature, and affording a presumption
that the whole was the work, not of many, but of the same hand. It must
have appeared vastly more probable that there should be one indefinitely
foreseeing Intelligence and immovable Will, than hundreds and thousands
of such. The philosophers had not at that time the arguments which might
have been grounded on universal laws not yet suspected, such as the law
of gravitation and the laws of heat; but there was a multitude, obvious
even to them, of analogies and homologies in natural phaenomena, which
suggested unity of plan; and a still greater number were raised up by
their active fancy, aided by their premature scientific theories, all of
which aimed at interpreting some phaenomenon by the analogy of others
supposed to be better known; assuming, indeed, a much greater similarity
among the various processes of Nature, than ampler experience has since
shown to exist. The theological mode of thought thus advanced from
Polytheism to Monotheism through the direct influence of the Positive
mode of thought, not yet aspiring to complete speculative ascendancy.
But, inasmuch as the belief in the invariability of natural laws was
still imperfect even in highly cultivated minds, and in the merest
infancy in the uncultivated, it gave rise to the belief in one God, but
not in an immovable one. For many centuries the God believed in was
flexible by entreaty, was incessantly ordering the affairs of mankind by
direct volitions, and continually reversing the course of nature by
miraculous interpositions; and this is believed still, wherever the
invariability of law has established itself in men's convictions as a
general, but not as an universal truth.

In the change from Polytheism to Monotheism, the Metaphysical mode of
thought contributed its part, affording great aid to the up-hill
struggle which the Positive spirit had to maintain against the
prevailing form, of the Theological. M. Comte, indeed, has considerably
exaggerated the share of the Metaphysical spirit in this mental
revolution, since by a lax use of terms he credits the Metaphysical mode
of thought with all that is due to dialectics and negative criticism--to
the exposure of inconsistencies and absurdities in the received
religions. But this operation is quite independent of the Metaphysical
mode of thought, and was no otherwise connected with it than in being
very generally carried on by the same minds (Plato is a brilliant
example), since the most eminent efficiency in it does not necessarily
depend on the possession of positive scientific knowledge. But the
Metaphysical spirit, strictly so called, did contribute largely to the
advent of Monotheism. The conception of impersonal entities, interposed
between the governing deity and the phaenomena, and forming the
machinery through which these are immediately produced, is not
repugnant, as the theory of direct supernatural volitions is, to the
belief in invariable laws. The entities not being, like the gods, framed
after the exemplar of men--being neither, like them, invested with human
passions, nor supposed, like them, to have power beyond the phaenomena
which are the special department of each, there was no fear of offending
them by the attempt to foresee and define their action, or by the
supposition that it took place according to fixed laws. The popular
tribunal which condemned Anaxagoras had evidently not risen to the
metaphysical point of view. Hippocrates, who was concerned only with a
select and instructed class, could say with impunity, speaking of what
were called the god-inflicted diseases, that to his mind they were
neither more nor less god-inflicted than all others. The doctrine of
abstract entities was a kind of instinctive conciliation between the
observed uniformity of the facts of nature, and their dependence on
arbitrary volition; since it was easier to conceive a single volition as
setting a machinery to work, which afterwards went on of itself, than to
suppose an inflexible constancy in so capricious and changeable a thing
as volition must then have appeared. But though the régime of
abstractions was in strictness compatible with Polytheism, it demanded
Monotheism as the condition of its free development. The received
Polytheism being only the first remove from Fetichism, its gods were too
closely mixed up in the daily details of phaenomena, and the habit of
propitiating them and ascertaining their will before any important
action of life was too inveterate, to admit, without the strongest shock
to the received system, the notion that they did not habitually rule by
special interpositions, but left phaenomena in all ordinary cases to the
operation of the essences or peculiar natures which they had first
implanted in them. Any modification of Polytheism which would have made
it fully compatible with the Metaphysical conception of the world, would
have been more difficult to effect than the transition to Monotheism, as
Monotheism was at first conceived.

We have given, in our own way, and at some length, this important
portion of M. Comte's view of the evolution of human thought, as a
sample of the manner in which his theory corresponds with and interprets
historical facts, and also to obviate some objections to it, grounded on
an imperfect comprehension, or rather on a mere first glance. Some, for
example, think the doctrine of the three successive stages of
speculation and belief, inconsistent with the fact that they all three
existed contemporaneously; much as if the natural succession of the
hunting, the nomad, and the agricultural state could be refuted by the
fact that there are still hunters and nomads. That the three states were
contemporaneous, that they all began before authentic history, and still
coexist, is M. Comte's express statement: as well as that the advent of
the two later modes of thought was the very cause which disorganized and
is gradually destroying the primitive one. The Theological mode of
explaining phaenomena was once universal, with the exception, doubtless,
of the familiar facts which, being even then seen to be controllable by
human will, belonged already to the positive mode of thought. The first
and easiest generalizations of common observation, anterior to the first
traces of the scientific spirit, determined the birth of the
Metaphysical mode of thought; and every further advance in the
observation of nature, gradually bringing to light its invariable laws,
determined a further development of the Metaphysical spirit at the
expense of the Theological, this being the only medium through which the
conclusions of the Positive mode of thought and the premises of the
Theological could be temporarily made compatible. At a later period,
when the real character of the positive laws of nature had come to be in
a certain degree understood, and the theological idea had assumed, in
scientific minds, its final character, that of a God governing by
general laws, the positive spirit, having now no longer need of the
fictitious medium of imaginary entities, set itself to the easy task of
demolishing the instrument by which it had risen. But though it
destroyed the actual belief in the objective reality of these
abstractions, that belief has left behind it vicious tendencies of the
human mind, which are still far enough from being extinguished, and
which we shall presently have occasion to characterize.

The next point on which we have to touch is one of greater importance
than it seems. If all human speculation had to pass through the three
stages, we may presume that its different branches, having always been
very unequally advanced, could not pass from one stage to another at the
same time. There must have been a certain order of succession in which
the different sciences would enter, first into the metaphysical, and
afterwards into the purely positive stage; and this order M. Comte
proceeds to investigate. The result is his remarkable conception of a
scale of subordination of the sciences, being the order of the logical
dependence of those which follow on those which precede. It is not at
first obvious how a mere classification of the sciences can be not
merely a help to their study, but itself an important part of a body of
doctrine; the classification, however, is a very important part of M.
Comte's philosophy.

He first distinguishes between the abstract and the concrete sciences.
The abstract sciences have to do with the laws which govern the
elementary facts of Nature; laws on which all phaenomena actually
realized must of course depend, but which would have been equally
compatible with many other combinations than those which actually come
to pass. The concrete sciences, on the contrary, concern themselves only
with the particular combinations of phaenomena which are found in
existence. For example; the minerals which compose our planet, or are
found in it, have been produced and are held together by the laws of
mechanical aggregation and by those of chemical union. It is the
business of the abstract sciences, Physics and Chemistry, to ascertain
these laws: to discover how and under what conditions bodies may become
aggregated, and what are the possible modes and results of chemical
combination. The great majority of these aggregations and combinations
take place, so far as we are aware, only in our laboratories; with these
the concrete science, Mineralogy, has nothing to do. Its business is
with those aggregates, and those chemical compounds, which form
themselves, or have at some period been formed, in the natural world.
Again, Physiology, the abstract science, investigates, by such means as
are available to it, the general laws of organization and life. Those
laws determine what living beings are possible, and maintain the
existence and determine the phaenomena of those which actually exist:
but they would be equally capable of maintaining in existence plants and
animals very different from these. The concrete sciences, Zoology and
Botany, confine themselves to species which really exist, or can be
shown to have really existed: and do not concern themselves with the
mode in which even these would comport themselves under all
circumstances, but only under those which really take place. They set
forth the actual mode of existence of plants and animals, the phaenomena
which they in fact present: but they set forth all of these, and take
into simultaneous consideration the whole real existence of each
species, however various the ultimate laws on which it depends, and to
whatever number of different abstract sciences these laws may belong.
The existence of a date tree, or of a lion, is a joint result of many
natural laws, physical, chemical, biological, and even astronomical.
Abstract science deals with these laws separately, but considers each of
them in all its aspects, all its possibilities of operation: concrete
science considers them only in combination, and so far as they exist and
manifest themselves in the animals or plants of which we have
experience. The distinctive attributes of the two are summed up by M.
Comte in the expression, that concrete science relates to Beings, or
Objects, abstract science to Events.[2]

The concrete sciences are inevitably later in their development than the
abstract sciences on which they depend. Not that they begin later to be
studied; on the contrary, they are the earliest cultivated, since in our
abstract investigations we necessarily set out from spontaneous facts.
But though we may make empirical generalizations, we can form no
scientific theory of concrete phaenomena until the laws which govern and
explain them are first known; and those laws are the subject of the
abstract sciences. In consequence, there is not one of the concrete
studies (unless we count astronomy among them) which has received, up to
the present time, its final scientific constitution, or can be accounted
a science, except in a very loose sense, but only materials for science:
partly from insufficiency of facts, but more, because the abstract
sciences, except those at the very beginning of the scale, have not
attained the degree of perfection necessary to render real concrete
sciences possible.

Postponing, therefore, the concrete sciences, as not yet formed, but
only tending towards formation, the abstract sciences remain to be
classed. These, as marked out by M. Comte, are six in number; and the
principle which he proposes for their classification is admirably in
accordance with the conditions of our study of Nature. It might have
happened that the different classes of phaenomena had depended on laws
altogether distinct; that in changing from one to another subject of
scientific study, the student left behind all the laws he previously
knew, and passed under the dominion of a totally new set of
uniformities. The sciences would then have been wholly independent of
one another; each would have rested entirely on its own inductions, and
if deductive at all, would have drawn its deductions from premises
exclusively furnished by itself. The fact, however, is otherwise. The
relation which really subsists between different kinds of phaenomena,
enables the sciences to be arranged in such an order, that in travelling
through them we do not pass out of the sphere of any laws, but merely
take up additional ones at each step. In this order M. Comte proposes to
arrange them. He classes the sciences in an ascending series, according
to the degree of complexity of their phaenomena; so that each science
depends on the truths of all those which precede it, with the addition
of peculiar truths of its own.

Thus, the truths of number are true of all things, and depend only on
their own laws; the science, therefore, of Number, consisting of
Arithmetic and Algebra, may be studied without reference to any other
science. The truths of Geometry presuppose the laws of Number, and a
more special class of laws peculiar to extended bodies, but require no
others: Geometry, therefore, can be studied independently of all
sciences except that of Number.

Rational Mechanics presupposes, and depends on, the laws of number and
those of extension, and along with them another set of laws, those of
Equilibrium and Motion. The truths of Algebra and Geometry nowise depend
on these last, and would have been true if these had happened to be the
reverse of what we find them: but the phaenomena of equilibrium and
motion cannot be understood, nor even stated, without assuming the laws
of number and extension, such as they actually are. The phaenomena of
Astronomy depend on these three classes of laws, and on the law of
gravitation besides; which last has no influence on the truths of
number, geometry, or mechanics. Physics (badly named in common English
parlance Natural Philosophy) presupposes the three mathematical
sciences, and also astronomy; since all terrestrial phaenomena are
affected by influences derived from the motions of the earth and of the
heavenly bodies. Chemical phaenomena depend (besides their own laws) on
all the preceding, those of physics among the rest, especially on the
laws of heat and electricity; physiological phaenomena, on the laws of
physics and chemistry, and their own laws in addition. The phaenomena of
human society obey laws of their own, but do not depend solely upon
these: they depend upon all the laws of organic and animal life,
together with those of inorganic nature, these last influencing society
not only through their influence on life, but by determining the
physical conditions under which society has to be carried on. "Chacun de
ces degré's successifs exige des inductions qui lui sont propres; mais
elles ne peuvent jamais devenir systématiques que sous l'impulsion
déductive resultée de tous les ordres moins compliqués."[3]

Thus arranged by M. Comte in a series, of which each term represents an
advance in speciality beyond the term preceding it, and (what
necessarily accompanies increased speciality) an increase of
complexity--a set of phaenomena determined by a more numerous
combination of laws; the sciences stand in the following order: 1st,
Mathematics; its three branches following one another on the same
principle, Number, Geometry, Mechanics. 2nd, Astronomy. 3rd, Physics.
4th, Chemistry. 5th, Biology. 6th, Sociology, or the Social Science, the
phaemomena, of which depend on, and cannot be understood without, the
principal truths of all the other sciences. The subject matter and
contents of these various sciences are obvious of themselves, with the
exception of Physics, which is a group of sciences rather than a single
science, and is again divided by M. Comte into five departments:
Barology, or the science of weight; Thermology, or that of heat;
Acoustics, Optics, and Electrology. These he attempts to arrange on the
same principle of increasing speciality and complexity, but they hardly
admit of such a scale, and M. Comte's mode of placing them varied at
different periods. All the five being essentially independent of one
another, he attached little importance to their order, except that
barology ought to come first, as the connecting link with astronomy, and
electrology last, as the transition to chemistry.

If the best classification is that which is grounded on the properties
most important for our purposes, this classification will stand the
test. By placing the sciences in the order of the complexity of their
subject matter, it presents them in the order of their difficulty. Each
science proposes to itself a more arduous inquiry than those which
precede it in the series; it is therefore likely to be susceptible, even
finally, of a less degree of perfection, and will certainly arrive later
at the degree attainable by it. In addition to this, each science, to
establish its own truths, needs those of all the sciences anterior to
it. The only means, for example, by which the physiological laws of life
could have been ascertained, was by distinguishing, among the
multifarious and complicated facts of life, the portion which physical
and chemical laws cannot account for. Only by thus isolating the effects
of the peculiar organic laws, did it become possible to discover what
these are. It follows that the order in which the sciences succeed one
another in the series, cannot but be, in the main, the historical order
of their development; and is the only order in which they can rationally
be studied. For this last there is an additional reason: since the more
special and complete sciences require not only the truths of the simpler
and more general ones, but still more their methods. The scientific
intellect, both in the individual and in the race, must learn in the
move elementary studies that art of investigation and those canons of
proof which are to be put in practice in the more elevated. No intellect
is properly qualified for the higher part of the scale, without due
practice in the lower.

Mr Herbert Spencer, in his essay entitled "The Genesis of Science," and
more recently in a pamphlet on "the Classification of the Sciences," has
criticised and condemned M. Comte's classification, and proposed a more
elaborate one of his own: and M. Littré, in his valuable biographical
and philosophical work on M. Comte ("Auguste Comte et la Philosophie
Positive"), has at some length criticised the criticism. Mr Spencer is
one of the small number of persons who by the solidity and
encyclopedical character of their knowledge, and their power of
co-ordination and concatenation, may claim to be the peers of M. Comte,
and entitled to a vote in the estimation of him. But after giving to his
animadversions the respectful attention due to all that comes from Mr
Spencer, we cannot find that he has made out any case. It is always easy
to find fault with a classification. There are a hundred possible ways
of arranging any set of objects, and something may almost always be said
against the best, and in favour of the worst of them. But the merits of
a classification depend on the purposes to which it is instrumental. We
have shown the purposes for which M. Comte's classification is intended.
Mr Spencer has not shown that it is ill adapted to those purposes: and
we cannot perceive that his own answers any ends equally important. His
chief objection is that if the more special sciences need the truths of
the more general ones, the latter also need some of those of the former,
and have at times been stopped in their progress by the imperfect state
of sciences which follow long after them in M. Comte's scale; so that,
the dependence being mutual, there is a _consensus_, but not an
ascending scale or hierarchy of the sciences. That the earlier sciences
derive help from the later is undoubtedly true; it is part of M. Comte's
theory, and amply exemplified in the details of his work. When he
affirms that one science historically precedes another, he does not mean
that the perfection of the first precedes the humblest commencement of
those which follow. Mr Spencer does not distinguish between the
empirical stage of the cultivation of a branch of knowledge, and the
scientific stage. The commencement of every study consists in gathering
together unanalyzed facts, and treasuring up such spontaneous
generalizations as present themselves to natural sagacity. In this stage
any branch of inquiry can be carried on independently of every other;
and it is one of M. Comte's own remarks that the most complex, in a
scientific point of view, of all studies, the latest in his series, the
study of man as a moral and social being, since from its absorbing
interest it is cultivated more or less by every one, and pre-eminently
by the great practical minds, acquired at an early period a greater
stock of just though unscientific observations than the more elementary
sciences. It is these empirical truths that the later and more special
sciences lend to the earlier; or, at most, some extremely elementary
scientific truth, which happening to be easily ascertainable by direct
experiment, could be made available for carrying a previous science
already founded, to a higher stage of development; a re-action of the
later sciences on the earlier which M. Comte not only fully recognized,
but attached great importance to systematizing.[4]

But though detached truths relating to the more complex order of
phaenomena may be empirically observed, and a few of them even
scientifically established, contemporaneously with an early stage of
some of the sciences anterior in the scale, such detached truths, as M.
Littré justly remarks, do not constitute a science. What is known of a
subject, only becomes a science when it is made a connected body of
truth; in which the relation between the general principles and the
details is definitely made out, and each particular truth can be
recognized as a case of the operation of wider laws. This point of
progress, at which the study passes from the preliminary state of mere
preparation, into a science, cannot be reached by the more complex
studies until it has been attained by the simpler ones. A certain
regularity of recurrence in the celestial appearances was ascertained
empirically before much progress had been made in geometry; but
astronomy could no more be a science until geometry was a highly
advanced one, than the rule of three could have been practised before
addition and subtraction. The truths of the simpler sciences are a part
of the laws to which the phaenomena of the more complex sciences
conform: and are not only a necessary element in their explanation, but
must be so well understood as to be traceable through complex
combinations, before the special laws which co-exist and co-operate with
them can be brought to light. This is all that M. Comte affirms, and
enough for his purpose.[5] He no doubt occasionally indulges in more
unqualified expressions than can be completely justified, regarding the
logical perfection of the construction of his series, and its exact
correspondence with the historical evolution of the sciences;
exaggerations confined to language, and which the details of his
exposition often correct. But he is sufficiently near the truth, in both
respects, for every practical purpose.[6] Minor inaccuracies must often
be forgiven even to great thinkers. Mr Spencer, in the very-writings in
which he criticises M. Comte, affords signal instances of them.[7]

Combining the doctrines, that every science is in a less advanced state
as it occupies a higher place in the ascending scale, and that all the
sciences pass through the three stages, theological, metaphysical, and
positive, it follows that the more special a science is, the tardier is
it in effecting each transition, so that a completely positive state of
an earlier science has often coincided with the metaphysical state of
the one next to it, and a purely theological state of those further on.
This statement correctly represents the general course of the facts,
though requiring allowances in the detail. Mathematics, for example,
from the very beginning of its cultivation, can hardly at any time have
been in the theological state, though exhibiting many traces of the
metaphysical. No one, probably, ever believed that the will of a god
kept parallel lines from meeting, or made two and two equal to four; or
ever prayed to the gods to make the square of the hypothenuse equal to
more or less than the sum of the squares of the sides. The most devout
believers have recognized in propositions of this description a class of
truths independent of the devine omnipotence. Even among the truths
which popular philosophy calls by the misleading name of Contingent the
few which are at once exact and obvious were probably, from the very
first, excepted from the theological explanation. M. Comte observes,
after Adam Smith, that we are not told in any age or country of a god of
Weight. It was otherwise with Astronomy: the heavenly bodies were
believed not merely to be moved by gods, but to be gods themselves: and
when this theory was exploded, there movements were explained by
metaphysical conceptions; such as a tendency of Nature to perfection, in
virtue of which these sublime bodies, being left to themselves, move in
the most perfect orbit, the circle. Even Kepler was full of fancies of
this description, which only terminated when Newton, by unveiling the
real physical laws of the celestial motions, closed the metaphysical
period of astronomical science. As M. Comte remarks, our power of
foreseeing phaenomena, and our power of controlling them, are the two
things which destroy the belief of their being governed by changeable
wills. In the case of phaenomena which science has not yet taught us
either to foresee or to control, the theological mode of thought has not
ceased to operate: men still pray for rain, or for success in war, or to
avert a shipwreck or a pestilence, but not to put back the stars in
their courses, to abridge the time necessary for a journey, or to arrest
the tides. Such vestiges of the primitive mode of thought linger in the
more intricate departments of sciences which have attained a high degree
of positive development. The metaphysical mode of explanation, being
less antagonistic than the theological to the idea of invariable laws,
is still slower in being entirely discarded. M. Comte finds remains of
it in the sciences which are the most completely positive, with the
single exception of astronomy, mathematics itself not being, he thinks,
altogether free from them: which is not wonderful, when we see at how
very recent a date mathematicians have been able to give the really
positive interpretation of their own symbols.[8] We have already however
had occasion to notice M. Comte's propensity to use the term
metaphysical in cases containing nothing that truly answers to his
definition of the word. For instance, he considers chemistry as tainted
with the metaphysical mode of thought by the notion of chemical
affinity. He thinks that the chemists who said that bodies combine
because they have an affinity for each other, believed in a mysterious
entity residing in bodies and inducing them to combine. On any other
supposition, he thinks the statement could only mean that bodies combine
because they combine. But it really meant more. It was the abstract
expression of the doctrine, that bodies have an invariable tendency to
combine with one thing in preference to another: that the tendencies of
different substances to combine are fixed quantities, of which the
greater always prevails over the less, so that if A detaches B from C in
one case it will do so in every other; which was called having a greater
attraction, or, more technically, a greater affinity for it. This was
not a metaphysical theory, but a positive generalization, which
accounted for a great number of facts, and would have kept its place as
a law of nature, had it not been disproved by the discovery of cases in
which though A detached B from C in some circumstances, C detached it
from A in others, showing the law of elective chemical combination to be
a less simple one than had at first been supposed. In this case,
therefore, M. Comte made a mistake: and he will be found to have made
many similar ones. But in the science next after chemistry, biology, the
empty mode of explanation by scholastic entities, such as a plastic
force, a vital principle, and the like, has been kept up even to the
present day. The German physiology of the school of Oken,
notwithstanding his acknowledged genius, is almost as metaphysical as
Hegel, and there is in France a quite recent revival of the Animism of
Stahl. These metaphysical explanations, besides their inanity, did
serious harm, by directing the course of positive scientific inquiry
into wrong channels. There was indeed nothing to prevent investigating
the mode of action of the supposed plastic or vital force by observation
and experiment; but the phrases gave currency and coherence to a false
abstraction and generalization, setting inquirers to look out for one
cause of complex phaenomena which undoubtedly depended on many.

According to M. Comte, chemistry entered into the positive stage with
Lavoisier, in the latter half of the last century (in a subsequent
treatise he places the date a generation earlier); and biology at the
beginning of the present, when Bichat drew the fundamental distinction
between nutritive or vegetative and properly animal life, and referred
the properties of organs to the general laws of the component tissues.
The most complex of all sciences, the Social, had not, he maintained,
become positive at all, but was the subject of an ever-renewed and
barren contest between the theological and the metaphysical modes of
thought. To make this highest of the sciences positive, and thereby
complete the positive character of all human speculations, was the
principal aim of his labours, and he believed himself to have
accomplished it in the last three volumes of his Treatise. But the term
Positive is not, any more than Metaphysical, always used by M. Comte in
the same meaning. There never can have been a period in any science when
it was not in some degree positive, since it always professed to draw
conclusions from experience and observation. M. Comte would have been
the last to deny that previous to his own speculations, the world
possessed a multitude of truths, of greater or less certainty, on social
subjects, the evidence of which was obtained by inductive or deductive
processes from observed sequences of phaenomena. Nor could it be denied
that the best writers on subjects upon which so many men of the highest
mental capacity had employed their powers, had accepted as thoroughly
the positive point of view, and rejected the theological and
metaphysical as decidedly, as M. Comte himself. Montesquieu; even
Macchiavelli; Adam Smith and the political economists universally, both
in France and in England; Bentham, and all thinkers initiated by
him,--had a full conviction that social phaenomena conform to invariable
laws, the discovery and illustration of which was their great object as
speculative thinkers. All that can be said is, that those philosophers
did not get so far as M. Comte in discovering the methods best adapted
to bring these laws to light. It was not, therefore, reserved for M.
Comte to make sociological inquiries positive. But what he really meant
by making a science positive, is what we will call, with M. Littré,
giving it its final scientific constitution; in other words, discovering
or proving, and pursuing to their consequences, those of its truths
which are fit to form the connecting links among the rest: truths which
are to it what the law of gravitation is to astronomy, what the
elementary properties of the tissues are to physiology, and we will add
(though M. Comte did not) what the laws of association are to
psychology. This is an operation which, when accomplished, puts an end
to the empirical period, and enables the science to be conceived as a
co-ordinated and coherent body of doctrine. This is what had not yet
been done for sociology; and the hope of effecting it was, from his
early years, the prompter and incentive of all M. Comte's philosophic
labours.

It was with a view to this that he undertook that wonderful
systematization of the philosophy of all the antecedent sciences, from
mathematics to physiology, which, if he had done nothing else, would
have stamped him, in all minds competent to appreciate it, as one of the
principal thinkers of the age. To make its nature intelligible to those
who are not acquainted with it, we must explain what we mean by the
philosophy of a science, as distinguished from the science itself. The
proper meaning of philosophy we take to be, what the ancients understood
by it--the scientific knowledge of Man, as an intellectual, moral, and
social being. Since his intellectual faculties include his knowing
faculty, the science of Man includes everything that man can know, so
far as regards his mode of knowing it: in other words, the whole
doctrine of the conditions of human knowledge. The philosophy of a
Science thus comes to mean the science itself, considered not as to its
results, the truths which it ascertains, but as to the processes by
which the mind attains them, the marks by which it recognises them, and
the co-ordinating and methodizing of them with a view to the greatest
clearness of conception and the fullest and readiest availibility for
use: in one word, the logic of the science. M. Comte has accomplished
this for the first five of the fundamental sciences, with a success
which can hardly be too much admired. We never reopen even the least
admirable part of this survey, the volume on chemistry and biology
(which was behind the actual state of those sciences when first written,
and is far in the rear of them now), without a renewed sense of the
great reach of its speculations, and a conviction that the way to a
complete rationalizing of those sciences, still very imperfectly
conceived by most who cultivate them, has been shown nowhere so
successfully as there.

Yet, for a correct appreciation of this great philosophical achievement,
we ought to take account of what has not been accomplished, as well as
of what has. Some of the chief deficiencies and infirmities of M.
Comte's system of thought will be found, as is usually the case, in
close connexion with its greatest successes.

The philosophy of Science consists of two principal parts; the methods
of investigation, and the requisites of proof. The one points out the
roads by which the human intellect arrives at conclusions, the other the
mode of testing their evidence. The former if complete would be an
Organon of Discovery, the latter of Proof. It is to the first of these
that M. Comte principally confines himself, and he treats it with a
degree of perfection hitherto unrivalled. Nowhere is there anything
comparable, in its kind, to his survey of the resources which the mind
has at its disposal for investigating the laws of phaenomena; the
circumstances which render each of the fundamental modes of exploration
suitable or unsuitable to each class of phaenomena; the extensions and
transformations which the process of investigation has to undergo in
adapting itself to each new province of the field of study; and the
especial gifts with which every one of the fundamental sciences enriches
the method of positive inquiry, each science in its turn being the best
fitted to bring to perfection one process or another. These, and many
cognate subjects, such as the theory of Classification, and the proper
use of scientific Hypotheses, M. Comte has treated with a completeness
of insight which leaves little to be desired. Not less admirable is his
survey of the most comprehensive truths that had been arrived at by each
science, considered as to their relation to the general sum of human
knowledge, and their logical value as aids to its further progress. But
after all this, there remains a further and distinct question. We are
taught the right way of searching for results, but when a result has
been reached, how shall we know that it is true? How assure ourselves
that the process has been performed correctly, and that our premises,
whether consisting of generalities or of particular facts, really prove
the conclusion we have grounded on them? On this question M. Comte
throws no light. He supplies no test of proof. As regards deduction, he
neither recognises the syllogistic system of Aristotle and his
successors (the insufficiency of which is as evident as its utility is
real) nor proposes any other in lieu of it: and of induction he has no
canons whatever. He does not seem to admit the possibility of any
general criterion by which to decide whether a given inductive inference
is correct or not. Yet he does not, with Dr Whewell, regard an inductive
theory as proved if it accounts for the facts: on the contrary, he sets
himself in the strongest opposition to those scientific hypotheses
which, like the luminiferous ether, are not susceptible of direct proof,
and are accepted on the sole evidence of their aptitude for explaining
phenomena. He maintains that no hypothesis is legitimate unless it is
susceptible of verification, and that none ought to be accepted as true
unless it can be shown not only that it accords with the facts, but that
its falsehood would be inconsistent with them. He therefore needs a test
of inductive proof; and in assigning none, he seems to give up as
impracticable the main problem of Logic properly so called. At the
beginning of his treatise he speaks of a doctrine of Method, apart from
particular applications, as conceivable, but not needful: method,
according to him, is learnt only by seeing it in operation, and the
logic of a science can only usefully be taught through the science
itself. Towards the end of the work, he assumes a more decidedly
negative tone, and treats the very conception of studying Logic
otherwise than in its applications as chimerical. He got on, in his
subsequent writings, to considering it as wrong. This indispensable part
of Positive Philosophy he not only left to be supplied by others, but
did all that depended on him to discourage them from attempting it.

This hiatus in M. Comte's system is not unconnected with a defect in his
original conception of the subject matter of scientific investigation,
which has been generally noticed, for it lies on the surface, and is
more apt to be exaggerated than overlooked. It is often said of him that
he rejects the study of causes. This is not, in the correct acceptation,
true, for it is only questions of ultimate origin, and of Efficient as
distinguished from what are called Physical causes, that he rejects. The
causes that he regards as inaccessible are causes which are not
themselves phaenomena. Like other people he admits the study of causes,
in every sense in which one physical fact can be the cause of another.
But he has an objection to the _word_ cause; he will only consent to
speak of Laws of Succession: and depriving himself of the use of a word
which has a Positive meaning, he misses the meaning it expresses. He
sees no difference between such generalizations as Kepler's laws, and
such as the theory of gravitation. He fails to perceive the real
distinction between the laws of succession and coexistence which
thinkers of a different school call Laws of Phaenomena, and those of
what they call the action of Causes: the former exemplified by the
succession of day and night, the latter by the earth's rotation which
causes it. The succession of day and night is as much an invariable
sequence, as the alternate exposure of opposite sides of the earth to
the sun. Yet day and night are not the causes of one another; why?
Because their sequence, though invariable in our experience, is not
unconditionally so: those facts only succeed each other, provided that
the presence and absence of the sun succeed each other, and if this
alternation were to cease, we might have either day or night unfollowed
by one another. There are thus two kinds of uniformities of succession,
the one unconditional, the other conditional on the first: laws of
causation, and other successions dependent on those laws. All ultimate
laws are laws of causation, and the only universal law beyond the pale
of mathematics is the law of universal causation, namely, that every
phaenomenon has a phaenomenal cause; has some phaenomenon other than
itself, or some combination of phaenomena, on which it is invariably and
unconditionally consequent. It is on the universality of this law that
the possibility rests of establishing a canon of Induction. A general
proposition inductively obtained is only then proved to be true, when
the instances on which it rests are such that if they have been
correctly observed, the falsity of the generalization would be
inconsistent with the constancy of causation; with the universality of
the fact that the phaenomena of nature take place according to
invariable laws of succession.[9] It is probable, therefore, that M.
Comte's determined abstinence from the word and the idea of Cause, had
much to do with his inability to conceive an Inductive Logic, by
diverting his attention from the only basis upon which it could be
founded.

We are afraid it must also be said, though shown only by slight
indications in his fundamental work, and coming out in full evidence
only in his later writings--that M. Comte, at bottom, was not so
solicitous about completeness of proof as becomes a positive
philosopher, and that the unimpeachable objectivity, as he would have
called it, of a conception--its exact correspondence to the realities of
outward fact--was not, with him, an indispensable condition of adopting
it, if it was subjectively useful, by affording facilities to the mind
for grouping phaenomena. This appears very curiously in his chapters on
the philosophy of Chemistry. He recommends, as a judicious use of "the
degree of liberty left to our intelligence by the end and purpose of
positive science," that we should accept as a convenient generalization
the doctrine that all chemical composition is between two elements only;
that every substance which our analysis decomposes, let us say into four
elements, has for its immediate constituents two hypothetical
substances, each compounded of two simpler ones. There would have been
nothing to object to in this as a scientific hypothesis, assumed
tentatively as a means of suggesting experiments by which its truth may
be tested. With this for its destination, the conception, would have
been legitimate and philosophical; the more so, as, if confirmed, it
would have afforded an explanation of the fact that some substances
which analysis shows to be composed of the same elementary substances
in the same proportions, differ in their general properties, as for
instance, sugar and gum.[10] And if, besides affording a reason for
difference between things which differ, the hypothesis had afforded a
reason for agreement between things which agree; if the intermediate
link by which the quaternary compound was resolved into two binary ones,
could have been so chosen as to bring each of them within the analogies
of some known class of binary compounds (which it is easy to suppose
possible, and which in some particular instances actually happens);[11]
the universality of binary composition would have been a successful
example of an hypothesis in anticipation of a positive theory, to give
a direction to inquiry which might end in its being either proved or
abandoned. But M. Comte evidently thought that even though it should
never be proved--however many cases of chemical composition might always
remain in which the theory was still as hypothetical as at first--so
long as it was not actually disproved (which it is scarcely in the
nature of the case that it should ever be) it would deserve to be
retained, for its mere convenience in bringing a large body of
phaenomena under a general conception. In a _résumé_ of the general
principles of the positive method at the end of the work, he claims,
in express terms, an unlimited license of adopting "without any vain
scruple" hypothetical conceptions of this sort; "in order to satisfy,
within proper limits, our just mental inclinations, which always turn,
with an instinctive predilection, towards simplicity, continuity, and
generality of conceptions, while always respecting the reality of
external laws in so far as accessible to us" (vi. 639). "The most
philosophic point of view leads us to conceive the study of natural laws
as destined to represent the external world so as to give as much
satisfaction to the essential inclinations of our intelligence, as is
consistent with the degree of exactitude commanded by the aggregate of
our practical wants" (vi. 642). Among these "essential inclinations" he
includes not only our "instinctive predilection for order and harmony,"
which makes us relish any conception, even fictitious, that helps to
reduce phaenomena to system; but even our feelings of taste, "les
convenances purement esthétiques," which, he says, have a legitimate
part in the employment of the "genre de liberté" resté facultatif pour
notre intelligence." After the due satisfaction of our "most eminent
mental inclinations," there will still remain "a considerable margin of
indeterminateness, which should be made use of to give a direct
gratification to our _besoin_ of ideality, by embellishing our
scientific thoughts, without injury to their essential reality" (vi.
647). In consistency with all this, M. Comte warns thinkers against too
severe a scrutiny of the exact truth of scientific laws, and stamps with
"severe reprobation" those who break down "by too minute an
investigation" generalizations already made, without being able to
substitute others (vi. 639): as in the case of Lavoisier's general
theory of chemistry, which would have made that science more
satisfactory than at present to "the instinctive inclinations of our
intelligence" if it had turned out true, but unhappily it did not. These
mental dispositions in M. Comte account for his not having found or
sought a logical criterion of proof; but they are scarcely consistent
with his inveterate hostility to the hypothesis of the luminiferous
ether, which certainly gratifies our "predilection for order and
harmony," not to say our "besoin d'idéalite", in no ordinary degree.
This notion of the "destination" of the study of natural laws is to our
minds a complete dereliction of the essential principles which form the
Positive conception of science; and contained the germ of the perversion
of his own philosophy which marked his later years. It might be
interesting, but scarcely worth while, to attempt to penetrate to the
just thought which misled M. Comte, for there is almost always a grain
of truth in the errors of an original and powerful mind. There is
another grave aberration in M. Comte's view of the method of positive
science, which though not more unphilosophical than the last mentioned,
is of greater practical importance. He rejects totally, as an invalid
process, psychological observation properly so called, or in other
words, internal consciousness, at least as regards our intellectual
operations. He gives no place in his series of the science of
Psychology, and always speaks of it with contempt. The study of mental
phaenomena, or, as he expresses it, of moral and intellectual functions,
has a place in his scheme, under the head of Biology, but only as a
branch of physiology. Our knowledge of the human mind must, he thinks,
be acquired by observing other people. How we are to observe other
people's mental operations, or how interpret the signs of them without
having learnt what the signs mean by knowledge of ourselves, he does not
state. But it is clear to him that we can learn very little about the
feelings, and nothing at all about the intellect, by self-observation.
Our intelligence can observe all other things, but not itself: we cannot
observe ourselves observing, or observe ourselves reasoning: and if we
could, attention to this reflex operation would annihilate its object,
by stopping the process observed.

There is little need for an elaborate refutation of a fallacy respecting
which the only wonder is that it should impose on any one. Two answers
may be given to it. In the first place, M. Comte might be referred to
experience, and to the writings of his countryman M. Cardaillac and our
own Sir William Hamilton, for proof that the mind can not only be
conscious of, but attend to, more than one, and even a considerable
number, of impressions at once.[12] It is true that attention is
weakened by being divided; and this forms a special difficulty in
psychological observation, as psychologists (Sir William Hamilton in
particular) have fully recognised; but a difficulty is not an
impossibility. Secondly, it might have occurred to M. Comte that a fact
may be studied through the medium of memory, not at the very moment of
our perceiving it, but the moment after: and this is really the mode in
which our best knowledge of our intellectual acts is generally acquired.
We reflect on what we have been doing, when the act is past, but when
its impression in the memory is still fresh. Unless in one of these
ways, we could not have acquired the knowledge, which nobody denies us
to have, of what passes in our minds. M. Comte would scarcely have
affirmed that we are not aware of our own intellectual operations. We
know of our observings and our reasonings, either at the very time, or
by memory the moment after; in either case, by direct knowledge, and not
(like things done by us in a state of somnambulism) merely by their
results. This simple fact destroys the whole of M. Comte's argument.
Whatever we are directly aware of, we can directly observe.

And what Organon for the study of "the moral and intellectual functions"
does M. Comte offer, in lieu of the direct mental observation which he
repudiates? We are almost ashamed to say, that it is Phrenology! Not,
indeed, he says, as a science formed, but as one still to be created;
for he rejects almost all the special organs imagined by phrenologists,
and accepts only their general division of the brain into the three
regions of the propensities, the sentiments, and the intellect,[13] and
the subdivision of the latter region between the organs of meditation
and those of observation. Yet this mere first outline of an
apportionment of the mental functions among different organs, he regards
as extricating the mental study of man from the metaphysical stage, and
elevating it to the positive. The condition of mental science would be
sad indeed if this were its best chance of being positive; for the later
course of physiological observation and speculation has not tended to
confirm, but to discredit, the phrenological hypothesis. And even if
that hypothesis were true, psychological observation would still be
necessary; for how is it possible to ascertain the correspondence
between two things, by observation of only one of them? To establish a
relation between mental functions and cerebral conformations, requires
not only a parallel system of observations applied to each, but (as M.
Comte himself, with some inconsistency, acknowledges) an analysis of the
mental faculties, "des diverses facultés élémentaires," (iii. 573),
conducted without any reference to the physical conditions, since the
proof of the theory would lie in the correspondence between the division
of the brain into organs and that of the mind into faculties, each shown
by separate evidence. To accomplish this analysis requires direct
psychological study carried to a high pitch of perfection; it being
necessary, among other things, to investigate the degree in which mental
character is created by circumstances, since no one supposes that
cerebral conformation does all, and circumstances nothing. The
phrenological study of Mind thus supposes as its necessary preparation
the whole of the Association psychology. Without, then, rejecting any
aid which study of the brain and nerves can afford to psychology (and it
has afforded, and will yet afford, much), we may affirm that M. Comte
has done nothing for the constitution of the positive method of mental
science. He refused to profit by the very valuable commencements made by
his predecessors, especially by Hartley, Brown, and James Mill (if
indeed any of those philosophers were known to him), and left the
psychological branch of the positive method, as well as psychology
itself, to be put in their true position as a part of Positive
Philosophy by successors who duly placed themselves at the twofold point
of view of physiology and psychology, Mr Bain and Mr Herbert Spencer.
This great mistake is not a mere hiatus in M. Comte's system, but the
parent of serious errors in his attempt to create a Social Science. He
is indeed very skilful in estimating the effect of circumstances in
moulding the general character of the human race; were he not, his
historical theory could be of little worth: but in appreciating the
influence which circumstances exercise, through psychological laws, in
producing diversities of character, collective or individual, he is
sadly at fault.

After this summary view of M. Comte's conception of Positive Philosophy,
it remains to give some account of his more special and equally
ambitious attempt to create the Science of Sociology, or, as he
expresses it, to elevate the study of social phaenomena to the positive
state.

He regarded all who profess any political opinions as hitherto divided
between the adherents of the theological and those of the metaphysical
mode of thought: the former deducing all their doctrines from divine
ordinances, the latter from abstractions. This assertion, however,
cannot be intended in the same sense as when the terms are applied to
the sciences of inorganic nature; for it is impossible that acts
evidently proceeding from the human will could be ascribed to the agency
(at least immediate) of either divinities or abstractions. No one ever
regarded himself or his fellow-man as a mere piece of machinery worked
by a god, or as the abode of an entity which was the true author of what
the man himself appeared to do. True, it was believed that the gods, or
God, could move or change human wills, as well as control their
consequences, and prayers were offered to them accordingly, rather as
able to overrule the spontaneous course of things, than as at each
instant carrying it on. On the whole, however, the theological and
metaphysical conceptions, in their application to sociology, had
reference not to the production of phaenomena, but to the rule of duty,
and conduct in life. It is this which was based, either on a divine
will, or on abstract mental conceptions, which, by an illusion of the
rational faculty, were invested with objective validity. On the one
hand, the established rules of morality were everywhere referred to a
divine origin. In the majority of countries the entire civil and
criminal law was looked upon as revealed from above; and it is to the
petty military communities which escaped this delusion, that man is
indebted for being now a progressive being. The fundamental institutions
of the state were almost everywhere believed to have been divinely
established, and to be still, in a greater or less degree, of divine
authority. The divine right of certain lines of kings to rule, and even
to rule absolutely, was but lately the creed of the dominant party in
most countries of Europe; while the divine right of popes and bishops to
dictate men's beliefs (and not respecting the invisible world alone) is
still striving, though under considerable difficulties, to rule mankind.
When these opinions began to be out of date, a rival theory presented
itself to take their place. There were, in truth, many such theories,
and to some of them the term metaphysical, in M. Comte's sense, cannot
justly be applied. All theories in which the ultimate standard of
institutions and rules of action was the happiness of mankind, and
observation and experience the guides (and some such there have been in
all periods of free speculation), are entitled to the name Positive,
whatever, in other respects, their imperfections may be. But these were
a small minority. M. Comte was right in affirming that the prevailing
schools of moral and political speculation, when not theological, have
been metaphysical. They affirmed that moral rules, and even political
institutions, were not means to an end, the general good, but
corollaries evolved from the conception of Natural Rights. This was
especially the case in all the countries in which the ideas of
publicists were the offspring of the Roman Law. The legislators of
opinion on these subjects, when not theologians, were lawyers: and the
Continental lawyers followed the Roman jurists, who followed the Greek
metaphysicians, in acknowledging as the ultimate source of right and
wrong in morals, and consequently in institutions, the imaginary law of
the imaginary being Nature. The first systematizers of morals in
Christian Europe, on any other than a purely theological basis, the
writers on International Law, reasoned wholly from these premises, and
transmitted them to a long line of successors. This mode of thought
reached its culmination in Rousseau, in whose hands it became as
powerful an instrument for destroying the past, as it was impotent for
directing the future. The complete victory which this philosophy gained,
in speculation, over the old doctrines, was temporarily followed by an
equally complete practical triumph, the French Revolution: when, having
had, for the first time, a full opportunity of developing its
tendencies, and showing what it could not do, it failed so conspicuously
as to determine a partial reaction to the doctrines of feudalism and
Catholicism. Between these and the political metaphysics (meta-politics
as Coleridge called it) of the Revolution, society has since oscillated;
raising up in the process a hybrid intermediate party, termed
Conservative, or the party of Order, which has no doctrines of its own,
but attempts to hold the scales even between the two others, borrowing
alternately the arguments of each, to use as weapons against whichever
of the two seems at the moment most likely to prevail.

Such, reduced to a very condensed form, is M. Comte's version of the
state of European opinion on politics and society. An Englishman's
criticism would be, that it describes well enough the general division
of political opinion in France and the countries which follow her lead,
but not in England, or the communities of English origin: in all of
which, divine right died out with the Jacobites, and the law of nature
and natural rights have never been favourites even with the extreme
popular party, who preferred to rest their claims on the historical
traditions of their own country, and on maxims drawn from its law books,
and since they outgrew this standard, almost always base them on general
expediency. In England, the preference of one form of government to
another seldom turns on anything but the practical consequences which it
produces, or which are expected from it. M. Comte can point to little of
the nature of metaphysics in English politics, except "la métaphysique
constitutionnelle," a name he chooses to give to the conventional
fiction by which the occupant of the throne is supposed to be the source
from whence all power emanates, while nothing can be further from the
belief or intention of anybody than that such should really be the case.
Apart from this, which is a matter of forms and words, and has no
connexion with any belief except belief in the proprieties, the severest
criticism can find nothing either worse or better, in the modes of
thinking either of our conservative or of our liberal party, than a
particularly shallow and flimsy kind of positivism. The working classes
indeed, or some portion of them, perhaps still rest their claim to
universal suffrage on abstract right, in addition to more substantial
reasons, and thus far and no farther does metaphysics prevail in the
region of English politics. But politics is not the entire art of social
existence: ethics is a still deeper and more vital part of it: and in
that, as much in England as elsewhere, the current opinions are still
divided between the theological mode of thought and the metaphysical.
What is the whole doctrine of Intuitive Morality, which reigns supreme
wherever the idolatry of Scripture texts has abated and the influence of
Bentham's philosophy has not reached, but the metaphysical state of
ethical science? What else, indeed, is the whole _a priori_ philosophy,
in morals, jurisprudence, psychology, logic, even physical science, for
it does not always keep its hands off that, the oldest domain of
observation and experiment? It has the universal diagnostic of the
metaphysical mode of thought, in the Comtean sense of the word; that of
erecting a mere creation of the mind into a test or _norma_ of external
truth, and presenting the abstract expression of the beliefs already
entertained, as the reason and evidence which justifies them. Of those
who still adhere to the old opinions we need not speak; but when one of
the most vigorous as well as boldest thinkers that English speculation
has yet produced, full of the true scientific spirit, Mr Herbert
Spencer, places in the front of his philosophy the doctrine that the
ultimate test of the truth of a proposition is the inconceivableness of
its negative; when, following in the steps of Mr Spencer, an able
expounder of positive philosophy like Mr Lewes, in his meritorious and
by no means superficial work on Aristotle, after laying, very justly,
the blame of almost every error of the ancient thinkers on their
neglecting to _verify_ their opinions, announces that there are two
kinds of verification, the Real and the Ideal, the ideal test of truth
being that its negative is unthinkable, and by the application of that
test judges that gravitation must be universal even in the stellar
regions, because in the absence of proof to the contrary, "the idea of
matter without gravity is unthinkable;"--when those from whom it was
least to be expected thus set up acquired necessities of thought in the
minds of one or two generations as evidence of real necessities in the
universe, we must admit that the metaphysical mode of thought still
rules the higher philosophy, even in the department of inorganic nature,
and far more in all that relates to man as a moral, intellectual, and
social being.

But, while M. Comte is so far in the right, we often, as already
intimated, find him using the name metaphysical to denote certain
practical conclusions, instead of a particular kind of theoretical
premises. Whatever goes by the different names of the revolutionary, the
radical, the democratic, the liberal, the free-thinking, the sceptical,
or the negative and critical school or party in religion, politics, or
philosophy, all passes with him under the designation of metaphysical,
and whatever he has to say about it forms part of his description of the
metaphysical school of social science. He passes in review, one after
another, what he deems the leading doctrines of the revolutionary school
of politics, and dismisses them all as mere instruments of attack upon
the old social system, with no permanent validity as social truth.

He assigns only this humble rank to the first of all the articles of the
liberal creed, "the absolute right of free examination, or the dogma of
unlimited liberty of conscience." As far as this doctrine only means
that opinions, and their expression, should be exempt from _legal_
restraint, either in the form of prevention or of penalty, M. Comte is a
firm adherent of it: but the _moral_ right of every human being, however
ill-prepared by the necessary instruction and discipline, to erect
himself into a judge of the most intricate as well as the most important
questions that can occupy the human intellect, he resolutely denies.
"There is no liberty of conscience," he said in an early work, "in
astronomy, in physics, in chemistry, even in physiology, in the sense
that every one would think it absurd not to accept in confidence the
principles established in those sciences by the competent persons. If it
is otherwise in politics, the reason is merely because, the old
doctrines having gone by and the new ones not being yet formed, there
are not properly, during the interval, any established opinions." When
first mankind outgrew the old doctrines, an appeal from doctors and
teachers to the outside public was inevitable and indispensable, since
without the toleration and encouragement of discussion and criticism
from all quarters, it would have been impossible for any new doctrines
to grow up. But in itself, the practice of carrying the questions which
more than all others require special knowledge and preparation, before
the incompetent tribunal of common opinion, is, he contends, radically
irrational, and will and ought to cease when once mankind have again
made up their minds to a system of doctrine. The prolongation of this
provisional state, producing an ever-increasing divergence of opinions,
is already, according to him, extremely dangerous, since it is only when
there is a tolerable unanimity respecting the rule of life, that a real
moral control can be established over the self-interest and passions of
individuals. Besides which, when every man is encouraged to believe
himself a competent judge of the most difficult social questions, he
cannot be prevented from thinking himself competent also to the most
important public duties, and the baneful competition for power and
official functions spreads constantly downwards to a lower and lower
grade of intelligence. In M. Comte's opinion, the peculiarly complicated
nature of sociological studies, and the great amount of previous
knowledge and intellectual discipline requisite for them, together with
the serious consequences that may be produced by even, temporary errors
on such subjects, render it necessary in the case of ethics and
politics, still more than of mathematics and physics, that whatever
legal liberty may exist of questioning and discussing, the opinions of
mankind should really be formed for them by an exceedingly small number
of minds of the highest class, trained to the task by the most thorough
and laborious mental preparation: and that the questioning of their
conclusions by any one, not of an equivalent grade of intellect and
instruction, should be accounted equally presumptuous, and more
blamable, than the attempts occasionally made by sciolists to refute the
Newtonian astronomy. All this is, in a sense, true: but we confess our
sympathy with those who feel towards it like the man in the story, who
being asked whether he admitted that six and five make eleven, refused
to give an answer until he knew what use was to be made of it. The
doctrine is one of a class of truths which, unless completed by other
truths, are so liable to perversion, that we may fairly decline to take
notice of them except in connexion with some definite application. In
justice to M. Comte it should be said that he does not wish this
intellectual dominion to be exercised over an ignorant people. Par from
him is the thought of promoting the allegiance of the mass to scientific
authority by withholding from them scientific knowledge. He holds it the
duty of society to bestow on every one who grows up to manhood or
womanhood as complete a course of instruction in every department of
science, from mathematics to sociology, as can possibly be made general:
and his ideas of what is possible in that respect are carried to a
length to which few are prepared to follow him. There is something
startling, though, when closely looked into, not Utopian or chimerical,
in the amount of positive knowledge of the most varied kind which he
believes may, by good methods of teaching, be made the common
inheritance of all persons with ordinary faculties who are born into the
world: not the mere knowledge of results, to which, except for the
practical arts, he attaches only secondary value, but knowledge also of
the mode in which those results were attained, and the evidence on which
they rest, so far as it can be known and understood by those who do not
devote their lives to its study.

We have stated thus fully M. Comte's opinion on the most fundamental
doctrine of liberalism, because it is the clue to much of his general
conception of politics. If his object had only been to exemplify by that
doctrine the purely negative character of the principal liberal and
revolutionary schools of thought, he need not have gone so far: it would
have been enough to say, that the mere liberty to hold and express any
creed, cannot itself _be_ that creed. Every one is free to believe and
publish that two and two make ten, but the important thing is to know
that they make four. M. Comte has no difficulty in making out an equally
strong case against the other principal tenets of what he calls the
revolutionary school; since all that they generally amount to is, that
something ought not to be: which cannot possibly be the whole truth, and
which M. Comte, in general, will not admit to be even part of it. Take
for instance the doctrine which denies to governments any initiative in
social progress, restricting them to the function of preserving order,
or in other words keeping the peace: an opinion which, so far as
grounded on so-called rights of the individual, he justly regards as
purely metaphysical; but does not recognise that it is also widely held
as an inference from the laws of human nature and human affairs, and
therefore, whether true or false, as a Positive doctrine. Believing with
M. Comte that there are no absolute truths in the political art, nor
indeed in any art whatever, we agree with him that the _laisser faire_
doctrine, stated without large qualifications, is both unpractical and
unscientific; but it does not follow that those who assert it are not,
nineteen times out of twenty, practically nearer the truth than those
who deny it. The doctrine of Equality meets no better fate at M. Comte's
hands. He regards it as the erection into an absolute dogma of a mere
protest against the inequalities which came down from the middle ages,
and answer no legitimate end in modern society. He observes, that
mankind in a normal state, having to act together, are necessarily, in
practice, organized and classed with some reference to their unequal
aptitudes, natural or acquired, which demand that some should be under
the direction of others: scrupulous regard being at the same time had to
the fulfilment towards all, of "the claims rightfully inherent in the
dignity of a human being; the aggregate of which, still very
insufficiently appreciated, will constitute more and more the principle
of universal morality as applied to daily use... a grand moral
obligation, which has never been directly denied since the abolition of
slavery" (iv. 51). There is not a word to be said against these
doctrines: but the practical question is one which M. Comte never even
entertains--viz., when, after being properly educated, people are left
to find their places for themselves, do they not spontaneously class
themselves in a manner much more conformable to their unequal or
dissimilar aptitudes, than governments or social institutions are likely
to do it for them? The Sovereignty of the People, again,--that
metaphysical axiom which in France and the rest of the Continent has so
long been the theoretic basis of radical and democratic politics,--he
regards as of a purely negative character, signifying the right of the
people to rid themselves by insurrection of a social order that has
become oppressive; but, when erected into a positive principle of
government, which condemns indefinitely all superiors to "an arbitrary
dependence upon the multitude of their inferiors," he considers it as a
sort of "transportation to peoples of the divine right so much
reproached to kings" (iv. 55, 56). On the doctrine as a metaphysical
dogma or an absolute principle, this criticism is just; but there is
also a Positive doctrine, without any pretension to being absolute,
which claims the direct participation of the governed in their own
government, not as a natural right, but as a means to important ends,
under the conditions and with the limitations which those ends impose.
The general result of M. Comte's criticism on the revolutionary
philosophy, is that he deems it not only incapable of aiding the
necessary reorganization of society, but a serious impediment thereto,
by setting up, on all the great interests of mankind, the mere negation
of authority, direction, or organization, as the most perfect state, and
the solution of all problems: the extreme point of this aberration being
reached by Rousseau and his followers, when they extolled the savage
state, as an ideal from which civilization was only a degeneracy, more
or less marked and complete.

The state of sociological speculation being such as has been
described--divided between a feudal and theological school, now effete,
and a democratic and metaphysical one, of no value except for the
destruction of the former; the problem, how to render the social science
positive, must naturally have presented itself, more or less distinctly,
to superior minds. M. Comte examines and criticises, for the most part
justly, some of the principal efforts which have been made by individual
thinkers for this purpose. But the weak side of his philosophy comes out
prominently in his strictures on the only systematic attempt yet made by
any body of thinkers, to constitute a science, not indeed of social
phenomena generally, but of one great class or division of them. We
mean, of course, political economy, which (with a reservation in favour
of the speculations of Adam Smith as valuable preparatory studies for
science) he deems unscientific, unpositive, and a mere branch of
metaphysics, that comprehensive category of condemnation in which he
places all attempts at positive science which are not in his opinion
directed by a right scientific method. Any one acquainted with the
writings of political economists need only read his few pages of
animadversions on them (iv. 193 to 205), to learn how extremely
superficial M. Comte can sometimes be. He affirms that they have added
nothing really new to the original _aperçus_ of Adam Smith; when every
one who has read them knows that they have added so much as to have
changed the whole aspect of the science, besides rectifying and clearing
up in the most essential points the _aperçus_ themselves. He lays an
almost puerile stress, for the purpose of disparagement, on the
discussions about the meaning of words which are found in the best books
on political economy, as if such discussions were not an indispensable
accompaniment of the progress of thought, and abundant in the history of
every physical science. On the whole question he has but one remark of
any value, and that he misapplies; namely, that the study of the
conditions of national wealth as a detached subject is unphilosophical,
because, all the different aspects of social phaenomena acting and
reacting on one another, they cannot be rightly understood apart: which
by no means proves that the material and industrial phaenomena of
society are not, even by themselves, susceptible of useful
generalizations, but only that these generalizations must necessarily be
relative to a given form of civilization and a given stage of social
advancement. This, we apprehend, is what no political economist would
deny. None of them pretend that the laws of wages, profits, values,
prices, and the like, set down in their treatises, would be strictly
true, or many of them true at all, in the savage state (for example), or
in a community composed of masters and slaves. But they do think, with
good reason, that whoever understands the political economy of a country
with the complicated and manifold civilization of the nations of Europe,
can deduce without difficulty the political economy of any other state
of society, with the particular circumstances of which he is equally
well acquainted.[14] We do not pretend that political economy has never
been prosecuted or taught in a contracted spirit. As often as a study is
cultivated by narrow minds, they will draw from it narrow conclusions.
If a political economist is deficient in general knowledge, he will
exaggerate the importance and universality of the limited class of
truths which he knows. All kinds of scientific men are liable to this
imputation, and M. Comte is never weary of urging it against them;
reproaching them with their narrowness of mind, the petty scale of their
thoughts, their incapacity for large views, and the stupidity of those
they occasionally attempt beyond the bounds of their own subjects.
Political economists do not deserve these reproaches more than other
classes of positive inquirers, but less than most. The principal error
of narrowness with which they are frequently chargeable, is that of
regarding, not any economical doctrine, but their present experience of
mankind, as of universal validity; mistaking temporary or local phases
of human character for human nature itself; having no faith in the
wonderful pliability of the human mind; deeming it impossible, in spite
of the strongest evidence, that the earth can produce human beings of a
different type from that which is familiar to them in their own age, or
even, perhaps, in their own country. The only security against this
narrowness is a liberal mental cultivation, and all it proves is that
a person is not likely to be a good political economist who is nothing
else.

Thus far, we have had to do with M. Comte, as a sociologist, only in his
critical capacity. We have now to deal with him as a constructor--the
author of a sociological system. The first question is that of the
Method proper to the study. His view of this is highly instructive.

The Method proper to the Science of Society must be, in substance, the
same as in all other sciences; the interrogation and interpretation of
experience, by the twofold process of Induction and Deduction. But its
mode of practising these operations has features of peculiarity. In
general, Induction furnishes to science the laws of the elementary
facts, from which, when known, those of the complex combinations are
thought out deductively: specific observation of complex phaenomena
yields no general laws, or only empirical ones; its scientific function
is to verify the laws obtained by deduction. This mode of philosophizing
is not adequate to the exigencies of sociological investigation. In
social phaemomena the elementary facts are feelings and actions, and the
laws of these are the laws of human nature, social facts being the
results of human acts and situations. Since, then, the phaenomena of man
in society result from his nature as an individual being, it might be
thought that the proper mode of constructing a positive Social Science
must be by deducing it from the general laws of human nature, using the
facts of history merely for verification. Such, accordingly, has been
the conception of social science by many of those who have endeavoured
to render it positive, particularly by the school of Bentham. M. Comte
considers this as an error. We may, he says, draw from the universal
laws of human nature some conclusions (though even these, we think,
rather precarious) concerning the very earliest stages of human
progress, of which there are either no, or very imperfect, historical
records. But as society proceeds in its development, its phaenomena are
determined, more and more, not by the simple tendencies of universal
human nature, but by the accumulated influence of past generations over
the present. The human beings themselves, on the laws of whose nature
the facts of history depend, are not abstract or universal but
historical human beings, already shaped, and made what they are, by
human society. This being the case, no powers of deduction could enable
any one, starting from the mere conception of the Being Man, placed in a
world such as the earth may have been before the commencement of human
agency, to predict and calculate the phaenomena of his development such
as they have in fact proved. If the facts of history, empirically
considered, had not given rise to any generalizations, a deductive study
of history could never have reached higher than more or less plausible
conjecture. By good fortune (for the case might easily have been
otherwise) the history of our species, looked at as a comprehensive
whole, does exhibit a determinate course, a certain order of
development: though history alone cannot prove this to be a necessary
law, as distinguished from a temporary accident. Here, therefore, begins
the office of Biology (or, as we should say, of Psychology) in the
social science. The universal laws of human nature are part of the data
of sociology, but in using them we must reverse the method of the
deductive physical sciences: for while, in these, specific experience
commonly serves to verify laws arrived at by deduction, in sociology it
is specific experience which suggests the laws, and deduction which
verifies them. If a sociological theory, collected from historical
evidence, contradicts the established general laws of human nature; if
(to use M. Comte's instances) it implies, in the mass of mankind, any
very decided natural bent, either in a good or in a bad direction; if it
supposes that the reason, in average human beings, predominates over the
desires, or the disinterested desires over the personal; we may know
that history has been misinterpreted, and that the theory is false. On
the other hand, if laws of social phaenomena, empirically generalized
from history, can when once suggested be affiliated to the known laws of
human nature; if the direction actually taken by the developments and
changes of human society, can be seen to be such as the properties of
man and of his dwelling-place made antecedently probable, the empirical
generalizations are raised into positive laws, and Sociology becomes a
science.

Much has been said and written for centuries past, by the practical or
empirical school of politicians, in condemnation of theories founded on
principles of human nature, without an historical basis; and the
theorists, in their turn, have successfully retaliated on the
practicalists. But we know not any thinker who, before M. Comte, had
penetrated to the philosophy of the matter, and placed the necessity of
historical studies as the foundation of sociological speculation on the
true footing. From this time any political thinker who fancies himself
able to dispense with a connected view of the great facts of history, as
a chain of causes and effects, must be regarded as below the level of
the age; while the vulgar mode of using history, by looking in it for
parallel cases, as if any cases were parallel, or as if a single
instance, or even many instances not compared and analysed, could reveal
a law, will be more than ever, and irrevocably, discredited.

The inversion of the ordinary relation between Deduction and Induction
is not the only point in which, according to M. Comte, the Method proper
to Sociology differs from that of the sciences of inorganic nature. The
common order of science proceeds from the details to the whole. The
method of Sociology should proceed from the whole to the details. There
is no universal principle for the order of study, but that of proceeding
from the known to the unknown; finding our way to the facts at whatever
point is most open to our observation. In the phaenomena of the social
state, the collective phaenomenon is more accessible to us than the
parts of which it is composed. This is already, in a great degree, true
of the mere animal body. It is essential to the idea of an organism, and
it is even more true of the social organism than of the individual. The
state of every part of the social whole at any time, is intimately
connected with the contemporaneous state of all the others. Religious
belief, philosophy, science, the fine arts, the industrial arts,
commerce, navigation, government, all are in close mutual dependence on
one another, insomuch that when any considerable change takes place in
one, we may know that a parallel change in all the others has preceded
or will follow it. The progress of society from one general state to
another is not an aggregate of partial changes, but the product of a
single impulse, acting through all the partial agencies, and can
therefore be most easily traced by studying them together. Could it even
be detected in them separately, its true nature could not be understood
except by examining them in the _ensemble_. In constructing, therefore,
a theory of society, all the different aspects of the social
organization must be taken into consideration at once.

Our space is not consistent with inquiring into all the limitations of
this doctrine. It requires many of which M. Comte's theory takes no
account. There is one, in particular, dependent on a scientific artifice
familiar to students of science, especially of the applications of
mathematics to the study of nature. When an effect depends on several
variable conditions, some of which change less, or more slowly, than
others, we are often able to determine, either by reasoning or by
experiment, what would be the law of variation of the effect if its
changes depended only on some of the conditions, the remainder being
supposed constant. The law so found will be sufficiently near the truth
for all times and places in which the latter set of conditions do not
vary greatly, and will be a basis to set out from when it becomes
necessary to allow for the variations of those conditions also. Most of
the conclusions of social science applicable to practical use are of
this description. M. Comte's system makes no room for them. We have seen
how he deals with the part of them which are the most scientific in
character, the generalizations of political economy.

There is one more point in the general philosophy of sociology requiring
notice. Social phaenomena, like all others, present two aspects, the
statical, and the dynamical; the phaenomena of equilibrium, and those of
motion. The statical aspect is that of the laws of social existence,
considered abstractedly from progress, and confined to what is common to
the progressive and the stationary state. The dynamical aspect is that
of social progress. The statics of society is the study of the
conditions of existence and permanence of the social state. The dynamics
studies the laws of its evolution. The first is the theory of the
_consensus,_ or interdependence of social phaenomena. The second is the
theory of their filiation.

The first division M. Comte, in his great work, treats in a much more
summary manner than the second; and it forms, to our thinking, the
weakest part of the treatise. He can hardly have seemed even to himself
to have originated, in the statics of society, anything new,[15] unless
his revival of the Catholic idea of a Spiritual Power may be so
considered. The remainder, with the exception of detached thoughts, in
which even his feeblest productions are always rich, is trite, while in
our judgment far from being always true.

He begins by a statement of the general properties of human nature which
make social existence possible. Man has a spontaneous propensity to the
society of his fellow-beings, and seeks it instinctively, for its own
sake, and not out of regard to the advantages it procures for him,
which, in many conditions of humanity, must appear to him very
problematical. Man has also a certain, though moderate, amount of
natural benevolence. On the other hand, these social propensities are by
nature weaker than his selfish ones; and the social state, being mainly
kept in existence through the former, involves an habitual antagonism
between the two. Further, our wants of all kinds, from the purely
organic upwards, can only be satisfied by means of labour, nor does
bodily labour suffice, without the guidance of intelligence. But labour,
especially when prolonged and monotonous, is naturally hateful, and
mental labour the most irksome of all; and hence a second antagonism,
which must exist in all societies whatever. The character of the society
is principally determined by the degree in which the better incentive,
in each of these cases, makes head against the worse. In both the
points, human nature is capable of great amelioration. The social
instincts may approximate much nearer to the strength of the personal
ones, though never entirely coming up to it; the aversion to labour in
general, and to intellectual labour in particular, may be much weakened,
and the predominance of the inclinations over the reason greatly
diminished, though never completely destroyed. The spirit of improvement
results from the increasing strength of the social instincts, combined
with the growth of an intellectual activity, which guiding the personal
propensities, inspires each individual with a deliberate desire to
improve his condition. The personal instincts left to their own
guidance, and the indolence and apathy natural to mankind, are the
sources which mainly feed the spirit of Conservation. The struggle
between the two spirits is an universal incident of the social state.

The next of the universal elements in human society is family life;
which M. Comte regards as originally the sole, and always the principal,
source of the social feelings, and the only school open to mankind in
general, in which unselfishness can be learnt, and the feelings and
conduct demanded by social relations be made habitual. M. Comte takes
this opportunity of declaring his opinions on the proper constitution of
the family, and in particular of the marriage institution. They are of
the most orthodox and conservative sort. M. Comte adheres not only to
the popular Christian, but to the Catholic view of marriage in its
utmost strictness, and rebukes Protestant nations for having tampered
with the indissolubility of the engagement, by permitting divorce. He
admits that the marriage institution has been, in various respects,
beneficially modified with the advance of society, and that we may not
yet have reached the last of these modifications; but strenuously
maintains that such changes cannot possibly affect what he regards as
the essential principles of the institution--the irrevocability of the
engagement, and the complete subordination of the wife to the husband,
and of women generally to men; which are precisely the great vulnerable
points of the existing constitution of society on this important
subject. It is unpleasant to have to say it of a philosopher, but the
incidents of his life which have been made public by his biographers
afford an explanation of one of these two opinions: he had quarrelled
with his wife.[16] At a later period, under the influence of
circumstances equally personal, his opinions and feelings respecting
women were very much modified, without becoming more rational: in his
final scheme of society, instead of being treated as grown children,
they were exalted into goddesses: honours, privileges, and immunities,
were lavished on them, only not simple justice. On the other question,
the irrevocability of marriage, M. Comte must receive credit for
impartiality, since the opposite doctrine would have better suited his
personal convenience: but we can give him no other credit, for his
argument is not only futile but refutes itself. He says that with
liberty of divorce, life would be spent in a constant succession of
experiments and failures; and in the same breath congratulates himself
on the fact, that modern manners and sentiments have in the main
prevented the baneful effects which the toleration of divorce in
Protestant countries might have been expected to produce. He did not
perceive that if modern habits and feelings have successfully resisted
what he deems the tendency of a less rigorous marriage law, it must be
because modern habits and feelings are inconsistent with the perpetual
series of new trials which he dreaded. If there are tendencies in human
nature which seek change and variety, there are others which demand
fixity, in matters which touch the daily sources of happiness; and one
who had studied history as much as M. Comte, ought to have known that
ever since the nomad mode of life was exchanged for the agricultural,
the latter tendencies have been always gaining ground on the former. All
experience testifies that regularity in domestic relations is almost in
direct proportion to industrial civilization. Idle life, and military
life with its long intervals of idleness, are the conditions to which,
either sexual profligacy, or prolonged vagaries of imagination on that
subject, are congenial. Busy men have no time for them, and have too
much other occupation for their thoughts: they require that home should
be a place of rest, not of incessantly renewed excitement and
disturbance. In the condition, therefore, into which modern society has
passed, there is no probability that marriages would often be contracted
without a sincere desire on both sides that they should be permanent.
That this has been the case hitherto in countries where divorce was
permitted, we have on M. Comte's own showing: and everything leads us to
believe that the power, if granted elsewhere, would in general be used
only for its legitimate purpose--for enabling those who, by a blameless
or excusable mistake, have lost their first throw for domestic
happiness, to free themselves (with due regard for all interests
concerned) from the burthensome yoke, and try, under more favourable
auspices, another chance. Any further discussion of these great social
questions would evidently be incompatible with the nature and limits of
the present paper.

Lastly, a phaenomenon universal in all societies, and constantly
assuming a wider extension as they advance in their progress, is the
co-operation of mankind one with another, by the division of employments
and interchange of commodities and services; a communion which extends
to nations as well as individuals. The economic importance of this
spontaneous organization of mankind as joint workers with and for one
another, has often been illustrated. Its moral effects, in connecting
them by their interests, and as a more remote consequence, by their
sympathies, are equally salutary. But there are some things to be said
on the other side. The increasing specialisation of all employments; the
division of mankind into innumerable small fractions, each engrossed by
an extremely minute fragment of the business of society, is not without
inconveniences, as well moral as intellectual, which, if they could not
be remedied, would be a serious abatement from the benefits of advanced
civilization. The interests of the whole--the bearings of things on the
ends of the social union--are less and less present to the minds of men
who have so contracted a sphere of activity. The insignificant detail
which forms their whole occupation--the infinitely minute wheel they
help to turn in the machinery of society--does not arouse or gratify any
feeling of public spirit, or unity with their fellow-men. Their work is
a mere tribute to physical necessity, not the glad performance of a
social office. This lowering effect of the extreme division of labour
tells most of all on those who are set up as the lights and teachers of
the rest. A man's mind is as fatally narrowed, and his feelings towards
the great ends of humanity as miserably stunted, by giving all his
thoughts to the classification of a few insects or the resolution of a
few equations, as to sharpening the points or putting on the heads of
pins. The "dispersive speciality" of the present race of scientific men,
who, unlike their predecessors, have a positive aversion to enlarged
views, and seldom either know or care for any of the interests of
mankind beyond the narrow limits of their pursuit, is dwelt on by M.
Comte as one of the great and growing evils of the time, and the one
which most retards moral and intellectual regeneration. To contend
against it is one of the main purposes towards which he thinks the
forces of society should be directed. The obvious remedy is a large and
liberal general education, preparatory to all special pursuits: and this
is M. Comte's opinion: but the education of youth is not in his
estimation enough: he requires an agency set apart for obtruding upon
all classes of persons through the whole of life, the paramount claims
of the general interest, and the comprehensive ideas that demonstrate
the mode in which human actions promote or impair it. In other words,
he demands a moral and intellectual authority, charged with the duty of
guiding men's opinions and enlightening and warning their consciences;
a Spiritual Power, whose judgments on all matters of high moment should
deserve, and receive, the same universal respect and deference which is
paid to the united judgment of astronomers in matters astronomical. The
very idea of such an authority implies that an unanimity has been
attained, at least in essentials, among moral and political thinkers,
corresponding or approaching to that which already exists in the other
sciences. There cannot be this unanimity, until the true methods of
positive science have been applied to all subjects, as completely as
they have been applied to the study of physical science: to this,
however, there is no real obstacle; and when once it is accomplished,
the same degree of accordance will naturally follow. The undisputed
authority which astronomers possess in astronomy, will be possessed on
the great social questions by Positive Philosophers; to whom will belong
the spiritual government of society, subject to two conditions: that
they be entirely independent, within their own sphere, of the temporal
government, and that they be peremptorily excluded from all share in it,
receiving instead the entire conduct of education.

This is the leading feature in M. Comte's conception of a regenerated
society; and however much this ideal differs from that which is implied
more or less confusedly in the negative philosophy of the last three
centuries, we hold the amount of truth in the two to be about the same.
M. Comte has got hold of half the truth, and the so-called liberal or
revolutionary school possesses the other half; each sees what the other
does not see, and seeing it exclusively, draws consequences from it
which to the other appear mischievously absurd. It is, without doubt,
the necessary condition of mankind to receive most of their opinions on
the authority of those who have specially studied the matters to which
they relate. The wisest can act on no other rule, on subjects with which
they are not themselves thoroughly conversant; and the mass of mankind
have always done the like on all the great subjects of thought and
conduct, acting with implicit confidence on opinions of which they did
not know, and were often incapable of understanding, the grounds, but on
which as long as their natural guides were unanimous they fully relied,
growing uncertain and sceptical only when these became divided, and
teachers who as far as they could judge were equally competent,
professed contradictory opinions. Any doctrines which come recommended
by the nearly universal verdict of instructed minds will no doubt
continue to be, as they have hitherto been, accepted without misgiving
by the rest. The difference is, that with the wide diffusion of
scientific education among the whole people, demanded by M. Comte, their
faith, however implicit, would not be that of ignorance: it would not be
the blind submission of dunces to men of knowledge, but the intelligent
deference of those who know much, to those who know still more. It is
those who have some knowledge of astronomy, not those who have none at
all, who best appreciate how prodigiously more Lagrange or Laplace knew
than themselves. This is what can be said in favour of M. Comte. On the
contrary side it is to be said, that in order that this salutary
ascendancy over opinion should be exercised by the most eminent
thinkers, it is not necessary that they should be associated and
organized. The ascendancy will come of itself when the unanimity is
attained, without which it is neither desirable nor possible. It is
because astronomers agree in their teaching that astronomy is trusted,
and not because there is an Academy of Sciences or a Royal Society
issuing decrees or passing resolutions. A constituted moral authority
can only be required when the object is not merely to promulgate and
diffuse principles of conduct, but to direct the detail of their
application; to declare and inculcate, not duties, but each person's
duty, as was attempted by the spiritual authority of the middle ages.
From this extreme application of his principle M. Comte does not shrink.
A function of this sort, no doubt, may often be very usefully discharged
by individual members of the speculative class; but if entrusted to any
organized body, would involve nothing less than a spiritual despotism.
This however is what M. Comte really contemplated, though it would
practically nullify that peremptory separation of the spiritual from the
temporal power, which he justly deemed essential to a wholesome state of
society. Those whom an irresistible public opinion invested with the
right to dictate or control the acts of rulers, though without the means
of backing their advice by force, would have all the real power of the
temporal authorities, without their labours or their responsibilities.
M. Comte would probably have answered that the temporal rulers, having
the whole legal power in their hands, would certainly not pay to the
spiritual authority more than a very limited obedience: which amounts to
saying that the ideal form of society which he sets up, is only fit to
be an ideal because it cannot possibly be realized.

That education should be practically directed by the philosophic class,
when there is a philosophic class who have made good their claim to the
place in opinion hitherto filled by the clergy, would be natural and
indispensable. But that all education should be in the hands of a
centralized authority, whether composed of clergy or of philosophers,
and be consequently all framed on the same model, and directed to the
perpetuation of the same type, is a state of things which instead of
becoming more acceptable, will assuredly be more repugnant to mankind,
with every step of their progress in the unfettered exercise of their
highest faculties. We shall see, in the Second Part, the evils with
which the conception of the new Spiritual Power is pregnant, coming out
into full bloom in the more complete development which M. Comte gave to
the idea in his later years.

After this unsatisfactory attempt to trace the outline of Social
Statics, M. Comte passes to a topic on which he is much more at
home--the subject of his most eminent speculations; Social Dynamics, or
the laws of the evolution of human society.

Two questions meet us at the outset: Is there a natural evolution in
human affairs? and is that evolution an improvement? M. Comte resolves
them both in the affirmative by the same answer. The natural progress of
society consists in the growth of our human attributes, comparatively to
our animal and our purely organic ones: the progress of our humanity
towards an ascendancy over our animality, ever more nearly approached
though incapable of being completely realized. This is the character and
tendency of human development, or of what is called civilization; and
the obligation of seconding this movement--of working in the direction
of it--is the nearest approach which M. Comte makes in this treatise to
a general principle or standard of morality.

But as our more eminent, and peculiarly human, faculties are of various
orders, moral, intellectual, and aesthetic, the question presents
itself, is there any one of these whose development is the predominant
agency in the evolution of our species? According to M. Comte, the main
agent in the progress of mankind is their intellectual development.

Not because the intellectual is the most powerful part of our nature,
for, limited to its inherent strength, it is one of the weakest: but
because it is the guiding part, and acts not with its own strength
alone, but with the united force of all parts of our nature which it can
draw after it. In a social state the feelings and propensities cannot
act with their full power, in a determinate direction, unless the
speculative intellect places itself at their head. The passions are,
in the individual man, a more energetic power than a mere intellectual
conviction; but the passions tend to divide, not to unite, mankind: it
is only by a common belief that passions are brought to work together,
and become a collective force instead of forces neutralizing one
another. Our intelligence is first awakened by the stimulus of our
animal wants and of our stronger and coarser desires; and these for
a long time almost exclusively determine the direction in which our
intelligence shall work: but once roused to activity, it assumes more
and more the management of the operations of which stronger impulses are
the prompters, and constrains them to follow its lead, not by its own
strength, but because in the play of antagonistic forces, the path it
points out is (in scientific phraseology) the direction of least
resistance. Personal interests and feelings, in the social state, can
only obtain the maximum of satisfaction by means of co-operation, and
the necessary condition of co-operation is a common belief. All human
society, consequently, is grounded on a system of fundamental opinions,
which only the speculative faculty can provide, and which when provided,
directs our other impulses in their mode of seeking their gratification.
And hence the history of opinions, and of the speculative faculty, has
always been the leading element in the history of mankind.

This doctrine has been combated by Mr Herbert Spencer, in the pamphlet
already referred to; and we will quote, in his own words, the theory he
propounds in opposition to it:--

/#
     "Ideas do not govern and overthrow the world; the world is governed
     or overthrown by feelings, to which ideas serve only as guides. The
     social mechanism does not rest finally upon opinions, but almost
     wholly upon character. Not intellectual anarchy, but moral
     antagonism, is the cause of political crises. All social phaenomena
     are produced by the totality of human emotions and beliefs, of
     which the emotions are mainly predetermined, while the beliefs are
     mainly post-determined. Men's desires are chiefly inherited; but
     their beliefs are chiefly acquired, and depend on surrounding
     conditions; and the most important surrounding conditions depend on
     the social state which the prevalent desires have produced. The
     social state at any time existing, is the resultant of all the
     ambitions, self-interests, fears, reverences, indignations,
     sympathies, &c., of ancestral citizens and existing citizens. The
     ideas current in this social state must, on the average, lie
     congruous with the feelings of citizens, and therefore, on the
     average, with the social state these feelings have produced. Ideas
     wholly foreign to this social state cannot be evolved, and if
     introduced from without, cannot get accepted--or, if accepted, die
     out when the temporary phase of feeling which caused their
     acceptance ends. Hence, though advanced ideas, when once
     established, act upon society and aid its further advance, yet the
     establishment of such ideas depends on the fitness of society for
     receiving them. Practically, the popular character and the social
     state determine what ideas shall be current; instead of the current
     ideas determining the social state and the character. The
     modification of men's moral natures, caused by the continuous
     discipline of social life, which adapts them more and more to
     social relations, is therefore the chief proximate cause of social
     progress."[17]
#/

A great part of these statements would have been acknowledged as true by
M. Comte, and belong as much to his theory as to Mr Spencer's. The
re-action of all other mental and social elements upon the intellectual
not only is fully recognized by him, but his philosophy of history makes
great use of it, pointing out that the principal intellectual changes
could not have taken place unless changes in other elements of society
had preceded; but also showing that these were themselves consequences
of prior intellectual changes. It will not be found, on a fair
examination of what M. Comte has written, that he has overlooked any of
the truth that there is in Mr Spencer's theory. He would not indeed have
said (what Mr Spencer apparently wishes us to say) that the effects
which can be historically traced, for example to religion, were not
produced by the belief in God, but by reverence and fear of him. He
would have said that the reverence and fear presuppose the belief: that
a God must be believed in before he can be feared or reverenced. The
whole influence of the belief in a God upon society and civilization,
depends on the powerful human sentiments which are ready to attach
themselves to the belief; and yet the sentiments are only a social force
at all, through the definite direction given to them by that or some
other intellectual conviction; nor did the sentiments spontaneously
throw up the belief in a God, since in themselves they were equally
capable of gathering round some other object. Though it is true that
men's passions and interests often dictate their opinions, or rather
decide their choice among the two or three forms of opinion, which the
existing condition of human intelligence renders possible, this
disturbing cause is confined to morals, politics, and religion; and it
is the intellectual movement in other regions than these, which is at
the root of all the great changes in human affairs. It was not human
emotions and passions which discovered the motion of the earth, or
detected the evidence of its antiquity; which exploded Scholasticism,
and inaugurated the exploration of nature; which invented printing,
paper, and the mariner's compass. Yet the Reformation, the English and
French revolutions, and still greater moral and social changes yet to
come, are direct consequences of these and similar discoveries. Even
alchemy and astrology were not believed because people thirsted for gold
and were anxious to pry into the future, for these desires are as strong
now as they were then: but because alchemy and astrology were
conceptions natural to a particular stage in the growth of human
knowledge, and consequently determined during that stage the particular
means whereby the passions which always exist, sought their
gratification. To say that men's intellectual beliefs do not determine
their conduct, is like saying that the ship is moved by the steam and
not by the steersman. The steam indeed is the motive power; the
steersman, left to himself, could not advance the vessel a single inch;
yet it is the steersman's will and the steersman's knowledge which
decide in what direction it shall move and whither it shall go.

Examining next what is the natural order of intellectual progress among
mankind, M. Comte observes, that as their general mode of conceiving the
universe must give its character to all their conceptions of detail, the
determining fact in their intellectual history must be the natural
succession of theories of the universe; which, it has been seen,
consists of three stages, the theological, the metaphysical, and the
positive. The passage of mankind through these stages, including the
successive modifications of the theological conception by the rising
influence of the other two, is, to M. Comte's mind, the most decisive
fact in the evolution of humanity. Simultaneously, however, there has
been going on throughout history a parallel movement in the purely
temporal department of things, consisting of the gradual decline of the
military mode of life (originally the chief occupation of all freemen)
and its replacement by the industrial. M. Comte maintains that there
is a necessary connexion and interdependence between this historical
sequence and the other: and he easily shows that the progress of
industry and that of positive science are correlative; man's power to
modify the facts of nature evidently depending on the knowledge he has
acquired of their laws. We do not think him equally successful in
showing a natural connexion between the theological mode of thought and
the military system of society: but since they both belong to the same
age of the world--since each is, in itself, natural and inevitable, and
they are together modified and together undermined by the same cause,
the progress of science and industry, M. Comte is justified in
considering them as linked together, and the movement by which mankind
emerge from them as a single evolution.

These propositions having been laid down as the first principles of
social dynamics, M. Comte proceeds to verify and apply them by a
connected view of universal history. This survey nearly fills two large
volumes, above a third of the work, in all of which there is scarcely a
sentence that does not add an idea. We regard it as by far his greatest
achievement, except his review of the sciences, and in some respects
more striking even than that. We wish it were practicable in the compass
of an essay like the present, to give even a faint conception of the
extraordinary merits of this historical analysis. It must be read to be
appreciated. Whoever disbelieves that the philosophy of history can be
made a science, should suspend his judgment until he has read these
volumes of M. Comte. We do not affirm that they would certainly change
his opinion; but we would strongly advise him to give them a chance.

We shall not attempt the vain task of abridgment, a few words are all we
can give to the subject. M. Comte confines himself to the main stream of
human progress, looking only at the races and nations that led the van,
and regarding as the successors of a people not their actual
descendants, but those who took up the thread of progress after them.
His object is to characterize truly, though generally, the successive
states of society through which the advanced guard of our species has
passed, and the filiation of these states on one another--how each grew
out of the preceding and was the parent of the following state. A more
detailed explanation, taking into account minute differences and more
special and local phaenomena, M. Comte does not aim at, though he does
not avoid it when it falls in his path. Here, as in all his other
speculations, we meet occasional misjudgments, and his historical
correctness in minor matters is now and then at fault; but we may well
wonder that it is not oftener so, considering the vastness of the field,
and a passage in one of his prefaces in which he says of himself that he
_rapidly_ amassed the materials for his great enterprise (vi. 34). This
expression in his mouth does not imply what it would in that of the
majority of men, regard being had to his rare capacity of prolonged and
concentrated mental labour: and it is wonderful that he so seldom gives
cause to wish that his collection of materials had been less "rapid."
But (as he himself remarks) in an inquiry of this sort the vulgarest
facts are the most important. A movement common to all mankind--to all
of them at least who do move--must depend on causes affecting them all;
and these, from the scale on which they operate, cannot require abstruse
research to bring them to light: they are not only seen, but best seen,
in the most obvious, most universal, and most undisputed phaenomena.
Accordingly M. Comte lays no claim to new views respecting the mere
facts of history; he takes them as he finds them, builds almost
exclusively on those concerning which there is no dispute, and only
tries what positive results can be obtained by combining them. Among
the vast mass of historical observations which he has grouped and
co-ordinated, if we have found any errors they are in things which do
not affect his main conclusions. The chain of causation by which he
connects the spiritual and temporal life of each era with one another
and with the entire series, will be found, we think, in all essentials,
irrefragable. When local or temporary disturbing causes have to be taken
into the account as modifying the general movement, criticism has more
to say. But this will only become important when the attempt is made to
write the history or delineate the character of some given society on M.
Comte's principles.

Such doubtful statements, or misappreciations of states of society, as
we have remarked, are confined to cases which stand more or less apart
from the principal line of development of the progressive societies. For
instance, he makes greatly too much of what, with many other Continental
thinkers, he calls the Theocratic state. He regards this as a natural,
and at one time almost an universal, stage of social progress, though
admitting that it either never existed or speedily ceased in the two
ancient nations to which mankind are chiefly indebted for being
permanently progressive. We hold it doubtful if there ever existed what
M. Comte means by a theocracy. There was indeed no lack of societies in
which, the civil and penal law being supposed to have been divinely
revealed, the priests were its authorized interpreters. But this is the
case even in Mussulman countries, the extreme opposite of theocracy. By
a theocracy we understand to be meant, and we understand M. Comte to
mean, a society founded on caste, and in which the speculative,
necessarily identical with the priestly caste, has the temporal
government in its hands or under its control. We believe that no such
state of things ever existed in the societies commonly cited as
theocratic. There is no reason to think that in any of them, the king,
or chief of the government, was ever, unless by occasional usurpation,
a member of the priestly caste.[18] It was not so in Israel, even in the
time of the Judges; Jephtha, for example, was a Gileadite, of the tribe
of Manasseh, and a military captain, as all governors in such an age and
country needed to be. Priestly rulers only present themselves in two
anomalous cases, of which next to nothing is known: the Mikados of Japan
and the Grand Lamas of Thibet: in neither of which instances was the
general constitution of society one of caste, and in the latter of them
the priestly sovereignty is as nominal as it has become in the former.
India is the typical specimen of the institution of caste--the only case
in which we are certain that it ever really existed, for its existence
anywhere else is a matter of more or less probable inference in the
remote past. But in India, where the importance of the sacerdotal order
was greater than in any other recorded state of society, the king not
only was not a priest, but, consistently with the religious law, could
not be one: he belonged to a different caste. The Brahmins were invested
with an exalted character of sanctity, and an enormous amount of civil
privileges; the king was enjoined to have a council of Brahmin advisers;
but practically he took their advice or disregarded it exactly as he
pleased. As is observed by the historian who first threw the light of
reason on Hindoo society,[19] the king, though in dignity, to judge by
the written code, he seemed vastly inferior to the Brahmins, had always
the full power of a despotic monarch: the reason being that he had the
command of the army, and the control of the public revenue. There is no
case known to authentic history in which either of these belonged to the
sacerdotal caste. Even in the cases most favourable to them, the
priesthood had no voice in temporal affairs, except the "consultative"
voice which M. Comte's theory allows to every spiritual power. His
collection of materials must have been unusually "rapid" in this
instance, for he regards almost all the societies of antiquity, except
the Greek and Roman, as theocratic, even Gaul under the Druids, and
Persia under Darius; admitting, however, that in these two countries,
when they emerge into the light of history, the theocracy had already
been much broken down by military usurpation. By what evidence he could
have proved that it ever existed, we confess ourselves unable to divine.

The only other imperfection worth noticing here, which we find in M.
Comte's view of history, is that he has a very insufficient
understanding of the peculiar phaenomena of English development; though
he recognizes, and on the whole correctly estimates, its exceptional
character in relation to the general European movement. His failure
consists chiefly in want of appreciation of Protestantism; which, like
almost all thinkers, even unbelievers, who have lived and thought
exclusively in a Catholic atmosphere, he sees and knows only on its
negative side, regarding the Reformation as a mere destructive movement,
stopped short in too early a stage. He does not seem to be aware that
Protestantism has any positive influences, other than the general ones
of Christianity; and misses one of the most important facts connected
with it, its remarkable efficacy, as contrasted with Catholicism, in
cultivating the intelligence and conscience of the individual believer.
Protestantism, when not merely professed but actually taken into the
mind, makes a demand on the intelligence; the mind is expected to be
active, not passive, in the reception of it. The feeling of a direct
responsibility of the individual immediately to God, is almost wholly
a creation of Protestantism. Even when Protestants were nearly as
persecuting as Catholics (quite as much so they never were); even when
they held as firmly as Catholics that salvation depended on having the
true belief, they still maintained that the belief was not to be
accepted from a priest, but to be sought and found by the believer, at
his eternal peril if he failed; and that no one could answer to God for
him, but that he had to answer for himself. The avoidance of fatal error
thus became in a great measure a question of culture; and there was the
strongest inducement to every believer, however humble, to seek culture
and to profit by it. In those Protestant countries, accordingly, whose
Churches were not, as the Church of England always was, principally
political institutions--in Scotland, for instance, and the New England
States--an amount of education was carried down to the poorest of the
people, of which there is no other example; every peasant expounded the
Bible to his family (many to their neighbours), and had a mind practised
in meditation and discussion on all the points of his religious creed.
The food may not have been the most nourishing, but we cannot be blind
to the sharpening and strengthening exercise which such great topics
gave to the understanding--the discipline in abstraction and reasoning
which such mental occupation brought down to the humblest layman, and
one of the consequences of which was the privilege long enjoyed by
Scotland of supplying the greater part of Europe with professors for its
universities, and educated and skilled workmen for its practical arts.

This, however, notwithstanding its importance, is, in a comprehensive
view of universal history, only a matter of detail. We find no
fundamental errors in M. Comte's general conception of history. He is
singularly exempt from most of the twists and exaggerations which we are
used to find in almost all thinkers who meddle with speculations of this
character. Scarcely any of them is so free (for example) from the
opposite errors of ascribing too much or too little influence to
accident, and to the qualities of individuals. The vulgar mistake of
supposing that the course of history has no tendencies of its own, and
that great events usually proceed from small causes, or that kings, or
conquerors, or the founders of philosophies and religions, can do with
society what they please, no one has more completely avoided or more
tellingly exposed. But he is equally free from the error of those who
ascribe all to general causes, and imagine that neither casual
circumstances, nor governments by their acts, nor individuals of genius
by their thoughts, materially accelerate or retard human progress. This
is the mistake which pervades the instructive writings of the thinker
who in England and in our own times bore the nearest, though a very
remote, resemblance to M. Comte--the lamented Mr Buckle; who, had he not
been unhappily cut off in an early stage of his labours, and before the
complete maturity of his powers, would probably have thrown off an
error, the more to be regretted as it gives a colour to the prejudice
which regards the doctrine of the invariability of natural laws as
identical with fatalism. Mr Buckle also fell into another mistake which
M. Comte avoided, that of regarding the intellectual as the only
progressive element in man, and the moral as too much the same at all
times to affect even the annual average of crime. M. Comte shows, on the
contrary, a most acute sense of the causes which elevate or lower the
general level of moral excellence; and deems intellectual progress in no
other way so beneficial as by creating a standard to guide the moral
sentiments of mankind, and a mode of bringing those sentiments
effectively to bear on conduct.

M. Comte is equally free from the error of considering any practical
rule or doctrine that can be laid down in politics as universal and
absolute. All political truth he deems strictly relative, implying as
its correlative a given state or situation of society. This conviction
is now common to him with all thinkers who are on a level with the age,
and comes so naturally to any intelligent reader of history, that the
only wonder is how men could have been prevented from reaching it
sooner. It marks one of the principal differences between the political
philosophy of the present time and that of the past; but M. Comte
adopted it when the opposite mode of thinking was still general, and
there are few thinkers to whom the principle owes more in the way of
comment and illustration.

Again, while he sets forth the historical succession of systems of
belief and forms of political society, and places in the strongest light
those imperfections in each which make it impossible that any of them
should be final, this does not make him for a moment unjust to the men
or the opinions of the past. He accords with generous recognition the
gratitude due to all who, with whatever imperfections of doctrine or
even of conduct, contributed materially to the work of human
improvement. In all past modes of thought and forms of society he
acknowledged a useful, in many a necessary, office, in carrying mankind
through one stage of improvement into a higher. The theological spirit
in its successive forms, the metaphysical in its principal varieties,
are honoured by him for the services they rendered in bringing mankind
out of pristine savagery into a state in which more advanced modes of
belief became possible. His list of heroes and benefactors of mankind
includes, not only every important name in the scientific movement, from
Thales of Miletus to Fourier the mathematician and Blainville the
biologist, and in the aesthetic from Homer to Manzoni, but the most
illustrious names in the annals of the various religions and
philosophies, and the really great politicians in all states of
society.[20] Above all, he has the most profound admiration for the
services rendered by Christianity, and by the Church of the middle ages.
His estimate of the Catholic period is such as the majority of
Englishmen (from whom we take the liberty to differ) would deem
exaggerated, if not absurd. The great men of Christianity, from St Paul
to St Francis of Assisi, receive his warmest homage: nor does he forget
the greatness even of those who lived and thought in the centuries in
which the Catholic Church, having stopt short while the world had gone
on, had become a hindrance to progress instead of a promoter of it; such
men as Fénélon and St Vincent de Paul, Bossuet and Joseph de Maistre.
A more comprehensive, and, in the primitive sense of the term, more
catholic, sympathy and reverence towards real worth, and every kind of
service to humanity, we have not met with in any thinker. Men who would
have torn each other in pieces, who even tried to do so, if each
usefully served in his own way the interests of mankind, are all
hallowed to him.

Neither is his a cramped and contracted notion of human excellence,
which cares only for certain forms of development. He not only
personally appreciates, but rates high in moral value, the creations of
poets and artists in all departments, deeming them, by their mixed
appeal to the sentiments and the understanding, admirably fitted to
educate the feelings of abstract thinkers, and enlarge the intellectual
horizon of people of the world.[21] He regards the law of progress as
applicable, in spite of appearances, to poetry and art as much as to
science and politics. The common impression to the contrary he ascribes
solely to the fact, that the perfection of aesthetic creation requires
as its condition a consentaneousness in the feelings of mankind, which
depends for its existence on a fixed and settled state of opinions:
while the last five centuries have been a period not of settling, but of
unsettling and decomposing, the most general beliefs and sentiments of
mankind. The numerous monuments of poetic and artistic genius which the
modern mind has produced even under this great disadvantage, are (he
maintains) sufficient proof what great productions it will be capable
of, when one harmonious vein of sentiment shall once more thrill through
the whole of society, as in the days of Homer, of Aeschylus, of Phidias,
and even of Dante.

After so profound and comprehensive a view of the progress of human
society in the past, of which the future can only be a prolongation, it
is natural to ask, to what use does he put this survey as a basis of
practical recommendations? Such recommendations he certainly makes,
though, in the present Treatise, they are of a much less definite
character than in his later writings. But we miss a necessary link;
there is a break in the otherwise close concatenation of his
speculations. We fail to see any scientific connexion between his
theoretical explanation of the past progress of society, and his
proposals for future improvement. The proposals are not, as we might
expect, recommended as that towards which human society has been tending
and working through the whole of history. It is thus that thinkers have
usually proceeded, who formed theories for the future, grounded on
historical analysis of the past. Tocqueville, for example, and others,
finding, as they thought, through all history, a steady progress in the
direction of social and political equality, argued that to smooth this
transition, and make the best of what is certainly coming, is the proper
employment of political foresight. We do not find M. Comte supporting
his recommendations by a similar line of argument. They rest as
completely, each on its separate reasons of supposed utility, as with
philosophers who, like Bentham, theorize on politics without any
historical basis at all. The only bridge of connexion which leads from
his historical speculations to his practical conclusions, is the
inference, that since the old powers of society, both in the region of
thought and of action, are declining and destined to disappear, leaving
only the two rising powers, positive thinkers on the one hand, leaders
of industry on the other, the future necessarily belongs to these:
spiritual power to the former, temporal to the latter. As a specimen of
historical forecast this is very deficient; for are there not the masses
as well as the leaders of industry? and is not theirs also a growing
power? Be this as it may, M. Comte's conceptions of the mode in which
these growing powers should be organized and used, are grounded on
anything rather than on history. And we cannot but remark a singular
anomaly in a thinker of M. Comte's calibre. After the ample evidence he
has brought forward of the slow growth of the sciences, all of which
except the mathematico-astronomical couple are still, as he justly
thinks, in a very early stage, it yet appears as if, to his mind, the
mere institution of a positive science of sociology were tantamount to
its completion; as if all the diversities of opinion on the subject,
which set mankind at variance, were solely owing to its having been
studied in the theological or the metaphysical manner, and as if when
the positive method which has raised up real sciences on other subjects
of knowledge, is similarly employed on this, divergence would at once
cease, and the entire body of positive social inquirers would exhibit
as much agreement in their doctrines as those who cultivate any of the
sciences of inorganic life. Happy would be the prospects of mankind if
this were so. A time such as M. Comte reckoned upon may come; unless
something stops the progress of human improvement, it is sure to come:
but after an unknown duration of hard thought and violent controversy.
The period of decomposition, which has lasted, on his own computation,
from the beginning of the fourteenth century to the present, is not yet
terminated: the shell of the old edifice will remain standing until
there is another ready to replace it; and the new synthesis is barely
begun, nor is even the preparatory analysis completely finished. On
other occasions M. Comte is very well aware that the Method of a science
is not the science itself, and that when the difficulty of discovering
the right processes has been overcome, there remains a still greater
difficulty, that of applying them. This, which is true of all sciences,
is truest of all in Sociology. The facts being more complicated, and
depending on a greater concurrence of forces, than in any other science,
the difficulty of treating them deductively is proportionally increased,
while the wide difference between any one case and every other in some
of the circumstances which affect the result, makes the pretence of
direct induction usually no better than empiricism. It is therefore, out
of all proportion, more uncertain than in any other science, whether two
inquirers equally competent and equally disinterested will take the same
view of the evidence, or arrive at the same conclusion. When to this
intrinsic difficulty is added the infinitely greater extent to which
personal or class interests and predilections interfere with impartial
judgment, the hope of such accordance of opinion among sociological
inquirers as would obtain, in mere deference to their authority, the
universal assent which M. Comte's scheme of society requires, must be
adjourned to an indefinite distance.

M. Comte's own theory is an apt illustration of these difficulties,
since, though prepared for these speculations as no one had ever been
prepared before, his views of social regeneration even in the
rudimentary form in which they appear above-ground in this treatise (not
to speak of the singular system into which he afterwards enlarged them)
are such as perhaps no other person of equal knowledge and capacity
would agree in. Were those views as true as they are questionable, they
could not take effect until the unanimity among positive thinkers, to
which he looked forward, shall have been attained; since the mainspring
of his system is a Spiritual Power composed of positive philosophers,
which only the previous attainment of the unanimity in question could
call into existence. A few words will sufficiently express the outline
of his scheme. A corporation of philosophers, receiving a modest support
from the state, surrounded by reverence, but peremptorily excluded not
only from all political power or employment, but from all riches, and
all occupations except their own, are to have the entire direction of
education: together with, not only the right and duty of advising and
reproving all persons respecting both their public and their private
life, but also a control (whether authoritative or only moral is not
defined) over the speculative class itself, to prevent them from wasting
time and ingenuity on inquiries and speculations of no value to mankind
(among which he includes many now in high estimation), and compel them
to employ all their powers on the investigations which may be judged, at
the time, to be the most urgently important to the general welfare. The
temporal government which is to coexist with this spiritual authority,
consists of an aristocracy of capitalists, whose dignity and authority
are to be in the ratio of the degree of generality of their conceptions
and operations--bankers at the summit, merchants next, then
manufacturers, and agriculturists at the bottom of the scale. No
representative system, or other popular organization, by way of
counterpoise to this governing power, is ever contemplated. The checks
relied upon for preventing its abuse, are the counsels and remonstrances
of the Spiritual Power, and unlimited liberty of discussion and comment
by all classes of inferiors. Of the mode in which either set of
authorities should fulfil the office assigned to it, little is said in
this treatise: but the general idea is, while regulating as little as
possible by law, to make the pressure of opinion, directed by the
Spiritual Power, so heavy on every individual, from the humblest to the
most powerful, as to render legal obligation, in as many cases as
possible, needless. Liberty and spontaneity on the part of individuals
form no part of the scheme. M. Comte looks on them with as great
jealousy as any scholastic pedagogue, or ecclesiastical director of
consciences. Every particular of conduct, public or private, is to be
open to the public eye, and to be kept, by the power of opinion, in the
course which the Spiritual corporation shall judge to be the most right.

This is not a sufficiently tempting picture to have much chance of
making converts rapidly, and the objections to the scheme are too
obvious to need stating. Indeed, it is only thoughtful persons to whom
it will be credible, that speculations leading to this result can
deserve the attention necessary for understanding them. We propose in
the next Essay to examine them as part of the elaborate and coherent
system of doctrine, which M. Comte afterwards put together for the
reconstruction of society. Meanwhile the reader will gather, from what
has been said, that M. Comte has not, in our opinion, created Sociology.
Except his analysis of history, to which there is much to be added, but
which we do not think likely to be ever, in its general features,
superseded, he has done nothing in Sociology which does not require to
be done over again, and better. Nevertheless, he has greatly advanced
the study. Besides the great stores of thought, of various and often of
eminent merit, with which he has enriched the subject, his conception of
its method is so much truer and more profound than that of any one who
preceded him, as to constitute an era in its cultivation. If it cannot
be said of him that he has created a science, it may be said truly that
he has, for the first time, made the creation possible. This is a great
achievement, and, with the extraordinary merit of his historical
analysis, and of his philosophy of the physical sciences, is enough to
immortalize his name. But his renown with posterity would probably have
been greater than it is now likely to be, if after showing the way in
which the social science should be formed, he had not flattered himself
that he had formed it, and that it was already sufficiently solid for
attempting to build upon its foundation the entire fabric of the
Political Art.



       *       *       *       *       *



PART II.

THE LATER SPECULATIONS OF M. COMTE.[22]


The appended list of publications contain the materials for knowing and
estimating what M. Comte termed his second career, in which the
_savant_, historian, and philosopher of his fundamental treatise, came
forth transfigured as the High Priest of the Religion of Humanity. They
include all his writings except the Cours de Philosophic Positive: for
his early productions, and the occasional publications of his later life,
are reprinted as Preludes or Appendices to the treatises here enumerated,
or in Dr Robinet's volume, which, as well as that of M. Littré, also
contains copious extracts from his correspondence.

In the concluding pages of his great systematic work, M. Comte had
announced four other treatises as in contemplation: on Politics; on the
Philosophy of Mathematics; on Education, a project subsequently enlarged
to include the systematization of Morals; and on Industry, or the action
of man upon external nature. Our list comprises the only two of these
which he lived to execute. It further contains a brief exposition of his
final doctrines, in the form of a Dialogue, or, as he terms it, a
Catechism, of which a translation has been published by his principal
English adherent, Mr Congreve. There has also appeared very recently,
under the title of "A General View of Positivism," a translation by Dr
Bridges, of the Preliminary Discourse in six chapters, prefixed to the
Système de Politique Positive. The remaining three books on our list are
the productions of disciples in different degrees. M. Littré, the only
thinker of established reputation who accepts that character, is a
disciple only of the Cours de Philosophie Positive, and can see the weak
points even in that. Some of them he has discriminated and discussed
with great judgment: and the merits of his volume, both as a sketch of
M. Comte's life and an appreciation of his doctrines, would well deserve
a fuller notice than we are able to give it here. M. de Blignières is
a far more thorough adherent; so much so, that the reader of his
singularly well and attractively written condensation and popularization
of his master's doctrines, does not easily discover in what it falls
short of that unqualified acceptance which alone, it would seem, could
find favour with M. Comte. For he ended by casting off M. de Blignières,
as he had previously cast off M. Littré, and every other person who,
having gone with him a certain length, refused to follow him to the end.
The author of the last work in our enumeration, Dr Robinet, is a
disciple after M. Comte's own heart; one whom no difficulty stops, and
no absurdity startles. But it is far from our disposition to speak
otherwise than respectfully of Dr Robinet and the other earnest men, who
maintain round the tomb of their master an organized co-operation for
the diffusion of doctrines which they believe destined to regenerate the
human race. Their enthusiastic veneration for him, and devotion to the
ends he pursued, do honour alike to them and to their teacher, and are
an evidence of the personal ascendancy he exercised over those who
approached him; an ascendancy which for a time carried away even M.
Littré, as he confesses, to a length which his calmer judgment does not
now approve.

These various writings raise many points of interest regarding M.
Comte's personal history, and some, not without philosophic bearings,
respecting his mental habits: from all which matters we shall abstain,
with the exception of two, which he himself proclaimed with great
emphasis, and a knowledge of which is almost indispensable to an
apprehension of the characteristic difference between his second career
and his first. It should be known that during his later life, and even
before completing his first great treatise, M. Comte adopted a rule, to
which he very rarely made any exception: to abstain systematically, not
only from newspapers or periodical publications, even scientific, but
from all reading whatever, except a few favourite poets in the ancient
and modern European languages. This abstinence he practised for the sake
of mental health; by way, as he said, of "_hygiène cérébrale_." We are
far from thinking that the practice has nothing whatever to recommend
it. For most thinkers, doubtless, it would be a very unwise one; but we
will not affirm that it may not sometimes be advantageous to a mind of
the peculiar quality of M. Comte's--one that can usefully devote itself
to following out to the remotest developments a particular line of
meditations, of so arduous a kind that the complete concentration of the
intellect upon its own thoughts is almost a necessary condition of
success. When a mind of this character has laboriously and
conscientiously laid in beforehand, as M. Comte had done, an ample stock
of materials, he may be justified in thinking that he will contribute
most to the mental wealth of mankind by occupying himself solely in
working upon these, without distracting his attention by continually
taking in more matter, or keeping a communication open with other
independent intellects. The practice, therefore, may be legitimate; but
no one should adopt it without being aware of what he loses by it. He
must resign the pretension of arriving at the whole truth on the
subject, whatever it be, of his meditations. That he should effect this,
even on a narrow subject, by the mere force of his own mind, building on
the foundations of his predecessors, without aid or correction from his
contemporaries, is simply impossible. He may do eminent service by
elaborating certain sides of the truth, but he must expect to find that
there are other sides which have wholly escaped his attention. However
great his powers, everything that he can do without the aid of incessant
remindings from other thinkers, is merely provisional, and will require
a thorough revision. He ought to be aware of this, and accept it with
his eyes open, regarding himself as a pioneer, not a constructor. If he
thinks that he can contribute most towards the elements of the final
synthesis by following out his own original thoughts as far as they will
go, leaving to other thinkers, or to himself at a subsequent time, the
business of adjusting them to the thoughts by which they ought to be
accompanied, he is right in doing so. But he deludes himself if he
imagines that any conclusions he can arrive at, while he practises M.
Comte's rule of _hygiène cérébrale_, can possibly be definitive.

Neither is such a practice, in a hygienic point of view, free from the
gravest dangers to the philosopher's own mind. When once he has
persuaded himself that he can work out the final truth on any subject,
exclusively from his own sources, he is apt to lose all measure or
standard by which to be apprized when he is departing from common sense.
Living only with his own thoughts, he gradually forgets the aspect they
present to minds of a different mould from his own; he looks at his
conclusions only from the point of view which suggested them, and from
which they naturally appear perfect; and every consideration which from
other points of view might present itself, either as an objection or as
a necessary modification, is to him as if it did not exist. When his
merits come to be recognised and appreciated, and especially if he
obtains disciples, the intellectual infirmity soon becomes complicated
with a moral one. The natural result of the position is a gigantic
self-confidence, not to say self-conceit. That of M. Comte is colossal.
Except here and there in an entirely self-taught thinker, who has no
high standard with which to compare himself, we have met with nothing
approaching to it. As his thoughts grew more extravagant, his
self-confidence grew more outrageous. The height it ultimately attained
must be seen, in his writings, to be believed.

The other circumstance of a personal nature which it is impossible not
to notice, because M. Comte is perpetually referring to it as the origin
of the great superiority which he ascribes to his later as compared with
his earlier speculations, is the "moral regeneration" which he underwent
from "une angélique influence" and "une incomparable passion privée." He
formed a passionate attachment to a lady whom he describes as uniting
everything which is morally with much that is intellectually admirable,
and his relation to whom, besides the direct influence of her character
upon his own, gave him an insight into the true sources of human
happiness, which changed his whole conception of life. This attachment,
which always remained pure, gave him but one year of passionate
enjoyment, the lady having been cut off by death at the end of that
short period; but the adoration of her memory survived, and became, as
we shall see, the type of his conception of the sympathetic culture
proper for all human beings. The change thus effected in his personal
character and sentiments, manifested itself at once in his speculations;
which, from having been only a philosophy, now aspired to become a
religion; and from having been as purely, and almost rudely, scientific
and intellectual, as was compatible with a character always enthusiastic
in its admirations and in its ardour for improvement, became from this
time what, for want of a better name, may be called sentimental; but
sentimental in a way of its own, very curious to contemplate. In
considering the system of religion, politics, and morals, which in his
later writings M. Comte constructed, it is not unimportant to bear in
mind the nature of the personal experience and inspiration to which he
himself constantly attributed this phasis of his philosophy. But as we
shall have much more to say against, than in favour of, the conclusions
to which he was in this manner conducted, it is right to declare that,
from the evidence of his writings, we really believe the moral influence
of Madame Clotilde de Vaux upon his character to have been of the
ennobling as well as softening character which he ascribes to it. Making
allowance for the effects of his exuberant growth in self-conceit, we
perceive almost as much improvement in his feelings, as deterioration in
his speculations, compared with those of the Philosophie Positive. Even
the speculations are, in some secondary aspects, improved through the
beneficial effect of the improved feelings; and might have been more so,
if, by a rare good fortune, the object of his attachment had been
qualified to exercise as improving an influence over him intellectually
as morally, and if he could have been contented with something less
ambitious than being the supreme moral legislator and religious pontiff
of the human race.

When we say that M. Comte has erected his philosophy into a religion,
the word religion must not be understood in its ordinary sense. He made
no change in the purely negative attitude which he maintained towards
theology: his religion is without a God. In saying this, we have done
enough to induce nine-tenths of all readers, at least in our own
country, to avert their faces and close their ears. To have no religion,
though scandalous enough, is an idea they are partly used to: but to
have no God, and to talk of religion, is to their feelings at once an
absurdity and an impiety. Of the remaining tenth, a great proportion,
perhaps, will turn away from anything which calls itself by the name of
religion at all. Between the two, it is difficult to find an audience
who can be induced to listen to M. Comte without an insurmountable
prejudice. But, to be just to any opinion, it ought to be considered,
not exclusively from an opponent's point of view, but from that of the
mind which propounds it. Though conscious of being in an extremely small
minority, we venture to think that a religion may exist without belief
in a God, and that a religion without a God may be, even to Christians,
an instructive and profitable object of contemplation.

What, in truth, are the conditions necessary to constitute a religion?
There must be a creed, or conviction, claiming authority over the whole
of human life; a belief, or set of beliefs, deliberately adopted,
respecting human destiny and duty, to which the believer inwardly
acknowledges that all his actions ought to be subordinate. Moreover,
there must be a sentiment connected with this creed, or capable of being
invoked by it, sufficiently powerful to give it in fact, the authority
over human conduct to which it lays claim in theory. It is a great
advantage (though not absolutely indispensable) that this sentiment
should crystallize, as it were, round a concrete object; if possible a
really existing one, though, in all the more important cases, only
ideally present. Such an object Theism and Christianity offer to the
believer: but the condition may be fulfilled, if not in a manner
strictly equivalent, by another object. It has been said that whoever
believes in "the Infinite nature of Duty," even if he believe in nothing
else, is religious. M. Comte believes in what is meant by the infinite
nature of duty, but ho refers the obligations of duty, as well as all
sentiments of devotion, to a concrete object, at once ideal and real;
the Human Race, conceived as a continuous whole, including the past, the
present, and the future. This great collective existence, this "Grand
Etre," as he terms it, though the feelings it can excite are necessarily
very different from those which direct themselves towards an ideally
perfect Being, has, as he forcibly urges, this advantage in respect to
us, that it really needs our services, which Omnipotence cannot, in any
genuine sense of the term, be supposed to do: and M. Comte says, that
assuming the existence of a Supreme Providence (which he is as far from
denying as from affirming), the best, and even the only, way in which we
can rightly worship or serve Him, is by doing our utmost to love and
serve that other Great Being, whose inferior Providence has bestowed on
us all the benefits that we owe to the labours and virtues of former
generations. It may not be consonant to usage to call this a religion;
but the term so applied has a meaning, and one which is not adequately
expressed by any other word. Candid persons of all creeds may be willing
to admit, that if a person has an ideal object, his attachment and sense
of duty towards which are able to control and discipline all his other
sentiments and propensities, and prescribe to him a rule of life, that
person has a religion: and though everyone naturally prefers his own
religion to any other, all must admit that if the object of this
attachment, and of this feeling of duty, is the aggregate of our
fellow-creatures, this Religion of the Infidel cannot, in honesty and
conscience, be called an intrinsically bad one. Many, indeed, may be
unable to believe that this object is capable of gathering round it
feelings sufficiently strong: but this is exactly the point on which a
doubt can hardly remain in an intelligent reader of M. Comte: and we
join with him in contemning, as equally irrational and mean, the
conception of human nature as incapable of giving its love and devoting
its existence to any object which cannot afford in exchange an eternity
of personal enjoyment.

The power which may be acquired over the mind by the idea of the general
interest of the human race, both as a source of emotion and as a motive
to conduct, many have perceived; but we know not if any one, before M.
Comte, realized so fully as he has done, all the majesty of which that
idea is susceptible. It ascends into the unknown recesses of the past,
embraces the manifold present, and descends into the indefinite and
unforeseeable future, forming a collective Existence without assignable
beginning or end, it appeals to that feeling of the Infinite, which is
deeply rooted in human nature, and which seems necessary to the
imposingness of all our highest conceptions. Of the vast unrolling web
of human life, the part best known to us is irrevocably past; this we
can no longer serve, but can still love: it comprises for most of us the
far greater number of those who have loved us, or from whom we have
received benefits, as well as the long series of those who, by their
labours and sacrifices for mankind, have deserved to be held in
everlasting and grateful remembrance. As M. Comte truly says, the
highest minds, even now, live in thought with the great dead, far more
than with the living; and, next to the dead, with those ideal human
beings yet to come, whom they are never destined to see. If we honour as
we ought those who have served mankind in the past, we shall feel that
we are also working for those benefactors by serving that to which their
lives were devoted. And when reflection, guided by history, has taught
us the intimacy of the connexion of every age of humanity with every
other, making us see in the earthly destiny of mankind the playing out
of a great drama, or the action of a prolonged epic, all the generations
of mankind become indissolubly united into a single image, combining all
the power over the mind of the idea of Posterity, with our best feelings
towards the living world which surrounds us, and towards the
predecessors who have made us what we are. That the ennobling power of
this grand conception may have its full efficacy, we should, with M.
Comte, regard the Grand Etre, Humanity, or Mankind, as composed, in the
past, solely of those who, in every age and variety of position, have
played their part worthily in life. It is only as thus restricted that
the aggregate of our species becomes an object deserving our veneration.
The unworthy members of it are best dismissed from our habitual
thoughts; and the imperfections which adhered through life, even to
those of the dead who deserve honourable remembrance, should be no
further borne in mind than is necessary not to falsify our conception of
facts. On the other hand, the Grand Etre in its completeness ought to
include not only all whom we venerate, but all sentient beings to which
we owe duties, and which have a claim on our attachment. M. Comte,
therefore, incorporates into the ideal object whose service is to be the
law of our life, not our own species exclusively, but, in a subordinate
degree, our humble auxiliaries, those animal races which enter into real
society with man, which attach themselves to him, and voluntarily
co-operate with him, like the noble dog who gives his life for his human
friend and benefactor. For this M. Comte has been subjected to unworthy
ridicule, but there is nothing truer or more honourable to him in the
whole body of his doctrines. The strong sense he always shows of the
worth of the inferior animals, and of the duties of mankind towards
them, is one of the very finest traits of his character.

We, therefore, not only hold that M. Comte was justified in the attempt
to develope his philosophy into a religion, and had realized the
essential conditions of one, but that all other religions are made
better in proportion as, in their practical result, they are brought to
coincide with that which he aimed at constructing. But, unhappily, the
next thing we are obliged to do, is to charge him with making a complete
mistake at the very outset of his operations--with fundamentally
misconceiving the proper office of a rule of life. He committed the
error which is often, but falsely, charged against the whole class of
utilitarian moralists; he required that the test of conduct should also
be the exclusive motive to it. Because the good of the human race is the
ultimate standard of right and wrong, and because moral discipline
consists in cultivating the utmost possible repugnance to all conduct
injurious to the general good, M. Comte infers that the good of others
is the only inducement on which we should allow ourselves to act; and
that we should endeavour to starve the whole of the desires which point
to our personal satisfaction, by denying them all gratification not
strictly required by physical necessities. The golden rule of morality,
in M. Comte's religion, is to live for others, "vivre pour autrui." To
do as we would be done by, and to love our neighbour as ourself, are not
sufficient for him: they partake, he thinks, of the nature of personal
calculations. We should endeavour not to love ourselves at all. We shall
not succeed in it, but we should make the nearest approach to it
possible. Nothing less will satisfy him, as towards humanity, than the
sentiment which one of his favourite writers, Thomas à Kempis, addresses
to God: Amem te plus quam me, nec me nisi propter te. All education and
all moral discipline should have but one object, to make altruism (a
word of his own coming) predominate over egoism. If by this were only
meant that egoism is bound, and should be taught, always to give way to
the well-understood interests of enlarged altruism, no one who
acknowledges any morality at all would object to the proposition.
But M. Comte, taking his stand on the biological fact that organs are
strengthened by exercise and atrophied by disuse, and firmly convinced
that each of our elementary inclinations has its distinct cerebral
organ, thinks it the grand duty of life not only to strengthen the
social affections by constant habit and by referring all our actions to
them, but, as far as possible, to deaden the personal passions and
propensities by desuetude. Even the exercise of the intellect is
required to obey as an authoritative rule the dominion of the social
feelings over the intelligence (du coeur sur l'esprit). The physical and
other personal instincts are to be mortified far beyond the demands of
bodily health, which indeed the morality of the future is not to insist
much upon, for fear of encouraging "les calculs personnels." M. Comte
condemns only such austerities as, by diminishing the vigour of the
constitution, make us less capable of being useful to others. Any
indulgence, even in food, not necessary to health and strength, he
condemns as immoral. All gratifications except those of the affections,
are to be tolerated only as "inevitable infirmities." Novalis said of
Spinoza that he was a God-intoxicated man: M. Comte is a
morality-intoxicated man. Every question with him is one of morality,
and no motive but that of morality is permitted.

The explanation of this we find in an original mental twist, very common
in French thinkers, and by which M. Comte was distinguished beyond them
all. He could not dispense with what he called "unity." It was for the
sake of Unity that a religion was, in his eyes, desirable. Not in the
mere sense of Unanimity, but in a far wider one. A religion must be
something by which to "systematize" human life. His definition of it, in
the "Catéchisme," is "the state of complete unity which distinguishes
our existence, at once personal and social, when all its parts, both
moral and physical, converge habitually to a common destination....
Such a harmony, individual and collective, being incapable of complete
realization in an existence so complicated as ours, this definition of
religion characterizes the immovable type towards which tends more and
more the aggregate of human efforts. Our happiness and our merit consist
especially in approaching as near as possible to this unity, of which
the gradual increase constitutes the best measure of real improvement,
personal or social." To this theme he continually returns, and argues
that this unity or harmony among all the elements of our life is not
consistent with the predominance of the personal propensities, since
these drag us in different directions; it can only result from the
subordination of them all to the social icelings, which may be made to
act in a uniform direction by a common system of convictions, and which
differ from the personal inclinations in this, that we all naturally
encourage them in one another, while, on the contrary, social life is a
perpetual restraint upon the selfish propensities.

The _fons errorum_ in M. Comte's later speculations is this inordinate
demand for "unity" and "systematization." This is the reason why it does
not suffice to him that all should be ready, in case of need, to
postpone their personal interests and inclinations to the requirements
of the general good: he demands that each should regard as vicious any
care at all for his personal interests, except as a means to the good of
others--should be ashamed of it, should strive to cure himself of it,
because his existence is not "systematized," is not in "complete unity,"
as long as he cares for more than one thing. The strangest part of the
matter is, that this doctrine seems to M. Comte to be axiomatic. That
all perfection consists in unity, he apparently considers to be a maxim
which no sane man thinks of questioning. It never seems to enter into
his conceptions that any one could object _ab initio_, and ask, why this
universal systematizing, systematizing, systematizing? Why is it
necessary that all human life should point but to one object, and be
cultivated into a system of means to a single end? May it not be the
fact that mankind, who after all are made up of single human beings,
obtain a greater sum of happiness when each pursues his own, under the
rules and conditions required by the good of the rest, than when each
makes the good of the rest his only subject, and allows himself no
personal pleasures not indispensable to the preservation of his
faculties? The regimen of a blockaded town should be cheerfully
submitted to when high purposes require it, but is it the ideal
perfection of human existence? M. Comte sees none of these difficulties.
The only true happiness, he affirms, is in the exercise of the
affections. He had found it so for a whole year, which was enough to
enable him to get to the bottom of the question, and to judge whether he
could do without everything else. Of course the supposition was not to
be heard of that any other person could require, or be the better for,
what M. Comte did not value. "Unity" and "systematization" absolutely
demanded that all other people should model themselves after M. Comte.
It would never do to suppose that there could be more than one road to
human happiness, or more than one ingredient in it.

The most prejudiced must admit that this religion without theology is
not chargeable with relaxation of moral restraints. On the contrary, it
prodigiously exaggerates them. It makes the same ethical mistake as the
theory of Calvinism, that every act in life should be done for the glory
of God, and that whatever is not a duty is a sin. It does not perceive
that between the region of duty and that of sin there is an intermediate
space, the region of positive worthiness. It is not good that persons
should be bound, by other people's opinion, to do everything that they
would deserve praise for doing. There is a standard of altruism to which
all should be required to come up, and a degree beyond it which is not
obligatory, but meritorious. It is incumbent on every one to restrain
the pursuit of his personal objects within the limits consistent with
the essential interests of others. What those limits are, it is the
province of ethical science to determine; and to keep all individuals
and aggregations of individuals within them, is the proper office of
punishment and of moral blame. If in addition to fulfilling this
obligation, persons make the good of others a direct object of
disinterested exertions, postponing or sacrificing to it even innocent
personal indulgences, they deserve gratitude and honour, and are fit
objects of moral praise. So long as they are in no way compelled to this
conduct by any external pressure, there cannot be too much of it; but a
necessary condition is its spontaneity; since the notion of a happiness
for all, procured by the self-sacrifice of each, if the abnegation is
really felt to be a sacrifice, is a contradiction. Such spontaneity by
no means excludes sympathetic encouragement; but the encouragement
should take the form of making self-devotion pleasant, not that of
making everything else painful. The object should be to stimulate
services to humanity by their natural rewards; not to render the pursuit
of our own good in any other manner impossible, by visiting it with the
reproaches of other and of our own conscience. The proper office of
those sanctions is to enforce upon every one, the conduct necessary to
give all other persons their fair chance: conduct which chiefly consists
in not doing them harm, and not impeding them in anything which without
harming others does good to themselves. To this must of course be added,
that when we either expressly or tacitly undertake to do more, we are
bound to keep our promise. And inasmuch as every one, who avails himself
of the advantages of society, leads others to expect from him all such
positive good offices and disinterested services as the moral
improvement attained by mankind has rendered customary, he deserves
moral blame if, without just cause, he disappoints that expectation.
Through this principle the domain of moral duty is always widening.
When what once was uncommon virtue becomes common virtue, it comes to be
numbered among obligations, while a degree exceeding what has grown
common, remains simply meritorious.

M. Comte is accustomed to draw most of his ideas of moral cultivation
from the discipline of the Catholic Church. Had he followed that
guidance in the present case, he would have been less wide of the mark.
For the distinction which we have drawn was fully recognized by the
sagacious and far-sighted men who created the Catholic ethics. It is
even one of the stock reproaches against Catholicism, that it has two
standards of morality, and does not make obligatory on all Christians
the highest rule of Christian perfection. It has one standard which,
faithfully acted up to, suffices for salvation, another and a higher
which when realized constitutes a saint. M. Comte, perhaps
unconsciously, for there is nothing that he would have been more
unlikely to do if he had been aware of it, has taken a leaf out of the
book of the despised Protestantism. Like the extreme Calvinists, he
requires that all believers shall be saints, and damns then (after his
own fashion) if they are not.

Our conception of human life is different. We do not conceive life to be
so rich in enjoyments, that it can afford to forego the cultivation of
all those which address themselves to what M. Comte terms the egoistic
propensities. On the contrary, we believe that a sufficient
gratification of these, short of excess, but up to the measure which
renders the enjoyment greatest, is almost always favourable to the
benevolent affections. The moralization of the personal enjoyments we
deem to consist, not in reducing them to the smallest possible amount,
but in cultivating the habitual wish to share them with others, and with
all others, and scorning to desire anything for oneself which is
incapable of being so shared. There is only one passion or inclination
which is permanently incompatible with this condition--the love of
domination, or superiority, for its own sake; which implies, and is
grounded on, the equivalent depression of other people. As a rule of
conduct, to be enforced by moral sanctions, we think no more should be
attempted than to prevent people from doing harm to others, or omitting
to do such good as they have undertaken. Demanding no more than this,
society, in any tolerable circumstances, obtains much more; for the
natural activity of human nature, shut out from all noxious directions,
will expand itself in useful ones. This is our conception of the moral
rule prescribed by the religion of Humanity. But above this standard
there is an unlimited range of moral worth, up to the most exalted
heroism, which should be fostered by every positive encouragement,
though not converted into an obligation. It is as much a part of our
scheme as of M. Comte's, that the direct cultivation of altruism, and
the subordination of egoism to it, far beyond the point of absolute
moral duty, should be one of the chief aims of education, both
individual and collective. We even recognize the value, for this end, of
ascetic discipline, in the original Greek sense of the word. We think
with Dr Johnson, that he who has never denied himself anything which is
not wrong, cannot be fully trusted for denying himself everything which
is so. We do not doubt that children and young persons will one day be
again systematically disciplined in self-mortification; that they will
be taught, as in antiquity, to control their appetites, to brave
dangers, and submit voluntarily to pain, as simple exercises in
education. Something has been lost as well as gained by no longer giving
to every citizen the training necessary for a soldier. Nor can any pains
taken be too great, to form the habit, and develop the desire, of being
useful to others and to the world, by the practice, independently of
reward and of every personal consideration, of positive virtue beyond
the bounds of prescribed duty. No efforts should be spared to associate
the pupil's self-respect, and his desire of the respect of others, with
service rendered to Humanity; when possible, collectively, but at all
events, what is always possible, in the persons of its individual
members. There are many remarks and precepts in M. Comte's volumes,
which, as no less pertinent to our conception of morality than to his,
we fully accept. For example; without admitting that to make "calculs
personnels" is contrary to morality, we agree with him in the opinion,
that the principal hygienic precepts should be inculcated, not solely or
principally as maxims of prudence, but as a matter of duty to others,
since by squandering our health we disable ourselves from rendering to
our fellow-creatures the services to which they are entitled. As M.
Comte truly says, the prudential motive is by no means fully sufficient
for the purpose, even physicians often disregarding their own precepts.
The personal penalties of neglect of health are commonly distant, as
well as more or less uncertain, and require the additional and more
immediate sanction of moral responsibility. M. Comte, therefore, in this
instance, is, we conceive, right in principle; though we have not the
smallest doubt that he would have gone into extreme exaggeration in
practice, and would have wholly ignored the legitimate liberty of the
individual to judge for himself respecting his own bodily conditions,
with due relation to the sufficiency of his means of knowledge, and
taking the responsibility of the result.

Connected with the same considerations is another idea of M. Comte,
which has great beauty and grandeur in it, and the realization of which,
within the bounds of possibility, would be a cultivation of the social
feelings on a most essential point. It is, that every person who lives
by any useful work, should be habituated to regard himself not as an
individual working for his private benefit, but as a public functionary;
and his wages, of whatever sort, as not the remuneration or
purchase-money of his labour, which should be given freely, but as the
provision made by society to enable him to carry it on, and to replace
the materials and products which have been consumed in the process. M.
Comte observes, that in modern industry every one in fact works much
more for others than for himself, since his productions are to be
consumed by others, and it is only necessary that his thoughts and
imagination should adapt themselves to the real state of the fact. The
practical problem, however, is not quite so simple, for a strong sense
that he is working for others may lead to nothing better than feeling
himself necessary to them, and instead of freely giving his commodity,
may only encourage him to put a high price upon it. What M. Comte really
means is that we should regard working for the benefit of others as a
good in itself; that we should desire it for its own sake, and not for
the sake of remuneration, which cannot justly be claimed for doing what
we like: that the proper return for a service to society is the
gratitude of society: and that the moral claim of any one in regard to
the provision for his personal wants, is not a question of _quid pro
quo_ in respect to his co-operation, but of how much the circumstances
of society permit to be assigned to him, consistently with the just
claims of others. To this opinion we entirely subscribe. The rough
method of settling the labourer's share of the produce, the competition
of the market, may represent a practical necessity, but certainly not a
moral ideal. Its defence is, that civilization has not hitherto been
equal to organizing anything better than this first rude approach to an
equitable distribution. Rude as it is, we for the present go less wrong
by leaving the thing to settle itself, than by settling it artificially
in any mode which has yet been tried. But in whatever manner that
question may ultimately be decided, the true moral and social idea of
Labour is in no way affected by it. Until labourers and employers
perform the work of industry in the spirit in which soldiers perform
that of an army, industry will never be moralized, and military life
will remain, what, in spite of the anti-social character of its direct
object, it has hitherto been--the chief school of moral co-operation.

Thus far of the general idea of M. Comte's ethics and religion. We must
now say something of the details. Here we approach the ludicrous side of
the subject: but we shall unfortunately have to relate other things far
more really ridiculous.

There cannot be a religion without a _cultus._ We use this term for want
of any other, for its nearest equivalent, worship, suggests a different
order of ideas. We mean by it, a set of systematic observances, intended
to cultivate and maintain the religious sentiment. Though M. Comte
justly appreciates the superior efficacy of acts, in keeping up and
strengthening the feeling which prompts them, over any mode whatever of
mere expression, he takes pains to organize the latter also with great
minuteness. He provides an equivalent both for the private devotions,
and for the public ceremonies, of other faiths. The reader will be
surprised to learn, that the former consists of prayer. But prayer, as
understood by M. Comte, does not mean asking; it is a mere outpouring of
feeling; and for this view of it he claims the authority of the
Christian mystics. It is not to be addressed to the Grand Etre, to
collective Humanity; though he occasionally carries metaphor so far as
to style this a goddess. The honours to collective Humanity are reserved
for the public celebrations. Private adoration is to be addressed to it
in the persons of worthy individual representatives, who may be either
living or dead, but must in all cases be women; for women, being the
_sexe aimant_, represent the best attribute of humanity, that which
ought to regulate all human life, nor can Humanity possibly be
symbolized in any form but that of a woman. The objects of private
adoration are the mother, the wife, and the daughter, representing
severally the past, the present, and the future, and calling into active
exercise the three social sentiments, veneration, attachment, and
kindness. We are to regard them, whether dead or alive, as our guardian
angels, "les vrais anges gardiens." If the last two have never existed,
or if, in the particular case, any of the three types is too faulty for
the office assigned to it, their place may be supplied by some other
type of womanly excellence, even by one merely historical. Be the object
living or dead, the adoration (as we understand it) is to be addressed
only to the idea. The prayer consists of two parts; a commemoration,
followed by an effusion. By a commemoration M. Comte means an effort of
memory and imagination, summoning up with the utmost possible vividness
the image of the object: and every artifice is exhausted to render the
image as life-like, as close to the reality, as near an approach to
actual hallucination, as is consistent with sanity. This degree of
intensity having been, as far as practicable, attained, the effusion
follows. Every person should compose his own form of prayer, which
should be repeated not mentally only, but orally, and may be added
to or varied for sufficient cause, but never arbitrarily. It may be
interspersed with passages from the best poets, when they present
themselves spontaneously, as giving a felicitous expression to the
adorer's own feeling. These observances M. Comte practised to the memory
of his Clotilde, and he enjoins them on all true believers. They are to
occupy two hours of every day, divided into three parts; at rising, in
the middle of the working hours, and in bed at night. The first, which
should be in a kneeling attitude, will commonly be the longest, and the
second the shortest. The third is to be extended as nearly as possible
to the moment of falling asleep, that its effect may be felt in
disciplining even the dreams.

The public _cultus_ consists of a series of celebrations or festivals,
eighty-four in the year, so arranged that at least one occurs in every
week. They are devoted to the successive glorification of Humanity
itself; of the various ties, political and domestic, among mankind; of
the successive stages in the past evolution of our species; and of the
several classes into which M. Comte's polity divides mankind. M. Comte's
religion has, moreover, nine Sacraments; consisting in the solemn
consecration, by the priests of Humanity, with appropriate exhortations,
of all the great transitions in life; the entry into life itself, and
into each of its successive stages: education, marriage, the choice of a
profession, and so forth. Among these is death, which receives the name
of transformation, and is considered as a passage from objective
existence to subjective--to living in the memory of our
fellow-creatures. Having no eternity of objective existence to offer,
M. Comte's religion gives it all he can, by holding out the hope of
subjective immortality--of existing in the remembrance and in the
posthumous adoration of mankind at large, if we have done anything to
deserve remembrance from them; at all events, of those whom we loved
during life; and when they too are gone, of being included in the
collective adoration paid to the Grand Etre. People are to be taught to
look forward to this as a sufficient recompense for the devotion of a
whole life to the service of Humanity. Seven years after death, comes
the last Sacrament: a public judgment, by the priesthood, on the memory
of the defunct. This is not designed for purposes of reprobation, but of
honour, and any one may, by declaration during life, exempt himself from
it. If judged, and found worthy, he is solemnly incorporated with the
Grand Etre, and his remains are transferred from the civil to the
religious place of sepulture: "le bois sacré" qui doit entourer chaque
temple de l'Humanité."

This brief abstract gives no idea of the minuteness of M. Comte's
prescriptions, and the extraordinary height to which he carries the
mania for regulation by which Frenchmen are distinguished among
Europeans, and M. Comte among Frenchmen. It is this which throws an
irresistible air of ridicule over the whole subject. There is nothing
really ridiculous in the devotional practices which M. Comte recommends
towards a cherished memory or an ennobling ideal, when they come
unprompted from the depths of the individual feeling; but there is
something ineffably ludicrous in enjoining that everybody shall practise
them three times daily for a period of two hours, not because his
feelings require them, but for the premeditated, purpose of getting his
feelings up. The ludicrous, however, in any of its shapes, is a
phaenomenon with which M. Comte seems to have been totally unacquainted.
There is nothing in his writings from which it could be inferred that he
knew of the existence of such things as wit and humour. The only writer
distinguished for either, of whom he shows any admiration, is Molière,
and him he admires not for his wit but for his wisdom. We notice this
without intending any reflection on M. Comte; for a profound conviction
raises a person above the feeling of ridicule. But there are passages in
his writings which, it really seems to us, could have been written by no
man who had ever laughed. We will give one of these instances. Besides
the regular prayers, M. Comte's religion, like the Catholic, has need of
forms which can be applied to casual and unforeseen occasions. These, he
says, must in general be left to the believer's own choice; but he
suggests as a very suitable one the repetition of "the fundamental
formula of Positivism," viz., "l'amour pour principe, l'ordre pour base,
et le progrès pour but." Not content, however, with an equivalent for
the Paters and Aves of Catholicism, he must have one for the sign of the
cross also; and he thus delivers himself:[23] "Cette expansion peut être
perfectionnée par des signes universels.... Afin de mieux développer
l'aptitude nécessaire de la formule positiviste à représenter toujours
la condition humaine, il convient ordinairement de l'énoncer en touchant
successivement les principaux organes que la théorie cérébrale assigne à
ses trois éléments." This _may_ be a very appropriate mode of expressing
one's devotion to the Grand Etre: but any one who had appreciated its
effect on the profane reader, would have thought it judicious to keep it
back till a considerably more advanced stage in the propagation of the
Positive Religion.

As M. Comte's religion has a _cultus_, so also it has a clergy, who are
the pivot of his entire social and political system. Their nature and
office will be best shown by describing his ideal of political society
in its normal state, with the various classes of which it is composed.

The necessity of a Spiritual Power, distinct and separate from the
temporal government, is the essential principle of M. Comte's political
scheme; as it may well be, since the Spiritual Power is the only
counterpoise he provides or tolerates, to the absolute dominion of the
civil rulers. Nothing can exceed his combined detestation and contempt
for government by assemblies, and for parliamentary or representative
institutions in any form. They are an expedient, in his opinion, only
suited to a state of transition, and even that nowhere but in England.
The attempt to naturalize them in France, or any Continental nation, he
regards as mischievous quackery. Louis Napoleon's usurpation is
absolved, is made laudable to him, because it overthrew a representative
government. Election of superiors by inferiors, except as a
revolutionary expedient, is an abomination in his sight. Public
functionaries of all kinds should name their successors, subject to the
approbation of their own superiors, and giving public notice of the
nomination so long beforehand as to admit of discussion, and the timely
revocation of a wrong choice. But, by the side of the temporal rulers,
he places another authority, with no power to command, but only to
advise and remonstrate. The family being, in his mind as in that of
Frenchmen generally, the foundation and essential type of all society,
the separation of the two powers commences there. The spiritual, or
moral and religious power, in a family, is the women of it. The
positivist family is composed of the "fundamental couple," their
children, and the parents of the man, if alive. The whole government of
the household, except as regards the education of the children, resides
in the man; and even over that he has complete power, but should forbear
to exert it. The part assigned to the women is to improve the man
through his affections, and to bring up the children, who, until the age
of fourteen, at which scientific instruction begins, are to be educated
wholly by their mother. That women may be better fitted for these
functions, they are peremptorily excluded from all others. No woman is
to work for her living. Every woman is to be supported by her husband or
her male relations, and if she has none of these, by the State. She is
to have no powers of government, even domestic, and no property. Her
legal rights of inheritance are preserved to her, that her feelings of
duty may make her voluntarily forego them. There are to be no marriage
portions, that women may no longer be sought in marriage from interested
motives. Marriages are to be rigidly indissoluble, except for a single
cause. It is remarkable that the bitterest enemy of divorce among all
philosophers, nevertheless allows it, in a case which the laws of
England, and of other countries reproached by him with tolerating
divorce, do not admit: namely, when one of the parties has been
sentenced to an infamizing punishment, involving loss of civil rights.
It is monstrous that condemnation, even for life, to a felon's
punishment, should leave an unhappy victim bound to, and in the wife's
case under the legal authority of, the culprit. M. Comte could feel for
the injustice in this special case, because it chanced to be the
unfortunate situation of his Clotilde. Minor degrees of unworthiness may
entitle the innocent party to a legal separation, but without the power
of re-marriage. Second marriages, indeed, are not permitted by the
Positive Religion. There is to be no impediment to them by law, but
morality is to condemn them, and every couple who are married
religiously as well as civilly are to make a vow of eternal widowhood,
"le veuvage éternel." This absolute monogamy is, in M. Comte's opinion,
essential to the complete fusion between two beings, which is the
essence of marriage; and moreover, eternal constancy is required by the
posthumous adoration, which is to be continuously paid by the survivor
to one who, though objectively dead, still lives "subjectively." The
domestic spiritual power, which resides in the women of the family, is
chiefly concentrated in the most venerable of them, the husband's
mother, while alive. It has an auxiliary in the influence of age,
represented by the husband's father, who is supposed to have passed the
period of retirement from active life, fixed by M. Comte (for he fixes
everything) at sixty-three; at which age the head of the family gives up
the reins of authority to his son, retaining only a consultative voice.

This domestic Spiritual Power, being principally moral, and confined to
a private life, requires the support and guidance of an intellectual
power exterior to it, the sphere of which will naturally be wider,
extending also to public life. This consists of the clergy, or
priesthood, for M. Comte is fond of borrowing the consecrated
expressions of Catholicism to denote the nearest equivalents which his
own system affords. The clergy are the theoretic or philosophical class,
and are supported by an endowment from the State, voted periodically,
but administered by themselves. Like women, they are to be excluded from
all riches, and from all participation in power (except the absolute
power of each over his own household). They are neither to inherit, nor
to receive emolument from any of their functions, or from their writings
or teachings of any description, but are to live solely on their small
salaries. This M. Comte deems necessary to the complete
disinterestedness of their counsel. To have the confidence of the
masses, they must, like the masses, be poor. Their exclusion from
political and from all other practical occupations is indispensable for
the same reason, and for others equally peremptory. Those occupations
are, he contends, incompatible with the habits of mind necessary to
philosophers. A practical position, either private or public, chains the
mind to specialities and details, while a philosopher's business is with
general truths and connected views (vues d'ensemble). These, again,
require an habitual abstraction from details, which unfits the mind for
judging well and rapidly of individual cases. The same person cannot be
both a good theorist and a good practitioner or ruler, though
practitioners and rulers ought to have a solid theoretic education. The
two kinds of function must be absolutely exclusive of one another: to
attempt them both, is inconsistent with fitness for either. But as men
may mistake their vocation, up to the age of thirty-five they are
allowed to change their career.

To the clergy is entrusted the theoretic or scientific instruction of
youth. The medical art also is to be in their hands, since no one is fit
to be a physician who does not study and understand the whole man, moral
as well as physical. M. Comte has a contemptuous opinion of the existing
race of physicians, who, he says, deserve no higher name than that of
veterinaires, since they concern themselves with man only in his animal,
and not in his human character. In his last years, M. Comte (as we learn
from Dr Robinet's volume) indulged in the wildest speculations on
medical science, declaring all maladies to be one and the same disease,
the disturbance or destruction of "l'unité cérébrale." The other
functions of the clergy are moral, much more than intellectual. They are
the spiritual directors, and venerated advisers, of the active or
practical classes, including the political. They are the mediators in
all social differences; between the labourers, for instance, and their
employers. They are to advise and admonish on all important violations
of the moral law. Especially, it devolves on them to keep the rich and
powerful to the performance of their moral duties towards their
inferiors. If private remonstrance fails, public denunciation is to
follow: in extreme cases they may proceed to the length of
excommunication, which, though it only operates through opinion, yet if
it carries opinion with it, may, as M. Comte complacently observes, be
of such powerful efficacy, that the richest man may be driven to produce
his subsistence by his own manual labour, through the impossibility of
inducing any other person to work for him. In this as in all other
cases, the priesthood depends for its authority on carrying with it the
mass of the people--those who, possessing no accumulations, live on the
wages of daily labour; popularly but incorrectly termed the working
classes, and by French writers, in their Roman law phraseology,
proletaires. These, therefore, who are not allowed the smallest
political rights, are incorporated into the Spiritual Power, of which
they form, after women and the clergy, the third element.

It remains to give an account of the Temporal Power, composed of the
rich and the employers of labour, two classes who in M. Comte's system
are reduced to one, for he allows of no idle rich. A life made up of
mere amusement and self-indulgence, though not interdicted by law, is to
be deemed so disgraceful, that nobody with the smallest sense of shame
would choose to be guilty of it. Here, we think, M. Comte has lighted on
a true principle, towards which the tone of opinion in modern Europe is
more and more tending, and which is destined to be one of the
constitutive principles of regenerated society. We believe, for example,
with him, that in the future there will be no class of landlords living
at ease on their rents, but every landlord will be a capitalist trained
to agriculture, himself superintending and directing the cultivation of
his estate. No one but he who guides the work, should have the control
of the tools. In M. Comte's system, the rich, as a rule, consist of the
"captains of industry:" but the rule is not entirely without exception,
for M. Comte recognizes other useful modes of employing riches. In
particular, one of his favourite ideas is that of an order of Chivalry,
composed of the most generous and self-devoted of the rich, voluntarily
dedicating themselves, like knights-errant of old, to the redressing of
wrongs, and the protection of the weak and oppressed. He remarks, that
oppression, in modern life, can seldom reach, or even venture to attack,
the life or liberty of its victims (he forgets the case of domestic
tyranny), but only their pecuniary means, and it is therefore by the
purse chiefly that individuals can usefully interpose, as they formerly
did by the sword. The occupation, however, of nearly all the rich, will
be the direction of labour, and for this work they will be educated.
Reciprocally, it is in M. Comte's opinion essential, that all directors
of labour should be rich. Capital (in which he includes land) should be
concentrated in a few holders, so that every capitalist may conduct the
most extensive operations which one mind is capable of superintending.
This is not only demanded by good economy, in order to take the utmost
advantage of a rare kind of practical ability, but it necessarily
follows from the principle of M. Comte's scheme, which regards a
capitalist as a public functionary. M. Comte's conception of the
relation of capital to society is essentially that of Socialists, but he
would bring about by education and opinion, what they aim at effecting
by positive institution. The owner of capital is by no means to consider
himself its absolute proprietor. Legally he is not to be controlled in
his dealings with it, for power should be in proportion to
responsibility: but it does not belong to him for his own use; he is
merely entrusted by society with a portion of the accumulations made by
the past providence of mankind, to be administered for the benefit of
the present generation and of posterity, under the obligation of
preserving them unimpaired, and handing them down, more or less
augmented, to our successors. He is not entitled to dissipate them, or
divert them from the service of Humanity to his own pleasures. Nor has
he a moral right to consume on himself the whole even of his profits. He
is bound in conscience, if they exceed his reasonable wants, to employ
the surplus in improving either the efficiency of his operations, or the
physical and mental condition of his labourers. The portion of his gains
which he may appropriate to his own use, must be decided by himself,
under accountability to opinion; and opinion ought not to look very
narrowly into the matter, nor hold him to a rigid reckoning for any
moderate indulgence of luxury or ostentation; since under the great
responsibilities that will be imposed on him, the position of an
employer of labour will be so much less desirable, to any one in whom
the instincts of pride and vanity are not strong, than the "heureuse
insouciance" of a labourer, that those instincts must be to a certain
degree indulged, or no one would undertake the office. With this
limitation, every employer is a mere administrator of his possessions,
for his work-people and for society at large. If he indulges himself
lavishly, without reserving an ample remuneration for all who are
employed under him, he is morally culpable, and will incur sacerdotal
admonition. This state of things necessarily implies that capital should
be in few hands, because, as M. Comte observes, without great riches,
the obligations which society ought to impose, could not be fulfilled
without an amount of personal abnegation that it would be hopeless to
expect. If a person is conspicuously qualified for the conduct of an
industrial enterprise, but destitute of the fortune necessary for
undertaking it, M. Comte recommends that he should be enriched by
subscription, or, in cases of sufficient importance, by the State. Small
landed proprietors and capitalists, and the middle classes altogether,
he regards as a parasitic growth, destined to disappear, the best of the
body becoming large capitalists, and the remainder proletaires. Society
will consist only of rich and poor, and it will be the business of the
rich to make the best possible lot for the poor. The remuneration of the
labourers will continue, as at present, to be a matter of voluntary
arrangement between them and their employers, the last resort on either
side being refusal of co-operation, "refus de concours," in other words,
a strike or a lock-out; with the sacerdotal order for mediators in case
of need. But though wages are to be an affair of free contract, their
standard is not to be the competition of the market, but the application
of the products in equitable proportion between the wants of the
labourers and the wants and dignity of the employer. As it is one of M.
Comte's principles that a question cannot be usefully proposed without
an attempt at a solution, he gives his ideas from the beginning as to
what the normal income of a labouring family should be. They are on such
a scale, that until some great extension shall have taken place in the
scientific resources of mankind, it is no wonder he thinks it necessary
to limit as much as possible the number of those who are to be supported
by what is left of the produce. In the first place the labourer's
dwelling, which is to consist of seven rooms, is, with all that it
contains, to be his own property: it is the only landed property he is
allowed to possess, but every family should be the absolute owner of all
things which are destined for its exclusive use. Lodging being thus
independently provided for, and education and medical attendance being
secured gratuitously by the general arrangements of society, the pay of
the labourer is to consist of two portions, the one monthly, and of
fixed amount, the other weekly, and proportioned to the produce of his
labour. The former M. Comte fixes at 100 francs (£4) for a month of 28
days; being £52 a year: and the rate of piece-work should be such as to
make the other part amount to an average of seven francs (5_s_. _6d_.)
per working day.

Agreeably to M. Comte's rule, that every public functionary should
appoint his successor, the capitalist has unlimited power of
transmitting his capital by gift or bequest, after his own death or
retirement. In general it will be best bestowed entire upon one person,
unless the business will advantageously admit of subdivision. He will
naturally leave it to one or more of his sons, if sufficiently
qualified; and rightly so, hereditary being, in M. Comte's opinion,
preferable to acquired wealth, as being usually more generously
administered. But, merely as his sons, they have no moral right to it.
M. Comte here recognizes another of the principles, on which we believe
that the constitution of regenerated society will rest. He maintains (as
others in the present generation have done) that the father owes nothing
to his son, except a good education, and pecuniary aid sufficient for an
advantageous start in life: that he is entitled, and may be morally
bound, to leave the bulk of his fortune to some other properly selected
person or persons, whom he judges likely to make a more beneficial use
of it. This is the first of three important points, in which M. Comte's
theory of the family, wrong as we deem it in its foundations, is in
advance of prevailing theories and existing institutions. The second is
the re-introduction of adoption, not only in default of children, but to
fulfil the purposes, and satisfy the sympathetic wants, to which such
children as there are may happen to be inadequate. The third is a most
important point--the incorporation of domestics as substantive members
of the family. There is hardly any part of the present constitution of
society more essentially vicious, and morally injurious to both parties,
than the relation between masters and servants. To make this a really
human and a moral relation, is one of the principal desiderata in social
improvement. The feeling of the vulgar of all classes, that domestic
service has anything in it peculiarly mean, is a feeling than which
there is none meaner. In the feudal ages, youthful nobles of the highest
rank thought themselves honoured by officiating in what is now called a
menial capacity, about the persons of superiors of both sexes, for whom
they felt respect: and, as M. Comte observes, there are many families
who can in no other way so usefully serve Humanity, as by ministering to
the bodily wants of other families, called to functions which require
the devotion of all their thoughts. "We will add, by way of supplement
to M. Comte's doctrine, that much of the daily physical work of a
household, even in opulent families, if silly notions of degradation,
common to all ranks, did not interfere, might very advantageously be
performed by the family itself, at least by its younger members; to whom
it would give healthful exercise of the bodily powers, which has now to
be sought in modes far less useful, and also a familiar acquaintance
with the real work of the world, and a moral willingness to take their
share of its burthens, which, in the great majority of the better-off
classes, do not now get cultivated at all.

We have still to speak of the directly political functions of the rich,
or, as M. Comte terms them, the patriciate. The entire political
government is to be in their hands. First, however, the existing nations
are to be broken up into small republics, the largest not exceeding the
size of Belgium, Portugal, or Tuscany; any larger nationalities being
incompatible with the unity of wants and feelings, which is required,
not only to give due strength to the sentiment of patriotism (always
strongest in small states), but to prevent undue compression; for no
territory, M. Comte thinks, can without oppression be governed from a
distant centre. Algeria, therefore, is to be given up to the Arabs,
Corsica to its inhabitants, and France proper is to be, before the end
of the century, divided into seventeen republics, corresponding to the
number of considerable towns: Paris, however, (need it be said?)
succeeding to Rome as the religious metropolis of the world. Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales, are to be separated from England, which is of
course to detach itself from all its transmarine dependencies. In each
state thus constituted, the powers of government are to be vested in a
triumvirate of the three principal bankers, who are to take the foreign,
home, and financial departments respectively. How they are to conduct
the government and remain bankers, does not clearly appear; but it must
be intended that they should combine both offices, for they are to
receive no pecuniary remuneration for the political one. Their power is
to amount to a dictatorship (M. Comte's own word): and he is hardly
justified in saying that he gives political power to the rich, since he
gives it over the rich and every one else, to three individuals of the
number, not even chosen by the rest, but named by their predecessors. As
a check on the dictators, there is to be complete freedom of speech,
writing, printing, and voluntary association; and all important acts of
the government, except in cases of emergency, are to be announced
sufficiently long beforehand to ensure ample discussion. This, and the
influences of the Spiritual Power, are the only guarantees provided
against misgovernment. When we consider that the complete dominion of
every nation of mankind is thus handed over to only four men--for the
Spiritual Power is to be under the absolute and undivided control of a
single Pontiff for the whole human race--one is appalled at the picture
of entire subjugation and slavery, which is recommended to us as the
last and highest result of the evolution of Humanity. But the conception
rises to the terrific, when we are told the mode in which the single
High Priest of Humanity is intended to use his authority. It is the most
warning example we know, into what frightful aberrations a powerful and
comprehensive mind may be led by the exclusive following out of a single
idea.

The single idea of M. Comte, on this subject, is that the intellect
should be wholly subordinated to the feelings; or, to translate the
meaning out of sentimental into logical language, that the exercise of
the intellect, as of all our other faculties, should have for its sole
object the general good. Every other employment of it should be
accounted not only idle and frivolous, but morally culpable. Being
indebted wholly to Humanity for the cultivation to which we owe our
mental powers, we are bound in return to consecrate them wholly to her
service. Having made up his mind that this ought to be, there is with M.
Comte but one step to concluding that the Grand Pontiff of Humanity must
take care that it shall be; and on this foundation he organizes an
elaborate system for the total suppression of all independent thought.
He does not, indeed, invoke the arm of the law, or call for any
prohibitions. The clergy are to have no monopoly. Any one else may
cultivate science if he can, may write and publish if he can find
readers, may give private instruction if anybody consents to receive it.
But since the sacerdotal body will absorb into itself all but those whom
it deems either intellectually or morally unequal to the vocation, all
rival teachers will, as he calculates, be so discredited beforehand,
that their competition will not be formidable. Within the body itself,
the High Priest has it in his power to make sure that there shall be no
opinions, and no exercise of mind, but such as he approves; for he alone
decides the duties and local residence of all its members, and can even
eject them from the body. Before electing to be under this rule, we feel
a natural curiosity to know in what manner it is to be exercised.
Humanity has only yet had one Pontiff, whose mental qualifications for
the post are not likely to be often surpassed, M. Comte himself. It is
of some importance to know what are the ideas of this High Priest,
concerning the moral and religious government of the human intellect.

One of the doctrines which M. Comte most strenuously enforces in his
later writings is, that during the preliminary evolution of humanity,
terminated by the foundation of Positivism, the free development of our
forces of all kinds was the important matter, but that from this time
forward the principal need is to regulate them. Formerly the danger was
of their being insufficient, but henceforth, of their being abused. Let
us express, in passing, our entire dissent from this doctrine. Whoever
thinks that the wretched education which mankind as yet receive, calls
forth their mental powers (except those of a select few) in a sufficient
or even tolerable degree, must be very easily satisfied: and the abuse
of them, far from becoming proportionally greater as knowledge and
mental capacity increase, becomes rapidly less, provided always that the
diffusion of those qualities keeps pace with their growth. The abuse of
intellectual power is only to be dreaded, when society is divided
between a few highly cultivated intellects and an ignorant and stupid
multitude. But mental power is a thing which M. Comte does not want--or
wants infinitely less than he wants submission and obedience. Of all the
ingredients of human nature, he continually says, the intellect most
needs to be disciplined and reined-in. It is the most turbulent "le plus
perturbateur," of all the mental elements; more so than even the selfish
instincts. Throughout the whole modern transition, beginning with
ancient Greece (for M. Comte tells us that we have always been in a
state of revolutionary transition since then), the intellect has been in
a state of systematic insurrection against "le coeur." The
metaphysicians and literati (lettrés), after helping to pull down the
old religion and social order, are rootedly hostile to the construction
of the new, and desiring only to prolong the existing scepticism and
intellectual anarchy, which secure to them a cheap social ascendancy,
without the labour of earning it by solid scientific preparation. The
scientific class, from whom better might have been expected, are, if
possible, worse. Void of enlarged views, despising all that is too large
for their comprehension, devoted exclusively each to his special
science, contemptuously indifferent to moral and political interests,
their sole aim is to acquire an easy reputation, and in France (through
paid Academies and professorships) personal lucre, by pushing their
sciences into idle and useless inquiries (speculations oiseuses), of no
value to the real interests of mankind, and tending to divert the
thoughts from them. One of the duties most incumbent on opinion and on
the Spiritual Power, is to stigmatize as immoral, and effectually
suppress, these useless employments of the speculative faculties. All
exercise of thought should be abstained from, which has not some
beneficial tendency, some actual utility to mankind. M. Comte, of
course, is not the man to say that it must be a merely material utility.
If a speculation, though it has no doctrinal, has a logical value--if it
throws any light on universal Method--it is still more deserving of
cultivation than if its usefulness was merely practical: but, either as
method or as doctrine, it must bring forth fruits to Humanity, otherwise
it is not only contemptible, but criminal.

That there is a portion of truth at the bottom of all this, we should be
the last to deny. No respect is due to any employment of the intellect
which does not tend to the good of mankind. It is precisely on a level
with any idle amusement, and should be condemned as waste of time, if
carried beyond the limit within which amusement is permissible. And
whoever devotes powers of thought which could render to Humanity
services it urgently needs, to speculations and studies which it could
dispense with, is liable to the discredit attaching to a well-grounded
suspicion of caring little for Humanity. But who can affirm positively
of any speculations, guided by right scientific methods, on subjects
really accessible to the human faculties, that they are incapable of
being of any use? Nobody knows what knowledge will prove to be of use,
and what is destined to be useless. The most that can be said is that
some kinds are of more certain, and above all, of more present utility
than others. How often the most important practical results have been
the remote consequence of studies which no one would have expected to
lead to them! Could the mathematicians, who, in the schools of
Alexandria, investigated the properties of the ellipse, have foreseen
that nearly two thousand years afterwards their speculations would
explain the solar system, and a little later would enable ships safely
to circumnavigate the earth? Even in M. Comte's opinion, it is well for
mankind that, in those early days, knowledge was thought worth pursuing
for its own sake. Nor has the "foundation of Positivism," we imagine, so
far changed the conditions of human existence, that it should now be
criminal to acquire, by observation and reasoning, a knowledge of the
facts of the universe, leaving to posterity to find a use for it. Even
in the last two or three years, has not the discovery of new metals,
which may prove important even in the practical arts, arisen from one of
the investigations which M. Comte most unequivocally condemns as idle,
the research into the internal constitution of the sun? How few,
moreover, of the discoveries which have changed the face of the world,
either were or could have been arrived at by investigations aiming
directly at the object! Would the mariner's compass ever have been found
by direct efforts for the improvement of navigation? Should we have
reached the electric telegraph by any amount of striving for a means of
instantaneous communication, if Franklin had not identified electricity
with lightning, and Ampère with magnetism? The most apparently
insignificant archaeological or geological fact, is often found to throw
a light on human history, which M. Comte, the basis of whose social
philosophy is history, should be the last person to disparage. The
direction of the entrance to the three great Pyramids of Ghizeh, by
showing the position of the circumpolar stars at the time when they were
built, is the best evidence we even now have of the immense antiquity of
Egyptian civilization.[24] The one point on which M. Comte's doctrine
has some colour of reason, is the case of sidereal astronomy: so little
knowledge of it being really accessible to us, and the connexion of that
little with any terrestrial interests being, according to all our means
of judgment, infinitesimal. It is certainly difficult to imagine how any
considerable benefit to humanity can be derived from a knowledge of the
motions of the double stars: should these ever become important to us it
will be in so prodigiously remote an age, that we can afford to remain
ignorant of them until, at least, all our moral, political, and social
difficulties have been settled. Yet the discovery that gravitation
extends even to those remote regions, gives some additional strength to
the conviction of the universality of natural laws; and the habitual
meditation on such vast objects and distances is not without an
aesthetic usefulness, by kindling and exalting the imagination, the
worth of which in itself, and even its re-action on the intellect, M.
Comte is quite capable of appreciating. He would reply, however, that
there are better means of accomplishing these purposes. In the same
spirit he condemns the study even of the solar system, when extended to
any planets but those which are visible to the naked eye, and which
alone exert an appreciable gravitative influence on the earth. Even the
perturbations he thinks it idle to study, beyond a mere general
conception of them, and thinks that astronomy may well limit its domain
to the motions and mutual action of the earth, sun, and moon. He looks
for a similar expurgation of all the other sciences. In one passage he
expressly says that the greater part of the researches which are really
accessible to us are idle and useless. He would pare down the dimensions
of all the sciences as narrowly as possible. He is continually repeating
that no science, as an abstract study, should be carried further than is
necessary to lay the foundation for the science next above it, and so
ultimately for moral science, the principal purpose of them all. Any
further extension of the mathematical and physical sciences should be
merely "episodic;" limited to what may from time to time be demanded by
the requirements of industry and the arts; and should be left to the
industrial classes, except when they find it necessary to apply to the
sacerdotal order for some additional development of scientific theory.
This, he evidently thinks, would be a rare contingency, most physical
truths sufficiently concrete and real for practice being empirical.
Accordingly in estimating the number of clergy necessary for France,
Europe, and our entire planet (for his forethought extends thus far),
he proportions it solely to their moral and religious attributions
(overlooking, by the way, even their medical); and leaves nobody with
any time to cultivate the sciences, except abortive candidates for the
priestly office, who having been refused admittance into it for
insufficiency in moral excellence or in strength of character, may be
thought worth retaining as "pensioners" of the sacerdotal order, on
account of their theoretic abilities.

It is no exaggeration to say, that M. Comte gradually acquired a real
hatred for scientific and all purely intellectual pursuits, and was bent
on retaining no more of them than was strictly indispensable. The
greatest of his anxieties is lest people should reason, and seek to
know, more than enough. He regards all abstraction and all reasoning as
morally dangerous, by developing an inordinate pride (orgueil), and
still more, by producing dryness (scheresse). Abstract thought, he says,
is not a wholesome occupation for more than a small number of human
beings, nor of them for more than a small part of their time. Art, which
calls the emotions into play along with and more than the reason, is the
only intellectual exercise really adapted to human nature. It is
nevertheless indispensable that the chief theories of the various
abstract sciences, together with the modes in which those theories were
historically and logically arrived at, should form a part of universal
education: for, first, it is only thus that the methods can be learnt,
by which to attain the results sought by the moral and social sciences:
though we cannot perceive that M. Comte got at his own moral and social
results by those processes. Secondly, the principal truths of the
subordinate sciences are necessary to the systematization (still
systematization!) of our conceptions, by binding together our notions of
the world in a set of propositions, which are coherent, and are a
sufficiently correct representation of fact for our practical wants.
Thirdly, a familiar knowledge of the invariable laws of natural
phaenomena is a great elementary lesson of submission, which, he is
never weary of saying, is the first condition both of morality and of
happiness. For these reasons, he would cause to be taught, from the age
of fourteen to that of twenty-one, to all persons, rich and poor, girls
or youths, a knowledge of the whole series of abstract sciences, such as
none but the most highly instructed persons now possess, and of a far
more systematic and philosophical character than is usually possessed
even by them. (N.B.--They are to learn, during the same years, Greek and
Latin, having previously, between the ages of seven and fourteen, learnt
the five principal modern languages, to the degree necessary for
reading, with due appreciation, the chief poetical compositions in
each.) But they are to be taught all this, not only without encouraging,
but stifling as much as possible, the examining and questioning spirit.
The disposition which should be encouraged is that of receiving all on
the authority of the teacher. The Positivist faith, even in its
scientific part, is _la foi démontrable_, but ought by no means to be
_la foi toujours démontrée_. The pupils have no business to be
over-solicitous about proof. The teacher should not even present the
proofs to them in a complete form, or as proofs. The object of
instruction is to make them understand the doctrines themselves,
perceive their mutual connexion, and form by means of them a consistent
and _systematized_ conception of nature. As for the demonstrations, it
is rather desirable than otherwise that even theorists should forget
them, retaining only the results. Among all the aberrations of
scientific men, M. Comte thinks none greater than the pedantic anxiety
they show for complete proof, and perfect rationalization of scientific
processes. It ought to be enough that the doctrines afford an
explanation of phaenomena, consistent with itself and with known facts,
and that the processes are justified by their fruits. This over-anxiety
for proof, he complains, is breaking down, by vain scruples, the
knowledge which seemed to have been attained; witness the present state
of chemistry. The demand of proof for what has been accepted by
Humanity, is itself a mark of "distrust, if not hostility, to the
sacerdotal order" (the naïveté of this would be charming, if it were not
deplorable), and is a revolt against the traditions of the human race.
So early had the new High Priest adopted the feelings and taken up the
inheritance of the old. One of his favourite aphorisms is the strange
one, that the living are more and more governed by the dead. As is not
uncommon with him, he introduces the dictum in one sense, and uses it in
another. What he at first means by it, is that as civilization advances,
the sum of our possessions, physical and intellectual, is due in a
decreasing proportion to ourselves, and in an increasing one to our
progenitors. The use he makes of it is, that we should submit ourselves
more and more implicitly to the authority of previous generations, and
suffer ourselves less and less to doubt their judgment, or test by our
own reason the grounds of their opinions. The unwillingness of the human
intellect and conscience, in their present state of "anarchy," to sign
their own abdication, lie calls "the insurrection of the living against
the dead." To this complexion has Positive Philosophy come at last!

Worse, however, remains to be told. M. Comte selects a hundred volumes
of science, philosophy, poetry, history, and general knowledge, which he
deems a sufficient library for every positivist, even of the theoretic
order, and actually proposes a systematic holocaust of books in
general--it would almost seem of all books except these. Even that to
which he shows most indulgence, poetry, except the very best, is to
undergo a similar fate, with the reservation of select passages, on the
ground that, poetry being intended to cultivate our instinct of ideal
perfection, any kind of it that is less than the best is worse than
none. This imitation of the error, we will call it the crime, of the
early Christians--and in an exaggerated form, for even they destroyed
only those writings of pagans or heretics which were directed against
themselves--is the one thing in M. Comte's projects which merits real
indignation. When once M. Comte has decided, all evidence on the other
side, nay, the very historical evidence on which he grounded his
decision, had better perish. When mankind have enlisted under his
banner, they must burn their ships. There is, though in a less offensive
form, the same overweening presumption in a suggestion he makes, that
all species of animals and plants which are useless to man should be
systematically rooted out. As if any one could presume to assert that
the smallest weed may not, as knowledge advances, be found to have some
property serviceable to man. When we consider that the united power of
the whole human race cannot reproduce a species once eradicated--that
what is once done, in the extirpation of races, can never be repaired;
one can only be thankful that amidst all which the past rulers of
mankind have to answer for, they have never come up to the measure of
the great regenerator of Humanity; mankind have not yet been under the
rule of one who assumes that he knows all there is to be known, and that
when he has put himself at the head of humanity, the book of human
knowledge may be closed.

Of course M. Comte does not make this assumption consistently. He does
not imagine that he actually possesses all knowledge, but only that he
is an infallible judge what knowledge is worth possessing. He does not
believe that mankind have reached in all directions the extreme limits
of useful and laudable scientific inquiry. He thinks there is a large
scope for it still, in adding to our power over the external world, but
chiefly in perfecting our own physical, intellectual, and moral nature.
He holds that all our mental strength should be economized, for the
pursuit of this object in the mode leading most directly to the end.
With this view, some one problem should always be selected, the solution
of which would be more important than any other to the interests of
humanity, and upon this the entire intellectual resources of the
theoretic mind should be concentrated, until it is either resolved, or
has to be given up as insoluble: after which mankind should go on to
another, to be pursued with similar exclusiveness. The selection of this
problem of course rests with the sacerdotal order, or in other words,
with the High Priest. We should then see the whole speculative intellect
of the human race simultaneously at work on one question, by orders from
above, as a French minister of public instruction once boasted that a
million of boys were saying the same lesson during the same half-hour in
every town and village of France. The reader will be anxious to know,
how much better and more wisely the human intellect will be applied
under this absolute monarchy, and to what degree this system of
government will be preferable to the present anarchy, in which every
theorist does what is intellectually right in his own eyes. M. Comte has
not left us in ignorance on this point. He gives us ample means of
judging. The Pontiff of Positivism informs us what problem, in his
opinion, should be selected before all others for this united pursuit.

What this problem is, we must leave those who are curious on the subject
to learn from the treatise itself. When they have done so, they will be
qualified to form their own opinion of the amount of advantage which the
general good of mankind would be likely to derive, from exchanging the
present "dispersive speciality" and "intellectual anarchy" for the
subordination of the intellect to the _coeur_, personified in a High
Priest, prescribing a single problem for the undivided study of the
theoretic mind.

We have given a sufficient general idea of M. Comte's plan for the
regeneration of human society, by putting an end to anarchy, and
"systematizing" human thought and conduct under the direction of
feeling. But an adequate conception will not have been formed of the
height of his self-confidence, until something more has been told. Be it
known, then, that M. Comte by no means proposes this new constitution of
society for realization in the remote future. A complete plan of
measures of transition is ready prepared, and he determines the year,
before the end of the present century, in which the new spiritual and
temporal powers will be installed, and the regime of our maturity will
begin. He did not indeed calculate on converting to Positivism, within
that time, more than a thousandth part of all the heads of families in
Western Europe and its offshoots beyond the Atlantic. But he fixes the
time necessary for the complete political establishment of Positivism at
thirty-three years, divided into three periods, of seven, five, and
twenty-one years respectively. At the expiration of seven, the direction
of public education in France would be placed in M. Comte's hands. In
five years more, the Emperor Napoleon, or his successor, will resign his
power to a provisional triumvirate, composed of three eminent
proletaires of the positivist faith; for proletaires, though not fit for
permanent rule, are the best agents of the transition, being the most
free from the prejudices which are the chief obstacle to it. These
rulers will employ the remaining twenty-one years in preparing society
for its final constitution; and after duly installing the Spiritual
Power, and effecting the decomposition of France into the seventeen
republics before mentioned, will give over the temporal government of
each to the normal dictatorship of the three bankers. A man may be
deemed happy, but scarcely modest, who had such boundless confidence in
his own powers of foresight, and expected so complete a triumph of his
own ideas on the reconstitution of society within the possible limits of
his lifetime. If he could live (he said) to the age of Pontenelle, or of
Hobbes, or even of Voltaire, he should see all this realized, or as good
as realized. He died, however, at sixty, without leaving any disciple
sufficiently advanced to be appointed his successor. There is now a
College, and a Director, of Positivism; but Humanity no longer possesses
a High Priest.

What more remains to be said may be despatched more summarily. Its
interest is philosophic rather than practical. In his four volumes of
"Politique Positive," M. Comte revises and reelaborates the scientific
and historical expositions of his first treatise. His object is to
systematize (again to systematize) knowledge from the human or
subjective point of view, the only one, he contends, from which a real
synthesis is possible. For (he says) the knowledge attainable by us of
the laws of the universe is at best fragmentary, and incapable of
reduction to a real unity. An objective synthesis, the dream of
Descartes and the best thinkers of old, is impossible. The laws of the
real world are too numerous, and the manner of their working into one
another too intricate, to be, as a general rule, correctly traced and
represented by our reason. The only connecting principle in our
knowledge is its relation to our wants, and it is upon that we must
found our systematization. The answer to this is, first, that there is
no necessity for an universal synthesis; and secondly, that the same
arguments may be used against the possibility of a complete subjective,
as of a complete objective systematization. A subjective synthesis must
consist in the arrangement and co-ordination of all useful knowledge, on
the basis of its relation to human wants and interests. But those wants
and interests are, like the laws of the universe, extremely
multifarious, and the order of preference among them in all their
different gradations (for it varies according to the degree of each)
cannot be cast into precise general propositions. M. Comte's subjective
synthesis consists only in eliminating from the sciences everything that
he deems useless, and presenting as far as possible every theoretical
investigation as the solution of a practical problem. To this, however,
he cannot consistently adhere; for, in every science, the theoretic
truths are much more closely connected with one another than with the
human purposes which they eventually serve, and can only be made to
cohere in the intellect by being, to a great degree, presented as if
they were truths of pure reason, irrespective of any practical
application.

There are many things eminently characteristic of M. Comte's second
career, in this revision of the results of his first. Under the head of
Biology, and for the better combination of that science with Sociology
and Ethics, he found that he required a new system of Phrenology, being
justly dissatisfied with that of Gall and his successors. Accordingly he
set about constructing one _è priori_, grounded on the best enumeration
and classification he could make of the elementary faculties of our
intellectual, moral, and animal nature; to each of which he assigned an
hypothetical place in the skull, the most conformable that he could to
the few positive facts on the subject which he considered as
established, and to the general presumption that functions which react
strongly on one another must have their organs adjacent: leaving the
localities avowedly to be hereafter verified, by anatomical and
inductive investigation. There is considerable merit in this attempt,
though it is liable to obvious criticisms, of the same nature as his own
upon Gall. But the characteristic thing is, that while presenting all
this as hypothesis waiting for verification, he could not have taken its
truth more completely for granted if the verification had been made. In
all that he afterwards wrote, every detail of his theory of the brain is
as unhesitatingly asserted, and as confidently built upon, as any other
doctrine of science. This is his first great attempt in the "Subjective
Method," which, originally meaning only the subordination of the pursuit
of truth to human uses, had already come to mean drawing truth itself
from the fountain of his own mind. He had become, on the one hand,
almost indifferent to proof, provided he attained theoretic coherency,
and on the other, serenely confident that even the guesses which
originated with himself could not but come out true.

There is one point in his later view of the sciences, which appears to
us a decided improvement on his earlier. He adds to the six fundamental
sciences of his original scale, a seventh under the name of Morals,
forming the highest step of the ladder, immediately after Sociology:
remarking that it might, with still greater propriety, be termed
Anthropology, being the science of individual human nature, a study,
when rightly understood, more special and complicated than even that of
Society. For it is obliged to take into consideration the diversities of
constitution and temperament (la réaction cérébrale des viscères
végétatifs) the effects of which, still very imperfectly understood, are
highly important in the individual, but in the theory of society may be
neglected, because, differing in different persons, they neutralize one
another on the large scale. This is a remark worthy of M. Comte in his
best days; and the science thus conceived is, as he says, the true
scientific foundation of the art of Morals (and indeed of the art of
human life), which, therefore, may, both philosophically and
didactically, be properly combined with it.

His philosophy of general history is recast, and in many respects
changed; we cannot but say, greatly for the worse. He gives much greater
development than before to the Fetishistic, and to what he terms the
Theocratic, periods. To the Fetishistic view of nature he evinces a
partiality, which appears strange in a Positive philosopher. But the
reason is that Fetish-worship is a religion of the feelings, and not at
all of the intelligence. He regards it as cultivating universal love: as
a practical fact it cultivates much rather universal fear. He looks upon
Fetishism as much more akin to Positivism than any of the forms of
Theology, inasmuch as these consider matter as inert, and moved only by
forces, natural and supernatural, exterior to itself: while Fetishism
resembles Positivism in conceiving matter as spontaneously active, and
errs only by not distinguishing activity from life. As if the
superstition of the Fetishist consisted only in believing that the
objects which produce the phaenomena of nature involuntarily, produce
them voluntarily. The Fetishist thinks not merely that his Fetish is
alive, but that it can help him in war, can cure him of diseases, can
grant him prosperity, or afflict him with all the contrary evils.
Therein consists the lamentable effect of Fetishism--its degrading and
prostrating influence on the feelings and conduct, its conflict with all
genuine experience, and antagonism to all real knowledge of nature.

M. Comte had also no small sympathy with the Oriental theocracies, as he
calls the sacerdotal castes, who indeed often deserved it by their early
services to intellect and civilization; by the aid they gave to the
establishment of regular government, the valuable though empirical
knowledge they accumulated, and the height to which they helped to carry
some of the useful arts. M. Comte admits that they became oppressive,
and that the prolongation of their ascendancy came to be incompatible
with further improvement. But he ascribes this to their having arrogated
to themselves the temporal government, which, so far as we have any
authentic information, they never did. The reason why the sacerdotal
corporations became oppressive, was because they were organized: because
they attempted the "unity" and "systematization" so dear to M. Comte,
and allowed no science and no speculation, except with their leave and
under their direction. M. Comte's sacerdotal order, which, in his
system, has all the power that ever they had, would be oppressive in the
same manner; with no variation but that which arises from the altered
state of society and of the human mind.

M. Comte's partiality to the theocracies is strikingly contrasted with
his dislike of the Greeks, whom as a people he thoroughly detests, for
their undue addiction to intellectual speculation, and considers to have
been, by an inevitable fatality, morally sacrificed to the formation of
a few great scientific intellects,--principally Aristotle, Archimedes,
Apollonius, and Hipparchus. Any one who knows Grecian history as it can
now be known, will be amazed at M. Comte's travestie of it, in which the
vulgarest historical prejudices are accepted and exaggerated, to
illustrate the mischiefs of intellectual culture left to its own
guidance.

There is no need to analyze further M. Comte's second view of universal
history. The best chapter is that on the Romans, to whom, because they
were greater in practice than in theory, and for centuries worked
together in obedience to a social sentiment (though only that of their
country's aggrandizement), M. Comte is as favourably affected, as he is
inimical to all but a small selection of eminent thinkers among the
Greeks. The greatest blemish in this chapter is the idolatry of Julius
Caesar, whom M. Comte regards as one of the most illustrious characters
in history, and of the greatest practical benefactors of mankind. Caesar
had many eminent qualities, but what he did to deserve such praise we
are at a loss to discover, except subverting a free government: that
merit, however, with M. Comte, goes a great way. It did not, in his
former days, suffice to rehabilitate Napoleon, whose name and memory he
regarded with a bitterness highly honourable to himself, and whose
career he deemed one of the greatest calamities in modern history. But
in his later writings these sentiments are considerably mitigated: he
regards Napoleon as a more estimable "dictator" than Louis Philippe, and
thinks that his greatest error was re-establishing the Academy of
Sciences! That this should be said by M. Comte, and said of Napoleon,
measures the depth to which his moral standard had fallen.

The last volume which he published, that on the Philosophy of
Mathematics, is in some respects a still sadder picture of intellectual
degeneracy than those which preceded it. After the admirable résumé of
the subject in the first volume of his first great work, we expected
something of the very highest order when he returned to the subject for
a more thorough treatment of it. But, being the commencement of a
Synthèse Subjective, it contains, as might be expected, a great deal
that is much more subjective than mathematical. Nor of this do we
complain: but we little imagined of what nature this subjective matter
was to be. M. Comte here joins together the two ideas, which, of all
that he has put forth, are the most repugnant to the fundamental
principles of Positive Philosophy. One of them is that on which we have
just commented, the assimilation between Positivism and Fetishism. The
other, of which we took notice in a former article, was the "liberté
facultative" of shaping our scientific conceptions to gratify the
demands not solely of objective truth, but of intellectual and aesthetic
suitability. It would be an excellent thing, M. Comte thinks, if science
could be deprived of its _sécheresse_, and directly associated with
sentiment. Now it is impossible to prove that the external world, and
the bodies composing it, are not endowed with feeling, and voluntary
agency. It is therefore highly desirable that we should educate
ourselves into imagining that they are. Intelligence it will not do to
invest them with, for some distinction must be maintained between simple
activity and life. But we may suppose that they feel what is done to
them, and desire and will what they themselves do. Even intelligence,
which we must deny to them in the present, may be attributed to them in
the past. Before man existed, the earth, at that time an intelligent
being, may have exerted "its physico-chemical activity so as to improve
the astronomical order by changing its principal coefficients. Our
planet may be supposed to have rendered its orbit less excentric, and
thereby more habitable, by planning a long series of explosions,
analogous to those from which, according to the best hypotheses, comets
proceed. Judiciously reproduced, similar shocks may have rendered the
inclination of the earth's axis better adapted to the future wants of
the Grand Etre. _A fortiori_ the Earth may have modified its own figure,
which is only beyond our intervention because our spiritual ascendancy
has not at its disposal a sufficient material force." The like may be
conceived as having been done by each of the other planets, in concert,
possibly, with the Earth and with one another. "In proportion as each
planet improved its own condition, its life exhausted itself by excess
of innervation; but with the consolation of rendering its self-devotion
more efficacious, when the extinction of its special functions, first
animal, and finally vegetative, reduced it to the universal attributes
of feeling and activity."[25] This stuff, though he calls it fiction, he
soon after speaks of as belief (croyance), to be greatly recommended, as
at once satisfying our natural curiosity, and "perfecting our unity"
(again unity!) "by supplying the gaps in our scientific notions with
poetic fictions, and developing sympathetic emotions and aesthetic
inspirations: the world being conceived as aspiring to second mankind in
ameliorating the universal order under the impulse of the Grand Etre."
And he obviously intends that we should be trained to make these
fantastical inventions permeate all our associations, until we are
incapable of conceiving the world and Nature apart from them, and they
become equivalent to, and are in fact transformed into, real beliefs.

Wretched as this is, it is singularly characteristic of M. Comte's later
mode of thought. A writer might be excused for introducing into an
avowed work of fancy this dance of the planets, and conception of an
animated Earth. If finely executed, he might even be admired for it. No
one blames a poet for ascribing feelings, purposes, and human
propensities to flowers. Because a conception might be interesting, and
perhaps edifying, in a poem, M. Comte would have it imprinted on the
inmost texture of every human mind in ordinary prose. If the imagination
were not taught its prescribed lesson equally with the reason, where
would be Unity? "It is important that the domain of fiction should
become as _systematic_ as that of demonstration, in order that their
mutual harmony may be conformable to their respective destinations, both
equally directed towards the continual increase of _unity_, personal and
social."[26]

Nor is it enough to have created the Grand Fétiche (so he actually
proposes to call the Earth), and to be able to include it and all
concrete existence in our adoration along with the Grand Etre. It is
necessary also to extend Positivist Fetishism to purely abstract
existence; to "animate" the laws as well as the facts of nature. It is
not sufficient to have made physics sentimental, mathematics must be
made so too. This does not at first seem easy; but M. Comte finds the
means of accomplishing it. His plan is, to make Space also an object of
adoration, under the name of the Grand Milieu, and consider it as the
representative of Fatality in general. "The final _unity_ disposes us to
cultivate sympathy by developing our gratitude to whatever serves the
Grand Etre. It must dispose us to venerate the Fatality on which reposes
the whole aggregate of our existence." We should conceive this Fatality
as having a fixed seat, and that seat must be considered to be Space,
which should be conceived as possessing feeling, but not activity or
intelligence. And in our abstract speculations we should imagine all our
conceptions as located in free Space. Our images of all sorts, down to
our geometrical diagrams, and even our ciphers and algebraic symbols,
should always be figured to ourselves as written in space, and not on
paper or any other material substance. M. Comte adds that they should be
conceived as green on a white ground.

We cannot go on any longer with this. In spite of it all, the volume on
mathematics is full of profound thoughts, and will be very suggestive to
those who take up the subject after M. Comte. What deep meaning there
is, for example, in the idea that the infinitesimal calculus is a
conception analogous to the corpuscular hypothesis in physics; which
last M. Comte has always considered as a logical artifice; not an
opinion respecting matters of fact. The assimilation, as it seems to us,
throws a flood of light on both conceptions; on the physical one still
more than the mathematical. We might extract many ideas of similar,
though none perhaps of equal, suggestiveness. But mixed with these, what
pitiable _niaiseries_! One of his great points is the importance of the
"moral and intellectual properties of numbers." He cultivates a
superstitious reverence for some of them. The first three are sacred,
_les nombres sacrés_: One being the type of all Synthesis, Two of all
Combination, which he now says _is_ always binary (in his first treatise
he only said that we may usefully represent it to ourselves as being
so), and Three of all Progression, which not only requires three terms,
but as he now maintains, never ought to have any more. To these sacred
numbers all our mental operations must be made, as far as possible, to
adjust themselves. Next to them, he has a great partiality for the
number seven; for these whimsical reasons: "Composed of two progressions
followed by a synthesis, or of one progression between two couples, the
number seven, coming next after the sum of the three sacred numbers,
determines the largest group which we can distinctly imagine.
Reciprocally, it marks the limit of the divisions which we can directly
conceive in a magnitude of any kind." The number seven, therefore, must
be foisted in wherever possible, and among other things, is to be made
the basis of numeration, which is hereafter to be septimal instead of
decimal: producing all the inconvenience of a change of system, not only
without getting rid of, but greatly aggravating, the disadvantages of
the existing one. But then, he says, it is absolutely necessary that the
basis of numeration should be a prime number. All other people think it
absolutely necessary that it should not, and regard the present basis as
only objectionable in not being divisible enough. But M. Comte's puerile
predilection for prime numbers almost passes belief. His reason is that
they are the type of irreductibility: each of them is a kind of ultimate
arithmetical fact. This, to any one who knows M. Comte in his later
aspects, is amply sufficient. Nothing can exceed his delight in anything
which says to the human mind, Thus far shalt thou go and no farther. If
prime numbers are precious, doubly prime numbers are doubly so; meaning
those which are not only themselves prime numbers, but the number which
marks their place in the series of prime numbers is a prime number.
Still greater is the dignity of trebly prime numbers; when the number
marking the place of this second number is also prime. The number
thirteen fulfils these conditions: it is a prime number, it is the
seventh prime number, and seven is the fifth prime number. Accordingly
he has an outrageous partiality to the number thirteen. Though one of
the most inconvenient of all small numbers, he insists on introducing it
everywhere.

These strange conceits are connected with a highly characteristic
example of M. Comte's frenzy for regulation. He cannot bear that
anything should be left unregulated: there ought to be no such thing as
hesitation; nothing should remain arbitrary, for _l'arbitraire_ is
always favourable to egoism. Submission to artificial prescriptions is
as indispensable as to natural laws, and he boasts that under the reign
of sentiment, human life may be made equally, and even more, regular
than the courses of the stars. But the great instrument of exact
regulation for the details of life is numbers: fixed numbers, therefore,
should be introduced into all our conduct. M. Comte's first application
of this system was to the correction of his own literary style.
Complaint had been made, not undeservedly, that in his first great work,
especially in the latter part of it, the sentences and paragraphs were
long, clumsy, and involved. To correct this fault, of which he was
aware, he imposed on himself the following rules. No sentence was to
exceed two lines of his manuscript, equivalent to five of print. No
paragraph was to consist of more than seven sentences. He further
applied to his prose writing the rule of French versification which
forbids a _hiatus_(the concourse of two vowels), not allowing it to
himself even at the break between two sentences or two paragraphs; nor
did he permit himself ever to use the same word twice, either in the
same sentence or in two consecutive sentences, though belonging to
different paragraphs: with the exception of the monosyllabic
auxiliaries.[27] All this is well enough, especially the first two
precepts, and a good way of breaking through a bad habit. But M. Comte
persuaded himself that any arbitrary restriction, though in no way
emanating from, and therefore necessarily disturbing, the natural order
and proportion of the thoughts, is a benefit in itself, and tends to
improve style. If it renders composition vastly more difficult, he
rejoices at it, as tending to confine writing to superior minds.
Accordingly, in the Synthèse Subjective, he institutes the following
"plan for all compositions of importance." "Every volume really capable
of forming a distinct treatise" should consist of "seven chapters,
besides the introduction and the conclusion; and each of these should be
composed of three parts." Each third part of a chapter should be divided
into "seven sections, each composed of seven groups of sentences,
separated by the usual break of line. Normally formed, the section
offers a central group of seven sentences, preceded and followed by
three groups of five: the first section of each part reduces to three
sentences three of its groups, symmetrically placed; the last section
gives seven sentences to each of its extreme groups. These rules of
composition make prose approach to the regularity of poetry, when
combined with my previous reduction of the maximum length of a sentence
to two manuscript or five printed lines, that is, 250 letters."
"Normally constructed, great poems consist of thirteen cantos,
decomposed into parts, sections, and groups like my chapters, saving the
complete equality of the groups and of the sections." "This difference
of structure between volumes of poetry and of philosophy is more
apparent than real, for the introduction and the conclusion of a poem
should comprehend six of its thirteen cantos," leaving, therefore, the
cabalistic numeber seven for the body of the poem. And all this
regulation not being sufficiently meaningless, fantastic, and
oppressive, he invents an elaborate system for compelling each of his
sections and groups to begin with a letter of the alphabet, determined
beforehand, the letters being selected so as to compose words having
"a synthetic or sympathetic signification," and as close a relation as
possible to the section or part to which they are appropriated.

Others may laugh, but we could far rather weep at this melancholy
decadence of a great intellect. M. Comte used to reproach his early
English admirers with maintaining the "conspiracy of silence" concerning
his later performances. The reader can now judge whether such reticence
is not more than sufficiently explained by tenderness for his fame, and
a conscientious fear of bringing undeserved discredit on the noble
speculations of his early career.

M. Comte was accustomed to consider Descartes and Leibnitz as his
principal precursors, and the only great philosophers (among many
thinkers of high philosophic capacity) in modern times. It was to their
minds that he considered his own to bear the nearest resemblance. Though
we have not so lofty an opinion of any of the three as M. Comte had, we
think the assimilation just: thes were, of all recorded thinkers, the
two who bore most resemblance to M. Comte. They were like him in
earnestness, like him, though scarcely equal to him, in confidence in
themselves; they had the same extraordinary power of concatenation and
co-ordination; they enriched human knowledge with great truths and great
conceptions of method; they were, of all great scientific thinkers, the
most consistent, and for that reason often the most absurd, because they
shrank from no consequences, however contrary to common sense, to which
their premises appeared to lead. Accordingly their names have come down
to us associated with grand thoughts, with most important discoveries,
and also with some of the most extravagantly wild and ludicrously absurd
conceptions and theories which ever were solemnly propounded by
thoughtful men. "We think M. Comte as great as either of these
philosophers, and hardly more extravagant. Were we to speak our whole
mind, we should call him superior to them: though not intrinsically, yet
by the exertion of equal intellectual power in a more advanced state of
human preparation; but also in an age less tolerant of palpable
absurdities, and to which those he has committed, if not in themselves
greater, at least appear more ridiculous.


THE END.



FOOTNOTES:

[1] See the Chapter on Efficient Causes in Reid's "Essays on the Active
Powers," which is avowedly grounded on Newton's ideas.

[2] Mr Herbert Spencer, who also distinguishes between abstract and
concrete sciences, employs the terms in a different sense from that
explained above. He calls a science abstract when its truths are merely
ideal; when, like the truths of geometry, they are not exactly true of
real things--or, like the so-called law of inertia (the persistence in
direction and velocity of a motion once impressed) are "involved" in
experience but never actually seen in it, being always more or less
completely frustrated. Chemistry and biology he includes, on the
contrary, among concrete sciences, because chemical combinations and
decompositions, and the physiological action of tissues, do actually
take place (as our senses testify) in the manner in which the scientific
propositions state them to take place. We will not discuss the logical
or philological propriety of either use of the terms abstract and
concrete, in which twofold point of view very few of the numerous
acceptations of these words are entirely defensible: but of the two
distinctions M. Comte's answers to by far the deepest and most vital
difference. Mr Spencer's is open to the radical objection, that it
classifies truths not according to their subject-matter or their mutual
relations, but according to an unimportant difference in the manner in
which we come to know them. Of what consequence is it that the law of
inertia (considered as an exact truth) is not generalized from our
direct perceptions, but inferred by combining with the movements which
we see, those which we should see if it were not for the disturbing
causes? In either case we are equally certain that it _is_ an exact
truth: for every dynamical law is perfectly fulfilled even when it seems
to be counteracted. There must, we should think, be many truths in
physiology (for example) which are only known by a similar indirect
process; and Mr Spencer would hardly detach these from the body of the
science, and call them abstract and the remainder concrete.

[3] Système de Politique Positive, ii. 36.

[4] The strongest case which Mr Spencer produces of a scientifically
ascertained law, which, though belonging to a later science, was
necessary to the scientific formation of one occupying an earlier place
in M. Comte's series, is the law of the accelerating force of gravity;
which M. Comte places in Physics, but without which the Newtonian theory
of the celestial motions could not have been discovered, nor could even
now be proved. This fact, as is judiciously remarked by M. Littré, is
not valid against the plan of M. Comte's classification, but discloses a
slight error in the detail. M. Comte should not have placed the laws of
terrestrial gravity under Physics. They are part of the general theory
of gravitation, and belong to astronomy. Mr Spencer has hit one of the
weak points in M. Comte's scientific scale; weak however only because
left unguarded. Astronomy, the second of M. Comte's abstract sciences,
answers to his own definition of a concrete science. M. Comte however
was only wrong in overlooking a distinction. There _is_ an abstract
science of astronomy, namely, the theory of gravitation, which would
equally agree with and explain the facts of a totally different solar
system from the one of which our earth forms a part. The actual facts of
our own system, the dimensions, distances, velocities, temperatures,
physical constitution, &c., of the sun, earth, and planets, are properly
the subject of a concrete science, similar to natural history; but the
concrete is more inseparably united to the abstract science than in any
other case, since the few celestial facts really accessible to us are
nearly all required for discovering and proving the law of gravitation
as an universal property of bodies, and have therefore an indispensable
place in the abstract science as its fundamental data.

[5] The only point at which the general principle of the series fails in
its application, is the subdivision of Physics; and there, as the
subordination of the different branches scarcely exists, their order is
of little consequence. Thermology, indeed, is altogether an exception to
the principle of decreasing generality, heat, as Mr Spencer truly says
being as universal as gravitation. But the place of Thermology is marked
out, within certain narrow limits, by the ends of the classification,
though not by its principle. The desideratum is, that every science
should precede those which cannot be scientifically constitute or
rationally studied until it is known. It is as a means to this end, that
the arrangement of the phaenomena in the order of their dependence on
one another is important. Now, though heat is as universal a phaenomenon
as any which external nature presents, its laws do not affect, in any
manner important to us, the phaenomena of Astronomy, and operate in the
other branches of Physics only as slight modifying agencies, the
consideration of which may be postponed to a rather advanced stage. But
the phaenomena of Chemistry and Biology depend on them often for their
very existence. The ends of the classification require therefore that
Thermology should precede Chemistry and Biology, but do not demand that
it should be thrown farther back. On the other hand, those same ends, in
another point of view, require that it should be subsequent to
Astronomy, for reasons not of doctrine but of method: Astronomy being
the best school of the true art of interpreting Nature, by which
Thermology profits like other sciences, but which it was ill adapted to
originate.

[6] The philosophy of the subject is perhaps nowhere so well expressed
as in the "Système de Politique Positive" (iii. 41). "Conçu logiquement,
l'ordre suivant lequel nos principales théories accomplissent
l'évolution fondamentale résulte nécessairement de leur dépendence
mutuelle. Toutes les sciences peuvent, sans doute, être ébauchées à la
fois: leur usage pratique exige même cette culture simultanée. Mais
elle ne peut concerner que les inductions propres à chaque classe de
spéculations. Or cet essor inductif ne saurait fournir des principes
suffisants qu'envers les plus simples études. Partout ailleurs, ils ne
peuvent être établis qu'en subordonnant chaque genre d'inductions
scientifiques à l'ensemble des déductions emanées des domaines moins
compliqués, et dès-lors moins dépendants. Ainsi nos diverses théories
reposent dogmatiquement les unes sur les autres, suivant un ordre
invariable, qui doit régler historiquement leur avénement décisif, les
plus indépendantes ayant toujours dû se développer plus tôt."

[7] "Science," says Mr Spencer in his "Genesis," "while purely inductive
is purely qualitative.... All quantitative prevision is reached
deductively; induction can achieve only qualitative prevision." Now, if
we remember that the very first accurate quantitative law of physical
phaenomena ever established, the law of the accelerating force of
gravity, was discovered and proved by Galileo partly at least by
experiment; that the quantitative laws on which the whole theory of the
celestial motions is grounded, were generalized by Kepler from direct
comparison of observations; that the quantitative law of the
condensation of gases by pressure, the law of Boyle and Mariotte, was
arrived at by direct experiment; that the proportional quantities in
which every known substance combines chemically with every other, were
ascertained by innumerable experiments, from which the general law of
chemical equivalents, now the ground of the most exact quantitative
previsions, was an inductive generalization; we must conclude that Mr
Spencer has committed himself to a general proposition, which a very
slight consideration of truths perfectly known to him would have shown
to be unsustainable.

Again, in the very pamphlet in which Mr Spencer defends himself against
the supposition of being a disciple of M. Comte ("The Classification of
the Sciences," p. 37), he speaks of "M. Comte's adherent, Mr Buckle."
Now, except in the opinion common to both, that history may be made a
subject of science, the speculations of these two thinkers are not only
different, but run in different channels, M. Comte applying himself
principally to the laws of evolution common to all mankind, Mr Buckle
almost exclusively to the diversities: and it may be affirmed without
presumption, that they neither saw the same truths, nor fell into the
same errors, nor defended their opinions, either true or erroneous, by
the same arguments. Indeed, it is one of the surprising things in the
case of Mr Buckle as of Mr Spencer, that being a man of kindred genius,
of the same wide range of knowledge, and devoting himself to
speculations of the same kind, he profited so little by M. Comte.

These oversights prove nothing against the general accuracy of Mr
Spencer's acquirements. They are mere lapses of inattention, such as
thinkers who attempt speculations requiring that vast multitudes of
facts should be kept in recollection at once, can scarcely hope always
to avoid.

[8] We refer particularly to the mystical metaphysics connected with the
negative sign, imaginary quantities, infinity and infinitesimals, &c,
all cleared up and put on a rational footing in the highly philosophical
treatises of Professor De Morgan.

[9] Those who wish to see this idea followed out, are referred to "A
System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive." It is not irrelevant to
state that M. Comte, soon after the publication of that work, expressed,
both in a letter (published in M. Littré's volume) and in print, his
high approval of it (especially of the Inductive part) as a real
contribution to the construction of the Positive Method. But we cannot
discover that he was indebted to it for a single idea, or that it
influenced, in the smallest particular, the course of his subsequent
speculations.

[10] The force, however, of this last consideration has been much
weakened by the progress of discovery since M. Comte left off studying
chemistry; it being now probable that most if not all substances, even
elementary, are susceptible of _allotropic_ forms; as in the case of
oxygen and ozone, the two forms of phosphorus, &c.

[11] Thus; by considering prussic acid as a compound of hydrogen and
cyanogen rather than of hydrogen and the elements of cyanogen (carbon
and nitrogen), it is assimilated to a whole class of acid compounds
between hydrogen and other substances, and a reason is thus found for
its agreeing in their acid properties.

[12] According to Sir William Hamilton, as many as six; but numerical
precision in such matters is out of the question, and it is probable
that different minds have the power in different degrees.

[13] Or, as afterwards corrected by him, the appetites and emotions, the
active capacities, and the intellectual faculties; "le coeur," "le
caractère," and "l'esprit."

[14] M. Littré, who, though a warm admirer, and accepting the position
of a disciple of M. Comte, is singularly free from his errors, makes the
equally ingenious and just remark, that Political Economy corresponds in
social science to the theory of the nutritive functions in biology,
which M. Comte, with all good physiologists, thinks it not only
permissible but a great and fundamental improvement to treat, in the
first place, separately, as the necessary basis of the higher branches
of the science: although the nutritive functions can no more be
withdrawn _in fact_ from the influence of the animal and human
attributes, than the economical phaenomena of society from that of the
political and moral.

[15] Indeed his claim to be the creator of Sociology does not extend to
this branch of the science; on the contrary, he, in a subsequent work,
expressly declares that the real founder of it was Aristotle, by whom
the theory of the conditions of social existence was carried as far
towards perfection as was possible in the absence of any theory of
Progress. Without going quite this length, we think it hardly possible
to appreciate too highly the merit of those early efforts, beyond which
little progress had been made, until a very recent period, either in
ethical or in political science.

[16] It is due to them both to say, that he continued to express, in
letters which have been published, a high opinion of her, both morally
and intellectually; and her persistent and strong concern for his
interests and his fame is attested both by M. Littré and by his own
correspondence.

[17] "Of the Classification of the Sciences," pp. 37, 38.

[18] In the case of Egypt we admit that there may be cited against us
the authority of Plato, in whose Politicus it is said that the king of
Egypt must be a member of the priestly caste, or if by usurpation a
member of any other caste acquired the sovereignty he must be initiated
with the sacerdotal order. But Plato was writing of a state of things
which already belonged to the past; nor have we any assurance that his
information on Egyptian institutions was authentic and accurate. Had the
king been necessarily or commonly a member of the priestly order, it is
most improbable that the careful Herodotus, of whose comprehensive work
an entire book was devoted to a minute account of Egypt and its
institutions, and who collected his information from Egyptian priests in
the country itself, would have been ignorant of a part so important, and
tending so much to exalt the dignity of the priesthood, who were much
more likely to affirm it falsely to Plato than to withhold the knowledge
of it if true from Heredotus. Not only is Herodotus silent respecting
any such law or custom, but he thinks it needful to mention that in one
particular instance the king (by name Sethôs) was a priest, which he
would scarcely have done if this had been other than an exceptional
case. It is likely enough that a king of Egypt would learn the hieratic
character, and would not suffer any of the mysteries of law or religion
which were in the keeping of the priests to be withheld from him; and
this was very probably all the foundation which existed for the
assertion of the Eleatic stranger in Plato's dialogue.

[19] Mill, History of British India, book ii. chap. iii.

[20] At a somewhat later period M. Comte drew up what he termed a
Positivist Calendar, in which every day was dedicated to some benefactor
of humanity (generally with the addition of a similar but minor
luminary, to be celebrated in the room of his principal each bissextile
year). In this no kind of human eminence, really useful, is omitted,
except that which is merely negative and destructive. On this principle
(which is avowed) the French _philosophes_ as such are excluded, those
only among them being admitted who, like Voltaire and Diderot, had
claims to admission on other grounds: and the Protestant religious
reformers are left out entirely, with the curious exception of George
Fox--who is included, we presume, in consideration of his Peace
principles.

[21] He goes still further and deeper in a subsequent work. "L'art
ramène doucement à la réalite les contemplations trop abstraites du
théoricien, tandis qu'il pousse noblement le praticien aux speculations
désinteressées." Système de Politique Positive, i. 287.

[22] 1. _Système de Politique Positive, ou Traité de Sociologie,
instituant la Religion de l'Humanité_. 4 vols. 8vo. Paris: 1851--1854.

2. _Catéchisme Positiviste, ou Sommaire Exposition de la Religion
Universelle, en onze Entretiens Systématiques entre une Femme et un
Prêtre de l'Humanité_. 1 vol. 12mo. Paris: 1852.

3. _Appel aux Conservateurs_. Paris: 1855 (brochure).

4. _Synthèse Subjective, ou Système Universel des Conceptions propres
à l'Etat Normal de l'Humanité_. Tome Premier, contenant le Système de
Logique Positive, ou Traité de Philosophie Mathématique. 8vo. Paris:
1856.

5. _Auguste Comte et la Philosophie Positive_. Par E. LITTRE. 1 vol.
8vo. Paris: 1863.

6. _Exposition Abrégée et Populaire de la Philosophie et de la Religion
Positives_. PAR CÉLESTIN DE BLIGNIÈRES, ancien élève de l'Ecole
Polytechnique. 1 vol. 12mo. Paris: 1857.

7. _Notice sur l'Oeuvre et sur la Vie d'Auguste Comte_. Par le DOCTEUR
ROBINET, son Médecin, et l'un de ses treize Exécuteurs Testamentaires. 1
vol. 8vo. Paris: 1860.

[23] Système de Politique Positive, iv. 100.

[24] See Sir John Herschel's Outlines of Astronomy, § 319.

[25] Synthèse Subjective, pp. 10, 11.

[26] Synthèse Subjective, pp. 11, 12.







AUTOBIOGRAPHY

by

JOHN STUART MILL





CONTENTS


CHAPTER I   1806-1819

CHILDHOOD AND EARLY EDUCATION


CHAPTER II   1813-1821

MORAL INFLUENCES IN EARLY YOUTH--MY FATHER'S CHARACTER AND OPINIONS


CHAPTER III   1821-1823

LAST STAGE OF EDUCATION, AND FIRST OF SELF-EDUCATION


CHAPTER IV   1823-1828

YOUTHFUL PROPAGANDISM--THE "WESTMINSTER REVIEW"


CHAPTER V   1826-1832

A CRISIS IN MY MENTAL HISTORY--ONE STAGE ONWARD


CHAPTER VI   1830-1840

COMMENCEMENT OF THE MOST VALUABLE FRIENDSHIP OF MY LIFE--MY FATHER'S
DEATH--WRITINGS AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS UP TO 1840


CHAPTER VII   1840-1870

GENERAL VIEW OF THE REMAINDER OF MY LIFE.--COMPLETION OF THE "SYSTEM
OF LOGIC"--PUBLICATION OF THE "PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY"
--MARRIAGE--RETIREMENT FROM THE INDIA HOUSE--PUBLICATION OF "LIBERTY"
--"CONSIDERATIONS ON REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT"--CIVIL WAR IN AMERICA
--EXAMINATION OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON'S PHILOSOPHY--PARLIAMENTARY LIFE
--REMAINDER OF MY LIFE






CHAPTER I

CHILDHOOD AND EARLY EDUCATION


It seems proper that I should prefix to the following biographical sketch
some mention of the reasons which have made me think it desirable that I
should leave behind me such a memorial of so uneventful a life as mine.
I do not for a moment imagine that any part of what I have to relate can
be interesting to the public as a narrative or as being connected with
myself. But I have thought that in an age in which education and its
improvement are the subject of more, if not of profounder, study than at
any former period of English history, it may be useful that there should
be some record of an education which was unusual and remarkable, and
which, whatever else it may have done, has proved how much more than is
commonly supposed may be taught, and well taught, in those early years
which, in the common modes of what is called instruction, are little
better than wasted. It has also seemed to me that in an age of transition
in opinions, there may be somewhat both of interest and of benefit in
noting the successive phases of any mind which was always pressing forward,
equally ready to learn and to unlearn either from its own thoughts or from
those of others. But a motive which weighs more with me than either of
these, is a desire to make acknowledgment of the debts which my
intellectual and moral development owes to other persons; some of them of
recognised eminence, others less known than they deserve to be, and the
one to whom most of all is due, one whom the world had no opportunity of
knowing. The reader whom these things do not interest, has only himself to
blame if he reads farther, and I do not desire any other indulgence from
him than that of bearing in mind that for him these pages were not written.

I was born in London, on the 20th of May, 1806, and was the eldest son
of James Mill, the author of the _History of British India_. My father,
the son of a petty tradesman and (I believe) small farmer, at Northwater
Bridge, in the county of Angus, was, when a boy, recommended by his
abilities to the notice of Sir John Stuart, of Fettercairn, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer in Scotland, and was, in consequence, sent to
the University of Edinburgh, at the expense of a fund established by
Lady Jane Stuart (the wife of Sir John Stuart) and some other ladies
for educating young men for the Scottish Church. He there went through
the usual course of study, and was licensed as a Preacher, but never
followed the profession; having satisfied himself that he could not
believe the doctrines of that or any other Church. For a few years he
was a private tutor in various families in Scotland, among others that
of the Marquis of Tweeddale, but ended by taking up his residence in
London, and devoting himself to authorship. Nor had he any other means
of support until 1819, when he obtained an appointment in the India House.

In this period of my father's life there are two things which it is
impossible not to be struck with: one of them unfortunately a very
common circumstance, the other a most uncommon one. The first is, that
in his position, with no resource but the precarious one of writing in
periodicals, he married and had a large family; conduct than which
nothing could be more opposed, both as a matter of good sense and of
duty, to the opinions which, at least at a later period of life, he
strenuously upheld. The other circumstance, is the extraordinary
energy which was required to lead the life he led, with the
disadvantages under which he laboured from the first, and with those
which he brought upon himself by his marriage. It would have been no
small thing, had he done no more than to support himself and his
family during so many years by writing, without ever being in debt,
or in any pecuniary difficulty; holding, as he did, opinions, both in
politics and in religion, which were more odious to all persons of
influence, and to the common run of prosperous Englishmen, in that
generation than either before or since; and being not only a man whom
nothing would have induced to write against his convictions, but one
who invariably threw into everything he wrote, as much of his
convictions as he thought the circumstances would in any way permit:
being, it must also be said, one who never did anything negligently;
never undertook any task, literary or other, on which he did not
conscientiously bestow all the labour necessary for performing it
adequately. But he, with these burdens on him, planned, commenced, and
completed, the _History of India_; and this in the course of about ten
years, a shorter time than has been occupied (even by writers who had
no other employment) in the production of almost any other historical
work of equal bulk, and of anything approaching to the same amount of
reading and research. And to this is to be added, that during the
whole period, a considerable part of almost every day was employed in
the instruction of his children: in the case of one of whom, myself,
he exerted an amount of labour, care, and perseverance rarely, if
ever, employed for a similar purpose, in endeavouring to give,
according to his own conception, the highest order of intellectual
education.

A man who, in his own practice, so vigorously acted up to the
principle of losing no time, was likely to adhere to the same rule
in the instruction of his pupil. I have no remembrance of the time
when I began to learn Greek; I have been told that it was when I was
three years old. My earliest recollection on the subject, is that of
committing to memory what my father termed vocables, being lists of
common Greek words, with their signification in English, which he
wrote out for me on cards. Of grammar, until some years later, I
learnt no more than the inflections of the nouns and verbs, but, after
a course of vocables, proceeded at once to translation; and I faintly
remember going through Aesop's _Fables_, the first Greek book which
I read. The _Anabasis_, which I remember better, was the second. I
learnt no Latin until my eighth year. At that time I had read, under
my father's tuition, a number of Greek prose authors, among whom I
remember the whole of Herodotus, and of Xenophon's _Cyropaedia_ and
_Memorials of Socrates_; some of the lives of the philosophers by
Diogenes Laertius; part of Lucian, and Isocrates ad Demonicum and Ad
Nicoclem. I also read, in 1813, the first six dialogues (in the common
arrangement) of Plato, from the Euthyphron to the Theoctetus inclusive:
which last dialogue, I venture to think, would have been better omitted,
as it was totally impossible I should understand it. But my father, in
all his teaching, demanded of me not only the utmost that I could do,
but much that I could by no possibility have done. What he was himself
willing to undergo for the sake of my instruction, may be judged from
the fact, that I went through the whole process of preparing my Greek
lessons in the same room and at the same table at which he was writing:
and as in those days Greek and English lexicons were not, and I could
make no more use of a Greek and Latin lexicon than could be made without
having yet begun to learn Latin, I was forced to have recourse to him
for the meaning of every word which I did not know. This incessant
interruption, he, one of the most impatient of men, submitted to, and
wrote under that interruption several volumes of his History and all
else that he had to write during those years.

The only thing besides Greek, that I learnt as a lesson in this part
of my childhood, was arithmetic: this also my father taught me: it was
the task of the evenings, and I well remember its disagreeableness.
But the lessons were only a part of the daily instruction I received.
Much of it consisted in the books I read by myself, and my father's
discourses to me, chiefly during our walks. From 1810 to the end of
1813 we were living in Newington Green, then an almost rustic
neighbourhood. My father's health required considerable and constant
exercise, and he walked habitually before breakfast, generally in the
green lanes towards Hornsey. In these walks I always accompanied him,
and with my earliest recollections of green fields and wild flowers,
is mingled that of the account I gave him daily of what I had read the
day before. To the best of my remembrance, this was a voluntary rather
than a prescribed exercise. I made notes on slips of paper while
reading, and from these in the morning walks, I told the story to him;
for the books were chiefly histories, of which I read in this manner
a great number: Robertson's histories, Hume, Gibbon; but my greatest
delight, then and for long afterwards, was Watson's _Philip the Second
and Third_. The heroic defence of the Knights of Malta against the
Turks, and of the revolted Provinces of the Netherlands against Spain,
excited in me an intense and lasting interest. Next to Watson, my
favourite historical reading was Hooke's _History of Rome_. Of Greece
I had seen at that time no regular history, except school abridgments
and the last two or three volumes of a translation of Rollin's
_Ancient History_, beginning with Philip of Macedon. But I read with
great delight Langhorne's translation of Plutarch. In English history,
beyond the time at which Hume leaves off, I remember reading Burnet's
_History of his Own Time_, though I cared little for anything in it
except the wars and battles; and the historical part of the _Annual
Register_, from the beginning to about 1788, where the volumes my
father borrowed for me from Mr. Bentham left off. I felt a lively
interest in Frederic of Prussia during his difficulties, and in Paoli,
the Corsican patriot; but when I came to the American War, I took my
part, like a child as I was (until set right by my father) on the
wrong side, because it was called the English side. In these frequent
talks about the books I read, he used, as opportunity offered, to give
me explanations and ideas respecting civilization, government, morality,
mental cultivation, which he required me afterwards to restate to him
in my own words. He also made me read, and give him a verbal account of,
many books which would not have interested me sufficiently to induce me
to read them of myself: among other's Millar's _Historical View of the
English Government_, a book of great merit for its time, and which he
highly valued; Mosheim's _Ecclesiastical History_, McCrie's _Life of
John Knox_, and even Sewell and Rutty's Histories of the Quakers. He was
fond of putting into my hands books which exhibited men of energy and
resource in unusual circumstances, struggling against difficulties and
overcoming them: of such works I remember Beaver's _African Memoranda_,
and Collins's _Account of the First Settlement of New South Wales_.
Two books which I never wearied of reading were Anson's Voyages, so
delightful to most young persons, and a collection (Hawkesworth's, I
believe) of _Voyages round the World_, in four volumes, beginning with
Drake and ending with Cook and Bougainville. Of children's books, any
more than of playthings, I had scarcely any, except an occasional gift
from a relation or acquaintance: among those I had, _Robinson Crusoe_
was pre-eminent, and continued to delight me through all my boyhood.
It was no part, however, of my father's system to exclude books of
amusement, though he allowed them very sparingly. Of such books he
possessed at that time next to none, but he borrowed several for me;
those which I remember are the _Arabian Nights_, Cazotte's _Arabian
Tales_, _Don Quixote_, Miss Edgeworth's _Popular Tales_, and a book
of some reputation in its day, Brooke's _Fool of Quality_.

In my eighth year I commenced learning Latin, in conjunction with a
younger sister, to whom I taught it as I went on, and who afterwards
repeated the lessons to my father; from this time, other sisters and
brothers being successively added as pupils, a considerable part of my
day's work consisted of this preparatory teaching. It was a part which
I greatly disliked; the more so, as I was held responsible for the
lessons of my pupils, in almost as full a sense as for my own: I,
however, derived from this discipline the great advantage, of learning
more thoroughly and retaining more lastingly the things which I was
set to teach: perhaps, too, the practice it afforded in explaining
difficulties to others, may even at that age have been useful. In
other respects, the experience of my boyhood is not favourable to the
plan of teaching children by means of one another. The teaching, I
am sure, is very inefficient as teaching, and I well know that the
relation between teacher and taught is not a good moral discipline
to either. I went in this manner through the Latin grammar, and a
considerable part of Cornelius Nepos and Caesar's Commentaries, but
afterwards added to the superintendence of these lessons, much longer
ones of my own.

In the same year in which I began Latin, I made my first commencement
in the Greek poets with the Iliad. After I had made some progress in
this, my father put Pope's translation into my hands. It was the first
English verse I had cared to read, and it became one of the books in
which for many years I most delighted: I think I must have read it
from twenty to thirty times through. I should not have thought it
worth while to mention a taste apparently so natural to boyhood, if I
had not, as I think, observed that the keen enjoyment of this brilliant
specimen of narrative and versification is not so universal with boys,
as I should have expected both _a priori_ and from my individual
experience. Soon after this time I commenced Euclid, and somewhat later,
Algebra, still under my father's tuition.

From my eighth to my twelfth year, the Latin books which I remember
reading were, the _Bucolics_ of Virgil, and the first six books of the
Aeneid; all Horace, except the Epodes; the Fables of Phaedrus; the
first five books of Livy (to which from my love of the subject I
voluntarily added, in my hours of leisure, the remainder of the first
decade); all Sallust; a considerable part of Ovid's _Metamorphoses_;
some plays of Terence; two or three books of Lucretius; several of the
Orations of Cicero, and of his writings on oratory; also his letters
to Atticus, my father taking the trouble to translate to me from the
French the historical explanations in Mingault's notes. In Greek I
read the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ through; one or two plays of Sophocles,
Euripides, and Aristophanes, though by these I profited little; all
Thucydides; the _Hellenics_ of Xenophon; a great part of Demosthenes,
Aeschines, and Lysias; Theocritus; Anacreon; part of the _Anthology_;
a little of Dionysius; several books of Polybius; and lastly
Aristotle's _Rhetoric_, which, as the first expressly scientific
treatise on any moral or psychological subject which I had read, and
containing many of the best observations of the ancients on human
nature and life, my father made me study with peculiar care, and throw
the matter of it into synoptic tables. During the same years I learnt
elementary geometry and algebra thoroughly, the differential calculus,
and other portions of the higher mathematics far from thoroughly: for
my father, not having kept up this part of his early acquired
knowledge, could not spare time to qualify himself for removing my
difficulties, and left me to deal with them, with little other aid
than that of books: while I was continually incurring his displeasure
by my inability to solve difficult problems for which he did not see
that I had not the necessary previous knowledge.

As to my private reading, I can only speak of what I remember. History
continued to be my strongest predilection, and most of all ancient
history. Mitford's Greece I read continually; my father had put me on
my guard against the Tory prejudices of this writer, and his
perversions of facts for the whitewashing of despots, and blackening
of popular institutions. These points he discoursed on, exemplifying
them from the Greek orators and historians, with such effect that in
reading Mitford my sympathies were always on the contrary side to
those of the author, and I could, to some extent, have argued the
point against him: yet this did not diminish the ever new pleasure
with which I read the book. Roman history, both in my old favourite,
Hooke, and in Ferguson, continued to delight me. A book which, in
spite of what is called the dryness of its style, I took great
pleasure in, was the _Ancient Universal History_, through the
incessant reading of which, I had my head full of historical details
concerning the obscurest ancient people, while about modern history,
except detached passages, such as the Dutch War of Independence, I
knew and cared comparatively little. A voluntary exercise, to which
throughout my boyhood I was much addicted, was what I called writing
histories. I successively composed a Roman History, picked out
of Hooke; and an Abridgment of the _Ancient Universal History_; a
History of Holland, from my favourite Watson and from an anonymous
compilation; and in my eleventh and twelfth year I occupied myself
with writing what I flattered myself was something serious. This was
no less than a History of the Roman Government, compiled (with the
assistance of Hooke) from Livy and Dionysius: of which I wrote as much
as would have made an octavo volume, extending to the epoch of the
Licinian Laws. It was, in fact, an account of the struggles between
the patricians and plebeians, which now engrossed all the interest in
my mind which I had previously felt in the mere wars and conquests of
the Romans. I discussed all the constitutional points as they arose:
though quite ignorant of Niebuhr's researches, I, by such lights as my
father had given me, vindicated the Agrarian Laws on the evidence of
Livy, and upheld, to the best of my ability, the Roman Democratic
party. A few years later, in my contempt of my childish efforts, I
destroyed all these papers, not then anticipating that I could ever
feel any curiosity about my first attempts at writing and reasoning.
My father encouraged me in this useful amusement, though, as I think
judiciously, he never asked to see what I wrote; so that I did not
feel that in writing it I was accountable to any one, nor had the
chilling sensation of being under a critical eye.

But though these exercises in history were never a compulsory lesson,
there was another kind of composition which was so, namely, writing
verses, and it was one of the most disagreeable of my tasks. Greek
and Latin verses I did not write, nor learnt the prosody of those
languages. My father, thinking this not worth the time it required,
contented himself with making me read aloud to him, and correcting
false quantities. I never composed at all in Greek, even in prose, and
but little in Latin. Not that my father could be indifferent to the
value of this practice, in giving a thorough knowledge of these
languages, but because there really was not time for it. The verses
I was required to write were English. When I first read Pope's Homer,
I ambitiously attempted to compose something of the same kind, and
achieved as much as one book of a continuation of the _Iliad_. There,
probably, the spontaneous promptings of my poetical ambition would
have stopped; but the exercise, begun from choice, was continued by
command. Conformably to my father's usual practice of explaining to
me, as far as possible, the reasons for what he required me to do,
he gave me, for this, as I well remember, two reasons highly
characteristic of him: one was, that some things could be expressed
better and more forcibly in verse than in prose: this, he said, was
a real advantage. The other was, that people in general attached more
value to verse than it deserved, and the power of writing it, was, on
this account, worth acquiring. He generally left me to choose my own
subjects, which, as far as I remember, were mostly addresses to some
mythological personage or allegorical abstraction; but he made me
translate into English verse many of Horace's shorter poems: I also
remember his giving me Thomson's _Winter_ to read, and afterwards
making me attempt (without book) to write something myself on the same
subject. The verses I wrote were, of course, the merest rubbish, nor
did I ever attain any facility of versification, but the practice may
have been useful in making it easier for me, at a later period, to
acquire readiness of expression.[1] I had read, up to this time, very
little English poetry. Shakspeare my father had put into my hands,
chiefly for the sake of the historical plays, from which, however,
I went on to the others. My father never was a great admirer of
Shakspeare, the English idolatry of whom he used to attack with some
severity. He cared little for any English poetry except Milton (for
whom he had the highest admiration), Goldsmith, Burns, and Gray's
_Bard_, which he preferred to his Elegy: perhaps I may add Cowper and
Beattie. He had some value for Spenser, and I remember his reading to
me (unlike his usual practice of making me read to him) the first book
of the _Fairie Queene_; but I took little pleasure in it. The poetry
of the present century he saw scarcely any merit in, and I hardly
became acquainted with any of it till I was grown up to manhood,
except the metrical romances of Walter Scott, which I read at his
recommendation and was intensely delighted with; as I always was with
animated narrative. Dryden's Poems were among my father's books, and
many of these he made me read, but I never cared for any of them
except _Alexander's Feast_, which, as well as many of the songs
in Walter Scott, I used to sing internally, to a music of my own: to
some of the latter, indeed, I went so far as to compose airs, which
I still remember. Cowper's short poems I read with some pleasure, but
never got far into the longer ones; and nothing in the two volumes
interested me like the prose account of his three hares. In my
thirteenth year I met with Campbell's poems, among which _Lochiel_,
_Hohenlinden_, _The Exile of Erin_, and some others, gave me
sensations I had never before experienced from poetry. Here, too,
I made nothing of the longer poems, except the striking opening of
_Gertrude of Wyoming_, which long kept its place in my feelings as
the perfection of pathos.

During this part of my childhood, one of my greatest amusements was
experimental science; in the theoretical, however, not the practical
sense of the word; not trying experiments--a kind of discipline which
I have often regretted not having had--nor even seeing, but merely
reading about them. I never remember being so wrapt up in any book, as
I was in Joyce's _Scientific Dialogues_; and I was rather recalcitrant
to my father's criticisms of the bad reasoning respecting the first
principles of physics, which abounds in the early part of that work. I
devoured treatises on Chemistry, especially that of my father's early
friend and schoolfellow, Dr. Thomson, for years before I attended a
lecture or saw an experiment.

From about the age of twelve, I entered into another and more advanced
stage in my course of instruction; in which the main object was no
longer the aids and appliances of thought, but the thoughts themselves.
This commenced with Logic, in which I began at once with the _Organon_,
and read it to the Analytics inclusive, but profited little by the
Posterior Analytics, which belong to a branch of speculation I was not
yet ripe for. Contemporaneously with the _Organon_, my father made me
read the whole or parts of several of the Latin treatises on the
scholastic logic; giving each day to him, in our walks, a minute account
of what I had read, and answering his numerous and most searching
questions. After this, I went in a similar manner through the _Computatio
sive Logica_ of Hobbes, a work of a much higher order of thought than the
books of the school logicians, and which he estimated very highly; in my
own opinion beyond its merits, great as these are. It was his invariable
practice, whatever studies he exacted from me, to make me as far as
possible understand and feel the utility of them: and this he deemed
peculiarly fitting in the case of the syllogistic logic, the usefulness
of which had been impugned by so many writers of authority. I well
remember how, and in what particular walk, in the neighbourhood of Bagshot
Heath (where we were on a visit to his old friend Mr. Wallace, then one
of the Mathematical Professors at Sandhurst) he first attempted by
questions to make me think on the subject, and frame some conception of
what constituted the utility of the syllogistic logic, and when I had
failed in this, to make me understand it by explanations. The
explanations did not make the matter at all clear to me at the time;
but they were not therefore useless; they remained as a nucleus for my
observations and reflections to crystallize upon; the import of his
general remarks being interpreted to me, by the particular instances
which came under my notice afterwards. My own consciousness and
experience ultimately led me to appreciate quite as highly as he did,
the value of an early practical familiarity with the school logic.
I know of nothing, in my education, to which I think myself more
indebted for whatever capacity of thinking I have attained. The first
intellectual operation in which I arrived at any proficiency, was
dissecting a bad argument, and finding in what part the fallacy lay:
and though whatever capacity of this sort I attained, was due to the
fact that it was an intellectual exercise in which I was most
perseveringly drilled by my father, yet it is also true that the
school logic, and the mental habits acquired in studying it, were
among the principal instruments of this drilling. I am persuaded that
nothing, in modern education, tends so much, when properly used, to
form exact thinkers, who attach a precise meaning to words and
propositions, and are not imposed on by vague, loose, or ambiguous
terms. The boasted influence of mathematical studies is nothing to
it; for in mathematical processes, none of the real difficulties of
correct ratiocination occur. It is also a study peculiarly adapted to
an early stage in the education of philosophical students, since it
does not presuppose the slow process of acquiring, by experience and
reflection, valuable thoughts of their own. They may become capable
of disentangling the intricacies of confused and self-contradictory
thought, before their own thinking faculties are much advanced; a
power which, for want of some such discipline, many otherwise able
men altogether lack; and when they have to answer opponents, only
endeavour, by such arguments as they can command, to support the
opposite conclusion, scarcely even attempting to confute the
reasonings of their antagonists; and, therefore, at the utmost,
leaving the question, as far as it depends on argument, a balanced one.

During this time, the Latin and Greek books which I continued to read
with my father were chiefly such as were worth studying, not for the
language merely, but also for the thoughts. This included much of the
orators, and especially Demosthenes, some of whose principal orations
I read several times over, and wrote out, by way of exercise, a full
analysis of them. My father's comments on these orations when I read
them to him were very instructive to me. He not only drew my attention
to the insight they afforded into Athenian institutions, and the
principles of legislation and government which they often illustrated,
but pointed out the skill and art of the orator--how everything
important to his purpose was said at the exact moment when he had
brought the minds of his audience into the state most fitted to
receive it; how he made steal into their minds, gradually and by
insinuation, thoughts which, if expressed in a more direct manner,
would have roused their opposition. Most of these reflections were
beyond my capacity of full comprehension at the time; but they left
seed behind, which germinated in due season. At this time I also read
the whole of Tacitus, Juvenal, and Quintilian. The latter, owing to
his obscure style and to the scholastic details of which many parts
of his treatise are made up, is little read, and seldom sufficiently
appreciated. His book is a kind of encyclopaedia of the thoughts of
the ancients on the whole field of education and culture; and I have
retained through life many valuable ideas which I can distinctly trace
to my reading of him, even at that early age. It was at this period
that I read, for the first time, some of the most important dialogues
of Plato, in particular the _Gorgias_, the _Protagoras_, and the
_Republic_. There is no author to whom my father thought himself more
indebted for his own mental culture, than Plato, or whom he more
frequently recommended to young students. I can bear similar testimony
in regard to myself. The Socratic method, of which the Platonic
dialogues are the chief example, is unsurpassed as a discipline for
correcting the errors, and clearing up the confusions incident to the
_intellectus sibi permissus_, the understanding which has made up all
its bundles of associations under the guidance of popular phraseology.
The close, searching _elenchus_ by which the man of vague generalities
is constrained either to express his meaning to himself in definite
terms, or to confess that he does not know what he is talking about;
the perpetual testing of all general statements by particular instances;
the siege in form which is laid to the meaning of large abstract terms,
by fixing upon some still larger class-name which includes that and more,
and dividing down to the thing sought--marking out its limits and
definition by a series of accurately drawn distinctions between it and
each of the cognate objects which are successively parted off from it
--all this, as an education for precise thinking, is inestimable, and
all this, even at that age, took such hold of me that it became part of
my own mind. I have felt ever since that the title of Platonist belongs
by far better right to those who have been nourished in and have
endeavoured to practise Plato's mode of investigation, than to those
who are distinguished only by the adoption of certain dogmatical
conclusions, drawn mostly from the least intelligible of his works, and
which the character of his mind and writings makes it uncertain whether
he himself regarded as anything more than poetic fancies, or philosophic
conjectures.

In going through Plato and Demosthenes, since I could now read these
authors, as far as the language was concerned, with perfect ease, I
was not required to construe them sentence by sentence, but to read
them aloud to my father, answering questions when asked: but the
particular attention which he paid to elocution (in which his own
excellence was remarkable) made this reading aloud to him a most
painful task. Of all things which he required me to do, there was none
which I did so constantly ill, or in which he so perpetually lost his
temper with me. He had thought much on the principles of the art of
reading, especially the most neglected part of it, the inflections of
the voice, or _modulation_, as writers on elocution call it (in
contrast with _articulation_ on the one side, and _expression_ on the
other), and had reduced it to rules, grounded on the logical analysis
of a sentence. These rules he strongly impressed upon me, and took me
severely to task for every violation of them: but I even then remarked
(though I did not venture to make the remark to him) that though he
reproached me when I read a sentence ill, and _told_ me how I ought to
have read it, he never by reading it himself, _showed_ me how it ought
to be read. A defect running through his otherwise admirable modes of
instruction, as it did through all his modes of thought, was that of
trusting too much to the intelligibleness of the abstract, when not
embodied in the concrete. It was at a much later period of my youth,
when practising elocution by myself, or with companions of my own age,
that I for the first time understood the object of his rules, and saw
the psychological grounds of them. At that time I and others followed
out the subject into its ramifications, and could have composed a very
useful treatise, grounded on my father's principles. He himself left
those principles and rules unwritten. I regret that when my mind was
full of the subject, from systematic practice, I did not put them, and
our improvements of them, into a formal shape.

A book which contributed largely to my education, in the best sense of
the term, was my father's _History of India_. It was published in the
beginning of 1818. During the year previous, while it was passing
through the press, I used to read the proof sheets to him; or rather,
I read the manuscript to him while he corrected the proofs. The number
of new ideas which I received from this remarkable book, and the
impulse and stimulus as well as guidance given to my thoughts by its
criticism and disquisitions on society and civilization in the Hindoo
part, on institutions and the acts of governments in the English part,
made my early familiarity with it eminently useful to my subsequent
progress. And though I can perceive deficiencies in it now as compared
with a perfect standard, I still think it, if not the most, one of the
most instructive histories ever written, and one of the books from
which most benefit may be derived by a mind in the course of making up
its opinions.

The Preface, among the most characteristic of my father's writings, as
well as the richest in materials of thought, gives a picture which may
be entirely depended on, of the sentiments and expectations with which
he wrote the History. Saturated as the book is with the opinions and
modes of judgment of a democratic radicalism then regarded as extreme;
and treating with a severity, at that time most unusual, the English
Constitution, the English law, and all parties and classes who
possessed any considerable influence in the country; he may have
expected reputation, but certainly not advancement in life, from its
publication; nor could he have supposed that it would raise up anything
but enemies for him in powerful quarters: least of all could he have
expected favour from the East India Company, to whose commercial
privileges he was unqualifiedly hostile, and on the acts of whose
government he had made so many severe comments: though, in various parts
of his book, he bore a testimony in their favour, which he felt to be
their just due, namely, that no Government had on the whole given so much
proof, to the extent of its lights, of good intention towards its subjects;
and that if the acts of any other Government had the light of publicity
as completely let in upon them, they would, in all probability, still less
bear scrutiny.

On learning, however, in the spring of 1819, about a year after the
publication of the History, that the East India Directors desired to
strengthen the part of their home establishment which was employed in
carrying on the correspondence with India, my father declared himself
a candidate for that employment, and, to the credit of the Directors,
successfully. He was appointed one of the Assistants of the Examiner
of India Correspondence; officers whose duty it was to prepare drafts
of despatches to India, for consideration by the Directors, in the
principal departments of administration. In this office, and in that
of Examiner, which he subsequently attained, the influence which his
talents, his reputation, and his decision of character gave him, with
superiors who really desired the good government of India, enabled him
to a great extent to throw into his drafts of despatches, and to carry
through the ordeal of the Court of Directors and Board of Control,
without having their force much weakened, his real opinions on Indian
subjects. In his History he had set forth, for the first time, many of
the true principles of Indian administration: and his despatches,
following his History, did more than had ever been done before to
promote the improvement of India, and teach Indian officials to
understand their business. If a selection of them were published, they
would, I am convinced, place his character as a practical statesman
fully on a level with his eminence as a speculative writer.

This new employment of his time caused no relaxation in his attention to
my education. It was in this same year, 1819, that he took me through a
complete course of political economy. His loved and intimate friend,
Ricardo, had shortly before published the book which formed so great an
epoch in political economy; a book which would never have been published
or written, but for the entreaty and strong encouragement of my father;
for Ricardo, the most modest of men, though firmly convinced of the
truth of his doctrines, deemed himself so little capable of doing them
justice in exposition and expression, that he shrank from the idea of
publicity. The same friendly encouragement induced Ricardo, a year or
two later, to become a member of the House of Commons; where, during the
remaining years of his life, unhappily cut short in the full vigour of
his intellect, he rendered so much service to his and my father's
opinions both on political economy and on other subjects.

Though Ricardo's great work was already in print, no didactic treatise
embodying its doctrines, in a manner fit for learners, had yet appeared.
My father, therefore, commenced instructing me in the science by a sort
of lectures, which he delivered to me in our walks. He expounded each
day a portion of the subject, and I gave him next day a written account
of it, which he made me rewrite over and over again until it was clear,
precise, and tolerably complete. In this manner I went through the whole
extent of the science; and the written outline of it which resulted from
my daily _compte rendu_, served him afterwards as notes from which to
write his _Elements of Political Economy_. After this I read Ricardo,
giving an account daily of what I read, and discussing, in the best
manner I could, the collateral points which offered themselves in our
progress.

On Money, as the most intricate part of the subject, he made me read
in the same manner Ricardo's admirable pamphlets, written during what
was called the Bullion controversy; to these succeeded Adam Smith; and
in this reading it was one of my father's main objects to make me
apply to Smith's more superficial view of political economy, the
superior lights of Ricardo, and detect what was fallacious in Smith's
arguments, or erroneous in any of his conclusions. Such a mode of
instruction was excellently calculated to form a thinker; but it
required to be worked by a thinker, as close and vigorous as my
father. The path was a thorny one, even to him, and I am sure it was
so to me, notwithstanding the strong interest I took in the subject.
He was often, and much beyond reason, provoked by my failures in cases
where success could not have been expected; but in the main his method
was right, and it succeeded. I do not believe that any scientific
teaching ever was more thorough, or better fitted for training the
faculties, than the mode in which logic and political economy were
taught to me by my father. Striving, even in an exaggerated degree,
to call forth the activity of my faculties, by making me find out
everything for myself, he gave his explanations not before, but after,
I had felt the full force of the difficulties; and not only gave me an
accurate knowledge of these two great subjects, as far as they were
then understood, but made me a thinker on both. I thought for myself
almost from the first, and occasionally thought differently from him,
though for a long time only on minor points, and making his opinion
the ultimate standard. At a later period I even occasionally convinced
him, and altered his opinion on some points of detail: which I state
to his honour, not my own. It at once exemplifies his perfect candour,
and the real worth of his method of teaching.

At this point concluded what can properly be called my lessons: when I
was about fourteen I left England for more than a year; and after my
return, though my studies went on under my father's general direction,
he was no longer my schoolmaster. I shall therefore pause here, and
turn back to matters of a more general nature connected with the part
of my life and education included in the preceding reminiscences.

In the course of instruction which I have partially retraced, the
point most superficially apparent is the great effort to give, during
the years of childhood, an amount of knowledge in what are considered
the higher branches of education, which is seldom acquired (if
acquired at all) until the age of manhood. The result of the experiment
shows the ease with which this may be done, and places in a strong
light the wretched waste of so many precious years as are spent in
acquiring the modicum of Latin and Greek commonly taught to schoolboys;
a waste which has led so many educational reformers to entertain the
ill-judged proposal of discarding these languages altogether from
general education. If I had been by nature extremely quick of
apprehension, or had possessed a very accurate and retentive memory,
or were of a remarkably active and energetic character, the trial
would not be conclusive; but in all these natural gifts I am rather
below than above par; what I could do, could assuredly be done by any
boy or girl of average capacity and healthy physical constitution: and
if I have accomplished anything, I owe it, among other fortunate
circumstances, to the fact that through the early training bestowed on
me by my father, I started, I may fairly say, with an advantage of a
quarter of a century over my contemporaries.

There was one cardinal point in this training, of which I have already
given some indication, and which, more than anything else, was the
cause of whatever good it effected. Most boys or youths who have had
much knowledge drilled into them, have their mental capacities not
strengthened, but overlaid by it. They are crammed with mere facts,
and with the opinions or phrases of other people, and these are
accepted as a substitute for the power to form opinions of their own;
and thus the sons of eminent fathers, who have spared no pains in
their education, so often grow up mere parroters of what they have
learnt, incapable of using their minds except in the furrows traced
for them. Mine, however, was not an education of cram. My father never
permitted anything which I learnt to degenerate into a mere exercise
of memory. He strove to make the understanding not only go along with
every step of the teaching, but, if possible, precede it. Anything
which could be found out by thinking I never was told, until I had
exhausted my efforts to find it out for myself. As far as I can trust
my remembrance, I acquitted myself very lamely in this department; my
recollection of such matters is almost wholly of failures, hardly ever
of success. It is true the failures were often in things in which
success, in so early a stage of my progress, was almost impossible.
I remember at some time in my thirteenth year, on my happening to
use the word idea, he asked me what an idea was; and expressed some
displeasure at my ineffectual efforts to define the word: I recollect
also his indignation at my using the common expression that something
was true in theory but required correction in practice; and how, after
making me vainly strive to define the word theory, he explained its
meaning, and showed the fallacy of the vulgar form of speech which I
had used; leaving me fully persuaded that in being unable to give a
correct definition of Theory, and in speaking of it as something which
might be at variance with practice, I had shown unparalleled ignorance.
In this he seems, and perhaps was, very unreasonable; but I think, only
in being angry at my failure. A pupil from whom nothing is ever demanded
which he cannot do, never does all he can.

One of the evils most liable to attend on any sort of early proficiency,
and which often fatally blights its promise, my father most anxiously
guarded against. This was self-conceit. He kept me, with extreme
vigilance, out of the way of hearing myself praised, or of being led
to make self-flattering comparisons between myself and others. From
his own intercourse with me I could derive none but a very humble
opinion of myself; and the standard of comparison he always held up to
me, was not what other people did, but what a man could and ought to
do. He completely succeeded in preserving me from the sort of influences
he so much dreaded. I was not at all aware that my attainments were
anything unusual at my age. If I accidentally had my attention drawn to
the fact that some other boy knew less than myself--which happened less
often than might be imagined--I concluded, not that I knew much, but that
he, for some reason or other, knew little, or that his knowledge was of
a different kind from mine. My state of mind was not humility, but neither
was it arrogance. I never thought of saying to myself, I am, or I can do,
so and so. I neither estimated myself highly nor lowly: I did not estimate
myself at all. If I thought anything about myself, it was that I was
rather backward in my studies, since I always found myself so, in
comparison with what my father expected from me. I assert this with
confidence, though it was not the impression of various persons who saw
me in my childhood. They, as I have since found, thought me greatly and
disagreeably self-conceited; probably because I was disputatious, and did
not scruple to give direct contradictions to things which I heard said.
I suppose I acquired this bad habit from having been encouraged in an
unusual degree to talk on matters beyond my age, and with grown persons,
while I never had inculcated on me the usual respect for them. My father
did not correct this ill-breeding and impertinence, probably from not
being aware of it, for I was always too much in awe of him to be otherwise
than extremely subdued and quiet in his presence. Yet with all this I had
no notion of any superiority in myself; and well was it for me that I had
not. I remember the very place in Hyde Park where, in my fourteenth year,
on the eve of leaving my father's house for a long absence, he told me
that I should find, as I got acquainted with new people, that I had been
taught many things which youths of my age did not commonly know; and that
many persons would be disposed to talk to me of this, and to compliment
me upon it. What other things he said on this topic I remember very
imperfectly; but he wound up by saying, that whatever I knew more than
others, could not be ascribed to any merit in me, but to the very unusual
advantage which had fallen to my lot, of having a father who was able to
teach me, and willing to give the necessary trouble and time; that it was
no matter of praise to me, if I knew more than those who had not had a
similar advantage, but the deepest disgrace to me if I did not. I have a
distinct remembrance, that the suggestion thus for the first time made to
me, that I knew more than other youths who were considered well educated,
was to me a piece of information, to which, as to all other things which
my father told me, I gave implicit credence, but which did not at all
impress me as a personal matter. I felt no disposition to glorify myself
upon the circumstance that there were other persons who did not know what
I knew; nor had I ever flattered myself that my acquirements, whatever
they might be, were any merit of mine: but, now when my attention was
called to the subject, I felt that what my father had said respecting my
peculiar advantages was exactly the truth and common sense of the matter,
and it fixed my opinion and feeling from that time forward.




CHAPTER II

MORAL INFLUENCES IN EARLY YOUTH. MY FATHER'S CHARACTER AND OPINIONS


In my education, as in that of everyone, the moral influences, which
are so much more important than all others, are also the most
complicated, and the most difficult to specify with any approach to
completeness. Without attempting the hopeless task of detailing the
circumstances by which, in this respect, my early character may have
been shaped, I shall confine myself to a few leading points, which
form an indispensable part of any true account of my education.

I was brought up from the first without any religious belief, in the
ordinary acceptation of the term. My father, educated in the creed of
Scotch Presbyterianism, had by his own studies and reflections been
early led to reject not only the belief in Revelation, but the
foundations of what is commonly called Natural Religion. I have heard
him say, that the turning point of his mind on the subject was reading
Butler's _Analogy_. That work, of which he always continued to speak
with respect, kept him, as he said, for some considerable time, a
believer in the divine authority of Christianity; by proving to him
that whatever are the difficulties in believing that the Old and New
Testaments proceed from, or record the acts of, a perfectly wise and
good being, the same and still greater difficulties stand in the way
of the belief, that a being of such a character can have been the
Maker of the universe. He considered Butler's argument as conclusive
against the only opponents for whom it was intended. Those who admit
an omnipotent as well as perfectly just and benevolent maker and ruler
of such a world as this, can say little against Christianity but what
can, with at least equal force, be retorted against themselves.
Finding, therefore, no halting place in Deism, he remained in a state
of perplexity, until, doubtless after many struggles, he yielded to
the conviction, that concerning the origin of things nothing whatever
can be known. This is the only correct statement of his opinion; for
dogmatic atheism he looked upon as absurd; as most of those, whom the
world has considered Atheists, have always done. These particulars are
important, because they show that my father's rejection of all that is
called religious belief, was not, as many might suppose, primarily a
matter of logic and evidence: the grounds of it were moral, still more
than intellectual. He found it impossible to believe that a world so
full of evil was the work of an Author combining infinite power with
perfect goodness and righteousness. His intellect spurned the
subtleties by which men attempt to blind themselves to this open
contradiction. The Sabaean, or Manichaean theory of a Good and an Evil
Principle, struggling against each other for the government of the
universe, he would not have equally condemned; and I have heard him
express surprise, that no one revived it in our time. He would have
regarded it as a mere hypothesis; but he would have ascribed to it no
depraving influence. As it was, his aversion to religion, in the sense
usually attached to the term, was of the same kind with that of
Lucretius: he regarded it with the feelings due not to a mere mental
delusion, but to a great moral evil. He looked upon it as the greatest
enemy of morality: first, by setting up fictitious excellences--belief
in creeds, devotional feelings, and ceremonies, not connected with the
good of human-kind--and causing these to be accepted as substitutes
for genuine virtues: but above all, by radically vitiating the
standard of morals; making it consist in doing the will of a being,
on whom it lavishes indeed all the phrases of adulation, but whom in
sober truth it depicts as eminently hateful. I have a hundred times
heard him say that all ages and nations have represented their gods as
wicked, in a constantly increasing progression; that mankind have gone
on adding trait after trait till they reached the most perfect
conception of wickedness which the human mind can devise, and have
called this God, and prostrated themselves before it. This _ne plus
ultra_ of wickedness he considered to be embodied in what is commonly
presented to mankind as the creed of Christianity. Think (he used to
say) of a being who would make a Hell--who would create the human race
with the infallible foreknowledge, and therefore with the intention,
that the great majority of them were to be consigned to horrible and
everlasting torment. The time, I believe, is drawing near when this
dreadful conception of an object of worship will be no longer
identified with Christianity; and when all persons, with any sense of
moral good and evil, will look upon it with the same indignation with
which my father regarded it. My father was as well aware as anyone
that Christians do not, in general, undergo the demoralizing
consequences which seem inherent in such a creed, in the manner or
to the extent which might have been expected from it. The same
slovenliness of thought, and subjection of the reason to fears,
wishes, and affections, which enable them to accept a theory involving
a contradiction in terms, prevents them from perceiving the logical
consequences of the theory. Such is the facility with which mankind
believe at one and the same time things inconsistent with one another,
and so few are those who draw from what they receive as truths, any
consequences but those recommended to them by their feelings, that
multitudes have held the undoubting belief in an Omnipotent Author
of Hell, and have nevertheless identified that being with the best
conception they were able to form of perfect goodness. Their worship
was not paid to the demon which such a being as they imagined would
really be, but to their own ideal of excellence. The evil is, that
such a belief keeps the ideal wretchedly low; and opposes the most
obstinate resistance to all thought which has a tendency to raise it
higher. Believers shrink from every train of ideas which would lead
the mind to a clear conception and an elevated standard of excellence,
because they feel (even when they do not distinctly see) that such a
standard would conflict with many of the dispensations of nature, and
with much of what they are accustomed to consider as the Christian
creed. And thus morality continues a matter of blind tradition, with
no consistent principle, nor even any consistent feeling, to guide it.

It would have been wholly inconsistent with my father's ideas of duty,
to allow me to acquire impressions contrary to his convictions and
feelings respecting religion: and he impressed upon me from the first,
that the manner in which the world came into existence was a subject
on which nothing was known: that the question, "Who made me?" cannot
be answered, because we have no experience or authentic information
from which to answer it; and that any answer only throws the difficulty
a step further back, since the question immediately presents itself,
"Who made God?" He, at the same time, took care that I should be
acquainted with what had been thought by mankind on these impenetrable
problems. I have mentioned at how early an age he made me a reader of
ecclesiastical history; and he taught me to take the strongest interest
in the Reformation, as the great and decisive contest against priestly
tyranny for liberty of thought.

I am thus one of the very few examples, in this country, of one who has
not thrown off religious belief, but never had it: I grew up in a
negative state with regard to it. I looked upon the modern exactly as
I did upon the ancient religion, as something which in no way concerned
me. It did not seem to me more strange that English people should believe
what I did not, than that the men I read of in Herodotus should have done
so. History had made the variety of opinions among mankind a fact familiar
to me, and this was but a prolongation of that fact. This point in my
early education had, however, incidentally one bad consequence deserving
notice. In giving me an opinion contrary to that of the world, my father
thought it necessary to give it as one which could not prudently be avowed
to the world. This lesson of keeping my thoughts to myself, at that early
age, was attended with some moral disadvantages; though my limited
intercourse with strangers, especially such as were likely to speak to
me on religion, prevented me from being placed in the alternative of
avowal or hypocrisy. I remember two occasions in my boyhood, on which I
felt myself in this alternative, and in both cases I avowed my disbelief
and defended it. My opponents were boys, considerably older than myself:
one of them I certainly staggered at the time, but the subject was never
renewed between us: the other who was surprised and somewhat shocked, did
his best to convince me for some time, without effect.

The great advance in liberty of discussion, which is one of the most
important differences between the present time and that of my childhood,
has greatly altered the moralities of this question; and I think that
few men of my father's intellect and public spirit, holding with such
intensity of moral conviction as he did, unpopular opinions on religion,
or on any other of the great subjects of thought, would now either
practise or inculcate the withholding of them from the world, unless in
the cases, becoming fewer every day, in which frankness on these subjects
would either risk the loss of means of subsistence, or would amount to
exclusion from some sphere of usefulness peculiarly suitable to the
capacities of the individual. On religion in particular the time appears
to me to have come when it is the duty of all who, being qualified in
point of knowledge, have on mature consideration satisfied themselves
that the current opinions are not only false but hurtful, to make their
dissent known; at least, if they are among those whose station or
reputation gives their opinion a chance of being attended to. Such an
avowal would put an end, at once and for ever, to the vulgar prejudice,
that what is called, very improperly, unbelief, is connected with any
bad qualities either of mind or heart. The world would be astonished if
it knew how great a proportion of its brightest ornaments--of those most
distinguished even in popular estimation for wisdom and virtue--are
complete sceptics in religion; many of them refraining from avowal, less
from personal considerations than from a conscientious, though now in my
opinion a most mistaken, apprehension, lest by speaking out what would
tend to weaken existing beliefs, and by consequence (as they suppose)
existing restraints, they should do harm instead of good.

Of unbelievers (so called) as well as of believers, there are many
species, including almost every variety of moral type. But the best
among them, as no one who has had opportunities of really knowing them
will hesitate to affirm, are more genuinely religious, in the best
sense of the word religion, than those who exclusively arrogate to
themselves the title. The liberality of the age, or in other words the
weakening of the obstinate prejudice which makes men unable to see
what is before their eyes because it is contrary to their expectations,
has caused it be very commonly admitted that a Deist may be truly
religious: but if religion stands for any graces of character and not
for mere dogma, the assertion may equally be made of many whose belief
is far short of Deism. Though they may think the proof incomplete that
the universe is a work of design, and though they assuredly disbelieve
that it can have an Author and Governor who is _absolute_ in power as
well as perfect in goodness, they have that which constitutes the
principal worth of all religions whatever, an ideal conception of a
Perfect Being, to which they habitually refer as the guide of their
conscience; and this ideal of Good is usually far nearer to perfection
than the objective Deity of those who think themselves obliged to find
absolute goodness in the author of a world so crowded with suffering
and so deformed by injustice as ours.

My father's moral convictions, wholly dissevered from religion, were
very much of the character of those of the Greek philosophers; and
were delivered with the force and decision which characterized all
that came from him. Even at the very early age at which I read with
him the _Memorabilia_ of Xenophon, I imbibed from that work and from
his comments a deep respect for the character of Socrates; who stood
in my mind as a model of ideal excellence: and I well remember how my
father at that time impressed upon me the lesson of the "Choice of
Hercules." At a somewhat later period the lofty moral standard
exhibited in the writings of Plato operated upon me with great force.
My father's moral inculcations were at all times mainly those of the
"Socratici viri"; justice, temperance (to which he gave a very
extended application), veracity, perseverance, readiness to encounter
pain and especially labour; regard for the public good; estimation of
persons according to their merits, and of things according to their
intrinsic usefulness; a life of exertion in contradiction to one of
self-indulgent ease and sloth. These and other moralities he conveyed
in brief sentences, uttered as occasion arose, of grave exhortation,
or stern reprobation and contempt.

But though direct moral teaching does much, indirect does more; and
the effect my father produced on my character, did not depend solely
on what he said or did with that direct object, but also, and still
more, on what manner of man he was.

In his views of life he partook of the character of the Stoic, the
Epicurean, and the Cynic, not in the modern but the ancient sense of
the word. In his personal qualities the Stoic predominated. His
standard of morals was Epicurean, inasmuch as it was utilitarian,
taking as the exclusive test of right and wrong, the tendency of
actions to produce pleasure or pain. But he had (and this was the
Cynic element) scarcely any belief in pleasure; at least in his later
years, of which alone, on this point, I can speak confidently. He was
not insensible to pleasures; but he deemed very few of them worth the
price which, at least in the present state of society, must be paid
for them. The greater number of miscarriages in life he considered to
be attributable to the overvaluing of pleasures. Accordingly,
temperance, in the large sense intended by the Greek philosophers
--stopping short at the point of moderation in all indulgences--was
with him, as with them, almost the central point of educational
precept. His inculcations of this virtue fill a large place in my
childish remembrances. He thought human life a poor thing at best,
after the freshness of youth and of unsatisfied curiosity had gone by.
This was a topic on which he did not often speak, especially, it may
be supposed, in the presence of young persons: but when he did, it
was with an air of settled and profound conviction. He would sometimes
say that if life were made what it might be, by good government and
good education, it would be worth having: but he never spoke with
anything like enthusiasm even of that possibility. He never varied in
rating intellectual enjoyments above all others, even in value as
pleasures, independently of their ulterior benefits. The pleasures of
the benevolent affections he placed high in the scale; and used to
say, that he had never known a happy old man, except those who were
able to live over again in the pleasures of the young. For passionate
emotions of all sorts, and for everything which bas been said or
written in exaltation of them, he professed the greatest contempt.
He regarded them as a form of madness. "The intense" was with him a
bye-word of scornful disapprobation. He regarded as an aberration of
the moral standard of modern times, compared with that of the ancients,
the great stress laid upon feeling. Feelings, as such, he considered
to be no proper subjects of praise or blame. Right and wrong, good and
bad, he regarded as qualities solely of conduct--of acts and omissions;
there being no feeling which may not lead, and does not frequently lead,
either to good or to bad actions: conscience itself, the very desire to
act right, often leading people to act wrong. Consistently carrying
out the doctrine that the object of praise and blame should be the
discouragement of wrong conduct and the encouragement of right, he
refused to let his praise or blame be influenced by the motive of the
agent. He blamed as severely what he thought a bad action, when the
motive was a feeling of duty, as if the agents had been consciously
evil doers. He would not have accepted as a plea in mitigation for
inquisitors, that they sincerely believed burning heretics to be an
obligation of conscience. But though he did not allow honesty of purpose
to soften his disapprobation of actions, it had its full effect on his
estimation of characters. No one prized conscientiousness and rectitude
of intention more highly, or was more incapable of valuing any person
in whom he did not feel assurance of it. But he disliked people quite
as much for any other deficiency, provided he thought it equally likely
to make them act ill. He disliked, for instance, a fanatic in any bad
cause, as much as or more than one who adopted the same cause from
self-interest, because he thought him even more likely to be practically
mischievous. And thus, his aversion to many intellectual errors, or what
he regarded as such, partook, in a certain sense, of the character of a
moral feeling. All this is merely saying that he, in a degree once common,
but now very unusual, threw his feelings into his opinions; which truly
it is difficult to understand how anyone who possesses much of both, can
fail to do. None but those who do not care about opinions will confound
this with intolerance. Those who, having opinions which they hold to be
immensely important, and their contraries to be prodigiously hurtful,
have any deep regard for the general good, will necessarily dislike, as
a class and in the abstract, those who think wrong what they think right,
and right what they think wrong: though they need not therefore be, nor
was my father, insensible to good qualities in an opponent, nor governed
in their estimation of individuals by one general presumption, instead
of by the whole of their character. I grant that an earnest person,
being no more infallible than other men, is liable to dislike people
on account of opinions which do not merit dislike; but if he neither
himself does them any ill office, nor connives at its being donc by
others, he is not intolerant: and the forbearance which flows from a
conscientious sense of the importance to mankind of the equal freedom
of all opinions, is the only tolerance which is commendable, or, to the
highest moral order of minds, possible.

It will be admitted, that a man of the opinions, and the character,
above described, was likely to leave a strong moral impression on any
mind principally formed by him, and that his moral teaching was not
likely to err on the side of laxity or indulgence. The element which
was chiefly deficient in his moral relation to his children was that
of tenderness. I do not believe that this deficiency lay in his own
nature. I believe him to have had much more feeling than he habitually
showed, and much greater capacities of feeling than were ever
developed. He resembled most Englishmen in being ashamed of the signs
of feeling, and, by the absence of demonstration, starving the
feelings themselves. If we consider further that he was in the trying
position of sole teacher, and add to this that his temper was
constitutionally irritable, it is impossible not to feel true pity for
a father who did, and strove to do, so much for his children, who
would have so valued their affection, yet who must have been
constantly feeling that fear of him was drying it up at its source.
This was no longer the case later in life, and with his younger
children. They loved him tenderly: and if I cannot say so much of
myself, I was always loyally devoted to him. As regards my own
education, I hesitate to pronounce whether I was more a loser or
gainer by his severity. It was not such as to prevent me from having a
happy childhood. And I do not believe that boys can be induced to
apply themselves with vigour, and--what is so much more
difficult--perseverance, to dry and irksome studies, by the sole force
of persuasion and soft words. Much must be done, and much must be
learnt, by children, for which rigid discipline, and known liability
to punishment, are indispensable as means. It is, no doubt, a very
laudable effort, in modern teaching, to render as much as possible of
what the young are required to learn, easy and interesting to them.
But when this principle is pushed to the length of not requiring them
to learn anything _but_ what has been made easy and interesting, one
of the chief objects of education is sacrificed. I rejoice in the
decline of the old brutal and tyrannical system of teaching, which,
however, did succeed in enforcing habits of application; but the new,
as it seems to me, is training up a race of men who will be incapable
of doing anything which is disagreeable to them. I do not, then,
believe that fear, as an element in education, can be dispensed with;
but I am sure that it ought not to be the main element; and when it
predominates so much as to preclude love and confidence on the part of
the child to those who should be the unreservedly trusted advisers of
after years, and perhaps to seal up the fountains of frank and
spontaneous communicativeness in the child's nature, it is an evil for
which a large abatement must be made from the benefits, moral and
intellectual, which may flow from any other part of the education.

During this first period of my life, the habitual frequenters of my
father's house were limited to a very few persons, most of them little
known to the world, but whom personal worth, and more or less of
congeniality with at least his political opinions (not so frequently
to be met with then as since), inclined him to cultivate; and his
conversations with them I listened to with interest and instruction.
My being an habitual inmate of my father's study made me acquainted
with the dearest of his friends, David Ricardo, who by his benevolent
countenance, and kindliness of manner, was very attractive to young
persons, and who, after I became a student of political economy,
invited me to his house and to walk with him in order to converse on
the subject. I was a more frequent visitor (from about 1817 or 1818)
to Mr. Hume, who, born in the same part of Scotland as my father, and
having been, I rather think, a younger schoolfellow or college
companion of his, had on returning from India renewed their youthful
acquaintance, and who--coming, like many others, greatly under the
influence of my father's intellect and energy of character--was
induced partly by that influence to go into Parliament, and there
adopt the line of conduct which has given him an honourable place in
the history of his country. Of Mr. Bentham I saw much more, owing to
the close intimacy which existed between him and my father. I do not
know how soon after my father's first arrival in England they became
acquainted. But my father was the earliest Englishman of any great
mark, who thoroughly understood, and in the main adopted, Bentham's
general views of ethics, government and law: and this was a natural
foundation for sympathy between them, and made them familiar
companions in a period of Bentham's life during which he admitted much
fewer visitors than was the case subsequently. At this time Mr.
Bentham passed some part of every year at Barrow Green House, in a
beautiful part of the Surrey Hills, a few miles from Godstone, and
there I each summer accompanied my father in a long visit. In 1813 Mr.
Bentham, my father, and I made an excursion, which included Oxford,
Bath and Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, and Portsmouth. In this journey I
saw many things which were instructive to me, and acquired my first
taste for natural scenery, in the elementary form of fondness for a
"view." In the succeeding winter we moved into a house very near Mr.
Bentham's, which my father rented from him, in Queen Square,
Westminster. From 1814 to 1817 Mr. Bentham lived during half of each
year at Ford Abbey, in Somersetshire (or rather in a part of
Devonshire surrounded by Somersetshire), which intervals I had the
advantage of passing at that place. This sojourn was, I think, an
important circumstance in my education. Nothing contributes more to
nourish elevation of sentiments in a people, than the large and free
character of their habitations. The middle-age architecture, the
baronial hall, and the spacious and lofty rooms, of this fine old
place, so unlike the mean and cramped externals of English
middle-class life, gave the sentiment of a larger and freer existence,
and were to me a sort of poetic cultivation, aided also by the
character of the grounds in which the Abbey stood; which were _riant_
and secluded, umbrageous, and full of the sound of falling waters.

I owed another of the fortunate circumstances in my education, a
year's residence in France, to Mr. Bentham's brother, General Sir
Samuel Bentham. I had seen Sir Samuel Bentham and his family at their
house near Gosport in the course of the tour already mentioned (he
being then Superintendent of the Dockyard at Portsmouth), and during a
stay of a few days which they made at Ford Abbey shortly after the
Peace, before going to live on the Continent. In 1820 they invited me
for a six months' visit to them in the South of France, which their
kindness ultimately prolonged to nearly a twelvemonth. Sir Samuel
Bentham, though of a character of mind different from that of his
illustrious brother, was a man of very considerable attainments and
general powers, with a decided genius for mechanical art. His wife, a
daughter of the celebrated chemist, Dr. Fordyce, was a woman of strong
will and decided character, much general knowledge, and great
practical good sense of the Edgeworth kind: she was the ruling spirit
of the household, as she deserved, and was well qualified, to be.
Their family consisted of one son (the eminent botanist) and three
daughters, the youngest about two years my senior. I am indebted to
them for much and various instruction, and for an almost parental
interest in my welfare. When I first joined them, in May, 1820, they
occupied the Château of Pompignan (still belonging to a descendant of
Voltaire's enemy) on the heights overlooking the plain of the Garonne
between Montauban and Toulouse. I accompanied them in an excursion to
the Pyrenees, including a stay of some duration at Bagnères de
Bigorre, a journey to Pau, Bayonne, and Bagnères de Luchon, and an
ascent of the Pic du Midi de Bigorre.

This first introduction to the highest order of mountain scenery made
the deepest impression on me, and gave a colour to my tastes through
life. In October we proceeded by the beautiful mountain route of
Castres and St. Pons, from Toulouse to Montpellier, in which last
neighbourhood Sir Samuel had just bought the estate of Restinclière,
near the foot of the singular mountain of St. Loup. During this
residence in France I acquired a familiar knowledge of the French
language, and acquaintance with the ordinary French literature; I took
lessons in various bodily exercises, in none of which, however, I made
any proficiency; and at Montpellier I attended the excellent winter
courses of lectures at the Faculté des Sciences, those of M. Anglada
on chemistry, of M. Provençal on zoology, and of a very accomplished
representative of the eighteenth century metaphysics, M. Gergonne, on
logic, under the name of Philosophy of the Sciences. I also went
through a course of the higher mathematics under the private tuition
of M. Lenthéric, a professor at the Lycée of Montpellier. But the
greatest, perhaps, of the many advantages which I owed to this episode
in my education, was that of having breathed for a whole year, the
free and genial atmosphere of Continental life. This advantage was not
the less real though I could not then estimate, nor even consciously
feel it. Having so little experience of English life, and the few
people I knew being mostly such as had public objects, of a large and
personally disinterested kind, at heart, I was ignorant of the low
moral tone of what, in England, is called society; the habit of, not
indeed professing, but taking for granted in every mode of
implication, that conduct is of course always directed towards low and
petty objects; the absence of high feelings which manifests itself by
sneering depreciation of all demonstrations of them, and by general
abstinence (except among a few of the stricter religionists) from
professing any high principles of action at all, except in those
preordained cases in which such profession is put on as part of the
costume and formalities of the occasion. I could not then know or
estimate the difference between this manner of existence, and that of
a people like the French, whose faults, if equally real, are at all
events different; among whom sentiments, which by comparison at least
may be called elevated, are the current coin of human intercourse,
both in books and in private life; and though often evaporating in
profession, are yet kept alive in the nation at large by constant
exercise, and stimulated by sympathy, so as to form a living and
active part of the existence of great numbers of persons, and to be
recognised and understood by all. Neither could I then appreciate the
general culture of the understanding, which results from the habitual
exercise of the feelings, and is thus carried down into the most
uneducated classes of several countries on the Continent, in a degree
not equalled in England among the so-called educated, except where an
unusual tenderness of conscience leads to a habitual exercise of the
intellect on questions of right and wrong. I did not know the way in
which, among the ordinary English, the absence of interest in things
of an unselfish kind, except occasionally in a special thing here and
there, and the habit of not speaking to others, nor much even to
themselves, about the things in which they do feel interest, causes
both their feelings and their intellectual faculties to remain
undeveloped, or to develop themselves only in some single and very
limited direction; reducing them, considered as spiritual beings, to
a kind of negative existence. All these things I did not perceive till
long afterwards; but I even then felt, though without stating it
clearly to myself, the contrast between the frank sociability and
amiability of French personal intercourse, and the English mode of
existence, in which everybody acts as if everybody else (with few, or
no exceptions) was either an enemy or a bore. In France, it is true,
the bad as well as the good points, both of individual and of national
character, come more to the surface, and break out more fearlessly in
ordinary intercourse, than in England: but the general habit of the
people is to show, as well as to expect, friendly feeling in every one
towards every other, wherever there is not some positive cause for the
opposite. In England it is only of the best bred people, in the upper
or upper middle ranks, that anything like this can be said.

In my way through Paris, both going and returning, I passed some time
in the house of M. Say, the eminent political economist, who was a
friend and correspondent of my father, having become acquainted with
him on a visit to England a year or two after the Peace. He was a man
of the later period of the French Revolution, a fine specimen of the
best kind of French Republican, one of those who had never bent the
knee to Bonaparte though courted by him to do so; a truly upright,
brave, and enlightened man. He lived a quiet and studious life, made
happy by warm affections, public and private. He was acquainted with
many of the chiefs of the Liberal party, and I saw various noteworthy
persons while staying at this house; among whom I have pleasure in the
recollection of having once seen Saint-Simon, not yet the founder
either of a philosophy or a religion, and considered only as a clever
original. The chief fruit which I carried away from the society I saw,
was a strong and permanent interest in Continental Liberalism, of
which I ever afterwards kept myself _au courant_, as much as of
English politics: a thing not at all usual in those days with
Englishmen, and which had a very salutary influence on my development,
keeping me free from the error always prevalent in England--and from
which even my father, with all his superiority to prejudice, was not
exempt--of judging universal questions by a merely English standard.
After passing a few weeks at Caen with an old friend of my father's,
I returned to England in July, 1821 and my education resumed its
ordinary course.




CHAPTER III

LAST STAGE OF EDUCATION, AND FIRST OF SELF-EDUCATION


For the first year or two after my visit to France, I continued my old
studies, with the addition of some new ones. When I returned, my
father was just finishing for the press his _Elements of Political
Economy_, and he made me perform an exercise on the manuscript, which
Mr. Bentham practised on all his own writings, making what he called
"marginal contents"; a short abstract of every paragraph, to enable
the writer more easily to judge of, and improve, the order of the
ideas, and the general character of the exposition. Soon after, my
father put into my hands Condillac's _Traité des Sensations_, and the
logical and metaphysical volumes of his _Cours d'Etudes_; the first
(notwithstanding the superficial resemblance between Condillac's
psychological system and my father's) quite as much for a warning as
for an example. I am not sure whether it was in this winter or the
next that I first read a history of the French Revolution. I learnt
with astonishment that the principles of democracy, then apparently in
so insignificant and hopeless a minority everywhere in Europe, had
borne all before them in France thirty years earlier, and had been the
creed of the nation. As may be supposed from this, I had previously a
very vague idea of that great commotion. I knew only that the French
had thrown off the absolute monarchy of Louis XIV. and XV., had put
the King and Queen to death, guillotined many persons, one of whom was
Lavoisier, and had ultimately fallen under the despotism of Bonaparte.
From this time, as was natural, the subject took an immense hold of my
feelings. It allied itself with all my juvenile aspirations to the
character of a democratic champion. What had happened so lately,
seemed as if it might easily happen again: and the most transcendent
glory I was capable of conceiving, was that of figuring, successful or
unsuccessful, as a Girondist in an English Convention.

During the winter of 1821-2, Mr. John Austin, with whom at the time of
my visit to France my father had but lately become acquainted, kindly
allowed me to read Roman law with him. My father, notwithstanding his
abhorrence of the chaos of barbarism called English Law, had turned
his thoughts towards the bar as on the whole less ineligible for me
than any other profession: and these readings with Mr. Austin, who had
made Bentham's best ideas his own, and added much to them from other
sources and from his own mind, were not only a valuable introduction
to legal studies, but an important portion of general education. With
Mr. Austin I read Heineccius on the Institutes, his _Roman Antiquities_,
and part of his exposition of the Pandects; to which was added a
considerable portion of Blackstone. It was at the commencement of these
studies that my father, as a needful accompaniment to them, put into my
hands Bentham's principal speculations, as interpreted to the Continent,
and indeed to all the world, by Dumont, in the _Traité de Législation_.
The reading of this book was an epoch in my life; one of the turning
points in my mental history.

My previous education had been, in a certain sense, already a course
of Benthamism. The Benthamic standard of "the greatest happiness" was
that which I had always been taught to apply; I was even familiar
with an abstract discussion of it, forming an episode in an
unpublished dialogue on Government, written by my father on the
Platonic model. Yet in the first pages of Bentham it burst upon me
with all the force of novelty. What thus impressed me was the chapter
in which Bentham passed judgment on the common modes of reasoning in
morals and legislation, deduced from phrases like "law of nature,"
"right reason," "the moral sense," "natural rectitude," and the like,
and characterized them as dogmatism in disguise, imposing its
sentiments upon others under cover of sounding expressions which
convey no reason for the sentiment, but set up the sentiment as its
own reason. It had not struck me before, that Bentham's principle put
an end to all this. The feeling rushed upon me, that all previous
moralists were superseded, and that here indeed was the commencement
of a new era in thought. This impression was strengthened by the
manner in which Bentham put into scientific form the application of
the happiness principle to the morality of actions, by analysing the
various classes and orders of their consequences. But what struck me
at that time most of all, was the Classification of Offences, which is
much more clear, compact, and imposing in Dumont's _rédaction_ than in
the original work of Bentham from which it was taken. Logic and the
dialectics of Plato, which had formed so large a part of my previous
training, had given me a strong relish for accurate classification.
This taste had been strengthened and enlightened by the study of
botany, on the principles of what is called the Natural Method, which
I had taken up with great zeal, though only as an amusement, during my
stay in France; and when I found scientific classification applied to
the great and complex subject of Punishable Acts, under the guidance
of the ethical principle of Pleasurable and Painful Consequences,
followed out in the method of detail introduced into these subjects by
Bentham, I felt taken up to an eminence from which I could survey a
vast mental domain, and see stretching out into the distance
intellectual results beyond all computation. As I proceeded further,
there seemed to be added to this intellectual clearness, the most
inspiring prospects of practical improvement in human affairs. To
Bentham's general view of the construction of a body of law I was not
altogether a stranger, having read with attention that admirable
compendium, my father's article on Jurisprudence: but I had read it
with little profit, and scarcely any interest, no doubt from its
extremely general and abstract character, and also because it
concerned the form more than the substance of the _corpus juris_, the
logic rather than the ethics of law. But Bentham's subject was
Legislation, of which Jurisprudence is only the formal part: and at
every page he seemed to open a clearer and broader conception of what
human opinions and institutions ought to be, how they might be made
what they ought to be, and how far removed from it they now are. When
I laid down the last volume of the _Traité_, I had become a different
being. The "principle of utility," understood as Bentham understood
it, and applied in the manner in which he applied it through these
three volumes, fell exactly into its place as the keystone which held
together the detached and fragmentary component parts of my knowledge
and beliefs. It gave unity to my conceptions of things. I now had
opinions; a creed, a doctrine, a philosophy; in one among the best
senses of the word, a religion; the inculcation and diffusion of which
could be made the principal outward purpose of a life. And I had a
grand conception laid before me of changes to be effected in the
condition of mankind through that doctrine. The _Traité de Legislation_
wound up with what was to me a most impressive picture of human life as
it would be made by such opinions and such laws as were recommended in
the treatise. The anticipations of practicable improvement were
studiously moderate, deprecating and discountenancing as reveries of
vague enthusiasm many things which will one day seem so natural to human
beings, that injustice will probably be done to those who once thought
them chimerical. But, in my state of mind, this appearance of superiority
to illusion added to the effect which Bentham's doctrines produced on me,
by heightening the impression of mental power, and the vista of improvement
which he did open was sufficiently large and brilliant to light up my life,
as well as to give a definite shape to my aspirations.

After this I read, from time to time, the most important of the other
works of Bentham which had then seen the light, either as written by
himself or as edited by Dumont. This was my private reading: while,
under my father's direction, my studies were carried into the higher
branches of analytic psychology. I now read Locke's _Essay_, and wrote
out an account of it, consisting of a complete abstract of every
chapter, with such remarks as occurred to me; which was read by, or
(I think) to, my father, and discussed throughout. I performed the same
process with _Helvetius de L'Esprit_, which I read of my own choice.
This preparation of abstracts, subject to my father's censorship, was
of great service to me, by compelling precision in conceiving and
expressing psychological doctrines, whether accepted as truths or only
regarded as the opinion of others. After Helvetius, my father made me
study what he deemed the really master-production in the philosophy
of mind, Hartley's _Observations on Man_. This book, though it did
not, like the _Traité de Législation_, give a new colour to my
existence, made a very similar impression on me in regard to its
immediate subject. Hartley's explanation, incomplete as in many points
it is, of the more complex mental phenomena by the law of association,
commended itself to me at once as a real analysis, and made me feel by
contrast the insufficiency of the merely verbal generalizations of
Condillac, and even of the instructive gropings and feelings about for
psychological explanations, of Locke. It was at this very time that my
father commenced writing his _Analysis_ of the Mind, which carried
Hartley's mode of explaining the mental phenomena to so much greater
length and depth. He could only command the concentration of thought
necessary for this work, during the complete leisure of his holiday
for a month or six weeks annually: and he commenced it in the summer
of 1822, in the first holiday he passed at Dorking; in which
neighbourhood, from that time to the end of his life, with the
exception of two years, he lived, as far as his official duties
permitted, for six months of every year. He worked at the _Analysis_
during several successive vacations, up to the year 1829, when it was
published, and allowed me to read the manuscript, portion by portion,
as it advanced. The other principal English writers on mental
philosophy I read as I felt inclined, particularly Berkeley, Hume's
_Essays_, Reid, Dugald Stewart and Brown on Cause and Effect. Brown's
_Lectures_ I did not read until two or three years later, nor at that
time had my father himself read them.

Among the works read in the course of this year, which contributed
materially to my development, I owe it to mention a book (written on
the foundation of some of Bentham's manuscripts and published under
the pseudonyme of Philip Beauchamp) entitled _Analysis of the Influence
of Natural Religion on the Temporal Happiness of Mankind_. This was an
examination not of the truth, but of the usefulness of religious belief,
in the most general sense, apart from the peculiarities of any special
revelation; which, of all the parts of the discussion concerning
religion, is the most important in this age, in which real belief in
any religious doctrine is feeble and precarious, but the opinion of
its necessity for moral and social purposes almost universal; and when
those who reject revelation, very generally take refuge in an
optimistic Deism, a worship of the order of Nature, and the supposed
course of Providence, at least as full of contradictions, and
perverting to the moral sentiments, as any of the forms of
Christianity, if only it is as completely realized. Yet very little,
with any claim to a philosophical character, has been written by
sceptics against the usefulness of this form of belief. The volume
bearing the name of Philip Beauchamp had this for its special object.
Having been shown to my father in manuscript, it was put into my hands
by him, and I made a marginal analysis of it as I had done of the
_Elements of Political Economy_. Next to the Traité de Législation_,
it was one of the books which by the searching character of its
analysis produced the greatest effect upon me. On reading it lately
after an interval of many years, I find it to have some of the defects
as well as the merits of the Benthamic modes of thought, and to
contain, as I now think, many weak arguments, but with a great
overbalance of sound ones, and much good material for a more
completely philosophic and conclusive treatment of the subject.

I have now, I believe, mentioned all the books which had any
considerable effect on my early mental development. From this point
I began to carry on my intellectual cultivation by writing still more
than by reading. In the summer of 1822 I wrote my first argumentative
essay. I remember very little about it, except that it was an attack
on what I regarded as the aristocratic prejudice, that the rich were,
or were likely to be, superior in moral qualities to the poor. My
performance was entirely argumentative, without any of the declamation
which the subject would admit of, and might be expected to suggest to
a young writer. In that department, however, I was, and remained, very
inapt. Dry argument was the only thing I could, manage, or willingly
attempted; though passively I was very susceptible to the effect of
all composition, whether in the form of poetry or oratory, which
appealed to the feelings on any basis of reason. My father, who knew
nothing of this essay until it was finished, was well satisfied, and,
as I learnt from others, even pleased with it; but, perhaps from a
desire to promote the exercise of other mental faculties than the
purely logical, he advised me to make my next exercise in composition
one of the oratorical kind; on which suggestion, availing myself of
my familiarity with Greek history and ideas, and with the Athenian
orators, I wrote two speeches, one an accusation, the other a defence
of Pericles, on a supposed impeachment for not marching out to fight
the Lacedemonians on their invasion of Attica. After this I continued
to write papers on subjects often very much beyond my capacity, but
with great benefit both from the exercise itself, and from the
discussions which it led to with my father.

I had now also begun to converse, on general subjects, with the
instructed men with whom I came in contact: and the opportunities of
such contact naturally became more numerous. The two friends of my
father from whom I derived most, and with whom I most associated, were
Mr. Grote and Mr. John Austin. The acquaintance of both with my father
was recent, but had ripened rapidly into intimacy. Mr. Grote was
introduced to my father by Mr. Ricardo, I think in 1819 (being then
about twenty-five years old), and sought assiduously his society and
conversation. Already a highly instructed man, he was yet, by the side
of my father, a tyro in the great subjects of human opinion; but he
rapidly seized on my father's best ideas; and in the department of
political opinion he made himself known as early as 1820, by a
pamphlet in defence of Radical Reform, in reply to a celebrated
article by Sir James Mackintosh, then lately published in he
_Edinburgh Review_. Mr. Grote's father, the banker, was, I believe,
a thorough Tory, and his mother intensely Evangelical; so that for
his liberal opinions he was in no way indebted to home influences.
But, unlike most persons who have the prospect of being rich by
inheritance, he had, though actively engaged in the business of
banking, devoted a great portion of time to philosophic studies; and
his intimacy with my father did much to decide the character of the
next stage in his mental progress. Him I often visited, and my
conversations with him on political, moral, and philosophical subjects
gave me, in addition to much valuable instruction, all the pleasure
and benefit of sympathetic communion with a man of the high
intellectual and moral eminence which his life and writings have since
manifested to the world.

Mr. Austin, who was four or five years older than Mr. Grote, was the
eldest son of a retired miller in Suffolk, who had made money by
contracts during the war, and who must have been a man of remarkable
qualities, as I infer from the fact that all his sons were of more
than common ability and all eminently gentlemen. The one with whom we
are now concerned, and whose writings on jurisprudence have made him
celebrated, was for some time in the army, and served in Sicily under
Lord William Bentinck. After the Peace he sold his commission and
studied for the bar, to which he had been called for some time before
my father knew him. He was not, like Mr. Grote, to any extent, a pupil
of my father, but he had attained, by reading and thought, a
considerable number of the same opinions, modified by his own very
decided individuality of character. He was a man of great intellectual
powers, which in conversation appeared at their very best; from the
vigour and richness of expression with which, under the excitement of
discussion, he was accustomed to maintain some view or other of most
general subjects; and from an appearance of not only strong, but
deliberate and collected will; mixed with a certain bitterness, partly
derived from temperament, and partly from the general cast of his
feelings and reflections. The dissatisfaction with life and the world,
felt more or less in the present state of society and intellect by
every discerning and highly conscientious mind, gave in his case a
rather melancholy tinge to the character, very natural to those whose
passive moral susceptibilities are more than proportioned to their
active energies. For it must be said, that the strength of will of
which his manner seemed to give such strong assurance, expended itself
principally in manner. With great zeal for human improvement, a strong
sense of duty, and capacities and acquirements the extent of which is
proved by the writings he has left, he hardly ever completed any
intellectual task of magnitude. He had so high a standard of what
ought to be done, so exaggerated a sense of deficiencies in his own
performances, and was so unable to content himself with the amount of
elaboration sufficient for the occasion and the purpose, that he not
only spoilt much of his work for ordinary use by overlabouring it, but
spent so much time and exertion in superfluous study and thought, that
when his task ought to have been completed, he had generally worked
himself into an illness, without having half finished what he
undertook. From this mental infirmity (of which he is not the sole
example among the accomplished and able men whom I have known),
combined with liability to frequent attacks of disabling though not
dangerous ill-health, he accomplished, through life, little in
comparison with what he seemed capable of; but what he did produce is
held in the very highest estimation by the most competent judges; and,
like Coleridge, he might plead as a set-off that he had been to many
persons, through his conversation, a source not only of much
instruction but of great elevation of character. On me his influence
was most salutary. It was moral in the best sense. He took a sincere
and kind interest in me, far beyond what could have been expected
towards a mere youth from a man of his age, standing, and what seemed
austerity of character. There was in his conversation and demeanour a
tone of high-mindedness which did not show itself so much, if the
quality existed as much, in any of the other persons with whom at that
time I associated. My intercourse with him was the more beneficial,
owing to his being of a different mental type from all other
intellectual men whom I frequented, and he from the first set himself
decidedly against the prejudices and narrownesses which are almost
sure to be found in a young man formed by a particular mode of thought
or a particular social circle.

His younger brother, Charles Austin, of whom at this time and for the
next year or two I saw much, had also a great effect on me, though of
a very different description. He was but a few years older than
myself, and had then just left the University, where he had shone with
great _éclat_ as a man of intellect and a brilliant orator and
converser. The effect he produced on his Cambridge contemporaries
deserves to be accounted an historical event; for to it may in part be
traced the tendency towards Liberalism in general, and the Benthamic
and politico-economic form of it in particular, which showed itself in
a portion of the more active-minded young men of the higher classes
from this time to 1830. The Union Debating Society, at that time at
the height of its reputation, was an arena where what were then
thought extreme opinions, in politics and philosophy, were weekly
asserted, face to face with their opposites, before audiences
consisting of the _élite_ of the Cambridge youth: and though many
persons afterwards of more or less note (of whom Lord Macaulay is the
most celebrated) gained their first oratorical laurels in those
debates, the really influential mind among these intellectual
gladiators was Charles Austin. He continued, after leaving the
University, to be, by his conversation and personal ascendency, a
leader among the same class of young men who had been his associates
there; and he attached me among others to his car. Through him I
became acquainted with Macaulay, Hyde and Charles Villiers, Strutt
(now Lord Belper), Romilly (now Lord Romilly and Master of the Rolls),
and various others who subsequently figured in literature or politics,
and among whom I heard discussions on many topics, as yet to a certain
degree new to me. The influence of Charles Austin over me differed
from that of the persons I have hitherto mentioned, in being not the
influence of a man over a boy, but that of an elder contemporary. It
was through him that I first felt myself, not a pupil under teachers,
but a man among men. He was the first person of intellect whom I met
on a ground of equality, though as yet much his inferior on that
common ground. He was a man who never failed to impress greatly those
with whom he came in contact, even when their opinions were the very
reverse of his. The impression he gave was that of boundless strength,
together with talents which, combined with such apparent force of will
and character, seemed capable of dominating the world. Those who knew
him, whether friendly to him or not, always anticipated that he would
play a conspicuous part in public life. It is seldom that men produce
so great an immediate effect by speech, unless they, in some degree,
lay themselves out for it; and he did this in no ordinary degree. He
loved to strike, and even to startle. He knew that decision is the
greatest element of effect, and he uttered his opinions with all the
decision he could throw into them, never so well pleased as when he
astonished anyone by their audacity. Very unlike his brother, who made
war against the narrower interpretations and applications of the
principles they both professed, he, on the contrary, presented the
Benthamic doctrines in the most startling form of which they were
susceptible, exaggerating everything in them which tended to
consequences offensive to anyone's preconceived feelings. All which,
he defended with such verve and vivacity, and carried off by a manner
so agreeable as well as forcible, that he always either came off
victor, or divided the honours of the field. It is my belief that much
of the notion popularly entertained of the tenets and sentiments of
what are called Benthamites or Utilitarians had its origin in paradoxes
thrown out by Charles Austin. It must be said, however, that his example
was followed, _haud passibus aequis_, by younger proselytes, and that to
_outrer_ whatever was by anybody considered offensive in the doctrines
and maxims of Benthamism, became at one time the badge of a small coterie
of youths. All of these who had anything in them, myself among others,
quickly outgrew this boyish vanity; and those who had not, became tired
of differing from other people, and gave up both the good and the bad part
of the heterodox opinions they had for some time professed.

It was in the winter of 1822-3 that I formed the plan of a little
society, to be composed of young men agreeing in fundamental
principles--acknowledging Utility as their standard in ethics and
politics, and a certain number of the principal corollaries drawn from
it in the philosophy I had accepted--and meeting once a fortnight to
read essays and discuss questions conformably to the premises thus
agreed on. The fact would hardly be worth mentioning, but for the
circumstance, that the name I gave to the society I had planned was the
Utilitarian Society. It was the first time that anyone had taken the
title of Utilitarian; and the term made its way into the language, from
this humble source. I did not invent the word, but found it in one of
Galt's novels, the _Annals of the Parish_, in which the Scotch
clergyman, of whom the book is a supposed autobiography, is represented
as warning his parishioners not to leave the Gospel and become
utilitarians. With a boy's fondness for a name and a banner I seized
on the word, and for some years called myself and others by it as a
sectarian appellation; and it came to be occasionally used by some
others holding the opinions which it was intended to designate. As those
opinions attracted more notice, the term was repeated by strangers and
opponents, and got into rather common use just about the time when those
who had originally assumed it, laid down that along with other sectarian
characteristics. The Society so called consisted at first of no more
than three members, one of whom, being Mr. Bentham's amanuensis,
obtained for us permission to hold our meetings in his house. The number
never, I think, reached ten, and the Society was broken up in 1826. It
had thus an existence of about three years and a half. The chief effect
of it as regards myself, over and above the benefit of practice in oral
discussion, was that of bringing me in contact with several young men at
that time less advanced than myself, among whom, as they professed the
same opinions, I was for some time a sort of leader, and had considerable
influence on their mental progress. Any young man of education who fell
in my way, and whose opinions were not incompatible with those of the
Society, I endeavoured to press into its service; and some others I
probably should never have known, had they not joined it. Those of the
members who became my intimate companions--no one of whom was in any sense
of the word a disciple, but all of them independent thinkers on their own
basis--were William Eyton Tooke, son of the eminent political economist,
a young man of singular worth both moral and intellectual, lost to the
world by an early death; his friend William Ellis, an original thinker in
the field of political economy, now honourably known by his apostolic
exertions for the improvement of education; George Graham, afterwards
official assignee of the Bankruptcy Court, a thinker of originality and
power on almost all abstract subjects; and (from the time when he came
first to England to study for the bar in 1824 or 1825) a man who has made
considerably more noise in the world than any of these, John Arthur Roebuck.

In May, 1823, my professional occupation and status for the next
thirty-five years of my life, were decided by my father's obtaining for
me an appointment from the East India Company, in the office of the
Examiner of India Correspondence, immediately under himself. I was
appointed in the usual manner, at the bottom of the list of clerks, to
rise, at least in the first instance, by seniority; but with the
understanding that I should be employed from the beginning in preparing
drafts of despatches, and be thus trained up as a successor to those who
then filled the higher departments of the office. My drafts of course
required, for some time, much revision from my immediate superiors, but
I soon became well acquainted with the business, and by my father's
instructions and the general growth of my own powers, I was in a few
years qualified to be, and practically was, the chief conductor of the
correspondence with India in one of the leading departments, that of the
Native States. This continued to be my official duty until I was
appointed Examiner, only two years before the time when the abolition of
the East India Company as a political body determined my retirement. I
do not know any one of the occupations by which a subsistence can now be
gained, more suitable than such as this to anyone who, not being in
independent circumstances, desires to devote a part of the twenty-four
hours to private intellectual pursuits. Writing for the press cannot be
recommended as a permanent resource to anyone qualified to accomplish
anything in the higher departments of literature or thought: not only on
account of the uncertainty of this means of livelihood, especially if
the writer has a conscience, and will not consent to serve any opinions
except his own; but also because the writings by which one can live are
not the writings which themselves live, and are never those in which the
writer does his best. Books destined to form future thinkers take too
much time to write, and when written come, in general, too slowly into
notice and repute, to be relied on for subsistence. Those who have to
support themselves by their pen must depend on literary drudgery, or at
best on writings addressed to the multitude; and can employ in the
pursuits of their own choice, only such time as they can spare from
those of necessity; which is generally less than the leisure allowed by
office occupations, while the effect on the mind is far more enervating
and fatiguing. For my own part I have, through life, found office duties
an actual rest from the other mental occupations which I have carried on
simultaneously with them. They were sufficiently intellectual not to be
a distasteful drudgery, without being such as to cause any strain upon
the mental powers of a person used to abstract thought, or to the labour
of careful literary composition. The drawbacks, for every mode of life
has its drawbacks, were not, however, unfelt by me. I cared little for
the loss of the chances of riches and honours held out by some of the
professions, particularly the bar, which had been, as I have already
said, the profession thought of for me. But I was not indifferent to
exclusion from Parliament, and public life: and I felt very sensibly the
more immediate unpleasantness of confinement to London; the holiday
allowed by India House practice not exceeding a month in the year, while
my taste was strong for a country life, and my sojourn in France had
left behind it an ardent desire of travelling. But though these tastes
could not be freely indulged, they were at no time entirely sacrificed.
I passed most Sundays, throughout the year, in the country, taking long
rural walks on that day even when residing in London. The month's
holiday was, for a few years, passed at my father's house in the
country; afterwards a part or the whole was spent in tours, chiefly
pedestrian, with some one or more of the young men who were my chosen
companions; and, at a later period, in longer journeys or excursions,
alone or with other friends. France, Belgium, and Rhenish Germany were
within easy reach of the annual holiday: and two longer absences, one of
three, the other of six months, under medical advice, added Switzerland,
the Tyrol, and Italy to my list. Fortunately, also, both these journeys
occurred rather early, so as to give the benefit and charm of the
remembrance to a large portion of life.

I am disposed to agree with what has been surmised by others, that the
opportunity which my official position gave me of learning by personal
observation the necessary conditions of the practical conduct of
public affairs, has been of considerable value to me as a theoretical
reformer of the opinions and institutions of my time. Not, indeed,
that public business transacted on paper, to take effect on the other
side of the globe, was of itself calculated to give much practical
knowledge of life. But the occupation accustomed me to see and hear
the difficulties of every course, and the means of obviating them,
stated and discussed deliberately with a view to execution: it gave
me opportunities of perceiving when public measures, and other
political facts, did not produce the effects which had been expected
of them, and from what causes; above all, it was valuable to me by
making me, in this portion of my activity, merely one wheel in a
machine, the whole of which had to work together. As a speculative
writer, I should have had no one to consult but myself, and should
have encountered in my speculations none of the obstacles which would
have started up whenever they came to be applied to practice. But as a
Secretary conducting political correspondence, I could not issue an
order, or express an opinion, without satisfying various persons very
unlike myself, that the thing was fit to be done. I was thus in a good
position for finding out by practice the mode of putting a thought
which gives it easiest admittance into minds not prepared for it by
habit; while I became practically conversant with the difficulties of
moving bodies of men, the necessities of compromise, the art of
sacrificing the non-essential to preserve the essential. I learnt how
to obtain the best I could, when I could not obtain everything;
instead of being indignant or dispirited because I could not have
entirely my own way, to be pleased and encouraged when I could have
the smallest part of it; and when even that could not be, to bear with
complete equanimity the being overruled altogether. I have found,
through life, these acquisitions to be of the greatest possible
importance for personal happiness, and they are also a very necessary
condition for enabling anyone, either as theorist or as practical man,
to effect the greatest amount of good compatible with his opportunities.




CHAPTER IV

YOUTHFUL PROPAGANDISM. THE "WESTMINSTER REVIEW"


The occupation of so much of my time by office work did not relax my
attention to my own pursuits, which were never carried on more
vigorously. It was about this time that I began to write in newspapers.
The first writings of mine which got into print were two letters
published towards the end of 1822, in the _Traveller_ evening newspaper.
The _Traveller_ (which afterwards grew into the _Globe and Traveller_,
by the purchase and incorporation of the _Globe_) was then the property
of the well-known political economist, Colonel Torrens, and under the
editorship of an able man, Mr. Walter Coulson (who, after being an
amanuensis of Mr. Bentham, became a reporter, then an editor, next a
barrister and conveyancer, and died Counsel to the Home Office), it had
become one of the most important newspaper organs of Liberal politics.
Colonel Torrens himself wrote much of the political economy of his
paper; and had at this time made an attack upon some opinion of Ricardo
and my father, to which, at my father's instigation, I attempted an
answer, and Coulson, out of consideration for my father and goodwill to
me, inserted it. There was a reply by Torrens, to which I again
rejoined. I soon after attempted something considerably more ambitious.
The prosecutions of Richard Carlile and his wife and sister for
publications hostile to Christianity were then exciting much attention,
and nowhere more than among the people I frequented. Freedom of
discussion even in politics, much more in religion, was at that time far
from being, even in theory, the conceded point which it at least seems
to be now; and the holders of obnoxious opinions had to be always ready
to argue and re-argue for the liberty of expressing them. I wrote a
series of five letters, under the signature of Wickliffe, going over the
whole length and breadth of the question of free publication of all
opinions on religion, and offered them to the _Morning Chronicle_. Three
of them were published in January and February, 1823; the other two,
containing things too outspoken for that journal, never appeared at all.
But a paper which I wrote soon after on the same subject, _à propos_ of
a debate in the House of Commons, was inserted as a leading article; and
during the whole of this year, 1823, a considerable number of my
contributions were printed in the _Chronicle_ and _Traveller_: sometimes
notices of books, but oftener letters, commenting on some nonsense
talked in Parliament, or some defect of the law, or misdoings of the
magistracy or the courts of justice. In this last department the
_Chronicle_ was now rendering signal service. After the death of Mr.
Perry, the editorship and management of the paper had devolved on Mr.
John Black, long a reporter on its establishment; a man of most
extensive reading and information, great honesty and simplicity of mind;
a particular friend of my father, imbued with many of his and Bentham's
ideas, which he reproduced in his articles, among other valuable
thoughts, with great facility and skill. From this time the _Chronicle_
ceased to be the merely Whig organ it was before, and during the next
ten years became to a considerable extent a vehicle of the opinions of
the Utilitarian Radicals. This was mainly by what Black himself wrote,
with some assistance from Fonblanque, who first showed his eminent
qualities as a writer by articles and _jeux d'esprit_ in the
_Chronicle_. The defects of the law, and of the administration of
justice, were the subject on which that paper rendered most service to
improvement. Up to that time hardly a word had been said, except by
Bentham and my father, against that most peccant part of English
institutions and of their administration. It was the almost universal
creed of Englishmen, that the law of England, the judicature of England,
the unpaid magistracy of England, were models of excellence. I do not go
beyond the mark in saying, that after Bentham, who supplied the
principal materials, the greatest share of the merit of breaking down
this wretched superstition belongs to Black, as editor of the _Morning
Chronicle_. He kept up an incessant fire against it, exposing the
absurdities and vices of the law and the courts of justice, paid and
unpaid, until he forced some sense of them into people's minds. On many
other questions he became the organ of opinions much in advance of any
which had ever before found regular advocacy in the newspaper press.
Black was a frequent visitor of my father, and Mr. Grote used to say
that he always knew by the Monday morning's article whether Black had
been with my father on the Sunday. Black was one of the most influential
of the many channels through which my father's conversation and personal
influence made his opinions tell on the world; cooperating with the
effect of his writings in making him a power in the country such as it
has rarely been the lot of an individual in a private station to be,
through the mere force of intellect and character: and a power which was
often acting the most efficiently where it was least seen and suspected.
I have already noticed how much of what was done by Ricardo, Hume, and
Grote was the result, in part, of his prompting and persuasion. He was
the good genius by the side of Brougham in most of what he did for the
public, either on education, law reform, or any other subject. And his
influence flowed in minor streams too numerous to be specified. This
influence was now about to receive a great extension by the foundation
of the _Westminster Review_.

Contrary to what may have been supposed, my father was in no degree a
party to setting up the _Westminster Review_. The need of a Radical
organ to make head against the _Edinburgh_ and _Quarterly_ (then in the
period of their greatest reputation and influence) had been a topic of
conversation between him and Mr. Bentham many years earlier, and it had
been a part of their _Château en Espagne_ that my father should be the
editor; but the idea had never assumed any practical shape. In 1823,
however, Mr. Bentham determined to establish the _Review_ at his own
cost, and offered the editorship to my father, who declined it as
incompatible with his India House appointment. It was then entrusted to
Mr. (now Sir John) Bowring, at that time a merchant in the City. Mr.
Bowring had been for two or three years previous an assiduous frequenter
of Mr. Bentham, to whom he was recommended by many personal good
qualities, by an ardent admiration for Bentham, a zealous adoption of
many, though not all of his opinions, and, not least, by an extensive
acquaintanceship and correspondence with Liberals of all countries,
which seemed to qualify him for being a powerful agent in spreading
Bentham's fame and doctrines through all quarters of the world. My
father had seen little of Bowring, but knew enough of him to have formed
a strong opinion, that he was a man of an entirely different type from
what my father considered suitable for conducting a political and
philosophical Review: and he augured so ill of the enterprise that he
regretted it altogether, feeling persuaded not only that Mr. Bentham
would lose his money, but that discredit would probably be brought upon
Radical principles. He could not, however, desert Mr. Bentham, and he
consented to write an article for the first number. As it had been a
favourite portion of the scheme formerly talked of, that part of the
work should be devoted to reviewing the other Reviews, this article of
my father's was to be a general criticism of the _Edinburgh Review_ from
its commencement. Before writing it he made me read through all the
volumes of the _Review_, or as much of each as seemed of any importance
(which was not so arduous a task in 1823 as it would be now), and make
notes for him of the articles which I thought he would wish to examine,
either on account of their good or their bad qualities. This paper of my
father's was the chief cause of the sensation which the _Westminster
Review_ produced at its first appearance, and is, both in conception and
in execution, one of the most striking of all his writings. He began by
an analysis of the tendencies of periodical literature in general;
pointing out, that it cannot, like books, wait for success, but must
succeed immediately or not at all, and is hence almost certain to
profess and inculcate the opinions already held by the public to which
it addresses itself, instead of attempting to rectify or improve those
opinions. He next, to characterize the position of the _Edinburgh
Review_ as a political organ, entered into a complete analysis, from the
Radical point of view, of the British Constitution. He held up to notice
its thoroughly aristocratic character: the nomination of a majority of
the House of Commons by a few hundred families; the entire
identification of the more independent portion, the county members, with
the great landholders; the different classes whom this narrow oligarchy
was induced, for convenience, to admit to a share of power; and finally,
what he called its two props, the Church, and the legal profession. He
pointed out the natural tendency of an aristocratic body of this
composition, to group itself into two parties, one of them in possession
of the executive, the other endeavouring to supplant the former and
become the predominant section by the aid of public opinion, without any
essential sacrifice of the aristocratical predominance. He described the
course likely to be pursued, and the political ground occupied, by an
aristocratic party in opposition, coquetting with popular principles for
the sake of popular support. He showed how this idea was realized in the
conduct of the Whig party, and of the _Edinburgh Review_ as its chief
literary organ. He described, as their main characteristic, what he
termed "seesaw"; writing alternately on both sides of the question which
touched the power or interest of the governing classes; sometimes in
different articles, sometimes in different parts of the same article:
and illustrated his position by copious specimens. So formidable an
attack on the Whig party and policy had never before been made; nor had
so great a blow ever been struck, in this country, for Radicalism; nor
was there, I believe, any living person capable of writing that article
except my father.[2]

In the meantime the nascent _Review_ had formed a junction with another
project, of a purely literary periodical, to be edited by Mr. Henry
Southern, afterwards a diplomatist, then a literary man by profession.
The two editors agreed to unite their corps, and divide the editorship,
Bowring taking the political, Southern the literary department.
Southern's Review was to have been published by Longman, and that firm,
though part proprietors of the _Edinburgh_, were willing to be the
publishers of the new journal. But when all the arrangements had been
made, and the prospectuses sent out, the Longmans saw my father's attack
on the _Edinburgh_, and drew back. My father was now appealed to for his
interest with his own publisher, Baldwin, which was exerted with a
successful result. And so in April, 1824, amidst anything but hope on my
father's part, and that of most of those who afterwards aided in
carrying on the _Review_, the first number made its appearance.

That number was an agreeable surprise to most of us. The average of the
articles was of much better quality than had been expected. The literary
and artistic department had rested chiefly on Mr. Bingham, a barrister
(subsequently a police magistrate), who had been for some years a
frequenter of Bentham, was a friend of both the Austins, and had adopted
with great ardour Mr. Bentham's philosophical opinions. Partly from
accident, there were in the first number as many as five articles by
Bingham; and we were extremely pleased with them. I well remember the
mixed feeling I myself had about the _Review_; the joy of finding, what
we did not at all expect, that it was sufficiently good to be capable of
being made a creditable organ of those who held the opinions it
professed; and extreme vexation, since it was so good on the whole, at
what we thought the blemishes of it. When, however, in addition to our
generally favourable opinion of it, we learned that it had an
extraordinary large sale for a first number, and found that the
appearance of a Radical Review, with pretensions equal to those of the
established organs of parties, had excited much attention, there could
be no room for hesitation, and we all became eager in doing everything
we could to strengthen and improve it.

My father continued to write occasional articles. The _Quarterly Review_
received its exposure, as a sequel to that of the _Edinburgh_. Of his
other contributions, the most important were an attack on Southey's
_Book of the Church_, in the fifth number, and a political article in
the twelfth. Mr. Austin only contributed one paper, but one of great
merit, an argument against primogeniture, in reply to an article then
lately published in the _Edinburgh Review_ by McCulloch. Grote also
was a contributor only once; all the time he could spare being already
taken up with his _History of Greece_. The article he wrote was on his
own subject, and was a very complete exposure and castigation of
Mitford. Bingham and Charles Austin continued to write for some time;
Fonblanque was a frequent contributor from the third number. Of my
particular associates, Ellis was a regular writer up to the ninth
number; and about the time when he left off, others of the set began;
Eyton Tooke, Graham, and Roebuck. I was myself the most frequent writer
of all, having contributed, from the second number to the eighteenth,
thirteen articles; reviews of books on history and political economy, or
discussions on special political topics, as corn laws, game laws, law of
libel. Occasional articles of merit came in from other acquaintances of
my father's, and, in time, of mine; and some of Mr. Bowring's writers
turned out well. On the whole, however, the conduct of the Review was
never satisfactory to any of the persons strongly interested in its
principles, with whom I came in contact. Hardly ever did a number come
out without containing several things extremely offensive to us, either
in point of opinion, of taste, or by mere want of ability. The
unfavourable judgments passed by my father, Grote, the two Austins, and
others, were re-echoed with exaggeration by us younger people; and as
our youthful zeal rendered us by no means backward in making complaints,
we led the two editors a sad life. From my knowledge of what I then was,
I have no doubt that we were at least as often wrong as right; and I am
very certain that if the _Review_ had been carried on according to our
notions (I mean those of the juniors), it would have been no better,
perhaps not even so good as it was. But it is worth noting as a fact in
the history of Benthamism, that the periodical organ, by which it was
best known, was from the first extremely unsatisfactory to those whose
opinions on all subjects it was supposed specially to represent.

Meanwhile, however, the _Review_ made considerable noise in the world,
and gave a recognised _status_, in the arena of opinion and discussion,
to the Benthamic type of Radicalism, out of all proportion to the number
of its adherents, and to the personal merits and abilities, at that
time, of most of those who could be reckoned among them. It was a time,
as is known, of rapidly rising Liberalism. When the fears and
animosities accompanying the war with France had been brought to an end,
and people had once more a place in their thoughts for home politics,
the tide began to set towards reform. The renewed oppression of the
Continent by the old reigning families, the countenance apparently given
by the English Government to the conspiracy against liberty called the
Holy Alliance, and the enormous weight of the national debt and taxation
occasioned by so long and costly a war, rendered the government and
parliament very unpopular. Radicalism, under the leadership of the
Burdetts and Cobbetts, had assumed a character and importance which
seriously alarmed the Administration: and their alarm had scarcely been
temporarily assuaged by the celebrated Six Acts, when the trial of Queen
Caroline roused a still wider and deeper feeling of hatred. Though the
outward signs of this hatred passed away with its exciting cause, there
arose on all sides a spirit which had never shown itself before, of
opposition to abuses in detail. Mr. Hume's persevering scrutiny of the
public expenditure, forcing the House of Commons to a division on every
objectionable item in the estimates, had begun to tell with great force
on public opinion, and had extorted many minor retrenchments from an
unwilling administration. Political economy had asserted itself with
great vigour in public affairs, by the petition of the merchants of
London for free trade, drawn up in 1820 by Mr. Tooke and presented by
Mr. Alexander Baring; and by the noble exertions of Ricardo during the
few years of his parliamentary life. His writings, following up the
impulse given by the Bullion controversy, and followed up in their turn
by the expositions and comments of my father and McCulloch (whose
writings in the _Edinburgh Review_ during those years were most
valuable), had drawn general attention to the subject, making at least
partial converts in the Cabinet itself; and Huskisson, supported by
Canning, had commenced that gradual demolition of the protective system,
which one of their colleagues virtually completed in 1846, though the
last vestiges were only swept away by Mr. Gladstone in 1860. Mr. Peel,
then Home Secretary, was entering cautiously into the untrodden and
peculiarly Benthamic path of Law Reform. At this period, when Liberalism
seemed to be becoming the tone of the time, when improvement of
institutions was preached from the highest places, and a complete change
of the constitution of Parliament was loudly demanded in the lowest, it
is not strange that attention should have been roused by the regular
appearance in controversy of what seemed a new school of writers,
claiming to be the legislators and theorists of this new tendency. The
air of strong conviction with which they wrote, when scarcely anyone
else seemed to have an equally strong faith in as definite a creed; the
boldness with which they tilted against the very front of both the
existing political parties; their uncompromising profession of
opposition to many of the generally received opinions, and the suspicion
they lay under of holding others still more heterodox than they
professed; the talent and verve of at least my father's articles, and
the appearance of a corps behind him sufficient to carry on a Review;
and finally, the fact that the _Review_ was bought and read, made the
so-called Bentham school in philosophy and politics fill a greater place
in the public mind than it had held before, or has ever again held since
other equally earnest schools of thought have arisen in England. As I
was in the headquarters of it, knew of what it was composed, and as one
of the most active of its very small number, might say without undue
assumption, _quorum pars magna fui_, it belongs to me more than to most
others, to give some account of it.

This supposed school, then, had no other existence than what was
constituted by the fact, that my father's writings and conversation drew
round him a certain number of young men who had already imbibed, or who
imbibed from him, a greater or smaller portion of his very decided
political and philosophical opinions. The notion that Bentham was
surrounded by a band of disciples who received their opinions from his
lips, is a fable to which my father did justice in his "Fragment on
Mackintosh," and which, to all who knew Mr. Bentham's habits of life and
manner of conversation, is simply ridiculous. The influence which
Bentham exercised was by his writings. Through them he has produced, and
is producing, effects on the condition of mankind, wider and deeper, no
doubt, than any which can be attributed to my father. He is a much
greater name in history. But my father exercised a far greater personal
ascendency. He _was_ sought for the vigour and instructiveness of his
conversation, and did use it largely as an instrument for the diffusion
of his opinions. I have never known any man who could do such ample
justice to his best thoughts in colloquial discussion. His perfect
command over his great mental resources, the terseness and
expressiveness of his language and the moral earnestness as well as
intellectual force of his delivery, made him one of the most striking of
all argumentative conversers: and he was full of anecdote, a hearty
laugher, and, when with people whom he liked, a most lively and amusing
companion. It was not solely, or even chiefly, in diffusing his merely
intellectual convictions that his power showed itself: it was still more
through the influence of a quality, of which I have only since learnt to
appreciate the extreme rarity: that exalted public spirit, and regard
above all things to the good of the whole, which warmed into life and
activity every germ of similar virtue that existed in the minds he came
in contact with: the desire he made them feel for his approbation, the
shame at his disapproval; the moral support which his conversation and
his very existence gave to those who were aiming at the same objects, and
the encouragement he afforded to the fainthearted or desponding among
them, by the firm confidence which (though the reverse of sanguine as to
the results to be expected in any one particular case) he always felt in
the power of reason, the general progress of improvement, and the good
which individuals could do by judicious effort.

If was my father's opinions which gave the distinguishing character to
the Benthamic or utilitarian propagandism of that time. They fell
singly, scattered from him, in many directions, but they flowed from him
in a continued stream principally in three channels. One was through me,
the only mind directly formed by his instructions, and through whom
considerable influence was exercised over various young men, who became,
in their turn, propagandists. A second was through some of the Cambridge
contemporaries of Charles Austin, who, either initiated by him or under
the general mental impulse which he gave, had adopted many opinions
allied to those of my father, and some of the more considerable of whom
afterwards sought my father's acquaintance and frequented his house.
Among these may be mentioned Strutt, afterwards Lord Belper, and the
present Lord Romilly, with whose eminent father, Sir Samuel, my father
had of old been on terms of friendship. The third channel was that of a
younger generation of Cambridge undergraduates, contemporary, not with
Austin, but with Eyton Tooke, who were drawn to that estimable person by
affinity of opinions, and introduced by him to my father: the most
notable of these was Charles Buller. Various other persons individually
received and transmitted a considerable amount of my father's influence:
for example, Black (as before mentioned) and Fonblanque: most of these,
however, we accounted only partial allies; Fonblanque, for instance, was
always divergent from us on many important points. But indeed there was
by no means complete unanimity among any portion of us, nor had any of
us adopted implicitly all my father's opinions. For example, although
his _Essay on Government_ was regarded probably by all of us as a
masterpiece of political wisdom, our adhesion by no means extended to
the paragraph of it in which he maintains that women may, consistently
with good government, be excluded from the suffrage, because their
interest is the same with that of men. From this doctrine, I, and all
those who formed my chosen associates, most positively dissented. It is
due to my father to say that he denied having intended to affirm that
women _should_ be excluded, any more than men under the age of forty,
concerning whom he maintained in the very next paragraph an exactly
similar thesis. He was, as he truly said, not discussing whether the
suffrage had better be restricted, but only (assuming that it is to be
restricted) what is the utmost limit of restriction which does not
necessarily involve a sacrifice of the securities for good government.
But I thought then, as I have always thought since that the opinion
which he acknowledged, no less than that which he disclaimed, is as
great an error as any of those against which the _Essay_ was directed;
that the interest of women is included in that of men exactly as much as
the interest of subjects is included in that of kings, and no more; and
that every reason which exists for giving the suffrage to anybody,
demands that it should not be withheld from women. This was also the
general opinion of the younger proselytes; and it is pleasant to be able
to say that Mr. Bentham, on this important point, was wholly on our side.

But though none of us, probably, agreed in every respect with my father,
his opinions, as I said before, were the principal element which gave
its colour and character to the little group of young men who were the
first propagators of what was afterwards called "Philosophic Radicalism."
Their mode of thinking was not characterized by Benthamism in any sense
which has relation to Bentham as a chief or guide, but rather by a
combination of Bentham's point of view with that of the modern political
economy, and with the Hartleian metaphysics. Malthus's population
principle was quite as much a banner, and point of union among us, as
any opinion specially belonging to Bentham. This great doctrine,
originally brought forward as an argument against the indefinite
improvability of human affairs, we took up with ardent zeal in the
contrary sense, as indicating the sole means of realizing that
improvability by securing full employment at high wages to the whole
labouring population through a voluntary restriction of the increase of
their numbers. The other leading characteristics of the creed, which we
held in common with my father, may be stated as follows:

In politics, an almost unbounded confidence in the efficacy of two
things: representative government, and complete freedom of discussion.
So complete was my father's reliance on the influence of reason over the
minds of mankind, whenever it is allowed to reach them, that he felt as
if all would be gained if the whole population were taught to read, if
all sorts of opinions were allowed to be addressed to them by word and
in writing, and if by means of the suffrage they could nominate a
legislature to give effect to the opinions they adopted. He thought that
when the legislature no longer represented a class interest, it would
aim at the general interest, honestly and with adequate wisdom; since
the people would be sufficiently under the guidance of educated
intelligence, to make in general a good choice of persons to represent
them, and having done so, to leave to those whom they had chosen a
liberal discretion. Accordingly aristocratic rule, the government of the
Few in any of its shapes, being in his eyes the only thing which stood
between mankind and an administration of their affairs by the best
wisdom to be found among them, was the object of his sternest
disapprobation, and a democratic suffrage the principal article of his
political creed, not on the ground of liberty, Rights of Man, or any of
the phrases, more or less significant, by which, up to that time,
democracy had usually been defended, but as the most essential of
"securities for good government." In this, too, he held fast only to
what he deemed essentials; he was comparatively indifferent to
monarchical or republican forms--far more so than Bentham, to whom a
king, in the character of "corrupter-general," appeared necessarily very
noxious. Next to aristocracy, an established church, or corporation of
priests, as being by position the great depravers of religion, and
interested in opposing the progress of the human mind, was the object of
his greatest detestation; though he disliked no clergyman personally who
did not deserve it, and was on terms of sincere friendship with several.
In ethics his moral feelings were energetic and rigid on all points
which he deemed important to human well being, while he was supremely
indifferent in opinion (though his indifference did not show itself in
personal conduct) to all those doctrines of the common morality, which
he thought had no foundation but in asceticism and priestcraft. He
looked forward, for example, to a considerable increase of freedom in
the relations between the sexes, though without pretending to define
exactly what would be, or ought to be, the precise conditions of that
freedom. This opinion was connected in him with no sensuality either of
a theoretical or of a practical kind. He anticipated, on the contrary,
as one of the beneficial effects of increased freedom, that the
imagination would no longer dwell upon the physical relation and its
adjuncts, and swell this into one of the principal objects of life; a
perversion of the imagination and feelings, which he regarded as one of
the deepest seated and most pervading evils in the human mind. In
psychology, his fundamental doctrine was the formation of all human
character by circumstances, through the universal Principle of
Association, and the consequent unlimited possibility of improving the
moral and intellectual condition of mankind by education. Of all his
doctrines none was more important than this, or needs more to be
insisted on; unfortunately there is none which is more contradictory to
the prevailing tendencies of speculation, both in his time and since.

These various opinions were seized on with youthful fanaticism by the
little knot of young men of whom I was one: and we put into them a
sectarian spirit, from which, in intention at least, my father was
wholly free. What we (or rather a phantom substituted in the place of
us) were sometimes, by a ridiculous exaggeration, called by others,
namely a "school," some of us for a time really hoped and aspired to be.
The French _philosophes_ of the eighteenth century were the examples we
sought to imitate, and we hoped to accomplish no less results. No one of
the set went to so great excesses in his boyish ambition as I did; which
might be shown by many particulars, were it not an useless waste of
space and time.

All this, however, is properly only the outside of our existence; or, at
least, the intellectual part alone, and no more than one side of that.
In attempting to penetrate inward, and give any indication of what we
were as human beings, I must be understood as speaking only of myself,
of whom alone I can speak from sufficient knowledge; and I do not
believe that the picture would suit any of my companions without many
and great modifications.

I conceive that the description so often given of a Benthamite, as a
mere reasoning machine, though extremely inapplicable to most of those
who have been designated by that title, was during two or three years of
my life not altogether untrue of me. It was perhaps as applicable to me
as it can well be to anyone just entering into life, to whom the common
objects of desire must in general have at least the attraction of
novelty. There is nothing very extraordinary in this fact: no youth of
the age I then was, can be expected to be more than one thing, and this
was the thing I happened to be. Ambition and desire of distinction I had
in abundance; and zeal for what I thought the good of mankind was my
strongest sentiment, mixing with and colouring all others. But my zeal
was as yet little else, at that period of my life, than zeal for
speculative opinions. It had not its root in genuine benevolence, or
sympathy with mankind; though these qualities held their due place in
my ethical standard. Nor was it connected with any high enthusiasm for
ideal nobleness. Yet of this feeling I was imaginatively very
susceptible; but there was at that time an intermission of its natural
aliment, poetical culture, while there was a superabundance of the
discipline antagonistic to it, that of mere logic and analysis. Add to
this that, as already mentioned, my father's teachings tended to the
undervaluing of feeling. It was not that he was himself cold-hearted or
insensible; I believe it was rather from the contrary quality; he
thought that feeling could take care of itself; that there was sure to
be enough of it if actions were properly cared about. Offended by the
frequency with which, in ethical and philosophical controversy, feeling
is made the ultimate reason and justification of conduct, instead of
being itself called on for a justification, while, in practice, actions
the effect of which on human happiness is mischievous, are defended as
being required by feeling, and the character of a person of feeling
obtains a credit for desert, which he thought only due to actions, he
had a real impatience of attributing praise to feeling, or of any but
the most sparing reference to it, either in the estimation of persons or
in the discussion of things. In addition to the influence which this
characteristic in him had on me and others, we found all the opinions to
which we attached most importance, constantly attacked on the ground of
feeling. Utility was denounced as cold calculation; political economy as
hard-hearted; anti-population doctrines as repulsive to the natural
feelings of mankind. We retorted by the word "sentimentality," which,
along with "declamation" and "vague generalities," served us as common
terms of opprobrium. Although we were generally in the right, as against
those who were opposed to us, the effect was that the cultivation of
feeling (except the feelings of public and private duty) was not in much
esteem among us, and had very little place in the thoughts of most of
us, myself in particular. What we principally thought of, was to alter
people's opinions; to make them believe according to evidence, and know
what was their real interest, which when they once knew, they would, we
thought, by the instrument of opinion, enforce a regard to it upon one
another. While fully recognising the superior excellence of unselfish
benevolence and love of justice, we did not expect the regeneration of
mankind from any direct action on those sentiments, but from the effect
of educated intellect, enlightening the selfish feelings. Although this
last is prodigiously important as a means of improvement in the hands of
those who are themselves impelled by nobler principles of action, I do
not believe that any one of the survivors of the Benthamites or
Utilitarians of that day now relies mainly upon it for the general
amendment of human conduct.

From this neglect both in theory and in practice of the cultivation of
feeling, naturally resulted, among other things, an undervaluing of
poetry, and of Imagination generally, as an element of human nature. It
is, or was, part of the popular notion of Benthamites, that they are
enemies of poetry: this was partly true of Bentham himself; he used to
say that "all poetry is misrepresentation": but in the sense in which he
said it, the same might have been said of all impressive speech; of all
representation or inculcation more oratorical in its character than a
sum in arithmetic. An article of Bingham's in the first number of the
_Westminster Review_, in which he offered as an explanation of something
which he disliked in Moore, that "Mr. Moore _is_ a poet, and therefore
is _not_ a reasoner," did a good deal to attach the notion of hating
poetry to the writers in the _Review_. But the truth was that many of us
were great readers of poetry; Bingham himself had been a writer of it,
while as regards me (and the same thing might be said of my father), the
correct statement would be, not that I disliked poetry, but that I was
theoretically indifferent to it. I disliked any sentiments in poetry
which I should have disliked in prose; and that included a great deal.
And I was wholly blind to its place in human culture, as a means of
educating the feelings. But I was always personally very susceptible to
some kinds of it. In the most sectarian period of my Benthamism, I
happened to look into Pope's _Essay on Man_, and, though every opinion
in it was contrary to mine, I well remember how powerfully it acted on
my imagination. Perhaps at that time poetical composition of any higher
type than eloquent discussion in verse, might not have produced a
similar effect upon me: at all events I seldom gave it an opportunity.
This, however, was a mere passive state. Long before I had enlarged in
any considerable degree the basis of my intellectual creed, I had
obtained, in the natural course of my mental progress, poetic culture of
the most valuable kind, by means of reverential admiration for the lives
and characters of heroic persons; especially the heroes of philosophy.
The same inspiring effect which so many of the benefactors of mankind
have left on record that they had experienced from Plutarch's _Lives_,
was produced on me by Plato's pictures of Socrates, and by some modern
biographies, above all by Condorcet's _Life of Turgot_; a book well
calculated to rouse the best sort of enthusiasm, since it contains one
of the wisest and noblest of lives, delineated by one of the wisest and
noblest of men. The heroic virtue of these glorious representatives of
the opinions with which I sympathized, deeply affected me, and I
perpetually recurred to them as others do to a favourite poet, when
needing to be carried up into the more elevated regions of feeling and
thought. I may observe by the way that this book cured me of my
sectarian follies. The two or three pages beginning "Il regardait toute
secte comme nuisible," and explaining why Turgot always kept himself
perfectly distinct from the Encyclopedists, sank deeply into my mind.
I left off designating myself and others as Utilitarians, and by the
pronoun "we," or any other collective designation, I ceased to
_afficher_ sectarianism. My real inward sectarianism I did not get rid
of till later, and much more gradually.

About the end of 1824, or beginning of 1825, Mr. Bentham, having lately
got back his papers on Evidence from M. Dumont (whose _Traité des
Preuves Judiciaires_, grounded on them, was then first completed and
published), resolved to have them printed in the original, and bethought
himself of me as capable of preparing them for the press; in the same
manner as his _Book of Fallacies_ had been recently edited by Bingham.
I gladly undertook this task, and it occupied nearly all my leisure for
about a year, exclusive of the time afterwards spent in seeing the five
large volumes through the press. Mr. Bentham had begun this treatise
three time's, at considerable intervals, each time in a different
manner, and each time without reference to the preceding: two of the
three times he had gone over nearly the whole subject. These three
masses of manuscript it was my business to condense into a single
treatise, adopting the one last written as the groundwork, and
incorporating with it as much of the two others as it had not completely
superseded. I had also to unroll such of Bentham's involved and
parenthetical sentences as seemed to overpass by their complexity the
measure of what readers were likely to take the pains to understand. It
was further Mr. Bentham's particular desire that I should, from myself,
endeavour to supply any _lacunae_ which he had left; and at his instance
I read, for this purpose, the most authoritative treatises on the
English Law of Evidence, and commented on a few of the objectionable
points of the English rules, which had escaped Bentham's notice. I also
replied to the objections which had been made to some of his doctrines
by reviewers of Dumont's book, and added a few supplementary remarks on
some of the more abstract parts of the subject, such as the theory of
improbability and impossibility. The controversial part of these
editorial additions was written in a more assuming tone than became one
so young and inexperienced as I was: but indeed I had never contemplated
coming forward in my own person; and as an anonymous editor of Bentham I
fell into the tone of my author, not thinking it unsuitable to him or to
the subject, however it might be so to me. My name as editor was put to
the book after it was printed, at Mr. Bentham's positive desire, which I
in vain attempted to persuade him to forego.

The time occupied in this editorial work was extremely well employed in
respect to my own improvement. The _Rationale of Judicial Evidence_ is
one of the richest in matter of all Bentham's productions. The theory of
evidence being in itself one of the most important of his subjects, and
ramifying into most of the others, the book contains, very fully
developed, a great proportion of all his best thoughts: while, among
more special things, it comprises the most elaborate exposure of the
vices and defects of English law, as it then was, which is to be found
in his works; not confined to the law of evidence, but including, by way
of illustrative episode, the entire procedure or practice of Westminster
Hall. The direct knowledge, therefore, which I obtained from the book,
and which was imprinted upon me much more thoroughly than it could have
been by mere reading, was itself no small acquisition. But this
occupation did for me what might seem less to be expected; it gave a
great start to my powers of composition. Everything which I wrote
subsequently to this editorial employment, was markedly superior to
anything that I had written before it. Bentham's later style, as the
world knows, was heavy and cumbersome, from the excess of a good
quality, the love of precision, which made him introduce clause within
clause into the heart of every sentence, that the reader might receive
into his mind all the modifications and qualifications simultaneously
with the main proposition: and the habit grew on him until his sentences
became, to those not accustomed to them, most laborious reading. But his
earlier style, that of the _Fragment on Government, Plan of a Judicial
Establishment_, etc., is a model of liveliness and ease combined with
fulness of matter, scarcely ever surpassed: and of this earlier style
there were many striking specimens in the manuscripts on Evidence, all
of which I endeavoured to preserve. So long a course of this admirable
writing had a considerable effect upon my own; and I added to it by the
assiduous reading of other writers, both French and English, who
combined, in a remarkable degree, ease with force, such as Goldsmith,
Fielding, Pascal, Voltaire, and Courier. Through these influences my
writing lost the jejuneness of my early compositions; the bones and
cartilages began to clothe themselves with flesh, and the style became,
at times, lively and almost light.

This improvement was first exhibited in a new field. Mr. Marshall, of
Leeds, father of the present generation of Marshalls, the same who was
brought into Parliament for Yorkshire, when the representation forfeited
by Grampound was transferred to it, an earnest Parliamentary reformer,
and a man of large fortune, of which he made a liberal use, had been
much struck with Bentham's _Book of Fallacies_; and the thought had
occurred to him that it would be useful to publish annually the
Parliamentary Debates, not in the chronological order of Hansard, but
classified according to subjects, and accompanied by a commentary
pointing out the fallacies of the speakers. With this intention, he very
naturally addressed himself to the editor of the _Book of Fallacies_;
and Bingham, with the assistance of Charles Austin, undertook the
editorship. The work was called _Parliamentary History and Review_. Its
sale was not sufficient to keep it in existence, and it only lasted
three years. It excited, however, some attention among parliamentary and
political people. The best strength of the party was put forth in it;
and its execution did them much more credit than that of the
_Westminster Review_ had ever done. Bingham and Charles Austin wrote
much in it; as did Strutt, Romilly, and several other Liberal lawyers.
My father wrote one article in his best style; the elder Austin another.
Coulson wrote one of great merit. It fell to my lot to lead off the
first number by an article on the principal topic of the session (that
of 1825), the Catholic Association and the Catholic Disabilities. In the
second number I wrote an elaborate Essay on the Commercial Crisis of
1825 and the Currency Debates. In the third I had two articles, one on
a minor subject, the other on the Reciprocity principle in commerce,
_à propos_ of a celebrated diplomatic correspondence between Canning
and Gallatin. These writings were no longer mere reproductions and
applications of the doctrines I had been taught; they were original
thinking, as far as that name can be applied to old ideas in new forms
and connexions: and I do not exceed the truth in saying that there was a
maturity, and a well-digested, character about them, which there had not
been in any of my previous performances. In execution, therefore, they
were not at all juvenile; but their subjects have either gone by, or
have been so much better treated since, that they are entirely
superseded, and should remain buried in the same oblivion with my
contributions to the first dynasty of the _Westminster Review_.

While thus engaged in writing for the public, I did not neglect other
modes of self-cultivation. It was at this time that I learnt German;
beginning it on the Hamiltonian method, for which purpose I and several
of my companions formed a class. For several years from this period, our
social studies assumed a shape which contributed very much to my mental
progress. The idea occurred to us of carrying on, by reading and
conversation, a joint study of several of the branches of science which
we wished to be masters of. We assembled to the number of a dozen or
more. Mr. Grote lent a room of his house in Threadneedle Street for the
purpose, and his partner, Prescott, one of the three original members of
the Utilitarian Society, made one among us. We met two mornings in every
week, from half-past eight till ten, at which hour most of us were
called off to our daily occupations. Our first subject was Political
Economy. We chose some systematic treatise as our text-book; my father's
_Elements_ being our first choice. One of us read aloud a chapter, or
some smaller portion of the book. The discussion was then opened, and
anyone who had an objection, or other remark to make, made it. Our rule
was to discuss thoroughly every point raised, whether great or small,
prolonging the discussion until all who took part were satisfied with
the conclusion they had individually arrived at; and to follow up every
topic of collateral speculation which the chapter or the conversation
suggested, never leaving it until we had untied every knot which we
found. We repeatedly kept up the discussion of some one point for
several weeks, thinking intently on it during the intervals of our
meetings, and contriving solutions of the new difficulties which had
risen up in the last morning's discussion. When we had finished in this
way my father's _Elements_, we went in the same manner through Ricardo's
_Principles of Political Economy_, and Bailey's _Dissertation on Value_.
These close and vigorous discussions were not only improving in a high
degree to those who took part in them, but brought out new views of some
topics of abstract Political Economy. The theory of International Values
which I afterwards published, emanated from these conversations, as did
also the modified form of Ricardo's _Theory of Profits_, laid down in my
_Essay on Profits and Interest_. Those among us with whom new
speculations chiefly originated, were Ellis, Graham, and I; though
others gave valuable aid to the discussions, especially Prescott and
Roebuck, the one by his knowledge, the other by his dialectical
acuteness. The theories of International Values and of Profits were
excogitated and worked out in about equal proportions by myself and
Graham: and if our original project had been executed, my _Essays on
Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_ would have been brought
out along with some papers of his, under our joint names. But when my
exposition came to be written, I found that I had so much over-estimated
my agreement with him, and he dissented so much from the most original
of the two Essays, that on International Values, that I was obliged to
consider the theory as now exclusively mine, and it came out as such
when published many years later. I may mention that among the
alterations which my father made in revising his _Elements_ for the
third edition, several were founded on criticisms elicited by these
conversations; and in particular he modified his opinions (though not to
the extent of our new speculations) on both the points to which I
have adverted.

When we had enough of political economy, we took up the syllogistic
logic in the same manner, Grote now joining us. Our first text-book was
Aldrich, but being disgusted with its superficiality, we reprinted one
of the most finished among the many manuals of the school logic, which
my father, a great collector of such books, possessed, the _Manuductio
ad Logicam_ of the Jesuit Du Trieu. After finishing this, we took up
Whately's _Logic_, then first republished from the _Encyclopedia
Metropolitana_, and finally the _Computatio sive Logica_ of Hobbes.
These books, dealt with in our manner, afforded a high range for
original metaphysical speculation: and most of what has been done in the
First Book of my _System of Logic_, to rationalize and correct the
principles and distinctions of the school logicians, and to improve the
theory of the Import of Propositions, had its origin in these
discussions; Graham and I originating most of the novelties, while Grote
and others furnished an excellent tribunal or test. From this time I
formed the project of writing a book on Logic, though on a much humbler
scale than the one I ultimately executed.

Having done with Logic, we launched into Analytic Psychology, and having
chosen Hartley for our text-book, we raised Priestley's edition to an
extravagant price by searching through London to furnish each of us with
a copy. When we had finished Hartley, we suspended our meetings; but my
father's _Analysis of the Mind_ being published soon after, we
reassembled for the purpose of reading it. With this our exercises
ended. I have always dated from these conversations my own real
inauguration as an original and independent thinker. It was also through
them that I acquired, or very much strengthened, a mental habit to which
I attribute all that I have ever done, or ever shall do, in speculation:
that of never accepting half-solutions of difficulties as complete;
never abandoning a puzzle, but again and again returning to it until it
was cleared up; never allowing obscure corners of a subject to remain
unexplored, because they did not appear important; never thinking that I
perfectly understood any part of a subject until I understood the whole.

Our doings from 1825 to 1830 in the way of public speaking, filled a
considerable place in my life during those years, and as they had
important effects on my development, something ought to be said of them.

There was for some time in existence a society of Owenites, called the
Co-operative Society, which met for weekly public discussions in
Chancery Lane. In the early part of 1825, accident brought Roebuck in
contact with several of its members, and led to his attending one or two
of the meetings and taking part in the debate in opposition to Owenism.
Some one of us started the notion of going there in a body and having a
general battle: and Charles Austin and some of his friends who did not
usually take part in our joint exercises, entered into the project. It
was carried out by concert with the principal members of the Society,
themselves nothing loth, as they naturally preferred a controversy with
opponents to a tame discussion among their own body. The question of
population was proposed as the subject of debate: Charles Austin led the
case on our side with a brilliant speech, and the fight was kept up by
adjournment through five or six weekly meetings before crowded
auditories, including along with the members of the Society and their
friends, many hearers and some speakers from the Inns of Court. When
this debate was ended, another was commenced on the general merits of
Owen's system: and the contest altogether lasted about three months. It
was a _lutte corps à corps_ between Owenites and political economists,
whom the Owenites regarded as their most inveterate opponents: but it
was a perfectly friendly dispute. We who represented political economy,
had the same objects in view as they had, and took pains to show it; and
the principal champion on their side was a very estimable man, with whom
I was well acquainted, Mr. William Thompson, of Cork, author of a book
on the Distribution of Wealth, and of an " Appeal" in behalf of women
against the passage relating to them in my father's _Essay on
Government_. Ellis, Roebuck, and I took an active part in the debate,
and among those from the Inns of Court who joined in it, I remember
Charles Villiers. The other side obtained also, on the population
question, very efficient support from without. The well-known Gale
Jones, then an elderly man, made one of his florid speeches; but the
speaker with whom I was most struck, though I dissented from nearly
every word he said, was Thirlwall, the historian, since Bishop of St.
David's, then a Chancery barrister, unknown except by a high reputation
for eloquence acquired at the Cambridge Union before the era of Austin
and Macaulay. His speech was in answer to one of mine. Before he had
uttered ten sentences, I set him down as the best speaker I had ever
heard, and I have never since heard anyone whom I placed above him.

The great interest of these debates predisposed some of those who took
part in them, to catch at a suggestion thrown out by McCulloch, the
political economist, that a Society was wanted in London similar to the
Speculative Society at Edinburgh, in which Brougham, Horner, and others
first cultivated public speaking. Our experience at the Co-operative
Society seemed to give cause for being sanguine as to the sort of men
who might be brought together in London for such a purpose. McCulloch
mentioned the matter to several young men of influence, to whom he was
then giving private lessons in political economy. Some of these entered
warmly into the project, particularly George Villiers, after Earl of
Clarendon. He and his brothers, Hyde and Charles, Romilly, Charles
Austin and I, with some others, met and agreed on a plan. We determined
to meet once a fortnight from November to June, at the Freemasons'
Tavern, and we had soon a fine list of members, containing, along with
several members of Parliament, nearly all the most noted speakers of the
Cambridge Union and of the Oxford United Debating Society. It is
curiously illustrative of the tendencies of the time, that our principal
difficulty in recruiting for the Society was to find a sufficient number
of Tory speakers. Almost all whom we could press into the service were
Liberals, of different orders and degrees. Besides those already named,
we had Macaulay, Thirlwall, Praed, Lord Howick, Samuel Wilberforce
(afterwards Bishop of Oxford), Charles Poulett Thomson (afterwards Lord
Sydenham), Edward and Henry Lytton Bulwer, Fonblanque, and many others
whom I cannot now recollect, but who made themselves afterwards more or
less conspicuous in public or literary life. Nothing could seem more
promising. But when the time for action drew near, and it was necessary
to fix on a President, and find somebody to open the first debate, none
of our celebrities would consent to perform either office. Of the many
who were pressed on the subject, the only one who could be prevailed on
was a man of whom I knew very little, but who had taken high honours at
Oxford and was said to have acquired a great oratorical reputation
there; who some time afterwards became a Tory member of Parliament. He
accordingly was fixed on, both for filling the President's chair and for
making the first speech. The important day arrived; the benches were
crowded; all our great speakers were present, to judge of, but not to
help our efforts. The Oxford orator's speech was a complete failure.
This threw a damp on the whole concern: the speakers who followed were
few, and none of them did their best: the affair was a complete
_fiasco_; and the oratorical celebrities we had counted on went away
never to return, giving to me at least a lesson in knowledge of the
world. This unexpected breakdown altered my whole relation to the
project. I had not anticipated taking a prominent part, or speaking much
or often, particularly at first, but I now saw that the success of the
scheme depended on the new men, and I put my shoulder to the wheel. I
opened the second question, and from that time spoke in nearly every
debate. It was very uphill work for some time. The three Villiers and
Romilly stuck to us for some time longer, but the patience of all the
founders of the Society was at last exhausted, except me and Roebuck. In
the season following, 1826-7, things began to mend. We had acquired two
excellent Tory speakers, Hayward and Shee (afterwards Sergeant Shee):
the Radical side was reinforced by Charles Buller, Cockburn, and others
of the second generation of Cambridge Benthamities; and with their and
other occasional aid, and the two Tories as well as Roebuck and me for
regular speakers, almost every debate was a _bataille rangée_ between
the "philosophic Radicals" and the Tory lawyers; until our conflicts
were talked about, and several persons of note and consideration came to
hear us. This happened still more in the subsequent seasons, 1828 and
1829, when the Coleridgians, in the persons of Maurice and Sterling,
made their appearance in the Society as a second Liberal and even
Radical party, on totally different grounds from Benthamism and
vehemently opposed to it; bringing into these discussions the general
doctrines and modes of thought of the European reaction against the
philosophy of the eighteenth century; and adding a third and very
important belligerent party to our contests, which were now no bad
exponent of the movement of opinion among the most cultivated part of
the new generation. Our debates were very different from those of common
debating societies, for they habitually consisted of the strongest
arguments and most philosophic principles which either side was able to
produce, thrown often into close and _serré_ confutations of one
another. The practice was necessarily very useful to us, and eminently
so to me. I never, indeed, acquired real fluency, and had always a bad
and ungraceful delivery; but I could make myself listened to: and as I
always wrote my speeches when, from the feelings involved, or the nature
of the ideas to be developed, expression seemed important, I greatly
increased my power of effective writing; acquiring not only an ear for
smoothness and rhythm, but a practical sense for _telling_ sentences,
and an immediate criterion of their telling property, by their effect on
a mixed audience.

The Society, and the preparation for it, together with the preparation
for the morning conversations which were going on simultaneously,
occupied the greater part of my leisure; and made me feel it a relief
when, in the spring of 1828, I ceased to write for the _Westminster_.
The _Review_ had fallen into difficulties. Though the sale of the first
number had been very encouraging, the permanent sale had never, I
believe, been sufficient to pay the expenses, on the scale on which the
_Review_ was carried on. Those expenses had been considerably, but not
sufficiently, reduced. One of the editors, Southern, had resigned; and
several of the writers, including my father and me, who had been paid
like other contributors for our earlier articles, had latterly written
without payment. Nevertheless, the original funds were nearly or quite
exhausted, and if the _Review_ was to be continued some new arrangement
of its affairs had become indispensable. My father and I had several
conferences with Bowring on the subject. We were willing to do our
utmost for maintaining the _Review_ as an organ of our opinions, but not
under Bowring's editorship: while the impossibility of its any longer
supporting a paid editor, afforded a ground on which, without affront to
him, we could propose to dispense with his services. We and some of our
friends were prepared to carry on the _Review_ as unpaid writers, either
finding among ourselves an unpaid editor, or sharing the editorship
among us. But while this negotiation was proceeding with Bowring's
apparent acquiescence, he was carrying on another in a different quarter
(with Colonel Perronet Thompson), of which we received the first
intimation in a letter from Bowring as editor, informing us merely that
an arrangement had been made, and proposing to us to write for the next
number, with promise of payment. We did not dispute Bowring's right to
bring about, if he could, an arrangement more favourable to himself than
the one we had proposed; but we thought the concealment which he had
practised towards us, while seemingly entering into our own project, an
affront: and even had we not thought so, we were indisposed to expend
any more of our time and trouble in attempting to write up the _Review_
under his management. Accordingly my father excused himself from
writing; though two or three years later, on great pressure, he did
write one more political article. As for me, I positively refused. And
thus ended my connexion with the original _Westminster_. The last
article which I wrote in it had cost me more labour than any previous;
but it was a labour of love, being a defence of the early French
Revolutionists against the Tory misrepresentations of Sir Walter Scott,
in the introduction to his _Life of Napoleon_. The number of books which
I read for this purpose, making notes and extracts--even the number I
had to buy (for in those days there was no public or subscription
library from which books of reference could be taken home)--far exceeded
the worth of the immediate object; but I had at that time a half-formed
intention of writing a History of the French Revolution; and though I
never executed it, my collections afterwards were very useful to Carlyle
for a similar purpose.




CHAPTER V

CRISIS IN MY MENTAL HISTORY. ONE STAGE ONWARD


For some years after this time I wrote very little, and nothing
regularly, for publication: and great were the advantages which I
derived from the intermission. It was of no common importance to me, at
this period, to be able to digest and mature my thoughts for my own mind
only, without any immediate call for giving them out in print. Had I
gone on writing, it would have much disturbed the important
transformation in my opinions and character, which took place during
those years. The origin of this transformation, or at least the process
by which I was prepared for it, can only be explained by turning some
distance back.

From the winter of 1821, when I first read Bentham, and especially from
the commencement of the _Westminster Review_, I had what might truly be
called an object in life; to be a reformer of the world. My conception
of my own happiness was entirely identified with this object. The
personal sympathies I wished for were those of fellow labourers in this
enterprise. I endeavoured to pick up as many flowers as I could by the
way; but as a serious and permanent personal satisfaction to rest upon,
my whole reliance was placed on this; and I was accustomed to felicitate
myself on the certainty of a happy life which I enjoyed, through placing
my happiness in something durable and distant, in which some progress
might be always making, while it could never be exhausted by complete
attainment. This did very well for several years, during which the
general improvement going on in the world and the idea of myself as
engaged with others in struggling to promote it, seemed enough to fill
up an interesting and animated existence. But the time came when I
awakened from this as from a dream. It was in the autumn of 1826. I was
in a dull state of nerves, such as everybody is occasionally liable to;
unsusceptible to enjoyment or pleasurable excitement; one of those moods
when what is pleasure at other times, becomes insipid or indifferent;
the state, I should think, in which converts to Methodism usually are,
when smitten by their first "conviction of sin." In this frame of mind
it occurred to me to put the question directly to myself: "Suppose that
all your objects in life were realized; that all the changes in
institutions and opinions which you are looking forward to, could be
completely effected at this very instant: would this be a great joy and
happiness to you?" And an irrepressible self-consciousness distinctly
answered, "No!" At this my heart sank within me: the whole foundation on
which my life was constructed fell down. All my happiness was to have
been found in the continual pursuit of this end. The end had ceased to
charm, and how could there ever again be any interest in the means? I
seemed to have nothing left to live for.

At first I hoped that the cloud would pass away of itself; but it did
not. A night's sleep, the sovereign remedy for the smaller vexations of
life, had no effect on it. I awoke to a renewed consciousness of the
woful fact. I carried it with me into all companies, into all
occupations. Hardly anything had power to cause me even a few minutes'
oblivion of it. For some months the cloud seemed to grow thicker and
thicker. The lines in Coleridge's _Dejection_--I was not then acquainted
with them--exactly describe my case:

   "A grief without a pang, void, dark and drear,
    A drowsy, stifled, unimpassioned grief,
    Which finds no natural outlet or relief
    In word, or sigh, or tear."

In vain I sought relief from my favourite books; those memorials of past
nobleness and greatness from which I had always hitherto drawn strength
and animation. I read them now without feeling, or with the accustomed
feeling minus all its charm; and I became persuaded, that my love of
mankind, and of excellence for its own sake, had worn itself out. I
sought no comfort by speaking to others of what I felt. If I had loved
anyone sufficiently to make confiding my griefs a necessity, I should
not have been in the condition I was. I felt, too, that mine was not an
interesting, or in any way respectable distress. There was nothing in it
to attract sympathy. Advice, if I had known where to seek it, would have
been most precious. The words of Macbeth to the physician often occurred
to my thoughts. But there was no one on whom I could build the faintest
hope of such assistance. My father, to whom it would have been natural
to me to have recourse in any practical difficulties, was the last
person to whom, in such a case as this, I looked for help. Everything
convinced me that he had no knowledge of any such mental state as I was
suffering from, and that even if he could be made to understand it, he
was not the physician who could heal it. My education, which was wholly
his work, had been conducted without any regard to the possibility of
its ending in this result; and I saw no use in giving him the pain of
thinking that his plans had failed, when the failure was probably
irremediable, and, at all events, beyond the power of _his_ remedies. Of
other friends, I had at that time none to whom I had any hope of making
my condition intelligible. It was, however, abundantly intelligible to
myself; and the more I dwelt upon it, the more hopeless it appeared.

My course of study had led me to believe, that all mental and moral
feelings and qualities, whether of a good or of a bad kind, were the
results of association; that we love one thing, and hate another, take
pleasure in one sort of action or contemplation, and pain in another
sort, through the clinging of pleasurable or painful ideas to those
things, from the effect of education or of experience. As a corollary
from this, I had always heard it maintained by my father, and was myself
convinced, that the object of education should be to form the strongest
possible associations of the salutary class; associations of pleasure
with all things beneficial to the great whole, and of pain with all
things hurtful to it. This doctrine appeared inexpugnable; but it now
seemed to me, on retrospect, that my teachers had occupied themselves
but superficially with the means of forming and keeping up these
salutary associations. They seemed to have trusted altogether to the old
familiar instruments, praise and blame, reward and punishment. Now, I
did not doubt that by these means, begun early, and applied unremittingly,
intense associations of pain and pleasure, especially of pain, might be
created, and might produce desires and aversions capable of lasting
undiminished to the end of life. But there must always be something
artificial and casual in associations thus produced. The pains and
pleasures thus forcibly associated with things, are not connected with
them by any natural tie; and it is therefore, I thought, essential to
the durability of these associations, that they should have become so
intense and inveterate as to be practically indissoluble, before the
habitual exercise of the power of analysis had commenced. For I now saw,
or thought I saw, what I had always before received with incredulity
--that the habit of analysis has a tendency to wear away the feelings:
as indeed it has, when no other mental habit is cultivated, and the
analysing spirit remains without its natural complements and
correctives. The very excellence of analysis (I argued) is that it tends
to weaken and undermine whatever is the result of prejudice; that it
enables us mentally to separate ideas which have only casually clung
together: and no associations whatever could ultimately resist this
dissolving force, were it not that we owe to analysis our clearest
knowledge of the permanent sequences in nature; the real connexions
between Things, not dependent on our will and feelings; natural laws,
by virtue of which, in many cases, one thing is inseparable from another
in fact; which laws, in proportion as they are clearly perceived and
imaginatively realized, cause our ideas of things which are always
joined together in Nature, to cohere more and more closely in our
thoughts. Analytic habits may thus even strengthen the associations
between causes and effects, means and ends, but tend altogether to
weaken those which are, to speak familiarly, a _mere_ matter of feeling.
They are therefore (I thought) favourable to prudence and clear-
sightedness, but a perpetual worm at the root both of the passions and
of the virtues; and, above all, fearfully undermine all desires, and
all pleasures, which are the effects of association, that is, according
to the theory I held, all except the purely physical and organic; of the
entire insufficiency of which to make life desirable, no one had a
stronger conviction than I had. These were the laws of human nature, by
which, as it seemed to me, I had been brought to my present state. All
those to whom I looked up, were of opinion that the pleasure of sympathy
with human beings, and the feelings which made the good of others, and
especially of mankind on a large scale, the object of existence, were
the greatest and surest sources of happiness. Of the truth of this I was
convinced, but to know that a feeling would make me happy if I had it,
did not give me the feeling. My education, I thought, had failed to
create these feelings in sufficient strength to resist the dissolving
influence of analysis, while the whole course of my intellectual
cultivation had made precocious and premature analysis the inveterate
habit of my mind. I was thus, as I said to myself, left stranded at the
commencement of my voyage, with a well-equipped ship and a rudder, but
no sail; without any real desire for the ends which I had been so
carefully fitted out to work for: no delight in virtue, or the general
good, but also just as little in anything else. The fountains of vanity
and ambition seemed to have dried up within me, as completely as those
of benevolence. I had had (as I reflected) some gratification of vanity
at too early an age: I had obtained some distinction and felt myself of
some importance, before the desire of distinction and of importance had
grown into a passion: and little as it was which I had attained, yet
having been attained too early, like all pleasures enjoyed too soon, it
had made me _blasé_ and indifferent to the pursuit. Thus neither selfish
nor unselfish pleasures were pleasures to me. And there seemed no power
in nature sufficient to begin the formation of my character anew, and
create, in a mind now irretrievably analytic, fresh associations of
pleasure with any of the objects of human desire.

These were the thoughts which mingled with the dry, heavy dejection of
the melancholy winter of 1826-7. During this time I was not incapable of
my usual occupations. I went on with them mechanically, by the mere
force of habit. I had been so drilled in a certain sort of mental
exercise, that I could still carry it on when all the spirit had gone
out of it. I even composed and spoke several speeches at the debating
society, how, or with what degree of success, I know not. Of four years'
continual speaking at that society, this is the only year of which I
remember next to nothing. Two lines of Coleridge, in whom alone of all
writers I have found a true description of what I felt, were often in my
thoughts, not at this time (for I had never read them), but in a later
period of the same mental malady:

    "Work without hope draws nectar in a sieve,
     And hope without an object cannot live."

In all probability my case was by no means so peculiar as I fancied it,
and I doubt not that many others have passed through a similar state;
but the idiosyncrasies of my education had given to the general
phenomenon a special character, which made it seem the natural effect of
causes that it was hardly possible for time to remove. I frequently
asked myself, if I could, or if I was bound to go on living, when life
must be passed in this manner. I generally answered to myself that I did
not think I could possibly bear it beyond a year. When, however, not
more than half that duration of time had elapsed, a small ray of light
broke in upon my gloom. I was reading, accidentally, Marmontel's
_Mémoires_, and came to the passage which relates his father's death,
the distressed position of the family, and the sudden inspiration by
which he, then a mere boy, felt and made them feel that he would be
everything to them--would supply the place of all that they had lost. A
vivid conception of the scene and its feelings came over me, and I was
moved to tears. From this moment my burden grew lighter. The oppression
of the thought that all feeling was dead within me was gone. I was no
longer hopeless: I was not a stock or a stone. I had still, it seemed,
some of the material out of which all worth of character, and all
capacity for happiness, are made. Relieved from my ever-present sense of
irremediable wretchedness, I gradually found that the ordinary incidents
of life could again give me some pleasure; that I could again find
enjoyment, not intense, but sufficient for cheerfulness, in sunshine and
sky, in books, in conversation, in public affairs; and that there was,
once more, excitement, though of a moderate, kind, in exerting myself
for my opinions, and for the public good. Thus the cloud gradually drew
off, and I again enjoyed life; and though I had several relapses, some
of which lasted many months, I never again was as miserable as I
had been.

The experiences of this period had two very marked effects on my opinions
and character. In the first place, they led me to adopt a theory of life,
very unlike that on which I had before I acted, and having much in common
with what at that time I certainly had never heard of, the anti-self-
consciousness theory of Carlyle. I never, indeed, wavered in the conviction
that happiness is the test of all rules of conduct, and the end of life.
But I now thought that this end was only to be attained by not making it
the direct end. Those only are happy (I thought) who have their minds
fixed on some object other than their own happiness; on the happiness of
others, on the improvement of mankind, even on some art or pursuit,
followed not as a means, but as itself an ideal end. Aiming thus at
something else, they find happiness by the way. The enjoyments of life
(such was now my theory) are sufficient to make it a pleasant thing,
when they are taken _en passant_, without being made a principal object.
Once make them so, and they are immediately felt to be insufficient.
They will not bear a scrutinizing examination. Ask yourself whether you
are happy, and you cease to be so. The only chance is to treat, not
happiness, but some end external to it, as the purpose of life. Let your
self-consciousness, your scrutiny, your self-interrogation, exhaust
themselves on that; and if otherwise fortunately circumstanced you will
inhale happiness with the air you breathe, without dwelling on it or
thinking about it, without either forestalling it in imagination, or
putting it to flight by fatal questioning. This theory now became the
basis of my philosophy of life. And I still hold to it as the best
theory for all those who have but a moderate degree of sensibility and
of capacity I for enjoyment; that is, for the great majority of mankind.

The other important change which my opinions at this time underwent, was
that I, for the first time, gave its proper place, among the prime
necessities of human well-being, to the internal culture of the
individual. I ceased to attach almost exclusive importance to the
ordering of outward circumstances, and the training of the human being
for speculation and for action.

I had now learnt by experience that the passing susceptibilities needed
to be cultivated as well as the active capacities, and required to be
nourished and enriched as well as guided. I did not, for an instant,
lose sight of, or undervalue, that part of the truth which I had seen
before; I never turned recreant to intellectual culture, or ceased to
consider the power and practice of analysis as an essential condition
both of individual and of social improvement But 1 thought that it had
consequences which required to be corrected, by joining other kinds of
cultivation with it. The maintenance of a due balance among the
faculties now seemed to be of primary importance. The cultivation of the
feelings became one of the cardinal points in my ethical and philosophical
creed. And my thoughts and inclinations turned in an increasing degree
towards whatever seemed capable of being instrumental to that object.

I now began to find meaning in the things, which I had read or heard
about the importance of poetry and art as instruments of human culture.
But it was some time longer before I began to know this by personal
experience. The only one of the imaginative arts in which I had from
childhood taken great pleasure, was music; the best effect of which (and
in this it surpasses perhaps every other art) consists in exciting
enthusiasm; in winding up to a high pitch those feelings of an elevated
kind which are already in the character, but to which this excitement
gives a glow and a fervour, which, though transitory at its utmost
height, is precious for sustaining them at other times. This effect of
music I had often experienced; but, like all my pleasurable
susceptibilities, it was suspended during the gloomy period. I had
sought relief again and again from this quarter, but found none. After
the tide had turned, and I was in process of recovery, I had been helped
forward by music, but in a much less elevated manner. I at this time
first became acquainted with Weber's _Oberon_, and the extreme pleasure
which I drew from its delicious melodies did me good by showing me a
source of pleasure to which I was as susceptible as ever. The good,
however, was much impaired by the thought that the pleasure of music
(as is quite true of such pleasure as this was, that of mere tune) fades
with familiarity, and requires either to be revived by intermittence, or
fed by continual novelty. And it is very characteristic both of my then
state, and of the general tone of my mind at this period of my life,
that I was seriously tormented by the thought of the exhaustibility of
musical combinations. The octave consists only of five tones and two
semi-tones, which can be put together in only a limited number of ways,
of which but a small proportion are beautiful: most of these, it seemed
to me, must have been already discovered, and there could not be room
for a long succession of Mozarts and Webers, to strike out, as these had
done, entirely new and surpassingly rich veins of musical beauty. This
source of anxiety may, perhaps, be thought to resemble that of the
philosophers of Laputa, who feared lest the sun should be burnt out. It
was, however, connected with the best feature in my character, and the
only good point to be found in my very unromantic and in no way
honourable distress. For though my dejection, honestly looked at, could
not be called other than egotistical, produced by the ruin, as I thought,
of my fabric of happiness, yet the destiny of mankind in general was ever
in my thoughts, and could not be separated from my own. I felt that the
flaw in my life, must be a flaw in life itself; that the question was,
whether, if the reformers of society and government could succeed in
their objects, and every person in the community were free and in a state
of physical comfort, the pleasures of life, being no longer kept up by
struggle and privation, would cease to be pleasures. And I felt that
unless I could see my way to some better hope than this for human
happiness in general, my dejection must continue; but that if I could
see such an outlet, I should then look on the world with pleasure;
content, as far as I was myself concerned, with any fair share of the
general lot.

This state of my thoughts and feelings made the fact of my reading
Wordsworth for the first time (in the autumn of 1828), an important
event of my life. I took up the collection of his poems from curiosity,
with no expectation of mental relief from it, though I had before
resorted to poetry with that hope. In the worst period of my depression,
I had read through the whole of Byron (then new to me), to try whether a
poet, whose peculiar department was supposed to be that of the intenser
feelings, could rouse any feeling in me. As might be expected, I got no
good from this reading, but the reverse. The poet's state of mind was
too like my own. His was the lament of a man who had worn out all
pleasures, and who seemed to think that life, to all who possess the
good things of it, must necessarily be the vapid, uninteresting thing
which I found it. His Harold and Manfred had the same burden on them
which I had; and I was not in a frame of mind to desire any comfort from
the vehement sensual passion of his Giaours, or the sullenness of his
Laras. But while Byron was exactly what did not suit my condition,
Wordsworth was exactly what did. I had looked into the _Excursion_ two
or three years before, and found little in it; and I should probably
have found as little, had I read it at this time. But the miscellaneous
poems, in the two-volume edition of 1815 (to which little of value was
added in the latter part of the author's life), proved to be the precise
thing for my mental wants at that particular juncture.

In the first place, these poems addressed themselves powerfully to one
of the strongest of my pleasurable susceptibilities, the love of rural
objects and natural scenery; to which I had been indebted not only for
much of the pleasure of my life, but quite recently for relief from one
of my longest relapses into depression. In this power of rural beauty
over me, there was a foundation laid for taking pleasure in Wordsworth's
poetry; the more so, as his scenery lies mostly among mountains, which,
owing to my early Pyrenean excursion, were my ideal of natural beauty.
But Wordsworth would never have had any great effect on me, if he had
merely placed before me beautiful pictures of natural scenery. Scott
does this still better than Wordsworth, and a very second-rate landscape
does it more effectually than any poet. What made Wordsworth's poems a
medicine for my state of mind, was that they expressed, not mere outward
beauty, but states of feeling, and of thought coloured by feeling, under
the excitement of beauty. They seemed to be the very culture of the
feelings, which I was in quest of. In them I seemed to draw from a
source of inward joy, of sympathetic and imaginative pleasure, which
could be shared in by all human beings; which had no connection with
struggle or imperfection, but would be made richer by every improvement
in the physical or social condition of mankind. From them I seemed to
learn what would be the perennial sources of happiness, when all the
greater evils of life shall have been removed. And I felt myself at once
better and happier as I came under their influence. There have certainly
been, even in our own age, greater poets than Wordsworth; but poetry of
deeper and loftier feeling could not have done for me at that time what
his did. I needed to be made to feel that there was real, permanent
happiness in tranquil contemplation. Wordsworth taught me this, not only
without turning away from, but with a greatly increased interest in, the
common feelings and common destiny of human beings. And the delight
which these poems gave me, proved that with culture of this sort, there
was nothing to dread from the most confirmed habit of analysis. At the
conclusion of the Poems came the famous Ode, falsely called Platonic,
"Intimations of Immortality": in which, along with more than his usual
sweetness of melody and rhythm, and along with the two passages of grand
imagery but bad philosophy so often quoted, I found that he too had had
similar experience to mine; that he also had felt that the first
freshness of youthful enjoyment of life was not lasting; but that he had
sought for compensation, and found it, in the way in which he was now
teaching me to find it. The result was that I gradually, but completely,
emerged from my habitual depression, and was never again subject to it.
I long continued to value Wordsworth less according to his intrinsic
merits, than by the measure of what he had done for me. Compared with
the greatest poets, he may be said to be the poet of unpoetical natures,
possessed of quiet and contemplative tastes. But unpoetical natures are
precisely those which require poetic cultivation. This cultivation
Wordsworth is much more fitted to give, than poets who are intrinsically
far more poets than he.

It so fell out that the merits of Wordsworth were the occasion of my
first public declaration of my new way of thinking, and separation from
those of my habitual companions who had not undergone a similar change.
The person with whom at that time I was most in the habit of comparing
notes on such subjects was Roebuck, and I induced him to read
Wordsworth, in whom he also at first seemed to find much to admire: but
I, like most Wordsworthians, threw myself into strong antagonism to
Byron, both as a poet and as to his influence on the character. Roebuck,
all whose instincts were those of action and struggle, had, on the
contrary, a strong relish and great admiration of Byron, whose writings
he regarded as the poetry of human life, while Wordsworth's, according
to him, was that of flowers and butterflies. We agreed to have the fight
out at our Debating Society, where we accordingly discussed for two
evenings the comparative merits of Byron and Wordsworth, propounding and
illustrating by long recitations our respective theories of poetry:
Sterling also, in a brilliant speech, putting forward his particular
theory. This was the first debate on any weighty subject in which
Roebuck and I had been on opposite sides. The schism between us widened
from this time more and more, though we continued for some years longer
to be companions. In the beginning, our chief divergence related to the
cultivation of the feelings. Roebuck was in many respects very different
from the vulgar notion of a Benthamite or Utilitarian. He was a lover of
poetry and of most of the fine arts. He took great pleasure in music, in
dramatic performances, especially in painting, and himself drew and
designed landscapes with great facility and beauty. But he never could
be made to see that these things have any value as aids in the formation
of character. Personally, instead of being, as Benthamites are supposed
to be, void of feeling, he had very quick and strong sensibilities. But,
like most Englishmen who have feelings, he found his feelings stand very
much in his way. He was much more susceptible to the painful sympathies
than to the pleasurable, and, looking for his happiness elsewhere, he
wished that his feelings should be deadened rather than quickened. And,
in truth, the English character, and English social circumstances, make
it so seldom possible to derive happiness from the exercise of the
sympathies, that it is not wonderful if they count for little in an
Englishman's scheme of life. In most other countries the paramount
importance of the sympathies as a constituent of individual happiness is
an axiom, taken for granted rather than needing any formal statement;
but most English thinkers always seem to regard them as necessary evils,
required for keeping men's actions benevolent and compassionate. Roebuck
was, or appeared to be, this kind of Englishman. He saw little good in
any cultivation of the feelings, and none at all in cultivating them
through the imagination, which he thought was only cultivating
illusions. It was in vain I urged on him that the imaginative emotion
which an idea, when vividly conceived, excites in us, is not an illusion
but a fact, as real as any of the other qualities of objects; and, far
from implying anything erroneous and delusive in our mental apprehension
of the object, is quite consistent with the most accurate knowledge and
most perfect practical recognition of all its physical and intellectual
laws and relations. The intensest feeling of the beauty of a cloud
lighted by the setting sun, is no hindrance to my knowing that the cloud
is vapour of water, subject to all the laws of vapours in a state of
suspension; and I am just as likely to allow for, and act on, these
physical laws whenever there is occasion to do so, as if I had been
incapable of perceiving any distinction between beauty and ugliness.

While my intimacy with Roebuck diminished, I fell more and more into
friendly intercourse with our Coleridgian adversaries in the Society,
Frederick Maurice and John Sterling, both subsequently so well known,
the former by his writings, the latter through the biographies by Hare
and Carlyle. Of these two friends, Maurice was the thinker, Sterling the
orator, and impassioned expositor of thoughts which, at this period,
were almost entirely formed for him by Maurice.

With Maurice I had for some time been acquainted through Eyton Tooke,
who had known him at Cambridge, and although my discussions with him
were almost always disputes, I had carried away from them much that
helped to build up my new fabric of thought, in the same way as I was
deriving much from Coleridge, and from the writings of Goethe and other
German authors which I read during these years. I have so deep a respect
for Maurice's character and purposes, as well as for his great mental
gifts, that it is with some unwillingness I say anything which may seem
to place him on a less high eminence than I would gladly be able to
accord to him. But I have always thought that there was more
intellectual power wasted in Maurice than in any other of my
contemporaries. Few of them certainly have had so much to waste. Great
powers of generalization, rare ingenuity and subtlety, and a wide
perception of important and unobvious truths, served him not for putting
something better into the place of the worthless heap of received
opinions on the great subjects of thought, but for proving to his own
mind that the Church of England had known everything from the first, and
that all the truths on the ground of which the Church and orthodoxy have
been attacked (many of which he saw as clearly as anyone) are not only
consistent with the Thirty-nine Articles, but are better understood and
expressed in those Articles than by anyone who rejects them. I have
never been able to find any other explanation of this, than by
attributing it to that timidity of conscience, combined with original
sensitiveness of temperament, which has so often driven highly gifted
men into Romanism, from the need of a firmer support than they can find
in the independent conclusions of their own judgment. Any more vulgar
kind of timidity no one who knew Maurice would ever think of imputing to
him, even if he had not given public proof of his freedom from it, by
his ultimate collision with some of the opinions commonly regarded as
orthodox, and by his noble origination of the Christian Socialist
movement. The nearest parallel to him, in a moral point of view, is
Coleridge, to whom, in merely intellectual power, apart from poetical
genius, I think him decidedly superior. At this time, however, he might
be described as a disciple of Coleridge, and Sterling as a disciple of
Coleridge and of him. The modifications which were taking place in my
old opinions gave me some points of contact with them; and both Maurice
and Sterling were of considerable use to my development. With Sterling I
soon became very intimate, and was more attached to him than I have ever
been to any other man. He was indeed one of the most lovable of men. His
frank, cordial, affectionate, and expansive character; a love of truth
alike conspicuous in the highest things and the humblest; a generous and
ardent nature, which threw itself with impetuosity into the opinions it
adopted, but was as eager to do justice to the doctrines and the men it
was opposed to, as to make war on what it thought their errors; and an
equal devotion to the two cardinal points of Liberty and Duty, formed a
combination of qualities as attractive to me as to all others who knew
him as well as I did. With his open mind and heart, he found no
difficulty in joining hands with me across the gulf which as yet divided
our opinions. He told me how he and others had looked upon me (from
hearsay information), as a "made" or manufactured man, having had a
certain impress of opinion stamped on me which I could only reproduce;
and what a change took place in his feelings when he found, in the
discussion on Wordsworth and Byron, that Wordsworth, and all which that
name implies, "belonged" to me as much as to him and his friends. The
failure of his health soon scattered all his plans of life, and
compelled him to live at a distance from London, so that after the first
year or two of our acquaintance, we only saw each other at distant
intervals. But (as he said himself in one of his letters to Carlyle)
when we did meet it was like brothers. Though he was never, in the full
sense of the word, a profound thinker, his openness of mind, and the
moral courage in which he greatly surpassed Maurice, made him outgrow
the dominion which Maurice and Coleridge had once exercised over his
intellect; though he retained to the last a great but discriminating
admiration of both, and towards Maurice a warm affection. Except in that
short and transitory phasis of his life, during which he made the
mistake of becoming a clergyman, his mind was ever progressive: and the
advance he always seemed to have made when I saw him after an interval,
made me apply to him what Goethe said of Schiller, "er hatte eine
furchtliche Fortschreitung." He and I started from intellectual points
almost as wide apart as the poles, but the distance between us was
always diminishing: if I made steps towards some of his opinions, he,
during his short life, was constantly approximating more and more to
several of mine: and if he had lived, and had health and vigour to
prosecute his ever assiduous self-culture, there is no knowing how much
further this spontaneous assimilation might have proceeded.

After 1829 I withdrew from attendance on the Debating Society. I had had
enough of speech-making, and was glad to carry on my private studies and
meditations without any immediate call for outward assertion of their
results. I found the fabric of my old and taught opinions giving way in
many fresh places, and I never allowed it to fall to pieces, but was
incessantly occupied in weaving it anew. I never, in the course of my
transition, was content to remain, for ever so short a time, confused
and unsettled. When I had taken in any new idea, I could not rest till I
had adjusted its relation to my old opinions, and ascertained exactly
how far its effect ought to extend in modifying or superseding them.

The conflicts which I had so often had to sustain in defending the
theory of government laid down in Bentham's and my father's writings,
and the acquaintance I had obtained with other schools of political
thinking, made me aware of many things which that doctrine, professing
to be a theory of government in general, ought to have made room for,
and did not. But these things, as yet, remained with me rather as
corrections to be made in applying the theory to practice, than as
defects in the theory. I felt that politics could not be a science of
specific experience; and that the accusations against the Benthamic
theory of _being_ a theory, of proceeding _a priori_ by way of general
reasoning, instead of Baconian experiment, showed complete ignorance of
Bacon's principles, and of the necessary conditions of experimental
investigation. At this juncture appeared in the _Edinburgh Review_,
Macaulay's famous attack on my father's _Essay on Government_. This gave
me much to think about. I saw that Macaulay's conception of the logic of
politics was erroneous; that he stood up for the empirical mode of
treating political phenomena, against the philosophical; that even in
physical science his notions of philosophizing might have recognised
Kepler, but would have excluded Newton and Laplace. But I could not help
feeling, that though the tone was unbecoming (an error for which the
writer, at a later period, made the most ample and honourable amends),
there was truth in several of his strictures on my father's treatment of
the subject; that my father's premises were really too narrow, and
included but a small number of the general truths on which, in politics,
the important consequences depend. Identity of interest between the
governing body and the community at large is not, in any practical sense
which can be attached to it, the only thing on which good government
depends; neither can this identity of interest be secured by the mere
conditions of election. I was not at all satisfied with the mode in
which my father met the criticisms of Macaulay. He did not, as I thought
he ought to have done, justify himself by saying, "I was not writing a
scientific treatise on politics, I was writing an argument for
parliamentary reform." He treated Macaulay's argument as simply
irrational; an attack upon the reasoning faculty; an example of the
saying of Hobbes, that When reason is against a man, a man will be
against reason. This made me think that there was really something more
fundamentally erroneous in my father's conception of philosophical
method, as applicable to politics, than I had hitherto supposed there
was. But I did not at first see clearly what the error might be. At last
it flashed upon me all at once in the course of other studies. In the
early part of 1830 I had begun to put on paper the ideas on Logic
(chiefly on the distinctions among Terms, and the import of
Propositions) which had been suggested and in part worked out in the
morning conversations already spoken of. Having secured these thoughts
from being lost, I pushed on into the other parts of the subject, to try
whether I could do anything further towards clearing up the theory of
logic generally. I grappled at once with the problem of Induction,
postponing that of Reasoning, on the ground that it is necessary to
obtain premises before we can reason from them. Now, Induction is mainly
a process for finding the causes of effects: and in attempting to fathom
the mode of tracing causes and effects in physical science, I soon saw
that in the more perfect of the sciences, we ascend, by generalization
from particulars, to the tendencies of causes considered singly, and
then reason downward from those separate tendencies, to the effect of
the same causes when combined. I then asked myself, what is the ultimate
analysis of this deductive process; the common theory of the syllogism
evidently throwing no light upon it. My practice (learnt from Hobbes and
my father) being to study abstract principles by means of the best
concrete instances I could find, the Composition of Forces, in dynamics,
occurred to me as the most complete example of the logical process I was
investigating. On examining, accordingly, what the mind does when it
applies the principle of the Composition of Forces, I found that it
performs a simple act of addition. It adds the separate effect of the
one force to the separate effect of the other, and puts down the sum of
these separate effects as the joint effect. But is this a legitimate
process? In dynamics, and in all the mathematical branches of physics,
it is; but in some other cases, as in chemistry, it is not; and I then
recollected that something not unlike this was pointed out as one of the
distinctions between chemical and mechanical phenomena, in the
introduction to that favourite of my boyhood, Thompson's _System of
Chemistry_. This distinction at once made my mind clear as to what was
perplexing me in respect to the philosophy of politics. I now saw, that
a science is either deductive or experimental, according as, in the
province it deals with, the effects of causes when conjoined, are or are
not the sums of the effects which the same causes produce when separate.
It followed that politics must be a deductive science. It thus appeared,
that both Macaulay and my father were wrong; the one in assimilating the
method of philosophizing in politics to the purely experimental method
of chemistry; while the other, though right in adopting a deductive
method, had made a wrong selection of one, having taken as the type of
deduction, not the appropriate process, that of the deductive branches
of natural philosophy, but the inappropriate one of pure geometry,
which, not being a science of causation at all, does not require or
admit of any summing-up of effects. A foundation was thus laid in my
thoughts for the principal chapters of what I afterwards published on
the Logic of the Moral Sciences; and my new position in respect to my
old political creed, now became perfectly definite.

If I am asked, what system of political philosophy I substituted for
that which, as a philosophy, I had abandoned, I answer, No system: only
a conviction that the true system was something much more complex and
many-sided than I had previously had any idea of, and that its office
was to supply, not a set of model institutions, but principles from
which the institutions suitable to any given circumstances might be
deduced. The influences of European, that is to say, Continental,
thought, and especially those of the reaction of the nineteenth century
against the eighteenth, were now streaming in upon me. They came from
various quarters: from the writings of Coleridge, which I had begun to
read with interest even before the change in my opinions; from the
Coleridgians with whom I was in personal intercourse; from what I had
read of Goethe; from Carlyle's early articles in the _Edinburgh_ and
Foreign Reviews, though for a long time I saw nothing in these (as my
father saw nothing in them to the last) but insane rhapsody. From these
sources, and from the acquaintance I kept up with the French literature
of the time, I derived, among other ideas which the general turning
upside down of the opinions of European thinkers had brought uppermost,
these in particular: That the human mind has a certain order of possible
progress, in which some things must precede others, an order which
governments and public instructors can modify to some, but not to an
unlimited extent: that all questions of political institutions are
relative, not absolute, and that different stages of human progress not
only _will_ have, but _ought_ to have, different institutions: that
government is always either in the hands, or passing into the hands, of
whatever is the strongest power in society, and that what this power is,
does not depend on institutions, but institutions on it: that any
general theory or philosophy of politics supposes a previous theory of
human progress, and that this is the same thing with a philosophy of
history. These opinions, true in the main, were held in an exaggerated
and violent manner by the thinkers with whom I was now most accustomed
to compare notes, and who, as usual with a reaction, ignored that half
of the truth which the thinkers of the eighteenth century saw. But
though, at one period of my progress, I for some time undervalued that
great century, I never joined in the reaction against it, but kept as
firm hold of one side of the truth as I took of the other. The fight
between the nineteenth century and the eighteenth always reminded me of
the battle about the shield, one side of which was white and the other
black. I marvelled at the blind rage with which the combatants rushed
against one another. I applied to them, and to Coleridge himself, many
of Coleridge's sayings about half truths; and Goethe's device,
"many-sidedness," was one which I would most willingly, at this period,
have taken for mine.

The writers by whom, more than by any others, a new mode of political
thinking was brought home to me, were those of the St. Simonian school
in France. In 1829 and 1830 I became acquainted with some of their
writings. They were then only in the earlier stages of their
speculations. They had not yet dressed out their philosophy as a
religion, nor had they organized their scheme of Socialism. They were
just beginning to question the principle of hereditary property. I was
by no means prepared to go with them even this length; but I was greatly
struck with the connected view which they for the first time presented
to me, of the natural order of human progress; and especially with their
division of all history into organic periods and critical periods.
During the organic periods (they said) mankind accept with firm
conviction some positive creed, claiming jurisdiction over all their
actions, and containing more or less of truth and adaptation to the
needs of humanity. Under its influence they make all the progress
compatible with the creed, and finally outgrow it; when a period follows
of criticism and negation, in which mankind lose their old convictions
without acquiring any new ones, of a general or authoritative character,
except the conviction that the old are false. The period of Greek and
Roman polytheism, so long as really believed in by instructed Greeks and
Romans, was an organic period, succeeded by the critical or sceptical
period of the Greek philosophers. Another organic period came in with
Christianity. The corresponding critical period began with the
Reformation, has lasted ever since, still lasts, and cannot altogether
cease until a new organic period has been inaugurated by the triumph of
a yet more advanced creed. These ideas, I knew, were not peculiar to the
St. Simonians; on the contrary, they were the general property of
Europe, or at least of Germany and France, but they had never, to my
knowledge, been so completely systematized as by these writers, nor the
distinguishing characteristics of a critical period so powerfully set
forth; for I was not then acquainted with Fichte's _Lectures on the
Characteristics of the Present Age_. In Carlyle, indeed, I found bitter
denunciations of an "age of unbelief," and of the present age as such,
which I, like most people at that time, supposed to be passionate
protests in favour of the old modes of belief. But all that was true in
these denunciations, I thought that I found more calmly and
philosophically stated by the St. Simonians. Among their publications,
too, there was one which seemed to me far superior to the rest; in which
the general idea was matured into something much more definite and
instructive. This was an early work of Auguste Comte, who then called
himself, and even announced himself in the title-page as, a pupil of
Saint Simon. In this tract M. Comte first put forth the doctrine, which
he afterwards so copiously illustrated, of the natural succession of
three stages in every department of human knowledge: first, the
theological, next the metaphysical, and lastly, the positive stage; and
contended, that social science must be subject to the same law; that the
feudal and Catholic system was the concluding phasis of the theological
state of the social science, Protestantism the commencement, and the
doctrines of the French Revolution the consummation, of the
metaphysical; and that its positive state was yet to come. This doctrine
harmonized well with my existing notions, to which it seemed to give a
scientific shape. I already regarded the methods of physical science as
the proper models for political. But the chief benefit which I derived
at this time from the trains of thought suggested by the St. Simonians
and by Comte, was, that I obtained a clearer conception than ever before
of the peculiarities of an era of transition in opinion, and ceased to
mistake the moral and intellectual characteristics of such an era, for
the normal attributes of humanity. I looked forward, through the present
age of loud disputes but generally weak convictions, to a future which
shall unite the best qualities of the critical with the best qualities
of the organic periods; unchecked liberty of thought, unbounded freedom
of individual action in all modes not hurtful to others; but also,
convictions as to what is right and wrong, useful and pernicious, deeply
engraven on the feelings by early education and general unanimity of
sentiment, and so firmly grounded in reason and in the true exigencies
of life, that they shall not, like all former and present creeds,
religious, ethical, and political, require to be periodically thrown off
and replaced by others.

M. Comte soon left the St. Simonians, and I lost sight of him and his
writings for a number of years. But the St. Simonians I continued to
cultivate. I was kept _au courant_ of their progress by one of their
most enthusiastic disciples, M. Gustave d'Eichthal, who about that time
passed a considerable interval in England. I was introduced to their
chiefs, Bazard and Enfantin, in 1830; and as long as their public
teachings and proselytism continued, I read nearly everything they
wrote. Their criticisms on the common doctrines of Liberalism seemed to
me full of important truth; and it was partly by their writings that my
eyes were opened to the very limited and temporary value of the old
political economy, which assumes private property and inheritance as
indefeasible facts, and freedom of production and exchange as the
_dernier mot_ of social improvement. The scheme gradually unfolded by
the St. Simonians, under which the labour and capital of society would
be managed for the general account of the community, every individual
being required to take a share of labour, either as thinker, teacher,
artist, or producer, all being classed according to their capacity, and
remunerated according to their work, appeared to me a far superior
description of Socialism to Owen's. Their aim seemed to me desirable and
rational, however their means might be inefficacious; and though I
neither believed in the practicability, nor in the beneficial operation
of their social machinery, I felt that the proclamation of such an ideal
of human society could not but tend to give a beneficial direction to
the efforts of others to bring society, as at present constituted,
nearer to some ideal standard. I honoured them most of all for what they
have been most cried down for--the boldness and freedom from prejudice
with which they treated the subject of the family, the most important of
any, and needing more fundamental alterations than remain to be made in
any other great social institution, but on which scarcely any reformer
has the courage to touch. In proclaiming the perfect equality of men and
women, and an entirely new order of things in regard to their relations
with one another, the St. Simonians, in common with Owen and Fourier,
have entitled themselves to the grateful remembrance of future
generations.

In giving an account of this period of my life, I have only specified
such of my new impressions as appeared to me, both at the time and
since, to be a kind of turning points, marking a definite progress in my
mode of thought. But these few selected points give a very insufficient
idea of the quantity of thinking which I carried on respecting a host of
subjects during these years of transition. Much of this, it is true,
consisted in rediscovering things known to all the world, which I had
previously disbelieved or disregarded. But the rediscovery was to me a
discovery, giving me plenary possession of the truths, not as
traditional platitudes, but fresh from their source; and it seldom
failed to place them in some new light, by which they were reconciled
with, and seemed to confirm while they modified, the truths less
generally known which lay in my early opinions, and in no essential part
of which I at any time wavered. All my new thinking only laid the
foundation of these more deeply and strongly, while it often removed
misapprehension and confusion of ideas which had perverted their effect.
For example, during the later returns of my dejection, the doctrine of
what is called Philosophical Necessity weighed on my existence like an
incubus. I felt as if I was scientifically proved to be the helpless
slave of antecedent circumstances; as if my character and that of all
others had been formed for us by agencies beyond our control, and was
wholly out of our own power. I often said to myself, what a relief it
would be if I could disbelieve the doctrine of the formation of
character by circumstances; and remembering the wish of Fox respecting
the doctrine of resistance to governments, that it might never be
forgotten by kings, nor remembered by subjects, I said that it would be
a blessing if the doctrine of necessity could be believed by all _quoad_
the characters of others, and disbelieved in regard to their own. I
pondered painfully on the subject till gradually I saw light through it.
I perceived, that the word Necessity, as a name for the doctrine of
Cause and Effect applied to human action, carried with it a misleading
association; and that this association was the operative force in the
depressing and paralysing influence which I had experienced: I saw that
though our character is formed by circumstances, our own desires can do
much to shape those circumstances; and that what is really inspiriting
and ennobling in the doctrine of freewill is the conviction that we have
real power over the formation of our own character; that our will, by
influencing some of our circumstances, can modify our future habits or
capabilities of willing. All this was entirely consistent with the
doctrine of circumstances, or rather, was that doctrine itself, properly
understood. From that time I drew, in my own mind, a clear distinction
between the doctrine of circumstances and Fatalism; discarding
altogether the misleading word Necessity. The theory, which I now for
the first time rightly apprehended, ceased altogether to be
discouraging; and, besides the relief to my spirits, I no longer
suffered under the burden--so heavy to one who aims at being a reformer
in opinions--of thinking one doctrine true and the contrary doctrine
morally beneficial. The train of thought which had extricated me from
this dilemma seemed to me, in after years, fitted to render a similar
service to others; and it now forms the chapter on Liberty and Necessity
in the concluding Book of my _System of Logic_.

Again, in politics, though I no longer accepted the doctrine of the
_Essay on Government_ as a scientific theory; though I ceased to
consider representative democracy as an absolute principle, and regarded
it as a question of time, place, and circumstance; though I now looked
upon the choice of political institutions as a moral and educational
question more than one of material interests, thinking that it ought to
be decided mainly by the consideration, what great improvement in life
and culture stands next in order for the people concerned, as the
condition of their further progress, and what institutions are most
likely to promote that; nevertheless, this change in the premises of my
political philosophy did not alter my practical political creed as to
the requirements of my own time and country. I was as much as ever a
Radical and Democrat for Europe, and especially for England. I thought
the predominance of the aristocratic classes, the noble and the rich, in
the English constitution, an evil worth any struggle to get rid of; not
on account of taxes, or any such comparatively small inconvenience, but
as the great demoralizing agency in the country. Demoralizing, first,
because it made the conduct of the Government an example of gross public
immorality, through the predominance of private over public interests in
the State, and the abuse of the powers of legislation for the advantage
of classes. Secondly, and in a still greater degree, because the respect
of the multitude always attaching itself principally to that which, in
the existing state of society, is the chief passport to power; and under
English institutions, riches, hereditary or acquired, being the almost
exclusive source of political importance; riches, and the signs of
riches, were almost the only things really respected, and the life of
the people was mainly devoted to the pursuit of them. I thought, that
while the higher and richer classes held the power of government, the
instruction and improvement of the mass of the people were contrary to
the self-interest of those classes, because tending to render the people
more powerful for throwing off the yoke: but if the democracy obtained a
large, and perhaps the principal share, in the governing power, it would
become the interest of the opulent classes to promote their education,
in order to ward off really mischievous errors, and especially those
which would lead to unjust violations of property. On these grounds I
was not only as ardent as ever for democratic institutions, but
earnestly hoped that Owenite, St. Simonian, and all other anti-property
doctrines might spread widely among the poorer classes; not that I
thought those doctrines true, or desired that they should be acted on,
but in order that the higher classes might be made to see that they had
more to fear from the poor when uneducated than when educated.

In this frame of mind the French Revolution of July found me: It roused
my utmost enthusiasm, and gave me, as it were, a new existence. I went
at once to Paris, was introduced to Lafayette, and laid the groundwork
of the intercourse I afterwards kept up with several of the active
chiefs of the extreme popular party. After my return I entered warmly,
as a writer, into the political discussions of the time; which soon
became still more exciting, by the coming in of Lord Grey's Ministry,
and the proposing of the Reform Bill. For the next few years I wrote
copiously in newspapers. It was about this time that Fonblanque, who had
for some time written the political articles in the _Examiner_, became
the proprietor and editor of the paper. It is not forgotten with what
verve and talent, as well as fine wit, he carried it on, during the
whole period of Lord Grey's Ministry, and what importance it assumed as
the principal representative, in the newspaper press, of Radical
opinions. The distinguishing character of the paper was given to it
entirely by his own articles, which formed at least three-fourths of all
the original writing contained in it: but of the remaining fourth I
contributed during those years a much larger share than anyone else. I
wrote nearly all the articles on French subjects, including a weekly
summary of French politics, often extending to considerable length;
together with many leading articles on general politics, commercial and
financial legislation, and any miscellaneous subjects in which I felt
interested, and which were suitable to the paper, including occasional
reviews of books. Mere newspaper articles on the occurrences or
questions of the moment, gave no opportunity for the development of any
general mode of thought; but I attempted, in the beginning of 1831, to
embody in a series of articles, headed "The Spirit of the Age," some of
my new opinions, and especially to point out in the character of the
present age, the anomalies and evils characteristic of the transition
from a system of opinions which had worn out, to another only in process
of being formed. These articles, were, I fancy, lumbering in style, and
not lively or striking enough to be, at any time, acceptable to
newspaper readers; but had they been far more attractive, still, at that
particular moment, when great political changes were impending, and
engrossing all minds, these discussions were ill-timed, and missed fire
altogether. The only effect which I know to have been produced by them,
was that Carlyle, then living in a secluded part of Scotland, read them
in his solitude, and, saying to himself (as he afterwards told me) "Here
is a new Mystic," inquired on coming to London that autumn respecting
their authorship; an inquiry which was the immediate cause of our
becoming personally acquainted.

I have already mentioned Carlyle's earlier writings as one of the
channels through which I received the influences which enlarged my early
narrow creed; but I do not think that those writings, by themselves,
would ever have had any effect on my opinions. What truths they
contained, though of the very kind which I was already receiving from
other quarters, were presented in a form and vesture less suited than
any other to give them access to a mind trained as mine had been. They
seemed a haze of poetry and German metaphysics, in which almost the only
clear thing was a strong animosity to most of the opinions which were
the basis of my mode of thought; religious scepticism, utilitarianism,
the doctrine of circumstances, and the attaching any importance to
democracy, logic, or political economy. Instead of my having been taught
anything, in the first instance, by Carlyle, it was only in proportion
as I came to see the same truths through media more suited to my mental
constitution, that I recognised them in his writings. Then, indeed, the
wonderful power with which he put them forth made a deep impression upon
me, and I was during a long period one of his most fervent admirers; but
the good his writings did me, was not as philosophy to instruct, but as
poetry to animate. Even at the time when our acquaintance commenced, I
was not sufficiently advanced in my new modes of thought to appreciate
him fully; a proof of which is, that on his showing me the manuscript of
_Sartor Resartus_, his best and greatest work, which he just then
finished, I made little of it; though when it came out about two years
afterwards in _Fraser's Magazine_ I read it with enthusiastic admiration
and the keenest delight. I did not seek and cultivate Carlyle less on
account of the fundamental differences in our philosophy. He soon found
out that I was not "another mystic," and when for the sake of my own
integrity I wrote to him a distinct profession of all those of my
opinions which I knew he most disliked, he replied that the chief
difference between us was that I "was as yet consciously nothing of a
mystic." I do not know at what period he gave up the expectation that I
was destined to become one; but though both his and my opinions
underwent in subsequent years considerable changes, we never approached
much nearer to each other's modes of thought than we were in the first
years of our acquaintance. I did not, however, deem myself a competent
judge of Carlyle. I felt that he was a poet, and that I was not; that he
was a man of intuition, which I was not; and that as such, he not only
saw many things long before me, which I could only, when they were
pointed out to me, hobble after and prove, but that it was highly
probable he could see many things which were not visible to me even
after they were pointed out. I knew that I could not see round him, and
could never be certain that I saw over him; and I never presumed to
judge him with any definiteness, until he was interpreted to me by one
greatly the superior of us both--who was more a poet than he, and more a
thinker than I--whose own mind and nature included his, and
infinitely more.

Among the persons of intellect whom I had known of old, the one with
whom I had now most points of agreement was the elder Austin. I have
mentioned that he always set himself in opposition to our early
sectarianism; and latterly he had, like myself, come under new
influences. Having been appointed Professor of Jurisprudence in the
London University (now University College), he had lived for some time
at Bonn to study for his Lectures; and the influences of German
literature and of the German character and state of society had made a
very perceptible change in his views of life. His personal disposition
was much softened; he was less militant and polemic; his tastes had
begun to turn themselves towards the poetic and contemplative. He
attached much less importance than formerly to outward changes; unless
accompanied by a better cultivation of the inward nature. He had a
strong distaste for the general meanness of English life, the absence of
enlarged thoughts and unselfish desires, the low objects on which the
faculties of all classes of the English are intent. Even the kind of
public interests which Englishmen care for, he held in very little
esteem. He thought that there was more practical good government, and
(which is true enough) infinitely more care for the education and mental
improvement of all ranks of the people, under the Prussian monarchy,
than under the English representative government: and he held, with the
French _Economistes_, that the real security for good government is un
_peuple éclairé_, which is not always the fruit of popular institutions,
and which, if it could be had without them, would do their work better
than they. Though he approved of the Reform Bill, he predicted, what in
fact occurred, that it would not produce the great immediate
improvements in government which many expected from it. The men, he
said, who could do these great things did not exist in the country.
There were many points of sympathy between him and me, both in the new
opinions he had adopted and in the old ones which he retained. Like me,
he never ceased to be a utilitarian, and, with all his love for the
Germans and enjoyment of their literature, never became in the smallest
degree reconciled to the innate-principle metaphysics. He cultivated
more and more a kind of German religion, a religion of poetry and
feeling with little, if anything, of positive dogma; while in politics
(and here it was that I most differed with him) he acquired an
indifference, bordering on contempt, for the progress of popular
institutions: though he rejoiced in that of Socialism, as the most
effectual means of compelling the powerful classes to educate the
people, and to impress on them the only real means of permanently
improving their material condition, a limitation of their numbers.
Neither was he, at this time, fundamentally opposed to Socialism in
itself as an ultimate result of improvement. He professed great
disrespect for what he called "the universal principles of human nature
of the political economists," and insisted on the evidence which history
and daily experience afford of the "extraordinary pliability of human
nature" (a phrase which I have somewhere borrowed from him); nor did he
think it possible to set any positive bounds to the moral capabilities
which might unfold themselves in mankind, under an enlightened direction
of social and educational influences. Whether he retained all these
opinions to the end of life I know not. Certainly the modes of thinking
of his later years, and especially of his last publication, were much
more Tory in their general character than those which he held at
this time.

My father's tone of thought and feeling, I now felt myself at a great
distance from: greater, indeed, than a full and calm explanation and
reconsideration on both sides, might have shown to exist in reality. But
my father was not one with whom calm and full explanations on
fundamental points of doctrine could be expected, at least with one whom
he might consider as, in some sort, a deserter from his standard.
Fortunately we were almost always in strong agreement on the political
questions of the day, which engrossed a large part of his interest and
of his conversation. On those matters of opinion on which we differed,
we talked little. He knew that the habit of thinking for myself, which
his mode of education had fostered, sometimes led me to opinions
different from his, and he perceived from time to time that I did not
always tell him _how_ different. I expected no good, but only pain to
both of us, from discussing our differences: and I never expressed them
but when he gave utterance to some opinion or feeling repugnant to mine,
in a manner which would have made it disingenuousness on my part to
remain silent.

It remains to speak of what I wrote during these years, which,
independently of my contributions to newspapers, was considerable. In
1830 and 1831 I wrote the five Essays since published under the title of
_Essays on some Unsettled Questions of political Economy_, almost as
they now stand, except that in 1833 I partially rewrote the fifth Essay.
They were written with no immediate purpose of publication; and when,
some years later, I offered them to a publisher, he declined them. They
were only printed in 1844, after the success of the _System of Logic_. I
also resumed my speculations on this last subject, and puzzled myself,
like others before me, with the great paradox of the discovery of new
truths by general reasoning. As to the fact, there could be no doubt. As
little could it be doubted, that all reasoning is resolvable into
syllogisms, and that in every syllogism the conclusion is actually
contained and implied in the premises. How, being so contained and
implied, it could be new truth, and how the theorems of geometry, so
different in appearance from the definitions and axioms, could be all
contained in these, was a difficulty which no, one, I thought, had
sufficiently felt, and which, at all events, no one had succeeded in
clearing up. The explanations offered by Whately and others, though they
might give a temporary satisfaction, always, in my mind, left a mist
still hanging over the subject. At last, when reading a second or third
time the chapters on Reasoning in the second volume of Dugald Stewart,
interrogating myself on every point, and following out, as far as I knew
how, every topic of thought which the book suggested, I came upon an
idea of his respecting the use of axioms in ratiocination, which I did
not remember to have before noticed, but which now, in meditating on it,
seemed to me not only true of axioms, but of all general propositions
whatever, and to be the key of the whole perplexity. From this germ grew
the theory of the Syllogism propounded in the Second Book of the
_Logic_; which I immediately fixed by writing it out. And now, with
greatly increased hope of being able to produce a work on Logic, of some
originality and value, I proceeded to write the First Book, from the
rough and imperfect draft I had already made. What I now wrote became
the basis of that part of the subsequent Treatise; except that it did
not contain the Theory of Kinds, which was a later addition, suggested
by otherwise inextricable difficulties which met me in my first attempt
to work out the subject of some of the concluding chapters of the Third
Book. At the point which I had now reached I made a halt, which lasted
five years. I had come to the end of my tether; I could make nothing
satisfactory of Induction, at this time. I continued to read any book
which seemed to promise light on the subject, and appropriated, as well
as I could, the results; but for a long time I found nothing which
seemed to open to me any very important vein of meditation.

In 1832 I wrote several papers for the first series of _Tait's
Magazine_, and one for a quarterly periodical called the _Jurist_, which
had been founded, and for a short time carried on, by a set of friends,
all lawyers and law reformers, with several of whom I was acquainted.
The paper in question is the one on the rights and duties of the State
respecting Corporation and Church Property, now standing first among the
collected _Dissertations and Discussions_; where one of my articles in
_Tait_, "The Currency Juggle," also appears. In the whole mass of what
I wrote previous to these, there is nothing of sufficient permanent
value to justify reprinting. The paper in the _Jurist_, which I still
think a very complete discussion of the rights of the State over
Foundations, showed both sides of my opinions, asserting as firmly as I
should have done at any time, the doctrine that all endowments are
national property, which the government may and ought to control; but
not, as I should once have done, condemning endowments in themselves,
and proposing that they should be taken to pay off the national debt. On
the contrary, I urged strenuously the importance of a provision for
education, not dependent on the mere demand of the market, that is, on
the knowledge and discernment of average parents, but calculated to
establish and keep up a higher standard of instruction than is likely to
be spontaneously demanded by the buyers of the article. All these
opinions have been confirmed and strengthened by the whole of my
subsequent reflections.





CHAPTER VI.

COMMENCEMENT OF THE MOST VALUABLE FRIENDSHIP OF MY LIFE. MY
FATHER'S DEATH. WRITINGS AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS UP TO 1840.


It was the period of my mental progress which I have now reached that I
formed the friendship which has been the honour and chief blessing of my
existence, as well as the source of a great part of all that I have
attempted to do, or hope to effect hereafter, for human improvement. My
first introduction to the lady who, after a friendship of twenty years,
consented to become my wife, was in 1830, when I was in my twenty-fifth
and she in her twenty-third year. With her husband's family it was the
renewal of an old acquaintanceship. His grandfather lived in the next
house to my father's in Newington Green, and I had sometimes when a boy
been invited to play in the old gentleman's garden. He was a fine
specimen of the old Scotch puritan; stern, severe, and powerful, but
very kind to children, on whom such men make a lasting impression.
Although it was years after my introduction to Mrs. Taylor before my
acquaintance with her became at all intimate or confidential, I very
soon felt her to be the most admirable person I had ever known. It is
not to be supposed that she was, or that any one, at the age at which I
first saw her, could be, all that she afterwards became. Least of all
could this be true of her, with whom self-improvement, progress in the
highest and in all senses, was a law of her nature; a necessity equally
from the ardour with which she sought it, and from the spontaneous
tendency of faculties which could not receive an impression or an
experience without making it the source or the occasion of an accession
of wisdom. Up to the time when I first saw her, her rich and powerful
nature had chiefly unfolded itself according to the received type of
feminine genius. To her outer circle she was a beauty and a wit, with an
air of natural distinction, felt by all who approached her: to the
inner, a woman of deep and strong feeling, of penetrating and intuitive
intelligence, and of an eminently meditative and poetic nature. Married
at an early age to a most upright, brave, and honourable man, of liberal
opinions and good education, but without the intellectual or artistic
tastes which would have made him a companion for her, though a steady
and affectionate friend, for whom she had true esteem and the strongest
affection through life, and whom she most deeply lamented when dead;
shut out by the social disabilities of women from any adequate exercise
of her highest faculties in action on the world without; her life was
one of inward meditation, varied by familiar intercourse with a small
circle of friends, of whom one only (long since deceased) was a person
of genius, or of capacities of feeling or intellect kindred with her
own, but all had more or less of alliance with her in sentiments and
opinions. Into this circle I had the good fortune to be admitted, and I
soon perceived that she possessed in combination, the qualities which in
all other persons whom I had known I had been only too happy to find
singly. In her, complete emancipation from every kind of superstition
(including that which attributes a pretended perfection to the order of
nature and the universe), and an earnest protest against many things
which are still part of the established constitution of society,
resulted not from the hard intellect, but from strength of noble and
elevated feeling, and co-existed with a highly reverential nature. In
general spiritual characteristics, as well as in temperament and
organisation, I have often compared her, as she was at this time, to
Shelley: but in thought and intellect, Shelley, so far as his powers
were developed in his short life, was but a child compared with what she
ultimately became. Alike in the highest regions of speculation and in
the smaller practical concerns of daily life, her mind was the same
perfect instrument, piercing to the very heart and marrow of the matter;
always seizing the essential idea or principle. The same exactness and
rapidity of operation, pervading as it did her sensitive as well as her
mental faculties, would, with her gifts of feeling and imagination, have
fitted her to be a consummate artist, as her fiery and tender soul and
her vigorous eloquence would certainly have made her a great orator, and
her profound knowledge of human nature and discernment and sagacity in
practical life, would, in the times when such a _carrière_ was open to
women, have made her eminent among the rulers of mankind. Her
intellectual gifts did but minister to a moral character at once the
noblest and the best balanced which I have ever met with in life. Her
unselfishness was not that of a taught system of duties, but of a heart
which thoroughly identified itself with the feelings of others, and
often went to excess in consideration for them by imaginatively
investing their feelings with the intensity of its own. The passion of
justice might have been thought to be her strongest feeling, but for her
boundless generosity, and a lovingness ever ready to pour itself forth
upon any or all human beings who were capable of giving the smallest
feeling in return. The rest of her moral characteristics were such as
naturally accompany these qualities of mind and heart: the most genuine
modesty combined with the loftiest pride; a simplicity and sincerity
which were absolute, towards all who were fit to receive them; the
utmost scorn of whatever was mean and cowardly, and a burning
indignation at everything brutal or tyrannical, faithless or
dishonourable in conduct and character, while making the broadest
distinction between _mala in se_ and mere _mala prohibita_--between acts
giving evidence of intrinsic badness in feeling and character, and those
which are only violations of conventions either good or bad, violations
which, whether in themselves right or wrong, are capable of being
committed by persons in every other respect lovable or admirable.

To be admitted into any degree of mental intercourse with a being of
these qualities, could not but have a most beneficial influence on my
development; though the effect was only gradual, and many years elapsed
before her mental progress and mine went forward in the complete
companionship they at last attained. The benefit I received was far
greater than any which I could hope to give; though to her, who had at
first reached her opinions by the moral intuition of a character of
strong feeling, there was doubtless help as well as encouragement to be
derived from one who had arrived at many of the same results by study
and reasoning: and in the rapidity of her intellectual growth, her
mental activity, which converted everything into knowledge, doubtless
drew from me, as it did from other sources, many of its materials. What
I owe, even intellectually, to her, is in its detail, almost infinite;
of its general character a few words will give some, though a very
imperfect, idea.

With those who, like all the best and wisest of mankind, are
dissatisfied with human life as it is, and whose feelings are wholly
identified with its radical amendment, there are two main regions of
thought. One is the region of ultimate aims; the constituent elements of
the highest realizable ideal of human life. The other is that of the
immediately useful and practically attainable. In both these departments,
I have acquired more from her teaching, than from all other sources
taken together. And, to say truth, it is in these two extremes
principally, that real certainty lies. My own strength lay wholly in the
uncertain and slippery intermediate region, that of theory, or moral and
political science: respecting the conclusions of which, in any of the
forms in which I have received or originated them, whether as political
economy, analytic psychology, logic, philosophy of history, or anything
else, it is not the least of my intellectual obligations to her that I
have derived from her a wise scepticism, which, while it has not
hindered me from following out the honest exercise of my thinking
faculties to whatever conclusions might result from it, has put me on my
guard against holding or announcing these conclusions with a degree of
confidence which the nature of such speculations does not warrant, and
has kept my mind not only open to admit, but prompt to welcome and eager
to seek, even on the questions on which I have most meditated, any
prospect of clearer perceptions and better evidence. I have often
received praise, which in my own right I only partially deserve, for the
greater practicality which is supposed to be found in my writings,
compared with those of most thinkers who have been equally addicted to
large generalizations. The writings in which this quality has been
observed, were not the work of one mind, but of the fusion of two, one
of them as pre-eminently practical in its judgments and perceptions of
things present, as it was high and bold in its anticipations for a
remote futurity. At the present period, however, this influence was only
one among many which were helping to shape the character of my future
development: and even after it became, I may truly say, the presiding
principle of my mental progress, it did not alter the path, but only
made me move forward more boldly, and, at the same time, more
cautiously, in the same course. The only actual revolution which has
ever taken place in my modes of thinking, was already complete. My new
tendencies had to be confirmed in some respects, moderated in others:
but the only substantial changes of opinion that were yet to come,
related to politics, and consisted, on one hand, in a greater
approximation, so far as regards the ultimate prospects of humanity, to
a qualified Socialism, and on the other, a shifting of my political
ideal from pure democracy, as commonly understood by its partisans, to
the modified form of it, which is set forth in my _Considerations on
Representative Government_.

This last change, which took place very gradually, dates its
commencement from my reading, or rather study, of M. de Tocqueville's
_Democracy in America_, which fell into my hands immediately after its
first appearance. In that remarkable work, the excellences of democracy
were pointed out in a more conclusive, because a more specific manner
than I had ever known them to be, even by the most enthusiastic
democrats; while the specific dangers which beset democracy, considered
as the government of the numerical majority, were brought into equally
strong light, and subjected to a masterly analysis, not as reasons for
resisting what the author considered as an inevitable result of human
progress, but as indications of the weak points of popular government,
the defences by which it needs to be guarded, and the correctives which
must be added to it in order that while full play is given to its
beneficial tendencies, those which are of a different nature may be
neutralized or mitigated. I was now well prepared for speculations of
this character, and from this time onward my own thoughts moved more and
more in the same channel, though the consequent modifications in my
practical political creed were spread over many years, as would be shown
by comparing my first review of _Democracy in America_, written and
published in 1835, with the one in 1840 (reprinted in the _Dissertations_),
and this last, with the _Considerations on Representative Government_.

A collateral subject on which also I derived great benefit from the
study of Tocqueville, was the fundamental question of centralization.
The powerful philosophic analysis which he applied to American and to
French experience, led him to attach the utmost importance to the
performance of as much of the collective business of society, as can
safely be so performed, by the people themselves, without any
intervention of the executive government, either to supersede their
agency, or to dictate the manner of its exercise. He viewed this
practical political activity of the individual citizen, not only as one
of the most effectual means of training the social feelings and
practical intelligence of the people, so important in themselves and so
indispensable to good government, but also as the specific counteractive
to some of the characteristic infirmities of democracy, and a necessary
protection against its degenerating into the only despotism of which, in
the modern world, there is real danger--the absolute rule of the head
of the executive over a congregation of isolated individuals, all equals
but all slaves. There was, indeed, no immediate peril from this source
on the British side of the channel, where nine-tenths of the internal
business which elsewhere devolves on the government, was transacted by
agencies independent of it; where centralization was, and is, the
subject not only of rational disapprobation, but of unreasoning
prejudice; where jealousy of Government interference was a blind feeling
preventing or resisting even the most beneficial exertion of legislative
authority to correct the abuses of what pretends to be local
self-government, but is, too often, selfish mismanagement of local
interests, by a jobbing and _borné_ local oligarchy. But the more
certain the public were to go wrong on the side opposed to
centralization, the greater danger was there lest philosophic reformers
should fall into the contrary error, and overlook the mischiefs of which
they had been spared the painful experience. I was myself, at this very
time, actively engaged in defending important measures, such as the
great Poor Law Reform of 1834, against an irrational clamour grounded on
the anti-centralization prejudice: and had it not been for the lessons
of Tocqueville, I do not know that I might not, like many reformers
before me, have been hurried into the excess opposite to that, which,
being the one prevalent in my own country, it was generally my business
to combat. As it is, I have steered carefully between the two errors,
and whether I have or have not drawn the line between them exactly in
the right place, I have at least insisted with equal emphasis upon the
evils on both sides, and have made the means of reconciling the
advantages of both, a subject of serious study.

In the meanwhile had taken place the election of the first Reformed
Parliament, which included several of the most notable of my Radical
friends and acquaintances--Grote, Roebuck, Buller, Sir William
Molesworth, John and Edward Romilly, and several more; besides
Warburton, Strutt, and others, who were in parliament already. Those who
thought themselves, and were called by their friends, the philosophic
Radicals, had now, it seemed, a fair opportunity, in a more advantageous
position than they had ever before occupied, for showing what was in
them; and I, as well as my father, founded great hopes on them. These
hopes were destined to be disappointed. The men were honest, and
faithful to their opinions, as far as votes were concerned; often in
spite of much discouragement. When measures were proposed, flagrantly at
variance with their principles, such as the Irish Coercion Bill, or the
Canada Coercion in 1837, they came forward manfully, and braved any
amount of hostility and prejudice rather than desert the right. But on
the whole they did very little to promote any opinions; they had little
enterprise, little activity: they left the lead of the Radical portion
of the House to the old hands, to Hume and O'Connell. A partial
exception must be made in favour of one or two of the younger men; and
in the case of Roebuck, it is his title to permanent remembrance, that
in the very first year during which he sat in Parliament, he originated
(or re-originated after the unsuccessful attempt of Mr. Brougham) the
parliamentary movement for National Education; and that he was the first
to commence, and for years carried on almost alone, the contest for the
self-government of the Colonies. Nothing, on the whole equal to these
two things, was done by any other individual, even of those from whom
most was expected. And now, on a calm retrospect, I can perceive that
the men were less in fault than we supposed, and that we had expected
too much from them. They were in unfavourable circumstances. Their lot
was cast in the ten years of inevitable reaction, when, the Reform
excitement being over, and the few legislative improvements which the
public really called for having been rapidly effected, power gravitated
back in its natural direction, to those who were for keeping things as
they were; when the public mind desired rest, and was less disposed than
at any other period since the Peace, to let itself be moved by attempts
to work up the Reform feeling into fresh activity in favour of new
things. It would have required a great political leader, which no one is
to be blamed for not being, to have effected really great things by
parliamentary discussion when the nation was in this mood. My father and
I had hoped that some competent leader might arise; some man of
philosophic attainments and popular talents, who could have put heart
into the many younger or less distinguished men that would have been
ready to join him--could have made them available, to the extent of
their talents, in bringing advanced ideas before the public--could
have used the House of Commons as a rostra or a teacher's chair for
instructing and impelling the public mind; and would either have forced
the Whigs to receive their measures from him, or have taken the lead of
the Reform party out of their hands. Such a leader there would have
been, if my father had been in Parliament. For want of such a man, the
instructed Radicals sank into a mere _Côté Gauche_ of the Whig party.
With a keen, and as I now think, an exaggerated sense of the
possibilities which were open to the Radicals if they made even ordinary
exertion for their opinions, I laboured from this time till 1839, both
by personal influence with some of them, and by writings, to put ideas
into their heads, and purpose into their hearts. I did some good with
Charles Buller, and some with Sir William Molesworth; both of whom did
valuable service, but were unhappily cut off almost in the beginning of
their usefulness. On the whole, however, my attempt was vain. To have
had a chance of succeeding in it, required a different position from
mine. It was a task only for one who, being himself in Parliament, could
have mixed with the Radical members in daily consultation, could himself
have taken the initiative, and instead of urging others to lead, could
have summoned them to follow.

What I could do by writing, I did. During the year 1833 I continued
working in the _Examiner_ with Fonblanque who at that time was zealous
in keeping up the fight for Radicalism against the Whig ministry. During
the session of 1834 I wrote comments on passing events, of the nature of
newspaper articles (under the title "Notes on the Newspapers"), in the
_Monthly Repository_, a magazine conducted by Mr. Fox, well known as a
preacher and political orator, and subsequently as member of parliament
for Oldham; with whom I had lately become acquainted, and for whose sake
chiefly I wrote in his magazine. I contributed several other articles
to this periodical, the most considerable of which (on the theory of
Poetry), is reprinted in the "Dissertations." Altogether, the writings
(independently of those in newspapers) which I published from 1832 to
1834, amount to a large volume. This, however, includes abstracts of
several of Plato's Dialogues, with introductory remarks, which, though
not published until 1834, had been written several years earlier; and
which I afterwards, on various occasions, found to have been read, and
their authorship known, by more people than were aware of anything else
which I had written, up to that time. To complete the tale of my
writings at this period, I may add that in 1833, at the request of
Bulwer, who was just then completing his _England and the English_ (a
work, at that time, greatly in advance of the public mind), I wrote for
him a critical account of Bentham's philosophy, a small part of which
he incorporated in his text, and printed the rest (with an honourable
acknowledgment), as an appendix. In this, along with the favourable,
a part also of the unfavourable side of my estimation of Bentham's
doctrines, considered as a complete philosophy, was for the first time
put into print.

But an opportunity soon offered, by which, as it seemed, I might have it
in my power to give more effectual aid, and at the same time, stimulus,
to the "philosophic Radical" party, than I had done hitherto. One of the
projects occasionally talked of between my father and me, and some of
the parliamentary and other Radicals who frequented his house, was the
foundation of a periodical organ of philosophic radicalism, to take the
place which the _Westminster Review_ had been intended to fill: and the
scheme had gone so far as to bring under discussion the pecuniary
contributions which could be looked for, and the choice of an editor.
Nothing, however, came of it for some time: but in the summer of 1834
Sir William Molesworth, himself a laborious student, and a precise and
metaphysical thinker, capable of aiding the cause by his pen as well as
by his purse, spontaneously proposed to establish a Review, provided I
would consent to be the real, if I could not be the ostensible, editor.
Such a proposal was not to be refused; and the Review was founded, at
first under the title of the _London Review_, and afterwards under that
of the _London and Westminster_, Molesworth having bought the
_Westminster_ from its proprietor, General Thompson, and merged the two
into one. In the years between 1834 and 1840 the conduct of this Review
occupied the greater part of my spare time. In the beginning, it did
not, as a whole, by any means represent my opinions. I was under the
necessity of conceding much to my inevitable associates. The _Review_
was established to be the representative of the "philosophic Radicals,"
with most of whom I was now at issue on many essential points, and among
whom I could not even claim to be the most important individual. My
father's co-operation as a writer we all deemed indispensable, and he
wrote largely in it until prevented by his last illness. The subjects of
his articles, and the strength and decision with which his opinions were
expressed in them, made the _Review_ at first derive its tone and
colouring from him much more than from any of the other writers. I could
not exercise editorial control over his articles, and I was sometimes
obliged to sacrifice to him portions of my own. The old _Westminster
Review_ doctrines, but little modified, thus formed the staple of the
_Review_; but I hoped by the side of these, to introduce other ideas and
another tone, and to obtain for my own shade of opinion a fair
representation, along with those of other members of the party. With
this end chiefly in view, I made it one of the peculiarities of the work
that every article should bear an initial, or some other signature, and
be held to express the opinions solely of the individual writer; the
editor being only responsible for its being worth publishing and not in
conflict with the objects for which the _Review_ was set on foot. I had
an opportunity of putting in practice my scheme of conciliation between
the old and the new "philosophic radicalism," by the choice of a subject
for my own first contribution. Professor Sedgwick, a man of eminence in
a particular walk of natural science, but who should not have trespassed
into philosophy, had lately published his _Discourse on the Studies of
Cambridge_, which had as its most prominent feature an intemperate
assault on analytic psychology and utilitarian ethics, in the form of an
attack on Locke and Paley. This had excited great indignation in my
father and others, which I thought it fully deserved. And here, I
imagined, was an opportunity of at the same time repelling an unjust
attack, and inserting into my defence of Hartleianism and Utilitarianism
a number of the opinions which constituted my view of those subjects, as
distinguished from that of my old associates. In this I partially
succeeded, though my relation to my father would have made it painful to
me in any case, and impossible in a Review for which he wrote, to speak
out my whole mind on the subject at this time.

I am, however, inclined to think that my father was not so much opposed
as he seemed, to the modes of thought in which I believed myself to
differ from him; that he did injustice to his own opinions by the
unconscious exaggerations of an intellect emphatically polemical; and
that when thinking without an adversary in view, he was willing to make
room for a great portion of the truths he seemed to deny. I have
frequently observed that he made large allowance in practice for
considerations which seemed to have no place in his theory. His
_Fragment on Mackintosh_, which he wrote and published about this time,
although I greatly admired some parts of it, I read as a whole with more
pain than pleasure; yet on reading it again, long after, I found little
in the opinions it contains, but what I think in the main just; and I
can even sympathize in his disgust at the _verbiage_ of Mackintosh,
though his asperity towards it went not only beyond what was judicious,
but beyond what was even fair. One thing, which I thought, at the time,
of good augury, was the very favourable reception he gave to
Tocqueville's _Democracy in America_. It is true, he said and thought
much more about what Tocqueville said in favour of democracy, than about
what he said of its disadvantages. Still, his high appreciation of a
book which was at any rate an example of a mode of treating the question
of government almost the reverse of his--wholly inductive and analytical,
instead of purely ratiocinative--gave me great encouragement. He also
approved of an article which I published in the first number following
the junction of the two reviews, the essay reprinted in the _Dissertations_,
under the title "Civilization"; into which I threw many of my new opinions,
and criticised rather emphatically the mental and moral tendencies of the
time, on grounds and in a manner which I certainly had not learnt from him.

All speculation, however, on the possible future developments of my
father's opinions, and on the probabilities of permanent co-operation
between him and me in the promulgation of our thoughts, was doomed to be
cut short. During the whole of 1835 his health had been declining: his
symptoms became unequivocally those of pulmonary consumption, and after
lingering to the last stage of debility, he died on the 23rd of June,
1836. Until the last few days of his life there was no apparent
abatement of intellectual vigour; his interest in all things and persons
that had interested him through life was undiminished, nor did the
approach of death cause the smallest wavering (as in so strong and firm
a mind it was impossible that it should) in his convictions on the
subject of religion. His principal satisfaction, after he knew that his
end was near, seemed to be the thought of what he had done to make the
world better than he found it; and his chief regret in not living
longer, that he had not had time to do more.

His place is an eminent one in the literary, and even in the political
history of his country; and it is far from honourable to the generation
which has benefited by his worth, that he is so seldom mentioned, and,
compared with men far his inferiors, so little remembered. This is
probably to be ascribed mainly to two causes. In the first place, the
thought of him merges too much in the deservedly superior fame of
Bentham. Yet he was anything but Bentham's mere follower or disciple.
Precisely because he was himself one of the most original thinkers of
his time, he was one of the earliest to appreciate and adopt the most
important mass of original thought which had been produced by the
generation preceding him. His mind and Bentham's were essentially of
different construction. He had not all Bentham's high qualities, but
neither had Bentham all his. It would, indeed, be ridiculous to claim
for him the praise of having accomplished for mankind such splendid
services as Bentham's. He did not revolutionize, or rather create, one
of the great departments of human thought. But, leaving out of the
reckoning all that portion of his labours in which he benefited by what
Bentham had done, and counting only what he achieved in a province in
which Bentham had done nothing, that of analytic psychology, he will be
known to posterity as one of the greatest names in that most important
branch of speculation, on which all the moral and political sciences
ultimately rest, and will mark one of the essential stages in its
progress. The other reason which has made his fame less than he
deserved, is that notwithstanding the great number of his opinions
which, partly through his own efforts, have now been generally adopted,
there was, on the whole, a marked opposition between his spirit and that
of the present time. As Brutus was called the last of the Romans, so was
he the last of the eighteenth century: he continued its tone of thought
and sentiment into the nineteenth (though not unmodified nor
unimproved), partaking neither in the good nor in the bad influences of
the reaction against the eighteenth century, which was the great
characteristic of the first half of the nineteenth. The eighteenth
century was a great age, an age of strong and brave men, and he was a
fit companion for its strongest and bravest. By his writings and his
personal influence he was a great centre of light to his generation.
During his later years he was quite as much the head and leader of the
intellectual radicals in England, as Voltaire was of the _philosophes_
of France. It is only one of his minor merits, that he was the
originator of all sound statesmanship in regard to the subject of his
largest work, India. He wrote on no subject which he did not enrich with
valuable thought, and excepting the _Elements of Political Economy_, a
very useful book when first written, but which has now for some time
finished its work, it will be long before any of his books will be
wholly superseded, or will cease to be instructive reading to students
of their subjects. In the power of influencing by mere force of mind and
character, the convictions and purposes of others, and in the strenuous
exertion of that power to promote freedom and progress, he left, as far
as my knowledge extends, no equal among men and but one among women.

Though acutely sensible of my own inferiority in the qualities by which
he acquired his personal ascendancy, I had now to try what it might be
possible for me to accomplish without him: and the _Review_ was the
instrument on which I built my chief hopes of establishing a useful
influence over the liberal and democratic section of the public mind.
Deprived of my father's aid, I was also exempted from the restraints and
reticences by which that aid had been purchased. I did not feel that
there was any other radical writer or politician to whom I was bound to
defer, further than consisted with my own opinions: and having the
complete confidence of Molesworth, I resolved henceforth to give full
scope to my own opinions and modes of thought, and to open the _Review_
widely to all writers who were in sympathy with Progress as I understood
it, even though I should lose by it the support of my former associates.
Carlyle, consequently became from this time a frequent writer in the
_Review_; Sterling, soon after, an occasional one; and though each
individual article continued to be the expression of the private
sentiments of its writer, the general tone conformed in some tolerable
degree to my opinions. For the conduct of the _Review_, under, and in
conjunction with me, I associated with myself a young Scotchman of the
name of Robertson, who had some ability and information, much industry,
and an active scheming head, full of devices for making the _Review_
more saleable, and on whose capacities in that direction I founded a
good deal of hope: insomuch, that when Molesworth, in the beginning of
1837, became tired of carrying on the _Review_ at a loss, and desirous
of getting rid of it (he had done his part honourably, and at no small
pecuniary cost,) I, very imprudently for my own pecuniary interest, and
very much from reliance on Robertson's devices, determined to continue
it at my own risk, until his plans should have had a fair trial. The
devices were good, and I never had any reason to change my opinion of
them. But I do not believe that any devices would have made a radical
and democratic review defray its expenses, including a paid editor or
sub-editor, and a liberal payment to writers. I myself and several
frequent contributors gave our labour gratuitously, as we had done for
Molesworth; but the paid contributors continued to be remunerated on the
usual scale of the _Edinburgh_ and _Quarterly Reviews_; and this could
not be done from the proceeds of the sale.

In the same year, 1837, and in the midst of these occupations, I resumed
the _Logic_. I had not touched my pen on the subject for five years,
having been stopped and brought to a halt on the threshold of Induction.
I had gradually discovered that what was mainly wanting, to overcome the
difficulties of that branch of the subject, was a comprehensive, and, at
the same time, accurate view of the whole circle of physical science,
which I feared it would take me a long course of study to acquire; since
I knew not of any book, or other guide, that would spread out before me
the generalities and processes of the sciences, and I apprehended that I
should have no choice but to extract them for myself, as I best could,
from the details. Happily for me, Dr. Whewell, early in this year,
published his _History of the Inductive Sciences_. I read it with
eagerness, and found in it a considerable approximation to what I
wanted. Much, if not most, of the philosophy of the work appeared open
to objection; but the materials were there, for my own thoughts to work
upon: and the author had given to those materials that first degree of
elaboration, which so greatly facilitates and abridges the subsequent
labour. I had now obtained what I had been waiting for. Under the
impulse given me by the thoughts excited by Dr. Whewell, I read again
Sir J. Herschel's _Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy_: and I
was able to measure the progress my mind had made, by the great help I
now found in this work--though I had read and even reviewed it several
years before with little profit. I now set myself vigorously to work out
the subject in thought and in writing. The time I bestowed on this had
to be stolen from occupations more urgent. I had just two months to
spare, at this period, in the intervals of writing for the _Review_. In
these two months I completed the first draft of about a third, the most
difficult third, of the book. What I had before written, I estimate at
another third, so that one-third remained. What I wrote at this time
consisted of the remainder of the doctrine of Reasoning (the theory of
Trains of Reasoning, and Demonstrative Science), and the greater part of
the Book on Induction. When this was done, I had, as it seemed to me,
untied all the really hard knots, and the completion of the book had
become only a question of time. Having got thus far, I had to leave off
in order to write two articles for the next number of the _Review_. When
these were written, I returned to the subject, and now for the first
time fell in with Comte's _Cours de Philosophie Positive_, or rather
with the two volumes of it which were all that had at that time been
published. My theory of Induction was substantially completed before I
knew of Comte's book; and it is perhaps well that I came to it by a
different road from his, since the consequence has been that my treatise
contains, what his certainly does not, a reduction of the inductive
process to strict rules and to a scientific test, such as the syllogism
is for ratiocination. Comte is always precise and profound on the method
of investigation, but he does not even attempt any exact definition of
the conditions of proof: and his writings show that he never attained a
just conception of them. This, however, was specifically the problem,
which, in treating of Induction, I had proposed to myself. Nevertheless,
I gained much from Comte, with which to enrich my chapters in the
subsequent rewriting: and his book was of essential service to me in
some of the parts which still remained to be thought out. As his
subsequent volumes successively made their appearance, I read them with
avidity, but, when he reached the subject of Social Science, with
varying feelings. The fourth volume disappointed me: it contained those
of his opinions on social subjects with which I most disagree. But the
fifth, containing the connected view of history, rekindled all my
enthusiasm; which the sixth (or concluding) volume did not materially
abate. In a merely logical point of view, the only leading conception
for which I am indebted to him is that of the Inverse Deductive Method,
as the one chiefly applicable to the complicated subjects of History and
Statistics: a process differing from the more common form of the
deductive method in this--that instead of arriving at its conclusions
by general reasoning, and verifying them by specific experience (as is
the natural order in the deductive branches of physical science), it
obtains its generalizations by a collation of specific experience, and
verifies them by ascertaining whether they are such as would follow from
known general principles. This was an idea entirely new to me when I
found it in Comte: and but for him I might not soon (if ever) have
arrived at it.

I had been long an ardent admirer of Comte's writings before I had any
communication with himself; nor did I ever, to the last, see him in the
body. But for some years we were frequent correspondents, until our
correspondence became controversial, and our zeal cooled. I was the
first to slacken correspondence; he was the first to drop it. I found,
and he probably found likewise, that I could do no good to his mind, and
that all the good he could do to mine, he did by his books. This would
never have led to discontinuance of intercourse, if the differences
between us had been on matters of simple doctrine. But they were chiefly
on those points of opinion which blended in both of us with our
strongest feelings, and determined the entire direction of our
aspirations. I had fully agreed with him when he maintained that the
mass of mankind, including even their rulers in all the practical
departments of life, must, from the necessity of the case, accept most
of their opinions on political and social matters, as they do on
physical, from the authority of those who have bestowed more study on
those subjects than they generally have it in their power to do. This
lesson had been strongly impressed on me by the early work of Comte, to
which I have adverted. And there was nothing in his great Treatise which
I admired more than his remarkable exposition of the benefits which the
nations of modern Europe have historically derived from the separation,
during the Middle Ages, of temporal and spiritual power, and the
distinct organization of the latter. I agreed with him that the moral
and intellectual ascendancy, once exercised by priests, must in time
pass into the hands of philosophers, and will naturally do so when they
become sufficiently unanimous, and in other respects worthy to possess
it. But when he exaggerated this line of thought into a practical
system, in which philosophers were to be organized into a kind of
corporate hierarchy, invested with almost the same spiritual supremacy
(though without any secular power) once possessed by the Catholic
Church; when I found him relying on this spiritual authority as the only
security for good government, the sole bulwark against practical
oppression, and expecting that by it a system of despotism in the state
and despotism in the family would be rendered innocuous and beneficial;
it is not surprising, that while as logicians we were nearly at one, as
sociologists we could travel together no further. M. Comte lived to
carry out these doctrines to their extremest consequences, by planning,
in his last work, the _Système de Politique Positive_, the completest
system of spiritual and temporal despotism which ever yet emanated from
a human brain, unless possibly that of Ignatius Loyola: a system by
which the yoke of general opinion, wielded by an organized body of
spiritual teachers and rulers, would be made supreme over every action,
and as far as is in human possibility, every thought, of every member of
the community, as well in the things which regard only himself, as in
those which concern the interests of others. It is but just to say that
this work is a considerable improvement, in many points of feeling, over
Comte's previous writings on the same subjects: but as an accession to
social philosophy, the only value it seems to me to possess, consists in
putting an end to the notion that no effectual moral authority can be
maintained over society without the aid of religious belief; for Comte's
work recognises no religion except that of Humanity, yet it leaves an
irresistible conviction that any moral beliefs concurred in by the
community generally may be brought to bear upon the whole conduct and
lives of its individual members, with an energy and potency truly
alarming to think of. The book stands a monumental warning to thinkers
on society and politics, of what happens when once men lose sight, in
their speculations, of the value of Liberty and of Individuality.

To return to myself. The _Review_ engrossed, for some time longer,
nearly all the time I could devote to authorship, or to thinking with
authorship in view. The articles from the _London and Westminster
Review_ which are reprinted in the _Dissertations_, are scarcely a
fourth part of those I wrote. In the conduct of the _Review_ I had two
principal objects. One was to free philosophic radicalism from the
reproach of sectarian Benthamism. I desired, while retaining the
precision of expression, the definiteness of meaning, the contempt of
declamatory phrases and vague generalities, which were so honourably
characteristic both of Bentham and of my father, to give a wider basis
and a more free and genial character to Radical speculations; to show
that there was a Radical philosophy, better and more complete than
Bentham's, while recognizing and incorporating all of Bentham's which is
permanently valuable. In this first object I, to a certain extent,
succeeded. The other thing I attempted, was to stir up the educated
Radicals, in and out of Parliament, to exertion, and induce them to make
themselves, what I thought by using the proper means they might become
--a powerful party capable of taking the government of the country, or
at least of dictating the terms on which they should share it with the
Whigs. This attempt was from the first chimerical: partly because the
time was unpropitious, the Reform fervour being in its period of ebb,
and the Tory influences powerfully rallying; but still more, because, as
Austin so truly said, "the country did not contain the men." Among the
Radicals in Parliament there were several qualified to be useful members
of an enlightened Radical party, but none capable of forming and leading
such a party. The exhortations I addressed to them found no response.
One occasion did present itself when there seemed to be room for a bold
and successful stroke for Radicalism. Lord Durham had left the ministry,
by reason, as was thought, of their not being sufficiently Liberal; he
afterwards accepted from them the task of ascertaining and removing the
causes of the Canadian rebellion; he had shown a disposition to surround
himself at the outset with Radical advisers; one of his earliest
measures, a good measure both in intention and in effect, having been
disapproved and reversed by the Government at home, he had resigned his
post, and placed himself openly in a position of quarrel with the
Ministers. Here was a possible chief for a Radical party in the person
of a man of importance, who was hated by the Tories and had just been
injured by the Whigs. Any one who had the most elementary notions of
party tactics, must have attempted to make something of such an
opportunity. Lord Durham was bitterly attacked from all sides, inveighed
against by enemies, given up by timid friends; while those who would
willingly have defended him did not know what to say. He appeared to be
returning a defeated and discredited man. I had followed the Canadian
events from the beginning; I had been one of the prompters of his
prompters; his policy was almost exactly what mine would have been, and
I was in a position to defend it. I wrote and published a manifesto in
the _Review_, in which I took the very highest ground in his behalf,
claiming for him not mere acquittal, but praise and honour. Instantly a
number of other writers took up the tone: I believe there was a portion
of truth in what Lord Durham, soon after, with polite exaggeration, said
to me--that to this article might be ascribed the almost triumphal
reception which he met with on his arrival in England. I believe it to
have been the word in season, which, at a critical moment, does much to
decide the result; the touch which determines whether a stone, set in
motion at the top of an eminence, shall roll down on one side or on the
other. All hopes connected with Lord Durham as a politician soon
vanished; but with regard to Canadian, and generally to colonial policy,
the cause was gained: Lord Durham's report, written by Charles Buller,
partly under the inspiration of Wakefield, began a new era; its
recommendations, extending to complete internal self-government, were in
full operation in Canada within two or three years, and have been since
extended to nearly all the other colonies, of European race, which have
any claim to the character of important communities. And I may say that
in successfully upholding the reputation of Lord Durham and his advisers
at the most important moment, I contributed materially to this result.

One other case occurred during my conduct of the _Review_, which
similarly illustrated the effect of taking a prompt initiative. I
believe that the early success and reputation of Carlyle's _French
Revolution_, were considerably accelerated by what I wrote about it in
the _Review_. Immediately on its publication, and before the commonplace
critics, all whose rules and modes of judgment it set at defiance, had
time to pre-occupy the public with their disapproval of it, I wrote and
published a review of the book, hailing it as one of those productions
of genius which are above all rules, and are a law to themselves.
Neither in this case nor in that of Lord Durham do I ascribe the
impression, which I think was produced by what I wrote, to any
particular merit of execution: indeed, in at least one of the cases (the
article on Carlyle) I do not think the execution was good. And in both
instances, I am persuaded that anybody, in a position to be read, who
had expressed the same opinion at the same precise time, and had made
any tolerable statement of the just grounds for it, would have produced
the same effect. But, after the complete failure of my hopes of putting
a new life into Radical politics by means of the _Review_, I am glad to
look back on these two instances of success in an honest attempt to do
mediate service to things and persons that deserved it. After the last
hope of the formation of a Radical party had disappeared, it was time
for me to stop the heavy expenditure of time and money which the
_Review_ cost me. It had to some extent answered my personal purpose as
a vehicle for my opinions. It had enabled me to express in print much of
my altered mode of thought, and to separate myself in a marked manner
from the narrower Benthamism of my early writings. This was done by the
general tone of all I wrote, including various purely literary articles,
but especially by the two papers (reprinted in the _Dissertations_)
which attempted a philosophical estimate of Bentham and of Coleridge. In
the first of these, while doing full justice to the merits of Bentham, I
pointed out what I thought the errors and deficiencies of his
philosophy. The substance of this criticism _I_ still think perfectly
just; but I have sometimes doubted whether it was right to publish it at
that time. I have often felt that Bentham's philosophy, as an instrument
of progress, has been to some extent discredited before it had done its
work, and that to lend a hand towards lowering its reputation was doing
more harm than service to improvement. Now, however, when a
counter-reaction appears to be setting in towards what is good in
Benthamism, I can look with more satisfaction on this criticism of its
defects, especially as I have myself balanced it by vindications of the
fundamental principles of Bentham's philosophy, which are reprinted
along with it in the same collection. In the essay on Coleridge I
attempted to characterize the European reaction against the negative
philosophy of the eighteenth century: and here, if the effect only of
this one paper were to be considered, I might be thought to have erred
by giving undue prominence to the favourable side, as I had done in the
case of Bentham to the unfavourable. In both cases, the impetus with
which I had detached myself from what was untenable in the doctrines of
Bentham and of the eighteenth century, may have carried me, though in
appearance rather than in reality, too far on the contrary side. But as
far as relates to the article on Coleridge, my defence is, that I was
writing for Radicals and Liberals, and it was my business to dwell most
on that, in writers of a different school, from the knowledge of which
they might derive most improvement.

The number of the _Review_ which contained the paper on Coleridge, was
the last which was published during my proprietorship. In the spring of
1840 I made over the _Review_ to Mr. Hickson, who had been a frequent
and very useful unpaid contributor under my management: only stipulating
that the change should be marked by a resumption of the old name, that
of _Westminster Review_. Under that name Mr. Hickson conducted it for
ten years, on the plan of dividing among contributors only the net
proceeds of the _Review_ giving his own labour as writer and editor
gratuitously. Under the difficulty in obtaining writers, which arose
from this low scale of payment, it is highly creditable to him that he
was able to maintain, in some tolerable degree, the character of the
_Review_ as an organ of radicalism and progress. I did not cease
altogether to write for the _Review_, but continued to send it
occasional contributions, not, however, exclusively; for the greater
circulation of the _Edinburgh Review_ induced me from this time to offer
articles to it also when I had anything to say for which it appeared to
be a suitable vehicle. And the concluding volumes of _Democracy in
America_, having just then come out, I inaugurated myself as a
contributor to the _Edinburgh_, by the article on that work, which heads
the second volume of the _Dissertations_.




CHAPTER VII.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE REMAINDER OF MY LIFE.


From this time, what is worth relating of my life will come into a very
small compass; for I have no further mental changes to tell of, but
only, as I hope, a continued mental progress; which does not admit of a
consecutive history, and the results of which, if real, will be best
found in my writings. I shall, therefore, greatly abridge the chronicle
of my subsequent years.

The first use I made of the leisure which I gained by disconnecting
myself from the _Review_, was to finish the _Logic_. In July and August,
1838, I had found an interval in which to execute what was still undone
of the original draft of the Third Book. In working out the logical
theory of those laws of nature which are not laws of Causation, nor
corollaries from such laws, I was led to recognize kinds as realities in
nature, and not mere distinctions for convenience; a light which I had
not obtained when the First Book was written, and which made it
necessary for me to modify and enlarge several chapters of that Book.
The Book on Language and Classification, and the chapter on the
Classification of Fallacies, were drafted in the autumn of the same
year; the remainder of the work, in the summer and autumn of 1840. From
April following to the end of 1841, my spare time was devoted to a
complete rewriting of the book from its commencement. It is in this way
that all my books have been composed. They were always written at least
twice over; a first draft of the entire work was completed to the very
end of the subject, then the whole begun again _de novo_; but
incorporating, in the second writing, all sentences and parts of
sentences of the old draft, which appeared as suitable to my purpose as
anything which I could write in lieu of them. I have found great
advantages in this system of double redaction. It combines, better than
any other mode of composition, the freshness and vigour of the first
conception, with the superior precision and completeness resulting from
prolonged thought. In my own case, moreover, I have found that the
patience necessary for a careful elaboration of the details of
composition and expression, costs much less effort after the entire
subject has been once gone through, and the substance of all that I find
to say has in some manner, however imperfect, been got upon paper. The
only thing which I am careful, in the first draft, to make as perfect as
I am able, is the arrangement. If that is bad, the whole thread on which
the ideas string themselves becomes twisted; thoughts placed in a wrong
connection are not expounded in a manner that suits the right, and a
first draft with this original vice is next to useless as a foundation
for the final treatment.

During the re-writing of the _Logic_, Dr. Whewell's _Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences_ made its appearance; a circumstance fortunate for
me, as it gave me what I greatly desired, a full treatment of the
subject by an antagonist, and enabled me to present my ideas with
greater clearness and emphasis as well as fuller and more varied
development, in defending them against definite objections, or
confronting them distinctly with an opposite theory. The controversies
with Dr. Whewell, as well as much matter derived from Comte, were first
introduced into the book in the course of the re-writing.

At the end of 1841, the book being ready for the press, I offered it to
Murray, who kept it until too late for publication that season, and then
refused it, for reasons which could just as well have been given at
first. But I have had no cause to regret a rejection which led to my
offering it to Mr. Parker, by whom it was published in the spring of
1843. My original expectations of success were extremely limited.
Archbishop Whately had, indeed, rehabilitated the name of Logic, and the
study of the forms, rules, and fallacies of Ratiocination; and Dr.
Whewell's writings had begun to excite an interest in the other part of
my subject, the theory of Induction. A treatise, however, on a matter so
abstract, could not be expected to be popular; it could only be a book
for students, and students on such subjects were not only (at least in
England) few, but addicted chiefly to the opposite school of
metaphysics, the ontological and "innate principles" school. I therefore
did not expect that the book would have many readers, or approvers; and
looked for little practical effect from it, save that of keeping the
tradition unbroken of what I thought a better philosophy. What hopes I
had of exciting any immediate attention, were mainly grounded on the
polemical propensities of Dr Whewell; who, I thought, from observation
of his conduct in other cases, would probably do something to bring the
book into notice, by replying, and that promptly, to the attack on his
opinions. He did reply but not till 1850, just in time for me to answer
him in the third edition. How the book came to have, for a work of the
kind, so much success, and what sort of persons compose the bulk of
those who have bought, I will not venture to say read, it, I have never
thoroughly understood. But taken in conjunction with the many proofs
which have since been given of a revival of speculation, speculation too
of a free kind, in many quarters, and above all (where at one time I
should have least expected it) in the Universities, the fact becomes
partially intelligible. I have never indulged the illusion that the book
had made any considerable impression on philosophical opinion. The
German, or _a priori_ view of human knowledge, and of the knowing
faculties, is likely for some time longer (though it may be hoped in a
diminishing degree) to predominate among those who occupy themselves
with such inquiries, both here and on the Continent. But the "System of
Logic" supplies what was much wanted, a text-book of the opposite
doctrine--that which derives all knowledge from experience, and all
moral and intellectual qualities principally from the direction given to
the associations. I make as humble an estimate as anybody of what either
an analysis of logical processes, or any possible canons of evidence,
can do by themselves towards guiding or rectifying the operations of the
understanding. Combined with other requisites, I certainly do think them
of great use; but whatever may be the practical value of a true
philosophy of these matters, it is hardly possible to exaggerate the
mischiefs of a false one. The notion that truths external to the mind
may be known by intuition or consciousness, independently of observation
and experience, is, I am persuaded, in these times, the great
intellectual support of false doctrines and bad institutions. By the aid
of this theory, every inveterate belief and every intense feeling, of
which the origin is not remembered, is enabled to dispense with the
obligation of justifying itself by reason, and is erected into its own
all-sufficient voucher and justification. There never was such an
instrument devised for consecrating all deep-seated prejudices. And the
chief strength of this false philosophy in morals, politics, and
religion, lies in the appeal which it is accustomed to make to the
evidence of mathematics and of the cognate branches of physical science.
To expel it from these, is to drive it from its stronghold: and because
this had never been effectually done, the intuitive school, even after
what my father had written in his _Analysis of the Mind_, had in
appearance, and as far as published writings were concerned, on the
whole the best of the argument. In attempting to clear up the real
nature of the evidence of mathematical and physical truths, the _System
of Logic_ met the intuitive philosophers on ground on which they had
previously been deemed unassailable; and gave its own explanation, from
experience and association, of that peculiar character of what are
called necessary truths, which is adduced as proof that their evidence
must come from a deeper source than experience. Whether this has been
done effectually, is still _sub judice_; and even then, to deprive a
mode of thought so strongly rooted in human prejudices and partialities,
of its mere speculative support, goes but a very little way towards
overcoming it; but though only a step, it is a quite indispensable one;
for since, after all, prejudice can only be successfully combated by
philosophy, no way can really be made against it permanently until it
has been shown not to have philosophy on its side.

Being now released from any active concern in temporary politics, and
from any literary occupation involving personal communication with
contributors and others, I was enabled to indulge the inclination,
natural to thinking persons when the age of boyish vanity is once past,
for limiting my own society to a very few persons. General society, as
now carried on in England, is so insipid an affair, even to the persons
who make it what it is, that it is kept up for any reason rather than
the pleasure it affords. All serious discussion on matters on which
opinions differ, being considered ill-bred, and the national deficiency
in liveliness and sociability having prevented the cultivation of the
art of talking agreeably on trifles, in which the French of the last
century so much excelled, the sole attraction of what is called society
to those who are not at the top of the tree, is the hope of being aided
to climb a little higher in it; while to those who are already at the
top, it is chiefly a compliance with custom, and with the supposed
requirements of their station. To a person of any but a very common
order in thought or feeling, such society, unless he has personal
objects to serve by it, must be supremely unattractive: and most people,
in the present day, of any really high class of intellect, make their
contact with it so slight, and at such long intervals, as to be almost
considered as retiring from it altogether. Those persons of any mental
superiority who do otherwise, are, almost without exception, greatly
deteriorated by it. Not to mention loss of time, the tone of their
feelings is lowered: they become less in earnest about those of their
opinions respecting which they must remain silent in the society they
frequent: they come to look upon their most elevated objects as
unpractical, or, at least, too remote from realization to be more than a
vision, or a theory, and if, more fortunate than most, they retain their
higher principles unimpaired, yet with respect to the persons and
affairs of their own day they insensibly adopt the modes of feeling and
judgment in which they can hope for sympathy from the company they keep.
A person of high intellect should never go into unintellectual society
unless he can enter it as an apostle; yet he is the only person with
high objects who can safely enter it at all. Persons even of
intellectual aspirations had much better, if they can, make their
habitual associates of at least their equals, and, as far as possible,
their superiors, in knowledge, intellect, and elevation of sentiment.
Moreover, if the character is formed, and the mind made up, on the few
cardinal points of human opinion, agreement of conviction and feeling on
these, has been felt in all times to be an essential requisite of
anything worthy the name of friendship, in a really earnest mind. All
these circumstances united, made the number very small of those whose
society, and still more whose intimacy, I now voluntarily sought.

Among these, by far the principal was the incomparable friend of whom I
have already spoken. At this period she lived mostly with one young
daughter, in a quiet part of the country, and only occasionally in town,
with her first husband, Mr. Taylor. I visited her equally in both
places; and was greatly indebted to the strength of character which
enabled her to disregard the false interpretations liable to be put on
the frequency of my visits to her while living generally apart from Mr.
Taylor, and on our occasionally travelling together, though in all other
respects our conduct during those years gave not the slightest ground
for any other supposition than the true one, that our relation to each
other at that time was one of strong affection and confidential intimacy
only. For though we did not consider the ordinances of society binding
on a subject so entirely personal, we did feel bound that our conduct
should be such as in no degree to bring discredit on her husband, nor
therefore on herself.

In this third period (as it may be termed) of my mental progress, which
now went hand in hand with hers, my opinions gained equally in breadth
and depth, I understood more things, and those which I had understood
before I now understood more thoroughly. I had now completely turned
back from what there had been of excess in my reaction against
Benthamism. I had, at the height of that reaction, certainly become much
more indulgent to the common opinions of society and the world, and more
willing to be content with seconding the superficial improvement which
had begun to take place in those common opinions, than became one whose
convictions on so many points, differed fundamentally from them. I was
much more inclined, than I can now approve, to put in abeyance the more
decidedly heretical part of my opinions, which I now look upon as almost
the only ones, the assertion of which tends in any way to regenerate
society. But in addition to this, our opinions were far _more_ heretical
than mine had been in the days of my most extreme Benthamism. In those
days I had seen little further than the old school of political
economists into the possibilities of fundamental improvement in social
arrangements. Private property, as now understood, and inheritance,
appeared to me, as to them, the _dernier mot_ of legislation: and I
looked no further than to mitigating the inequalities consequent on
these institutions, by getting rid of primogeniture and entails. The
notion that it was possible to go further than this in removing the
injustice--for injustice it is, whether admitting of a complete remedy
or not--involved in the fact that some are born to riches and the vast
majority to poverty, I then reckoned chimerical, and only hoped that by
universal education, leading to voluntary restraint on population, the
portion of the poor might be made more tolerable. In short, I was a
democrat, but not the least of a Socialist. We were now much less
democrats than I had been, because so long as education continues to be
so wretchedly imperfect, we dreaded the ignorance and especially the
selfishness and brutality of the mass: but our ideal of ultimate
improvement went far beyond Democracy, and would class us decidedly
under the general designation of Socialists. While we repudiated with
the greatest energy that tyranny of society over the individual which
most Socialistic systems are supposed to involve, we yet looked forward
to a time when society will no longer be divided into the idle and the
industrious; when the rule that they who do not work shall not eat, will
be applied not to paupers only, but impartially to all; when the
division of the produce of labour, instead of depending, as in so great
a degree it now does, on the accident of birth, will be made by concert
on an acknowledged principle of justice; and when it will no longer
either be, or be thought to be, impossible for human beings to exert
themselves strenuously in procuring benefits which are not to be
exclusively their own, but to be shared with the society they belong to.
The social problem of the future we considered to be, how to unite the
greatest individual liberty of action, with a common ownership in the
raw material of the globe, and an equal participation of all in the
benefits of combined labour. We had not the presumption to suppose that
we could already foresee, by what precise form of institutions these
objects could most effectually be attained, or at how near or how
distant a period they would become practicable. We saw clearly that to
render any such social transformation either possible or desirable, an
equivalent change of character must take place both in the uncultivated
herd who now compose the labouring masses, and in the immense majority
of their employers. Both these classes must learn by practice to labour
and combine for generous, or at all events for public and social
purposes, and not, as hitherto, solely for narrowly interested ones. But
the capacity to do this has always existed in mankind, and is not, nor
is ever likely to be, extinct. Education, habit, and the cultivation of
the sentiments, will make a common man dig or weave for his country, as
readily as fight for his country. True enough, it is only by slow
degrees, and a system of culture prolonged through successive
generations, that men in general can be brought up to this point. But
the hindrance is not in the essential constitution of human nature.
Interest in the common good is at present so weak a motive in the
generality not because it can never be otherwise, but because the mind
is not accustomed to dwell on it as it dwells from morning till night on
things which tend only to personal advantage. When called into activity,
as only self-interest now is, by the daily course of life, and spurred
from behind by the love of distinction and the fear of shame, it is
capable of producing, even in common men, the most strenuous exertions
as well as the most heroic sacrifices. The deep-rooted selfishness which
forms the general character of the existing state of society, is _so_
deeply rooted, only because the whole course of existing institutions
tends to foster it; and modern institutions in some respects more than
ancient, since the occasions on which the individual is called on to do
anything for the public without receiving its pay, are far less frequent
in modern life, than the smaller commonwealths of antiquity. These
considerations did not make us overlook the folly of premature attempts
to dispense with the inducements of private interest in social affairs,
while no substitute for them has been or can be provided: but we
regarded all existing institutions and social arrangements as being (in
a phrase I once heard from Austin) "merely provisional," and we welcomed
with the greatest pleasure and interest all socialistic experiments by
select individuals (such as the Co-operative Societies), which, whether
they succeeded or failed, could not but operate as a most useful
education of those who took part in them, by cultivating their capacity
of acting upon motives pointing directly to the general good, or making
them aware of the defects which render them and others incapable of
doing so.

In the _Principles of Political Economy_, these opinions were
promulgated, less clearly and fully in the first edition, rather more so
in the second, and quite unequivocally in the third. The difference
arose partly from the change of times, the first edition having been
written and sent to press before the French Revolution of 1848, after
which the public mind became more open to the reception of novelties in
opinion, and doctrines appeared moderate which would have been thought
very startling a short time before. In the first edition the
difficulties of Socialism were stated so strongly, that the tone was on
the whole that of opposition to it. In the year or two which followed,
much time was given to the study of the best Socialistic writers on the
Continent, and to meditation and discussion on the whole range of topics
involved in the controversy: and the result was that most of what had
been written on the subject in the first edition was cancelled, and
replaced by arguments and reflections which represent a more advanced
opinion.

The _Political Economy_ was far more rapidly executed than the _Logic_,
or indeed than anything of importance which I had previously written. It
was commenced in the autumn of 1845, and was ready for the press before
the end of 1847. In this period of little more than two years there was
an interval of six months during which the work was laid aside, while I
was writing articles in the _Morning Chronicle_ (which unexpectedly
entered warmly into my purpose) urging the formation of peasant
properties on the waste lands of Ireland. This was during the period of
the Famine, the winter of 1846-47, when the stern necessities of the
time seemed to afford a chance of gaining attention for what appeared to
me the only mode of combining relief to immediate destitution with
permanent improvement of the social and economical condition of the
Irish people. But the idea was new and strange; there was no English
precedent for such a proceeding: and the profound ignorance of English
politicians and the English public concerning all social phenomena not
generally met with in England (however common elsewhere), made my
endeavours an entire failure. Instead of a great operation on the waste
lands, and the conversion of cottiers into proprietors, Parliament
passed a Poor Law for maintaining them as paupers: and if the nation has
not since found itself in inextricable difficulties from the joint
operation of the old evils and the quack remedy it is indebted for its
deliverance to that most unexpected and surprising fact, the
depopulation of ireland, commenced by famine, and continued by
emigration.

The rapid success of the _Political Economy_ showed that the public
wanted, and were prepared for such a book. Published early in 1848, an
edition of a thousand copies was sold in less than a year. Another
similar edition was published in the spring of 1849; and a third, of
1250 copies, early in 1852. It was, from the first, continually cited
and referred to as an authority, because it was not a book merely of
abstract science, but also of application, and treated Political Economy
not as a thing by itself, but as a fragment of a greater whole; a branch
of Social Philosophy, so interlinked with all the other branches, that
its conclusions, even in its own peculiar province, are only true
conditionally, subject to interference and counteraction from causes not
directly within its scope: while to the character of a practical guide
it has no pretension, apart from other classes of considerations.
Political Economy, in truth, has never pretended to give advice to
mankind with no lights but its own; though people who knew nothing but
political economy (and therefore knew that ill) have taken upon
themselves to advise, and could only do so by such lights as they had.
But the numerous sentimental enemies of political economy, and its still
more numerous interested enemies in sentimental guise, have been very
successful in gaining belief for this among other unmerited imputations
against it, and the _Principles_ having, in spite of the freedom of many
of its opinions, become for the present the most popular treatise on the
subject, has helped to disarm the enemies of so important a study. The
amount of its worth as an exposition of the science, and the value of
the different applications which it suggests, others of course must
judge.

For a considerable time after this, I published no work of magnitude;
though I still occasionally wrote in periodicals, and my correspondence
(much of it with persons quite unknown to me), on subjects of public
interest, swelled to a considerable bulk. During these years I wrote or
commenced various Essays, for eventual publication, on some of the
fundamental questions of human and social life, with regard to several
of which I have already much exceeded the severity of the Horatian
precept. I continued to watch with keen interest the progress of public
events. But it was not, on the whole, very encouraging to me. The
European reaction after 1848, and the success of an unprincipled usurper
in December, 1851, put an end, as it seemed, to all present hope for
freedom or social improvement in France and the Continent. In England, I
had seen and continued to see many of the opinions of my youth obtain
general recognition, and many of the reforms in institutions, for which
I had through life contended, either effected or in course of being so.
But these changes had been attended with much less benefit to human
well-being than I should formerly have anticipated, because they had
produced very little improvement in that which all real amelioration in
the lot of mankind depends on, their intellectual and moral state: and
it might even be questioned if the various causes of deterioration which
had been at work in the meanwhile, had not more than counterbalanced the
tendencies to improvement. I had learnt from experience that many false
opinions may be exchanged for true ones, without in the least altering
the habits of mind of which false opinions are the result. The English
public, for example, are quite as raw and undiscerning on subjects of
political economy since the nation has been converted to free-trade, as
they were before; and are still further from having acquired better
habits of thought and feeling, or being in any way better fortified
against error, on subjects of a more elevated character. For, though
they have thrown off certain errors, the general discipline of their
minds, intellectually and morally, is not altered. I am now convinced,
that no great improvements in the lot of mankind are possible, until a
great change takes place in the fundamental constitution of their modes
of thought. The old opinions in religion, morals, and politics, are so
much discredited in the more intellectual minds as to have lost the
greater part of their efficacy for good, while they have still life
enough in them to be a powerful obstacle to the growing up of any better
opinions on those subjects. When the philosophic minds of the world can
no longer believe its religion, or can only believe it with
modifications amounting to an essential change of its character, a
transitional period commences, of weak convictions, paralysed
intellects, and growing laxity of principle, which cannot terminate
until a renovation has been effected in the basis of their belief
leading to the evolution of some faith, whether religious or
merely human, which they can really believe: and when things are in this
state, all thinking or writing which does not tend to promote such a
renovation, is of very little value beyond the moment. Since there was
little in the apparent condition of the public mind, indicative of any
tendency in this direction, my view of the immediate prospects of human
improvement was not sanguine. More recently a spirit of free speculation
has sprung up, giving a more encouraging prospect of the gradual mental
emancipation of England; and concurring with the renewal under better
auspices, of the movement for political freedom in the rest of Europe,
has given to the present condition of human affairs a more hopeful
aspect.[3]

Between the time of which I have now spoken, and the present, took place
the most important events of my private life. The first of these was my
marriage, in April, 1851, to the lady whose incomparable worth had made
her friendship the greatest source to me both of happiness and of
improvement, during many years in which we never expected to be in any
closer relation to one another. Ardently as I should have aspired to
this complete union of our lives at any time in the course of my
existence at which it had been practicable, I, as much as my wife, would
far rather have foregone that privilege for ever, than have owed it to
the premature death of one for whom I had the sincerest respect, and she
the strongest affection. That event, however, having taken place in
July, 1849, it was granted to me to derive from that evil my own
greatest good, by adding to the partnership of thought, feeling, and
writing which had long existed, a partnership of our entire existence.
For seven and a-half years that blessing was mine; for seven and a-half
only! I can say nothing which could describe, even in the faintest
manner, what that loss was and is. But because I know that she would
have wished it, I endeavour to make the best of what life I have left,
and to work on for her purposes with such diminished strength as can be
derived from thoughts of her, and communion with her memory.

When two persons have their thoughts and speculations completely in
common; when all subjects of intellectual or moral interest are
discussed between them in daily life, and probed to much greater depths
than are usually or conveniently sounded in writings intended for
general readers; when they set out from the same principles, and arrive
at their conclusions by processes pursued jointly, it is of little
consequence in respect to the question of originality, which of them
holds the pen; the one who contributes least to the composition may
contribute more to the thought; the writings which result are the joint
product of both, and it must often be impossible to disentangle their
respective parts, and affirm that this belongs to one and that to the
other. In this wide sense, not only during the years of our married
life, but during many of the years of confidential friendship which
preceded, all my published writings were as much here work as mine; her
share in them constantly increasing as years advanced. But in certain
cases, what belongs to her can be distinguished, and specially
identified. Over and above the general influence which her mind had over
mine, the most valuable ideas and features in these joint
productions--those which have been most fruitful of important results,
and have contributed most to the success and reputation of the works
themselves--originated with her, were emanations from her mind, my part
in them being no greater than in any of the thoughts which I found in
previous writers, and made my own only by incorporating them with my own
system of thought! During the greater part of my literary life I have
performed the office in relation to her, which from a rather early
period I had considered as the most useful part that I was qualified to
take in the domain of thought, that of an interpreter of original
thinkers, and mediator between them and the public; for I had always a
humble opinion of my own powers as an original thinker, except in
abstract science (logic, metaphysics, and the theoretic principles of
political economy and politics), but thought myself much superior to
most of my contemporaries in willingness and ability to learn from
everybody; as I found hardly anyone who made such a point of examining
what was said in defence of all opinions, however new or however old, in
the conviction that even if they were errors there might be a substratum
of truth underneath them, and that in any case the discovery of what it
was that made them plausible, would be a benefit to truth. I had, in
consequence, marked this out as a sphere of usefulness in which I was
under a special obligation to make myself active; the more so, as the
acquaintance I had formed with the ideas of the Coleridgians, of the
German thinkers, and of Carlyle, all of them fiercely opposed to the
mode of thought in which I had been brought up, had convinced me that
along with much error they possessed much truth, which was veiled from
minds otherwise capable of receiving it by the transcendental and
mystical phraseology in which they were accustomed to shut it up, and
from which they neither cared, nor knew how, to disengage it; and I did
not despair of separating the truth from the error, and exposing it in
terms which would be intelligible and not repulsive to those on my own
side in philosophy. Thus prepared, it will easily be believed that when
I came into close intellectual communion with a person of the most
eminent faculties, whose genius, as it grew and unfolded itself in
thought, continually struck out truths far in advance of me, but in
which I could not, as I had done in those others, detect any mixture of
error, the greatest part of my mental growth consisted in the
assimilation of those truths, and the most valuable part of my
intellectual work was in building the bridges and clearing the paths
which connected them with my general system of thought.[4]

The first of my books in which her share was conspicious was the
_Principles of Political Economy_. The _System of Logic_ owed little to
her except in the minuter matters of composition, in which respect my
writings, both great and small, have largely benefited by her accurate
and clear-sighted criticism.[5] The chapter of the _Political Econonomy_
which has had a greater influence on opinion than all the rest, that on
'the Probable Future of the Labouring Classes,' is entirely due to her;
in the first draft of the book, that chapter did not exist. She pointed
out the need of such a chapter, and the extreme imperfection of the book
without it; she was the cause of my writing it; and the more general
part of the chapter, the statement and discussion of the two opposite
theories respecting the proper condition of the labouring classes, was
wholly an exposition of her thoughts, often in words taken from her own
lips. The purely scientific part of the _Political Economy_ I did not
learn from her; but it was chiefly her influence that gave to the book
that general tone by which it is distinguished from all previous
expositions of Political Economy that had any pretension to being
scientific, and which has made it so useful in conciliating minds which
those previous expositions had repelled. This tone consisted chiefly in
making the proper distinction between the laws of the Production of
Wealth--which are laws of nature, dependent on the properties of
objects--and the modes of its Distribution, which, subject to certain
conditions, depend on human will. The commom run of political economists
confuse these together, under the designation of economic laws, which
they deem incapable of being defeated or modified by human effort;
ascribing the same necessity to things dependent on the unchangeable
conditions of our earthly existence, and to those which, being but the
necessary consequences of particular social arrangements, are merely
co-extensive with these; given certain institutions and customs, wages,
profits, and rent will be determined by certain causes; but this class
of political economists drop the indispensable presupposition, and argue
that these causes must, by an inherent necessity, against which no human
means can avail, determine the shares which fall, in the division of the
produce, to labourers, capitalists, and landlords. The _Principles of
Political Economy_ yielded to none of its predecessors in aiming at the
scientific appreciation of the action of these causes, under the
conditions which they presuppose; but it set the example of not treating
those conditions as final. The economic generalizations which depend not
on necessaties of nature but on those combined with the existing
arrangements of society, it deals with only as provisional, and as
liable to be much altered by the progress of social improvement. I had
indeed partially learnt this view of things from the thoughts awakened
in me by the speculations of the St. Simonians; but it was made a living
principle pervading and animating the book by my wife's promptings. This
example illustrates well the general character of what she contributed
to my writings. What was abstract and purely scientific was generally
mine; the properly human element came from her: in all that concerned
the application of philosophy to the exigencies of human society and
progress, I was her pupil, alike in boldness of speculation and
cautiousness of practical judgment. For, on the one hand, she was much
more courageous and far-sighted than without her I should have been, in
anticipation of an order of things to come, in which many of the limited
generalizations now so often confounded with universal principles will
cease to be applicable. Those parts of my writings, and especially of
the _Political Economy_, which contemplate possibilities in the future
such as, when affirmed by Socialists, have in general been fiercely
denied by political economists, would, but for her, either have been
absent, or the suggestions would have been made much more timidly and in
a more qualified form. But while she thus rendered me bolder in
speculation on human affairs, her practical turn of mind, and her almost
unerring estimate of practical obstacles, repressed in me all tendencies
that were really visionary. Her mind invested all ideas in a concrete
shape, and formed to itself a conception of how they would actually
work: and her knowledge of the existing feelings and conduct of mankind
was so seldom at fault, that the weak point in any unworkable suggestion
seldom escapes her.[6]

During the two years which immediately preceded the cessation of my
official life, my wife and I were working together at the "Liberty."
I had first planned and written it as a short essay in 1854. It was in
mounting the steps of the Capitol, in January, 1855, that the thought
first arose of converting it into a volume. None of my writings have
been either so carefully composed, or so sedulously corrected as this.
After it had been written as usual twice over, we kept it by us,
bringing it out from time to time, and going through it _de novo_,
reading, weighing, and criticizing every sentence. Its final revision
was to have been a work of the winter of 1858-9, the first after my
retirement, which we had arranged to pass in the south of Europe. That
hope and every other were frustrated by the most unexpected and bitter
calamity of her death--at Avignon, on our way to Montpellier, from a
sudden attack of pulmonary congestion.

Since then I have sought for such allevation as my state
admitted of, by the mode of life which most enabled me to feel her still
near me. I bought a cottage as close as possible to the place where she
is buried, and there her daughter (my fellow-sufferer and now my chief
comfort) and I, live constantly during a great portion of the year. My
objects in life are solely those which were hers; my pursuits and
occupations those in which she shared, or sympathized, and which are
indissolubly associated with her. Her memory is to me a religion, and
her approbation the standard by which, summing up as it does all
worthiness, I endeavour to regulate my life.

After my irreparable loss, one of my earliest cares was to print and
publish the treatise, so much of which was the work of her whom I had
lost, and consecrate it to her memory. I have made no alteration or
addition to it, nor shall I ever. Though it wants the last touch of her
hand, no substitute for that touch shall ever be attempted by mine.

The _Liberty_ was more directly and literally our joint production than
anything else which bears my name, for there was not a sentence of it
that was not several times gone through by us together, turned over in
many ways, and carefully weeded of any faults, either in thought or
expression, that we detected in it. It is in consequence of this that,
although it never underwent her final revision, it far surpasses, as a
mere specimen of composition, anything which has proceeded from me
either before or since. With regard to the thoughts, it is difficult to
identify any particular part or element as being more hers than all the
rest. The whole mode of thinking of which the book was the expression,
was emphatically hers. But I also was so thoroughly imbued with it, that
the same thoughts naturally occurred to us both. That I was thus
penetrated with it, however, I owe in a great degree to her. There was a
moment in my mental progress when I might easily have fallen into a
tendency towards over-government, both social and political; as there
was also a moment when, by reaction from a contrary excess, I might have
become a less thorough radical and democrat than I am. In both these
points, as in many others, she benefited me as much by keeping me right
where I was right, as by leading me to new truths, and ridding me of
errors. My great readiness and eagerness to learn from everybody, and to
make room in my opinions for every new acquisition by adjusting the old
and the new to one another, might, but for her steadying influence, have
seduced me into modifying my early opinions too much. She was in nothing
more valuable to my mental development than by her just measure of the
relative importance of different considerations, which often protected
me from allowing to truths I had only recently learnt to see, a more
important place in my thoughts than was properly their due.

The _Liberty_ is likely to survive longer than anything else that I have
written (with the possible exception of the _Logic_), because the
conjunction of her mind with mine has rendered it a kind of philosophic
text-book of a single truth, which the changes progressively taking
place in modern society tend to bring out into ever stronger relief: the
importance, to man and society of a large variety in types of character,
and of giving full freedom to human nature to expand itself in
innumerable and conflicting directions. Nothing can better show how deep
are the foundations of this truth, than the great impression made by the
exposition of it at a time which, to superficial observation, did not
seem to stand much in need of such a lesson. The fears we expressed,
lest the inevitable growth of social equality and of the government of
public opinion, should impose on mankind an oppressive yoke of
uniformity in opinion and practice, might easily have appeared
chimerical to those who looked more at present facts than at tendencies;
for the gradual revolution that is taking place in society and
institutions has, thus far, been decidedly favourable to the development
of new opinions, and has procured for them a much more unprejudiced
hearing than they previously met with. But this is a feature belonging
to periods of transition, when old notions and feelings have been
unsettled, and no new doctrines have yet succeeded to their ascendancy.
At such times people of any mental activity, having given up their old
beliefs, and not feeling quite sure that those they still retain can
stand unmodified, listen eagerly to new opinions. But this state of
things is necessarily transitory: some particular body of doctrine in
time rallies the majority round it, organizes social institutions and
modes of action conformably to itself, education impresses this new
creed upon the new generations without the mental processes that have
led to it, and by degrees it acquires the very same power of
compression, so long exercised by the creeds of which it had taken the
place. Whether this noxious power will be exercised, depends on whether
mankind have by that time become aware that it cannot be exercised
without stunting and dwarfing human nature. It is then that the
teachings of the _Liberty_ will have their greatest value. And it is to
be feared that they will retain that value a long time.

As regards originality, it has of course no other than that which every
thoughtful mind gives to its own mode of conceiving and expressing
truths which are common property. The leading thought of the book is one
which though in many ages confined to insulated thinkers, mankind have
probably at no time since the beginning of civilization been entirely
without. To speak only of the last few generations, it is distinctly
contained in the vein of important thought respecting education and
culture, spread through the European mind by the labours and genius of
Pestalozzi. The unqualified championship of it by Wilhelm von Humboldt
is referred to in the book; but he by no means stood alone in his own
country. During the early part of the present century the doctrine of
the rights of individuality, and the claim of the moral nature to
develop itself in its own way, was pushed by a whole school of German
authors even to exaggeration; and the writings of Goethe, the most
celebrated of all German authors, though not belonging to that or to any
other school, are penetrated throughout by views of morals and of
conduct in life, often in my opinion not defensible, but which are
incessantly seeking whatever defence they admit of in the theory of the
right and duty of self-development. In our own country before the book
_On Liberty_ was written, the doctrine of Individuality had been
enthusiastically asserted, in a style of vigorous declamation sometimes
reminding one of Fichte, by Mr. William Maccall, in a series of writings
of which the most elaborate is entitled _Elements of Individualism_: and
a remarkable American, Mr. Warren, had framed a System of Society, on
the foundation of _the Sovereignty of the individual_, had obtained a
number of followers, and had actually commenced the formation of a
Village Community (whether it now exists I know not), which, though
bearing a superficial resemblance to some of the projects of Socialists,
is diametrically opposite to them in principle, since it recognizes no
authority whatever in Society over the individual, except to enforce
equal freedom of development for all individualities. As the book which
bears my name claimed no originality for any of its doctrines, and was
not intended to write their history, the only author who had preceded me
in their assertion, of whom I thought it appropriate to say anything,
was Humboldt, who furnished the motto to the work; although in one
passage I borrowed from the Warrenites their phrase, the sovereignty of
the individual. It is hardly necessary here to remark that there are
abundant differences in detail, between the conception of the doctrine
by any of the predecessors I have mentioned, and that set forth in the
book.

The political circumstances of the time induced me, shortly after, to
complete and publish a pamphlet (_Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform_),
part of which had been written some years previously on the occasion of
one of the abortive Reform Bills, and had at the time been approved and
revised by her. Its principal features were, hostility to the Ballot (a
change of opinion in both of us, in which she rather preceded me), and a
claim of representation for minorities; not, however, at that time going
beyond the cumulative vote proposed by Mr. Garth Marshall. In finishing
the pamphlet for publication, with a view to the discussions on the
Reform Bill of Lord Derby's and Mr. Disraeli's Government in 1859, I
added a third feature, a plurality of votes, to be given, not to
property, but to proved superiority of education. This recommended
itself to me as a means of reconciling the irresistible claim of every
man or woman to be consulted, and to be allowed a voice, in the
regulation of affairs which vitally concern them, with the superiority
of weight justly due to opinions grounded on superiority of knowledge.
The suggestion, however, was one which I had never discussed with my
almost infallible counsellor, and I have no evidence that she would have
concurred in it. As far as I have been able to observe, it has found
favour with nobody; all who desire any sort of inequality in the
electoral vote, desiring it in favour of property and not of
intelligence or knowledge. If it ever overcomes the strong feeling which
exists against it, this will only be after the establishment of a
systematic National Education by which the various grades of politically
valuable acquirement may be accurately defined and authenticated.
Without this it will always remain liable to strong, possibly
conclusive, objections; and with this, it would perhaps not be needed.

It was soon after the publication of _Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform_,
that I became acquainted with Mr. Hare's admirable system of Personal
Representation, which, in its present shape, was then for the first time
published. I saw in this great practical and philosophical idea, the
greatest improvement of which the system of representative government is
susceptible; an improvement which, in the most felicitous manner,
exactly meets and cures the grand, and what before seemed the inherent,
defect of the representative system; that of giving to a numerical
majority all power, instead of only a power proportional to its numbers,
and enabling the strongest party to exclude all weaker parties from
making their opinions heard in the assembly of the nation, except
through such opportunity as may be given to them by the accidentally
unequal distribution of opinions in different localities. To these great
evils nothing more than very imperfect palliations had seemed possible;
but Mr. Hare's system affords a radical cure. This great discovery, for
it is no less, in the political art, inspired me, as I believe it has
inspired all thoughtful persons who have adopted it, with new and more
sanguine hopes respecting the prospects of human society; by freeing the
form of political institutions towards which the whole civilized world
is manifestly and irresistibly tending, from the chief part of what
seemed to qualify, or render doubtful, its ultimate benefits.
Minorities, so long as they remain minorities, are, and ought to be,
outvoted; but under arrangements which enable any assemblage of voters,
amounting to a certain number, to place in the legislature a
representative of its own choice, minorities cannot be suppressed.
Independent opinions will force their way into the council of the nation
and make themselves heard there, a thing which often cannot happen in
the existing forms of representative democracy; and the legislature,
instead of being weeded of individual peculiarities and entirely made up
of men who simply represent the creed of great political or religious
parties, will comprise a large proportion of the most eminent individual
minds in the country, placed there, without reference to party, by
voters who appreciate their individual eminence. I can understand that
persons, otherwise intelligent, should, for want of sufficient
examination, be repelled from Mr. Hare's plan by what they think the
complex nature of its machinery. But any one who does not feel the want
which the scheme is intended to supply; any one who throws it over as a
mere theoretical subtlety or crotchet, tending to no valuable purpose,
and unworthy of the attention of practical men, may be pronounced an
incompetent statesman, unequal to the politics of the future. I mean,
unless he is a minister or aspires to become one: for we are quite
accustomed to a minister continuing to profess unqualified hostility to
an improvement almost to the very day when his conscience or his
interest induces him to take it up as a public measure, and carry it.

Had I met with Mr. Hare's system before the publication of my pamphlet,
I should have given an account of it there. Not having done so, I wrote
an article in _Fraser's Magazine_ (reprinted in my miscellaneous
writings) principally for that purpose, though I included in it, along
with Mr. Hare's book, a review of two other productions on the question
of the day; one of them a pamphlet by my early friend, Mr. John Austin,
who had in his old age become an enemy to all further Parliamentary
reform; the other an able and vigourous, though partially erroneous,
work by Mr. Lorimer.

In the course of the same summer I fulfilled a duty particularly
incumbent upon me, that of helping (by an article in the _Edinburgh
Review_) to make known Mr. Bain's profound treatise on the Mind, just
then completed by the publication of its second volume. And I carried
through the press a selection of my minor writings, forming the first
two volumes of _Dissertations and Discussions_. The selection had been
made during my wife's lifetime, but the revision, in concert with her,
with a view to republication, had been barely commenced; and when I had
no longer the guidance of her judgment I despaired of pursuing it
further, and republished the papers as they were, with the exception of
striking out such passages as were no longer in accordance with my
opinions. My literary work of the year was terminated with an essay in
_Fraser's Magazine_ (afterwards republished in the third volume of
_Dissertations and Discussions_), entitled "A Few Words on
Non-Intervention." I was prompted to write this paper by a desire, while
vindicating England from the imputations commonly brought against her on
the Continent, of a peculiar selfishness in matters of foreign policy to
warn Englishmen of the colour given to this imputation by the low tone
in which English statesmen are accustomed to speak of English policy as
concerned only with English interests, and by the conduct of Lord
Palmerston at that particular time in opposing the Suez Canal; and I
took the opportunity of expressing ideas which had long been in my mind
(some of them generated by my Indian experience, and others by the
international questions which then greatly occupied the European
public), respecting the true principles of international morality, and
the legitimate modifications made in it by difference of times and
circumstances; a subject I had already, to some extent, discussed in the
vindication of the French Provisional Government of 1848 against the
attacks of Lord Brougham and others, which I published at the time in
the _Westminster Review_, and which is reprinted in the _Dissertations_.

I had now settled, as I believed, for the remainder of my existence into
a purely literary life; if that can be called literary which continued
to be occupied in a pre-eminent degree with politics, and not merely
with theoretical, but practical politics, although a great part of the
year was spent at a distance of many hundred miles from the chief seat
of the politics of my own country, to which, and primarily for which, I
wrote. But, in truth, the modern facilities of communication have not
only removed all the disadvantages, to a political writer in tolerably
easy circumstances, of distance from the scene of political action, but
have converted them into advantages. The immediate and regular receipt
of newspapers and periodicals keeps him _au courant_ of even the most
temporary politics, and gives him a much more correct view of the state
and progress of opinion than he could acquire by personal contact with
individuals: for every one's social intercourse is more or less limited
to particular sets or classes, whose impressions and no others reach him
through that channel; and experience has taught me that those who give
their time to the absorbing claims of what is called society, not having
leisure to keep up a large acquaintance with the organs of opinion,
remain much more ignorant of the general state either of the public
mind, or of the active and instructed part of it, than a recluse who
reads the newspapers need be. There are, no doubt, disadvantages in too
long a separation from one's country--in not occasionally renewing
one's impressions of the light in which men and things appear when seen
from a position in the midst of them; but the deliberate judgment formed
at a distance, and undisturbed by inequalities of perspective, is the
most to be depended on, even for application to practice. Alternating
between the two positions, I combined the advantages of both. And,
though the inspirer of my best thoughts was no longer with me, I was not
alone: she had left a daughter, my stepdaughter, [Miss Helen Taylor, the
inheritor of much of her wisdom, and of all her nobleness of character,]
whose ever growing and ripening talents from that day to this have been
devoted to the same great purposes [and have already made her name
better and more widely known than was that of her mother, though far
less so than I predict, that if she lives it is destined to become. Of
the value of her direct cooperation with me, something will be said
hereafter, of what I owe in the way of instruction to her great powers
of original thought and soundness of practical judgment, it would be a
vain attempt to give an adequate idea]. Surely no one ever before was so
fortunate, as, after such a loss as mine, to draw another prize in the
lottery of life [--another companion, stimulator, adviser, and
instructor of the rarest quality]. Whoever, either now or hereafter, may
think of me and of the work I have done, must never forget that it is
the product not of one intellect and conscience, but of three[, the
least considerable of whom, and above all the least original, is the one
whose name is attached to it].

The work of the years 1860 and 1861 consisted chiefly of two treatises,
only one of which was intended for immediate publication. This was the
_Considerations on Representative Government_; a connected exposition of
what, by the thoughts of many years, I had come to regard as the best
form of a popular constitution. Along with as much of the general theory
of government as is necessary to support this particular portion of its
practice, the volume contains many matured views of the principal
questions which occupy the present age, within the province of purely
organic institutions, and raises, by anticipation, some other questions
to which growing necessities will sooner or later compel the attention
both of theoretical and of practical politicians. The chief of these
last, is the distinction between the function of making laws, for which
a numerous popular assembly is radically unfit, and that of getting good
laws made, which is its proper duty and cannot be satisfactorily
fulfilled by any other authority: and the consequent need of a
Legislative Commission, as a permanent part of the constitution of a
free country; consisting of a small number of highly trained political
minds, on whom, when Parliament has determined that a law shall be made,
the task of making it should be devolved: Parliament retaining the power
of passing or rejecting the bill when drawn up, but not of altering it
otherwise than by sending proposed amendments to be dealt with by the
Commission. The question here raised respecting the most important of
all public functions, that of legislation, is a particular case of the
great problem of modern political organization, stated, I believe, for
the first time in its full extent by Bentham, though in my opinion not
always satisfactorily resolved by him; the combination of complete
popular control over public affairs, with the greatest attainable
perfection of skilled agency.

The other treatise written at this time is the one which was published
some years[7] later under the title of _The Subjection of Women._ It was
written [at my daughter's suggestion] that there might, in any event, be
in existence a written exposition of my opinions on that great question,
as full and conclusive as I could make it. The intention was to keep
this among other unpublished papers, improving it from time to time if I
was able, and to publish it at the time when it should seem likely to be
most useful. As ultimately published [it was enriched with some
important ideas of my daughter's, and passages of her writing. But] in
what was of my own composition, all that is most striking and profound
belongs to my wife; coming from the fund of thought which had been made
common to us both, by our innumerable conversations and discussions on a
topic which filled so large a place in our minds.

Soon after this time I took from their repository a portion of the
unpublished papers which I had written during the last years of our
married life, and shaped them, with some additional matter, into the
little work entitled _Utilitarianism_; which was first published, in
three parts, in successive numbers of _Fraser's Magazine_, and
afterwards reprinted in a volume.

Before this, however, the state of public affairs had become extremely
critical, by the commencement of the American civil war. My strongest
feelings were engaged in this struggle, which, I felt from the
beginning, was destined to be a turning point, for good or evil, of the
course of human affairs for an indefinite duration. Having been a deeply
interested observer of the slavery quarrel in America, during the many
years that preceded the open breach, I knew that it was in all its
stages an aggressive enterprise of the slave-owners to extend the
territory of slavery; under the combined influences of pecuniary
interest, domineering temper, and the fanaticism of a class for its
class privileges, influences so fully and powerfully depicted in the
admirable work of my friend Professor Cairnes, _The Slave Power_. Their
success, if they succeeded, would be a victory of the powers of evil
which would give courage to the enemies of progress and damp the spirits
of its friends all over the civilized world, while it would create a
formidable military power, grounded on the worst and most anti-social
form of the tyranny of men over men, and, by destroying for a long time
the prestige of the great democratic republic, would give to all the
privileged classes of Europe a false confidence, probably only to be
extinguished in blood. On the other hand, if the spirit of the North was
sufficiently roused to carry the war to a successful termination, and if
that termination did not come too soon and too easily, I foresaw, from
the laws of human nature, and the experience of revolutions, that when
it did come it would in all probability be thorough: that the bulk of
the Northern population, whose conscience had as yet been awakened only
to the point of resisting the further extension of slavery, but whose
fidelity to the Constitution of the United States made them disapprove
of any attempt by the Federal Government to interfere with slavery in
the States where it already existed, would acquire feelings of another
kind when the Constitution had been shaken off by armed rebellion, would
determine to have done for ever with the accursed thing, and would join
their banner with that of the noble body of Abolitionists, of whom
Garrison was the courageous and single-minded apostle, Wendell Phillips
the eloquent orator, and John Brown the voluntary martyr.[8] Then, too,
the whole mind of the United States would be let loose from its bonds,
no longer corrupted by the supposed necessity of apologizing to
foreigners for the most flagrant of all possible violations of the free
principles of their Constitution; while the tendency of a fixed state of
society to stereotype a set of national opinions would be at least
temporarily checked, and the national mind would become more open to the
recognition of whatever was bad in either the institutions or the
customs of the people. These hopes, so far as related to slavery, have
been completely, and in other respects are in course of being
progressively realized. Foreseeing from the first this double set of
consequences from the success or failure of the rebellion, it may be
imagined with what feelings I contemplated the rush of nearly the whole
upper and middle classes of my own country even those who passed for
Liberals, into a furious pro-Southern partisanship: the working
classes, and some of the literary and scientific men, being almost the
sole exceptions to the general frenzy. I never before felt so keenly how
little permanent improvement had reached the minds of our influential
classes, and of what small value were the liberal opinions they had got
into the habit of professing. None of the Continental Liberals committed
the same frightful mistake. But the generation which had extorted negro
emancipation from our West India planters had passed away; another had
succeeded which had not learnt by many years of discussion and exposure
to feel strongly the enormities of slavery; and the inattention habitual
with Englishmen to whatever is going on in the world outside their own
island, made them profoundly ignorant of all the antecedents of the
struggle, insomuch that it was not generally believed in England, for
the first year or two of the war, that the quarrel was one of slavery.
There were men of high principle and unquestionable liberality of
opinion, who thought it a dispute about tariffs, or assimilated it to
the cases in which they were accustomed to sympathize, of a people
struggling for independence.

It was my obvious duty to be one of the small minority who protested
against this perverted state of public opinion. I was not the first to
protest. It ought to be remembered to the honour of Mr. Hughes and of
Mr. Ludlow, that they, by writings published at the very beginning of
the struggle, began the protestation. Mr. Bright followed in one of the
most powerful of his speeches, followed by others not less striking. I
was on the point of adding my words to theirs, when there occurred,
towards the end of 1861, the seizure of the Southern envoys on board a
British vessel, by an officer of the United States. Even English
forgetfulness has not yet had time to lose all remembrance of the
explosion of feeling in England which then burst forth, the expectation,
prevailing for some weeks, of war with the United States, and the
warlike preparations actually commenced on this side. While this state
of things lasted, there was no chance of a hearing for anything
favourable to the American cause; and, moreover, I agreed with those who
thought the act unjustifiable, and such as to require that England
should demand its disavowal. When the disavowal came, and the alarm of
war was over, I wrote, in January, 1862, the paper, in _Fraser's
Magazine_, entitled "The Contest in America," [and I shall always feel
grateful to my daughter that her urgency prevailed on me to write it
when I did, for we were then on the point of setting out for a journey
of some months in Greece and Turkey, and but for her, I should have
deferred writing till our return.] Written and published when it was,
this paper helped to encourage those Liberals who had felt overborne by
the tide of illiberal opinion, and to form in favour of the good cause a
nucleus of opinion which increased gradually, and, after the success of
the North began to seem probable, rapidly. When we returned from our
journey I wrote a second article, a review of Professor Cairnes' book,
published in the _Westminster Review_. England is paying the penalty, in
many uncomfortable ways, of the durable resentment which her ruling
classes stirred up in the United States by their ostentatious wishes for
the ruin of America as a nation; they have reason to be thankful that a
few, if only a few, known writers and speakers, standing firmly by the
Americans in the time of their greatest difficulty, effected a partial
diversion of these bitter feelings, and made Great Britain not
altogether odious to the Americans.

This duty having been performed, my principal occupation for the next
two years was on subjects not political. The publication of Mr. Austin's
_Lectures on Jurisprudence_ after his decease, gave me an opportunity of
paying a deserved tribute to his memory, and at the same time expressing
some thoughts on a subject on which, in my old days of Benthamism, I had
bestowed much study. But the chief product of those years was the
_Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_. His _Lectures_,
published in 1860 and 1861, I had read towards the end of the latter
year, with a half-formed intention of giving an account of them in a
Review, but I soon found that this would be idle, and that justice could
not be done to the subject in less than a volume. I had then to consider
whether it would be advisable that I myself should attempt such a
performance. On consideration, there seemed to be strong reasons for
doing so. I was greatly disappointed with the _Lectures_. I read them,
certainly, with no prejudice against Sir William Hamilton. I had up to
that time deferred the study of his _Notes to Reid_ on account of their
unfinished state, but I had not neglected his _Discussions in
Philosophy_; and though I knew that his general mode of treating the
facts of mental philosophy differed from that of which I most approved,
yet his vigorous polemic against the later Transcendentalists, and his
strenuous assertion of some important principles, especially the
Relativity of human knowledge, gave me many points of sympathy with his
opinions, and made me think that genuine psychology had considerably
more to gain than to lose by his authority and reputation. His
_Lectures_ and the _Dissertations on Reid_ dispelled this illusion: and
even the _Discussions_, read by the light which these throw on them,
lost much of their value. I found that the points of apparent agreement
between his opinions and mine were more verbal than real; that the
important philosophical principles which I had thought he recognised,
were so explained away by him as to mean little or nothing, or were
continually lost sight of, and doctrines entirely inconsistent with them
were taught in nearly every part of his philosophical writings. My
estimation of him was therefore so far altered, that instead of
regarding him as occupying a kind of intermediate position between the
two rival philosophies, holding some of the principles of both, and
supplying to both powerful weapons of attack and defence, I now looked
upon him as one of the pillars, and in this country from his high
philosophical reputation the chief pillar, of that one of the two which
seemed to me to be erroneous.

Now, the difference between these two schools of philosophy, that of
Intuition, and that of Experience and Association, is not a mere matter
of abstract speculation; it is full of practical consequences, and lies
at the foundation of all the greatest differences of practical opinion
in an age of progress. The practical reformer has continually to demand
that changes be made in things which are supported by powerful and
widely-spread feelings, or to question the apparent necessity and
indefeasibleness of established facts; and it is often an indispensable
part of his argument to show, how those powerful feelings had their
origin, and how those facts came to seem necessary and indefeasible.
There is therefore a natural hostility between him and a philosophy
which discourages the explanation of feelings and moral facts by
circumstances and association, and prefers to treat them as ultimate
elements of human nature; a philosophy which is addicted to holding up
favourite doctrines as intuitive truths, and deems intuition to be the
voice of Nature and of God, speaking with an authority higher than that
of our reason. In particular, I have long felt that the prevailing
tendency to regard all the marked distinctions of human character as
innate, and in the main indelible, and to ignore the irresistible proofs
that by far the greater part of those differences, whether between
individuals, races, or sexes, are such as not only might but naturally
would be produced by differences in circumstances, is one of the chief
hindrances to the rational treatment of great social questions, and one
of the greatest stumbling blocks to human improvement. This tendency has
its source in the intuitional metaphysics which characterized the
reaction of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, and it is a
tendency so agreeable to human indolence, as well as to conservative
interests generally, that unless attacked at the very root, it is sure
to be carried to even a greater length than is really justified by the
more moderate forms of the intuitional philosophy. That philosophy not
always in its moderate forms, had ruled the thought of Europe for the
greater part of a century. My father's _Analysis of the Mind_, my own
_Logic_, and Professor Bain's great treatise, had attempted to
re-introduce a better mode of philosophizing, latterly with quite as
much success as could be expected; but I had for some time felt that the
mere contrast of the two philosophies was not enough, that there ought
to be a hand-to-hand fight between them, that controversial as well as
expository writings were needed, and that the time was come when such
controversy would be useful. Considering, then, the writings and fame of
Sir W. Hamilton as the great fortress of the intuitional philosophy in
this country, a fortress the more formidable from the imposing
character, and the in many respects great personal merits and mental
endowments, of the man, I thought it might be a real service to
philosophy to attempt a thorough examination of all his most important
doctrines, and an estimate of his general claims to eminence as a
philosopher; and I was confirmed in this resolution by observing that in
the writings of at least one, and him one of the ablest, of Sir W.
Hamilton's followers, his peculiar doctrines were made the justification
of a view of religion which I hold to be profoundly immoral--that it is
our duty to bow down in worship before a Being whose moral attributes
are affirmed to be unknowable by us, and to be perhaps extremely
different from those which, when we are speaking of our
fellow-creatures, we call by the same names.

As I advanced in my task, the damage to Sir W. Hamilton's reputation
became greater than I at first expected, through the almost incredible
multitude of inconsistencies which showed themselves on comparing
different passages with one another. It was my business, however, to
show things exactly as they were, and I did not flinch from it. I
endeavoured always to treat the philosopher whom I criticized with the
most scrupulous fairness; and I knew that he had abundance of disciples
and admirers to correct me if I ever unintentionally did him injustice.
Many of them accordingly have answered me, more or less elaborately, and
they have pointed out oversights and misunderstandings, though few in
number, and mostly very unimportant in substance. Such of those as had
(to my knowledge) been pointed out before the publication of the latest
edition (at present the third) have been corrected there, and the
remainder of the criticisms have been, as far as seemed necessary,
replied to. On the whole, the book has done its work: it has shown the
weak side of Sir William Hamilton, and has reduced his too great
philosophical reputation within more moderate bounds; and by some of its
discussions, as well as by two expository chapters, on the notions of
Matter and of Mind, it has perhaps thrown additional light on some of
the disputed questions in the domain of psychology and metaphysics.

After the completion of the book on Hamilton, I applied myself to a task
which a variety of reasons seemed to render specially incumbent upon me;
that of giving an account, and forming an estimate, of the doctrines of
Auguste Comte. I had contributed more than any one else to make his
speculations known in England, and, in consequence chiefly of what I had
said of him in my _Logic_, he had readers and admirers among thoughtful
men on this side of the Channel at a time when his name had not yet in
France emerged from obscurity. So unknown and unappreciated was he at
the time when my _Logic_ was written and published, that to criticize
his weak points might well appear superfluous, while it was a duty to
give as much publicity as one could to the important contributions he
had made to philosophic thought. At the time, however, at which I have
now arrived, this state of affairs had entirely changed. His name, at
least, was known almost universally, and the general character of his
doctrines very widely. He had taken his place in the estimation both of
friends and opponents, as one of the conspicuous figures in the thought
of the age. The better parts of his speculations had made great progress
in working their way into those minds, which, by their previous culture
and tendencies, were fitted to receive them: under cover of those better
parts those of a worse character, greatly developed and added to in his
later writings, had also made some way, having obtained active and
enthusiastic adherents, some of them of no inconsiderable personal
merit, in England, France, and other countries. These causes not only
made it desirable that some one should undertake the task of sifting
what is good from what is bad in M. Comte's speculations, but seemed to
impose on myself in particular a special obligation to make the attempt.
This I accordingly did in two essays, published in successive numbers of
the _Westminster Review_, and reprinted in a small volume under the
title _Auguste Comte and Positivism_.

The writings which I have now mentioned, together with a small number of
papers in periodicals which I have not deemed worth preserving, were the
whole of the products of my activity as a writer during the years from
1859 to 1865. In the early part of the last-mentioned year, in
compliance with a wish frequently expressed to me by working men, I
published cheap People's Editions of those of my writings which seemed
the most likely to find readers among the working classes; viz,
_Principles of Political Economy_, _Liberty_, and _Representative
Government_. This was a considerable sacrifice of my pecuniary interest,
especially as I resigned all idea of deriving profit from the cheap
editions, and after ascertaining from my publishers the lowest price
which they thought would remunerate them on the usual terms of an equal
division of profits, I gave up my half share to enable the price to be
fixed still lower. To the credit of Messrs. Longman they fixed, unasked,
a certain number of years after which the copyright and stereotype
plates were to revert to me, and a certain number of copies after the
sale of which I should receive half of any further profit. This number
of copies (which in the case of the _Political Economy_ was 10,000) has
for some time been exceeded, and the People's Editions have begun to
yield me a small but unexpected pecuniary return, though very far from
an equivalent for the diminution of profit from the Library Editions.

In this summary of my outward life I have now arrived at the period at
which my tranquil and retired existence as a writer of books was to be
exchanged for the less congenial occupation of a member of the House of
Commons. The proposal made to me, early in 1865, by some electors of
Westminster, did not present the idea to me for the first time. It was
not even the first offer I had received, for, more than ten years
previous, in consequence of my opinions on the Irish Land Question, Mr.
Lucas and Mr. Duffy, in the name of the popular party in Ireland,
offered to bring me into Parliament for an Irish county, which they
could easily have done: but the incompatibility of a seat in Parliament
with the office I then held in the India House, precluded even
consideration of the proposal. After I had quitted the India House,
several of my friends would gladly have seen me a member of Parliament;
but there seemed no probability that the idea would ever take any
practical shape. I was convinced that no numerous or influential portion
of any electoral body, really wished to be represented by a person of my
opinions; and that one who possessed no local connection or popularity,
and who did not choose to stand as the mere organ of a party had small
chance of being elected anywhere unless through the expenditure of
money. Now it was, and is, my fixed conviction, that a candidate ought
not to incur one farthing of expense for undertaking a public duty. Such
of the lawful expenses of an election as have no special reference to
any particular candidate, ought to be borne as a public charge, either
by the State or by the locality. What has to be done by the supporters
of each candidate in order to bring his claims properly before the
constituency, should be done by unpaid agency or by voluntary
subscription. If members of the electoral body, or others, are willing
to subscribe money of their own for the purpose of bringing, by lawful
means, into Parliament some one who they think would be useful there, no
one is entitled to object: but that the expense, or any part of it,
should fall on the candidate, is fundamentally wrong; because it amounts
in reality to buying his seat. Even on the most favourable supposition
as to the mode in which the money is expended, there is a legitimate
suspicion that any one who gives money for leave to undertake a public
trust, has other than public ends to promote by it; and (a consideration
of the greatest importance) the cost of elections, when borne by the
candidates, deprives the nation of the services, as members of
Parliament, of all who cannot or will not afford to incur a heavy
expense. I do not say that, so long as there is scarcely a chance for an
independent candidate to come into Parliament without complying with
this vicious practice, it must always be morally wrong in him to spend
money, provided that no part of it is either directly or indirectly
employed in corruption. But, to justify it, he ought to be very certain
that he can be of more use to his country as a member of Parliament than
in any other mode which is open to him; and this assurance, in my own
case, I did not feel. It was by no means clear to me that I could do
more to advance the public objects which had a claim on my exertions,
from the benches of the House of Commons, than from the simple position
of a writer. I felt, therefore, that I ought not to seek election to
Parliament, much less to expend any money in procuring it.

But the conditions of the question were considerably altered when a body
of electors sought me out, and spontaneously offered to bring me forward
as their candidate. If it should appear, on explanation, that they
persisted in this wish, knowing my opinions, and accepting the only
conditions on which I could conscientiously serve, it was questionable
whether this was not one of those calls upon a member of the community
by his fellow-citizens, which he was scarcely justified in rejecting. I
therefore put their disposition to the proof by one of the frankest
explanations ever tendered, I should think, to an electoral body by a
candidate. I wrote, in reply to the offer, a letter for publication,
saying that I had no personal wish to be a member of Parliament, that I
thought a candidate ought neither to canvass nor to incur any expense,
and that I could not consent to do either. I said further, that if
elected, I could not undertake to give any of my time and labour to
their local interests. With respect to general politics, I told them
without reserve, what I thought on a number of important subjects on
which they had asked my opinion: and one of these being the suffrage, I
made known to them, among other things, my conviction (as I was bound to
do, since I intended, if elected, to act on it), that women were
entitled to representation in Parliament on the same terms with men. It
was the first time, doubtless, that such a doctrine had ever been
mentioned to English electors; and the fact that I was elected after
proposing it, gave the start to the movement which has since become so
vigorous, in favour of women's suffrage. Nothing, at the time, appeared
more unlikely than that a candidate (if candidate I could be called)
whose professions and conduct set so completely at defiance all ordinary
notions of electioneering, should nevertheless be elected. A well-known
literary man[, who was also a man of society,] was heard to say that the
Almighty himself would have no chance of being elected on such a
programme. I strictly adhered to it, neither spending money nor
canvassing, nor did I take any personal part in the election, until
about a week preceding the day of nomination, when I attended a few
public meetings to state my principles and give to any questions which
the electors might exercise their just right of putting to me for their
own guidance; answers as plain and unreserved as my address. On one
subject only, my religious opinions, I announced from the beginning that
I would answer no questions; a determination which appeared to be
completely approved by those who attended the meetings. My frankness on
all other subjects on which I was interrogated, evidently did me far
more good than my answers, whatever they might be, did harm. Among the
proofs I received of this, one is too remarkable not to be recorded. In
the pamphlet, _Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform_, I had said, rather
bluntly, that the working classes, though differing from those of some
other countries, in being ashamed of lying, are yet generally liars.
This passage some opponent got printed in a placard, which was handed to
me at a meeting, chiefly composed of the working classes, and I was
asked whether I had written and published it. I at once answered "I
did." Scarcely were these two words out of my mouth, when vehement
applause resounded through the whole meeting. It was evident that the
working people were so accustomed to expect equivocation and evasion
from those who sought their suffrages, that when they found, instead of
that, a direct avowal of what was likely to be disagreeable to them,
instead of being affronted, they concluded at once that this was a
person whom they could trust. A more striking instance never came under
my notice of what, I believe, is the experience of those who best know
the working classes, that the most essential of all recommendations to
their favour is that of complete straightforwardness; its presence
outweighs in their minds very strong objections, while no amount of
other qualities will make amends for its apparent absence. The first
working man who spoke after the incident I have mentioned (it was Mr.
Odger) said, that the working classes had no desire not to be told of
their faults; they wanted friends, not flatterers, and felt under
obligation to any one who told them anything in themselves which he
sincerely believed to require amendment. And to this the meeting
heartily responded.

Had I been defeated in the election, I should still have had no reason
to regret the contact it had brought me into with large bodies of my
countrymen; which not only gave me much new experience, but enabled me
to scatter my political opinions rather widely, and, by making me known
in many quarters where I had never before been heard of, increased the
number of my readers, and the presumable influence of my writings. These
latter effects were of course produced in a still greater degree, when,
as much to my surprise as to that of any one, I was returned to
Parliament by a majority of some hundreds over my Conservative
competitor.

I was a member of the House during the three sessions of the Parliament
which passed the Reform Bill; during which time Parliament was
necessarily my main occupation, except during the recess. I was a
tolerably frequent speaker, sometimes of prepared speeches, sometimes
extemporaneously. But my choice of occasions was not such as I should
have made if my leading object had been Parliamentary influence. When I
had gained the ear of the House, which I did by a successful speech on
Mr. Gladstone's Reform Bill, the idea I proceeded on was that when
anything was likely to be as well done, or sufficiently well done, by
other people, there was no necessity for me to meddle with it. As I,
therefore, in general reserved myself for work which no others were
likely to do, a great proportion of my appearances were on points on
which the bulk of the Liberal party, even the advanced portion of it,
either were of a different opinion from mine, or were comparatively
indifferent. Several of my speeches, especially one against the motion
for the abolition of capital punishment, and another in favour of
resuming the right of seizing enemies' goods in neutral vessels, were
opposed to what then was, and probably still is, regarded as the
advanced liberal opinion. My advocacy of women's suffrage and of
Personal Representation, were at the time looked upon by many as whims
of my own; but the great progress since made by those opinions, and
especially the response made from almost all parts of the kingdom to the
demand for women's suffrage, fully justified the timeliness of those
movements, and have made what was undertaken as a moral and social duty,
a personal success. Another duty which was particularly incumbent on me
as one of the Metropolitan Members, was the attempt to obtain a
Municipal Government for the Metropolis: but on that subject the
indifference of the House of Commons was such that I found hardly any
help or support within its walls. On this subject, however, I was the
organ of an active and intelligent body of persons outside, with whom,
and not with me, the scheme originated, and who carried on all the
agitation on the subject and drew up the Bills. My part was to bring in
Bills already prepared, and to sustain the discussion of them during the
short time they were allowed to remain before the House; after having
taken an active part in the work of a Committee presided over by Mr.
Ayrton, which sat through the greater part of the Session of 1866, to
take evidence on the subject. The very different position in which the
question now stands (1870) may justly be attributed to the preparation
which went on during those years, and which produced but little visible
effect at the time; but all questions on which there are strong private
interests on one side, and only the public good on the other, have a
similar period of incubation to go through.

The same idea, that the use of my being in Parliament was to do work
which others were not able or not willing to do, made me think it my
duty to come to the front in defence of advanced Liberalism on occasions
when the obloquy to be encountered was such as most of the advanced
Liberals in the House, preferred not to incur. My first vote in the
House was in support of an amendment in favour of Ireland, moved by an
Irish member, and for which only five English and Scotch votes were
given, including my own: the other four were Mr. Bright, Mr. McLaren,
Mr. T.B. Potter, and Mr. Hadfield. And the second speech I delivered[9]
was on the bill to prolong the suspension of the Habeas Corpus in
Ireland. In denouncing, on this occasion, the English mode of governing
Ireland, I did no more than the general opinion of England now admits to
have been just; but the anger against Fenianism was then in all its
freshness; any attack on what Fenians attacked was looked upon as an
apology for them; and I was so unfavourably received by the House, that
more than one of my friends advised me (and my own judgment agreed with
the advice) to wait, before speaking again, for the favourable
opportunity that would be given by the first great debate on the Reform
Bill. During this silence, many flattered themselves that I had turned
out a failure, and that they should not be troubled with me any more.
Perhaps their uncomplimentary comments may, by the force of reaction,
have helped to make my speech on the Reform Bill the success it was. My
position in the House was further improved by a speech in which I
insisted on the duty of paying off the National Debt before our coal
supplies are exhausted, and by an ironical reply to some of the Tory
leaders who had quoted against me certain passages of my writings, and
called me to account for others, especially for one in my
_Considerations on Representative Government_, which said that the
Conservative party was, by the law of its composition, the stupidest
party. They gained nothing by drawing attention to the passage, which up
to that time had not excited any notice, but the _sobriquet_ of "the
stupid party" stuck to them for a considerable time afterwards. Having
now no longer any apprehension of not being listened to, I confined
myself, as I have since thought too much, to occasions on which my
services seemed specially needed, and abstained more than enough from
speaking on the great party questions. With the exception of Irish
questions, and those which concerned the working classes, a single
speech on Mr. Disraeli's Reform Bill was nearly all that I contributed
to the great decisive debates of the last two of my three sessions.

I have, however, much satisfaction in looking back to the part I took on
the two classes of subjects just mentioned. With regard to the working
classes, the chief topic of my speech on Mr. Gladstone's Reform Bill was
the assertion of their claims to the suffrage. A little later, after the
resignation of Lord Russell's Ministry and the succession of a Tory
Government, came the attempt of the working classes to hold a meeting in
Hyde Park, their exclusion by the police, and the breaking down of the
park railing by the crowd. Though Mr. Beales and the leaders of the
working men had retired under protest before this took place, a scuffle
ensued in which many innocent persons were maltreated by the police, and
the exasperation of the working men was extreme. They showed a
determination to make another attempt at a meeting in the Park, to which
many of them would probably have come armed; the Government made
military preparations to resist the attempt, and something very serious
seemed impending. At this crisis I really believe that I was the means
of preventing much mischief. I had in my place in Parliament taken the
side of the working men, and strongly censured the conduct of the
Government. I was invited, with several other Radical members, to a
conference with the leading members of the Council of the Reform League;
and the task fell chiefly upon myself, of persuading them to give up the
Hyde Park project, and hold their meeting elsewhere. It was not Mr.
Beales and Colonel Dickson who needed persuading; on the contrary, it
was evident that these gentlemen had already exerted their influence in
the same direction, thus far without success. It was the working men who
held out, and so bent were they on their original scheme, that I was
obliged to have recourse to _les grands moyens_. I told them that a
proceeding which would certainly produce a collision with the military,
could only be justifiable on two conditions: if the position of affairs
had become such that a revolution was desirable, and if they thought
themselves able to accomplish one. To this argument, after considerable
discussion, they at last yielded: and I was able to inform Mr. Walpole
that their intention was given up. I shall never forget the depth of his
relief or the warmth of his expressions of gratitude. After the working
men had conceded so much to me, I felt bound to comply with their
request that I would attend and speak at their meeting at the
Agricultural Hall; the only meeting called by the Reform League which I
ever attended. I had always declined being a member of the League, on
the avowed ground that I did not agree in its programme of manhood
suffrage and the ballot: from the ballot I dissented entirely; and I
could not consent to hoist the flag of manhood suffrage, even on the
assurance that the exclusion of women was not intended to be implied;
since if one goes beyond what can be immediately carried, and professes
to take one's stand on a principle, one should go the whole length of
the principle. I have entered thus particularly into this matter because
my conduct on this occasion gave great displeasure to the Tory and
Tory-Liberal press, who have charged me ever since with having shown
myself, in the trials of public life, intemperate and passionate. I do
not know what they expected from me; but they had reason to be thankful
to me if they knew from what I had, in all probability preserved them.
And I do not believe it could have been done, at that particular
juncture, by any one else. No other person, I believe, had at that
moment the necessary influence for restraining the working classes,
except Mr. Gladstone and Mr. Bright, neither of whom was available: Mr.
Gladstone, for obvious reasons; Mr. Bright because he was out of town.

When, some time later, the Tory Government brought in a bill to prevent
public meetings in the Parks, I not only spoke strongly in opposition to
it, but formed one of a number of advanced Liberals, who, aided by the
very late period of the session, succeeded in defeating the Bill by what
is called talking it out. It has not since been renewed.

On Irish affairs also I felt bound to take a decided part. I was one of
the foremost in the deputation of Members of Parliament who prevailed on
Lord Derby to spare the life of the condemned Fenian insurgent, General
Burke. The Church question was so vigorously handled by the leaders of
the party, in the session of 1868, as to require no more from me than an
emphatic adhesion: but the land question was by no means in so advanced
a position; the superstitions of landlordism had up to that time been
little challenged, especially in Parliament, and the backward state of
the question, so far as concerned the Parliamentary mind, was evidenced
by the extremely mild measure brought in by Lord Russell's government in
1866, which nevertheless could not be carried. On that bill I delivered
one of my most careful speeches, in which I attempted to lay down some
of the principles of the subject, in a manner calculated less to
stimulate friends, than to conciliate and convince opponents. The
engrossing subject of Parliamentary Reform prevented either this bill,
or one of a similar character brought in by Lord Derby's Government,
from being carried through. They never got beyond the second reading.
Meanwhile the signs of Irish disaffection had become much more decided;
the demand for complete separation between the two countries had assumed
a menacing aspect, and there were few who did not feel that if there was
still any chance of reconciling Ireland to the British connection, it
could only be by the adoption of much more thorough reforms in the
territorial and social relations of the country, than had yet been
contemplated. The time seemed to me to have come when it would be useful
to speak out my whole mind; and the result was my pamphlet _England and
Ireland_, which was written in the winter of 1867, and published shortly
before the commencement of the session of 1868. The leading features of
the pamphlet were, on the one hand, an argument to show the
undesirableness, for Ireland as well as England, of separation between
the countries, and on the other, a proposal for settling the land
question by giving to the existing tenants a permanent tenure, at a
fixed rent, to be assessed after due inquiry by the State.

The pamphlet was not popular, except in Ireland, as I did not expect it
to be. But, if no measure short of that which I proposed would do full
justice to Ireland, or afford a prospect of conciliating the mass of the
Irish people, the duty of proposing it was imperative; while if, on the
other hand, there was any intermediate course which had a claim to a
trial, I well knew that to propose something which would be called
extreme, was the true way not to impede but to facilitate a more
moderate experiment. It is most improbable that a measure conceding so
much to the tenantry as Mr. Gladstone's Irish Land Bill, would have been
proposed by a Government, or could have been carried through Parliament,
unless the British public had been led to perceive that a case might be
made, and perhaps a party formed, for a measure considerably stronger.
It is the character of the British people, or at least of the higher and
middle classes who pass muster for the British people, that to induce
them to approve of any change, it is necessary that they should look
upon it as a middle course: they think every proposal extreme and
violent unless they hear of some other proposal going still farther,
upon which their antipathy to extreme views may discharge itself. So it
proved in the present instance; my proposal was condemned, but any
scheme for Irish Land reform short of mine, came to be thought moderate
by comparison. I may observe that the attacks made on my plan usually
gave a very incorrect idea of its nature. It was usually discussed as a
proposal that the State should buy up the land and become the universal
landlord; though in fact it only offered to each individual landlord
this as an alternative, if he liked better to sell his estate than to
retain it on the new conditions; and I fully anticipated that most
landlords would continue to prefer the position of landowners to that of
Government annuitants, and would retain their existing relation to their
tenants, often on more indulgent terms than the full rents on which the
compensation to be given them by Government would have been based. This
and many other explanations I gave in a speech on Ireland, in the debate
on Mr. Maguire's Resolution, early in the session of 1868. A corrected
report of this speech, together with my speech on Mr. Fortescue's Bill,
has been published (not by me, but with my permission) in Ireland.

Another public duty, of a most serious kind, it was my lot to have to
perform, both in and out of Parliament, during these years. A
disturbance in Jamaica, provoked in the first instance by injustice, and
exaggerated by rage and panic into a premeditated rebellion, had been
the motive or excuse for taking hundreds of innocent lives by military
violence, or by sentence of what were called courts-martial, continuing
for weeks after the brief disturbance had been put down; with many added
atrocities of destruction of property logging women as well as men, and
a general display of the brutal recklessness which usually prevails when
fire and sword are let loose. The perpetrators of those deeds were
defended and applauded in England by the same kind of people who had so
long upheld negro slavery: and it seemed at first as if the British
nation was about to incur the disgrace of letting pass without even a
protest, excesses of authority as revolting as any of those for which,
when perpetrated by the instruments of other governments, Englishmen can
hardly find terms sufficient to express their abhorrence. After a short
time, however, an indignant feeling was roused: a voluntary Association
formed itself under the name of the Jamaica Committee, to take such
deliberation and action as the case might admit of, and adhesions poured
in from all parts of the country. I was abroad at the time, but I sent
in my name to the Committee as soon as I heard of it, and took an active
part in the proceedings from the time of my return. There was much more
at stake than only justice to the negroes, imperative as was that
consideration. The question was, whether the British dependencies, and
eventually, perhaps, Great Britain itself, were to be under the
government of law, or of military licence; whether the lives and persons
of British subjects are at the mercy of any two or three officers
however raw and inexperienced or reckless and brutal, whom a
panic-stricken Governor, or other functionary, may assume the right to
constitute into a so-called court-martial. This question could only be
decided by an appeal to the tribunals; and such an appeal the Committee
determined to make. Their determination led to a change in the
chairmanship of the Committee, as the chairman, Mr. Charles Buxton,
thought it not unjust indeed, but inexpedient, to prosecute Governor
Eyre and his principal subordinates in a criminal court: but a
numerously attended general meeting of the Association having decided
this point against him, Mr. Buxton withdrew from the Committee, though
continuing to work in the cause, and I was, quite unexpectedly on my own
part, proposed and elected chairman. It became, in consequence, my duty
to represent the Committee in the House of Commons, sometimes by putting
questions to the Government, sometimes as the recipient of questions,
more or less provocative, addressed by individual members to myself; but
especially as speaker in the important debate originated in the session
of 1866, by Mr. Buxton: and the speech I then delivered is that which I
should probably select as the best of my speeches in Parliament.[10] For
more than two years we carried on the combat, trying every avenue
legally open to us, to the Courts of Criminal Justice. A bench of
magistrates in one of the most Tory counties in England dismissed our
case: we were more successful before the magistrates at Bow Street;
which gave an opportunity to the Lord Chief Justice of the Queen's
Bench, Sir Alexander Cockburn, for delivering his celebrated charge,
which settled the law of the question in favour of liberty, as far as it
is in the power of a judge's charge to settle it. There, however, our
success ended, for the Old Bailey Grand jury by throwing out our bill
prevented the case from coming to trial. It was clear that to bring
English functionaries to the bar of a criminal court for abuses of power
committed against negroes and mulattoes was not a popular proceeding
with the English middle classes. We had, however, redeemed, so far as
lay in us, the character of our country, by showing that there was at
any rate a body of persons determined to use all the means which the law
afforded to obtain justice for the injured. We had elicited from the
highest criminal judge in the nation an authoritative declaration that
the law was what we maintained it to be; and we had given an emphatic
warning to those who might be tempted to similar guilt hereafter, that,
though they might escape the actual sentence of a criminal tribunal,
they were not safe against being put to some trouble and expense in
order to avoid it. Colonial governors and other persons in authority,
will have a considerable motive to stop short of such extremities in
future.

As a matter of curiosity I kept some specimens of the abusive letters,
almost all of them anonymous, which I received while these proceedings
were going on. They are evidence of the sympathy felt with the
brutalities in Jamaica by the brutal part of the population at home.
They graduated from coarse jokes, verbal and pictorial, up to threats of
assassination.

Among other matters of importance in which I took an active part, but
which excited little interest in the public, two deserve particular
mention. I joined with several other independent Liberals in defeating
an Extradition Bill introduced at the very end of the session of 1866,
and by which, though surrender avowedly for political offences was not
authorized, political refugees, if charged by a foreign Government with
acts which are necessarily incident to all attempts at insurrection,
would have been surrendered to be dealt with by the criminal courts of
the Government against which they had rebelled: thus making the British
Government an accomplice in the vengeance of foreign despotisms. The
defeat of this proposal led to the appointment of a Select Committee (in
which I was included), to examine and report on the whole subject of
Extradition Treaties; and the result was, that in the Extradition Act
which passed through Parliament after I had ceased to be a member,
opportunity is given to any one whose extradition is demanded, of being
heard before an English court of justice to prove that the offence with
which he is charged, is really political. The cause of European freedom
has thus been saved from a serious misfortune, and our own country from
a great iniquity. The other subject to be mentioned is the fight kept up
by a body of advanced Liberals in the session of 1868, on the Bribery
Bill of Mr. Disraeli's Government, in which I took a very active part. I
had taken counsel with several of those who had applied their minds most
carefully to the details of the subject--Mr. W.D. Christie, Serjeant
Pulling, Mr. Chadwick--as well as bestowed much thought of my own, for
the purpose of framing such amendments and additional clauses as might
make the Bill really effective against the numerous modes of corruption,
direct and indirect, which might otherwise, as there was much reason to
fear, be increased instead of diminished by the Reform Act. We also
aimed at engrafting on the Bill, measures for diminishing the
mischievous burden of what are called the legitimate expenses of
elections. Among our many amendments, was that of Mr. Fawcett for making
the returning officer's expenses a charge on the rates, instead of on
the candidates; another was the prohibition of paid canvassers, and the
limitation of paid agents to one for each candidate; a third was the
extension of the precautions and penalties against bribery to municipal
elections, which are well known to be not only a preparatory school for
bribery at parliamentary elections, but an habitual cover for it. The
Conservative Government, however, when once they had carried the leading
provision of their Bill (for which I voted and spoke), the transfer of
the jurisdiction in elections from the House of Commons to the Judges,
made a determined resistance to all other improvements; and after one of
our most important proposals, that of Mr. Fawcett, had actually obtained
a majority, they summoned the strength of their party and threw out the
clause in a subsequent stage. The Liberal party in the House was greatly
dishonoured by the conduct of many of its members in giving no help
whatever to this attempt to secure the necessary conditions of an honest
representation of the people. With their large majority in the House
they could have carried all the amendments, or better ones if they had
better to propose. But it was late in the session; members were eager to
set about their preparations for the impending General Election: and
while some (such as Sir Robert Anstruther) honourably remained at their
post, though rival candidates were already canvassing their constituency,
a much greater number placed their electioneering interests before their
public duty. Many Liberals also looked with indifference on legislation
against bribery, thinking that it merely diverted public interest from
the Ballot, which they considered--very mistakenly as I expect it will
turn out--to be a sufficient, and the only, remedy. From these causes our
fight, though kept up with great vigour for several nights, was wholly
unsuccessful, and the practices which we sought to render more difficult,
prevailed more widely than ever in the first General Election held under
the new electoral law.

In the general debates on Mr. Disraeli's Reform Bill, my participation
was limited to the one speech already mentioned; but I made the Bill an
occasion for bringing the two great improvements which remain to be made
in Representative Government, formally before the House and the nation.
One of them was Personal, or, as it is called with equal propriety,
Proportional Representation. I brought this under the consideration of
the House, by an expository and argumentative speech on Mr. Hare's plan;
and subsequently I was active in support of the very imperfect
substitute for that plan, which, in a small number of constituencies,
Parliament was induced to adopt. This poor makeshift had scarcely any
recommendation, except that it was a partial recognition of the evil
which it did so little to remedy. As such, however, it was attacked by
the same fallacies, and required to be defended on the same principles,
as a really good measure; and its adoption in a few Parliamentary
elections, as well as the subsequent introduction of what is called the
Cumulative Vote in the elections for the London School Board, have had
the good effect of converting the equal claim of all electors to a
proportional share in the representation, from a subject of merely
speculative discussion, into a question of practical politics, much
sooner than would otherwise have been the case.

This assertion of my opinions on Personal Representation cannot be
credited with any considerable or visible amount of practical result. It
was otherwise with the other motion which I made in the form of an
amendment to the Reform Bill, and which was by far the most important,
perhaps the only really important, public service I performed in the
capacity of a Member of Parliament: a motion to strike out the words
which were understood to limit the electoral franchise to males, and
thereby to admit to the suffrage all women who, as householders or
otherwise, possessed the qualification required of male electors. For
women not to make their claim to the suffrage, at the time when the
elective franchise was being largely extended, would have been to abjure
the claim altogether; and a movement on the subject was begun in 1866,
when I presented a petition for the suffrage, signed by a considerable
number of distinguished women. But it was as yet uncertain whether the
proposal would obtain more than a few stray votes in the House: and
when, after a debate in which the speaker's on the contrary side were
conspicuous by their feebleness, the votes recorded in favour of the
motion amounted to 73--made up by pairs and tellers to above 80--the
surprise was general, and the encouragement great: the greater, too,
because one of those who voted for the motion was Mr. Bright, a fact
which could only be attributed to the impression made on him by the
debate, as he had previously made no secret of his nonconcurrence in the
proposal. [The time appeared to my daughter, Miss Helen Taylor, to have
come for forming a Society for the extension of the suffrage to women.
The existence of the Society is due to my daughter's initiative; its
constitution was planned entirely by her, and she was the soul of the
movement during its first years, though delicate health and
superabundant occupation made her decline to be a member of the
Executive Committee. Many distinguished members of parliament,
professors, and others, and some of the most eminent women of whom the
country can boast, became members of the Society, a large proportion
either directly or indirectly through my daughter's influence, she
having written the greater number, and all the best, of the letters by
which adhesions was obtained, even when those letters bore my signature.
In two remarkable instances, those of Miss Nightingale and Miss Mary
Carpenter, the reluctance those ladies had at first felt to come
forward, (for it was not on their past difference of opinion) was
overcome by appeals written by my daughter though signed by me.
Associations for the same object were formed in various local centres,
Manchester, Edinburgh, Birmingham, Bristol, and Glasgow; and others
which have done much valuable work for the cause. All the Societies take
the title of branches of the National Society for Women's Suffrage; but
each has its own governing body, and acts in complete independence of
the others.]

I believe I have mentioned all that is worth remembering of my
proceedings in the House. But their enumeration, even if complete, would
give but an inadequate idea of my occupations during that period, and
especially of the time taken up by correspondence. For many years before
my election to Parliament, I had been continually receiving letters from
strangers, mostly addressed to me as a writer on philosophy, and either
propounding difficulties or communicating thoughts on subjects connected
with logic or political economy. In common, I suppose, with all who are
known as political economists, I was a recipient of all the shallow
theories and absurd proposals by which people are perpetually
endeavouring to show the way to universal wealth and happiness by some
artful reorganization of the currency. When there were signs of
sufficient intelligence in the writers to make it worth while attempting
to put them right, I took the trouble to point out their errors, until
the growth of my correspondence made it necessary to dismiss such
persons with very brief answers. Many, however, of the communications I
received were more worthy of attention than these, and in some,
oversights of detail were pointed out in my writings, which I was thus
enabled to correct. Correspondence of this sort naturally multiplied
with the multiplication of the subjects on which I wrote, especially
those of a metaphysical character. But when I became a member of
Parliament. I began to receive letters on private grievances and on
every imaginable subject that related to any kind of public affairs,
however remote from my knowledge or pursuits. It was not my constituents
in Westminster who laid this burthen on me: they kept with remarkable
fidelity to the understanding on which I had consented to serve. I
received, indeed, now and then an application from some ingenuous youth
to procure for him a small government appointment; but these were few,
and how simple and ignorant the writers were, was shown by the fact that
the applications came in about equally whichever party was in power. My
invariable answer was, that it was contrary to the principles on which I
was elected to ask favours of any Government. But, on the whole, hardly
any part of the country gave me less trouble than my own constituents.
The general mass of correspondence, however, swelled into an oppressive
burthen.

[At this time, and thenceforth, a great proportion of all my letters
(including many which found their way into the newspapers) were not
written by me but by my daughter; at first merely from her willingness
to help in disposing of a mass of letters greater than I could get
through without assistance, but afterwards because I thought the letters
she wrote superior to mine, and more so in proportion to the difficulty
and importance of the occasion. Even those which I wrote myself were
generally much improved by her, as is also the case with all the more
recent of my prepared speeches, of which, and of some of my published
writings, not a few passages, and those the most successful, were hers.]

While I remained in Parliament my work as an author was unavoidably
limited to the recess. During that time I wrote (besides the pamphlet on
Ireland, already mentioned), the Essay on Plato, published in the
_Edinburgh Review_, and reprinted in the third volume of _Dissertations
and Discussions_; and the address which, conformably to custom, I
delivered to the University of St. Andrew's, whose students had done me
the honour of electing me to the office of Rector. In this Discourse I
gave expression to many thoughts and opinions which had been
accumulating in me through life, respecting the various studies which
belong to a liberal education, their uses and influences, and the mode
in which they should be pursued to render their influences most
beneficial. The position taken up, vindicating the high educational
value alike of the old classic